@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Democratic elections and centralized decisions: Condorcet and Approval Voting compared with Median and Coverage locations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Linking Approval Voting to the coverage problem.Condorcet and Simpson solutions compared to optimal solutions.Effect of lp-norms on quality of solutions.Multi-criteria voting decisions and their qualities.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Voting,Condorcet,Approval Voting,Median problem,Maximum Coverage problem,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we focus on the quality of Condorcet and Approval Voting winners using Median and Maximum Coverage problems as benchmarks. We assess the quality of solutions by democratic processes assuming many dimensions for evaluating candidates. We use different norms to map multidimensional preferences into single values. We perform extensive numerical experiments. The Condorcet winner, when he/she exists, may have very high quality measured by the Median objective function, but poor quality measured by the Maximum Coverage problem. We show that the Approval Voting winner is optimal when the quality is measured by the Maximum Coverage objective and fairs well when the Median objective is employed. The analyses further indicate that the number of voters and the distance norm may increase, while the number of candidates and dimensions may decrease the quality of democratic methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It has been generally acknowledged since Arrow’s (Arrow, 2012) work in the 1950s that voting methods have severe limitations. Elections may result in paradoxes such as winners not representing voters’ top preferences, or even no outright winners. These paradoxes may occur with different methods, and either increase or decrease with the number of voters (Balinski & Laraki, 2014; Plassmann & Tideman, 2014).Voting methods are defined by rules indicating how voters’ preferences are elicited and ordered to identify winners (De Sinopoli, 2000). In the Downsian model, a voter’s preference for a candidate increases with their proximity in a multidimensional space representing different utility criteria (Gouret, Hollard, & Rossignol, 2011; Henry & Mourifié, 2013; Merrill, 1985). According to Bhadury, Griffin, Griffin, and Narasimhan (1998), those distances are weighted according to the importance given by voters to each dimension. The ideal voting method would elicit a clear winner that maximized the products of voters’ preferences and weights along each utility dimension.In the Condorcet method, candidates are compared pairwise (Taylor & Pacelli, 2008). Each voter returns one ballot with a ranked order of preferred candidates. The candidate with more votes in the pairwise competition beats the other candidate. A candidate who beats all other candidates is proclaimed the winner. If there are ties, then we consider the winner the candidate who beats all others after ties are removed or, equivalently, the candidate who does not lose to any other candidate. If even after removing ties more than one candidate meets the criterion, then the result is decided randomly. It is possible not to have a winner due to what is known as the Condorcet Paradox (Balinski & Laraki, 2014; Plassmann & Tideman, 2014; Taylor & Pacelli, 2008).In Approval Voting, each voter makes an unranked list of candidates they approve. The candidates with the most approvals win. If ties occur, they are broken randomly. Brams and Fishburn (1978, 2007); Rapoport and Felsenthal (1990); Taylor and Pacelli (2008).Election planners need to identify methods that increase the odds of results being paradox-free and maximizing utility to voters in their particular context. The literature offers a broad choice of election methods and scoring systems (Balinski & Laraki, 2014; Plassmann & Tideman, 2014). Moreover, the quality of a method (i.e. how its results compare to an optimal, centralized solution by an “omniscient and benevolent dictator” (Mueller, Philpotts, & Vanek, 1972, p. 66)) may vary depending on the number of candidates and voters (Arrow, 2012; Drezner & Menezes, 2015; Plassmann & Tideman, 2014; Pritchard & Slinko, 2006).Given the well-known failures of voting methods (Balinski & Laraki, 2014), several studies have compared their relative performance when applied to different contexts. Klamler and Pferschy (2007) compare voting preferences for local versus global “tours” using Borda, Plurality, Simple Majority rules, and Approval Voting, with mixed results. Buenrostro, Dhillon, and Vida (2013) investigate necessary levels of agreement between voters using Borda rule, Plurality rule, Approval Voting, and Relative Utilitarianism leading to dominance-solvable games. They suggest that Approval Voting yields the best results. Merrill (1985) performs a simulation study of six methods to estimate the fraction of outcomes coinciding with the Condorcet winner. His statistical analysis uses both ℓ1 and ℓ2 norms.Campos-Rodríguez and Moreno-Pérez (2008) present an algorithm to find Condorcet solutions when the solution is not a singleton but a set of given cardinality. Menezes and Huang (2015) study the theoretical quality of a Condorcet solution as a function of the solution set cardinality. They find that the relative efficiency of a Condorcet solution is2in the worst case, and approaches 1 as the number of alternatives increases. They use a discrete model and the Euclidean distance (ℓ2 norm) as proxy for dis-utility.The Median problem is either defined in a network (Hakimi, 1964), or termed the Weber problem in continuous space (Drezner, Klamroth, Schöbel, & Wesolowsky, 2002). Hansen and Thisse (1981) use a network setting to derive upper bounds on the ratio of the Weber objective function at the Condorcet solution and the optimal solution. They prove that this ratio is bounded by 3. Further properties of Condorcet network problems based on graph-theoretic results are presented by Hansen, Thisse, and Wendel (1986), but mostly focusing on local rather than global solutions. Hansen and Labbè (1988) present polynomial algorithms to determine the sets of Condorcet and Simpson points of a network. Noltemeier, Spoerhase, and Wirth (2007) investigate the special topology of tree networks. For the case of single voting location problems on trees, algorithms are developed for Condorcet and Simpson cases. Wendel and Thorson (1974) prove that when the problem uses either the ℓ1 or the ℓ∞ norm, the Condorcet solution point is the Weber solution point.There are similarities between the models herein and competitive location models. Customers “vote” for the best retail facility by patronizing it. There are two main branches of thought in facility location studies depending on assumptions about consumer behavior. One follows the gravity model suggested by Reilly (1931) and applied to a retail competitive environment by Huff (1964, 1966). Locating a facility by this model is first introduced by Drezner (1994b). In the other approach, a customer patronizes the closest facility (Drezner, 1982; Hakimi, 1983; 1986; Hotelling, 1929). Drezner (1994a) suggests that the facility with highest utility may not be the closest one. For a review of competitive facility location the reader is referred to Berman, Drezner, Drezner, and Krass (2009).Campos-Rodríguez and Moreno-Pérez (2000) present a variation of the classic approach to Condorcet problems in location analysis. They introduce an insensitivity factor for voters when the difference between distances to two locations is less than α. This approach is reasonable because the decision by the voter is not clear when distances are similar. Another way to model those situations is by a stochastic approach. Since every demand point consists of many voters, their votes are shared across different locations based on their relative distances to the demand point. This approach is similar to the gravity model in competitive facility location (Drezner, 1994a; Huff, 1964; 1966; Reilly, 1931).Drezner and Menezes (2015) perform extensive numerical computations to assess the quality of Condorcet solutions compared with the Weber problem in two dimensions.In this paper, we compare Condorcet and Approval Voting with traditional approaches to centralized decision making, namely the median and maximum coverage models. There is a distance between each candidate and a node of voters on each of r dimensions. The shorter the distance between the candidate and a node, the higher the utility of the candidate to the voter, making distance a proxy for dis-utility (Gouret et al., 2011). We use an ℓpnorm for computing the distance from the candidate to the node taking into account all utility dimensions. As far as we know, no studies have assessed the quality of Approval Voting and Condorcet methods in relation to the Maximum Coverage problem. Also, studies on the effects of different norms on the quality of a method are not yet available. Most studies are analyzed inRorR2- the Euclidean space (Henry & Mourifié, 2013; Merrill, 1985), but not in higher dimensions spaces.We compare the total utility of a democratic election winner with the optimal choice obtained through a centralized process. In particular, we compare the Condorcet and Approval Voting methods with the Median (sum of all utilities) and Maximum Coverage problem (the candidate within a fixed distance of the highest number of voters). The Maximum Coverage problem is also referred to as the “Coverage” problem.The Coverage and Median solutions are obtained by a central planner (benevolent dictator) having complete information about voters’ preferences. Quality is defined by the ratio between the values of the centralized objective at the democratic solution and at the optimal centralized solution. By definition, this ratio is equal to or greater than one. The closer this ratio is to one, the better is the quality of the democratic solution. We assess the quality of each of the two democratic methods with each of the two centralized methods.We compare methods by varying four different election parameters. The first parameter is the number of nodes representing the electorate. Each node in a network represents a different number of voters having similar preferences over candidates. Second, given a stable set of strategies by voters in Approval Voting, their influence on an election may depend on the number of candidates (Fishburn & Brams, 1981; Rapoport & Felsenthal, 1990). Thus, we evaluate the relative quality of voting methods based on the number of candidates. The third parameter is the norm used to estimate distance between candidates and voters. Since our primary objective is to measure the utility of a candidate to a voter, we want to explore different magnitudes on those utilities. There is abundant literature on function spaces and, among them, a family of norms defined by ℓpnorms (Tao, 2008). The fourth parameter is the number of dimensions on which voters assess candidates (Merrill, 1985). For example, reviewing applicants to a faculty position might be based on a few or many criteria from a list such as teaching experience, research publications, committee service, editorial boards, grants, etc.In Approval Voting, we assume a critical distance so that voters approve candidates within that critical distance. To simulate Approval Voting, we apply different levels of the critical distance. Baron, Altman, and Kroll (2005) studied parochial voting and found that when the critical distance is short, only candidates with high utility to the voter or their group are approved, and when it is long, candidates with greater average utility to all voters may also be approved.In this section, we present the optimization and voting models. The problems are defined in a network with nodes representing voters having similar “values”. There is a set of candidates, and the distance from a node to each candidate is a proxy for the utility obtained from that candidate in a particular dimension. There is a function that evaluates the distances in all dimensions (an lpnorm) returning a proxy for the total utility a candidate generates to a voter. The voting mechanism defines the winner. We compare the winner returned from a voting mechanism with those obtained by well-known optimization models.We first list the notation used in this section and the rest of the paper.N={1,2,…,n}is a set of nodes representing one or more voters with similar preferences on candidates.is the weight associated with node i and represents the share of total voters in this node.is a set of candidates.is the distance from voter i ∈ N to candidate j ∈ M in dimensionk∈{1,…,t}. The shorter the distance, the higher the utility of a candidate to a voter.is an indicator function for two numbers y1 and y2:(1)δ(y1,y2)={1|ify1≤y20|otherwiseDefined for Approval Voting. Candidates within a distance tcinclusive will be approved by voters. Otherwise, they will not be approved.C is the Condorcet method, A is the Approval Voting method, M is the Median problem, and Co is the Maximum Coverage problem.is the solution obtained by method a. Xais called the “winning candidate” in voting, and the “optimal location” in Median and Coverage problems.The objective functions of the Median and Maximum Coverage, respectively, which are optimization models.ZM=ZM(XM)andZCo=ZCo(XCo)are the optimum objective function values of the Median and Coverage problems.QM(j)=ZM(j)/ZM,QCo(j)=ZCo/ZCo(j)are the Median quality index and the Coverage quality index. Both quality indices are in [1, ∞] because the Median problem is a minimization one and the Coverage problem is a maximization one. When the quality index is equal to 1, it implies that solution j is as good as the optimal solution to the problem under consideration. Higher values indicate poor performance of solution j.Consider a vectorxij={xij1,…,xijr}inRr+representing the distances from voter i to candidate j in each dimension. Hence, xijt≥ 0 for allt=1,…,r.The ℓpnorm for p ≥ 1 is defined by a functionf:Rr+→R+as(2)fp(xij)=∑k=1rxijkppThe ℓpdistance between points i and j is given by fp(xij). A voter uses a norm to compare different candidates: a candidate who is close is preferred over a candidate who is far away from the voter.Whenp=1,the ℓ1 norm is the sum of distances in all dimensions. The ℓ∞ norm is defined byf∞(xij)=max{xijk:k=1,…,r}. The ℓ∞ norm may be useful when voters are most concerned about the one dimension where a candidate is furthest away from their preferences. Therefore, when p > 1 and finite, fp(xij) changes from giving equal importance to all distances in the dimensions to giving near absolute importance to the maximum distance as the value of p increases.In our notation, the distance between two points is usually referring to the distance between a voter-node and a candidate, and is represented by xij. Hence, fp(xij) returns the lpnorm between a voter-node i and a candidate j. Again, this means that node i prefers candidate j1 to candidate j2 ifδ(fp(xi,j1),fp(xi,j2))=1.The two optimization models find the best solution at a node in N.The Median problem selects a winner that minimizes the total (weighted) distance to voters. It is commonly referred in the literature as the 1-median problem, which is a special case of the K-median problem where K facilities are to be located. The Median problem is either defined in a network (Hakimi, 1964), or termed the Weber problem in continuous space (Drezner et al., 2002). Since distance is a proxy for dis-utility, the Median problem maximizes utility.The Median problem is:(3)ZM=minj∈M{ZM(j)=∑i=1nwifp(xij)},and let XMto be the solution that induces ZM; that is(4)XM=argjminj∈MZM(j)so,ZM=ZM(XM).The objective of the Maximum Coverage problem (Church & ReVelle, 1974 and Megiddo, Zemel, & Hakimi, 1983) on a critical distance tcis to locate a facility that captures the most votes within the critical distance:(5)ZCo=maxj∈M{ZCo(j)=∑i=1nwiδ(fp(xij),tc)}.where the function δ is defined by (1). Analogously to XM,(6)XCo=argjmaxj∈MZCo(j)so,ZCo=ZCo(XCo).In the Condorcet method, candidates are compared pairwise (Taylor & Pacelli, 2008). Each voter returns one ballot with a ranked order of preferred candidates. The candidate with more votes in the pairwise competition beats the other candidate. A candidate who beats all other candidates is proclaimed the winner. Note that there may be a set of candidates who beat all other candidates outside the set, but tie with each other within the set. This case is termed a tie. The formulation is:XC={S1|if|S|≥10|otherwisewhereS={j|j∈M,∑i∈Nwiδ(fp(xij),fp(xik))≤∑i∈Nwiδ(fp(xik),fp(xij))∀k∈M,k≠j}XCis either the first element in S (which could have several elements if there were ties), or zero if the Condorcet solution does not exist (because then S is empty). Note that a candidate solution j will not be in S if it loses in pairwise competition to another candidate. The Condorcet Paradox means that an empty set may exist.Assuming that voters approve candidates at a distance no greater than tc, the winner of the Approval Voting method is given by XAas follows:(7)v=maxj∈M{∑i∈Nwiδ(fp(xij),tc)}S={j∈M|∑i∈Nwiδ(fp(xij),tc)=v}XA={S1|ifv>00|otherwisewhere 0 indicates the non-existence of a winner, i.e. no candidate has a single approval.We start with a theoretical result that brings together Approval Voting and Maximum Coverage problems.Property 1When a non-null solution to Approval Voting exists, then it is a solution (since there may be more than one solution) to the Maximum Coverage problem. Otherwise, the solution to the Coverage problem is trivial. A non-trivial solution to the Maximum Coverage problem is an Approval Voting winner.Expression (7) has its right-hand side exactly equal to the objective function (5). Thus, v is the Maximum Coverage possible. So, XAis a solution that optimizes the Maximum Coverage. and Property 1 is proven in one direction.Let j* be the solution to the Maximum Coverage problem. Assuming there is a winner to the Approval Voting method,ZCo=ZCo(j*)=∑i∈Nwiδ(fp(xij*),tc)=maxj∈M∑i=1nwiδ(fp(xij),tc)=v=∑i∈Nwiδ(fp(xiXA),tc)=ZCo(XA),which implies that both XAand j* are solutions to the Coverage problem and Approval Voting problem.The equalities above follow the definition of both problems. They imply that j* ∈ S, but nothing guarantees thatj*=XA. When Approval Voting returns no winner, then any node in M solves the Maximum Coverage problem, which is the trivial solution.□In conclusion, if the distance tccorrectly defines approval, then there is a Maximum Coverage problem that finds the winner of the Approval Voting method. If there is a winner in Approval Voting, thenQCo(XA)=1! That is, the voting process is as good as a centralized decision process conducted by a benevolent dictator.Property 1 does not discriminate the norm used. Thus, for the relationship between Maximum Coverage and Approval Voting, the choice of norm is neutral with respect to the quality index. Also, the number of dimensions characterizing a candidate does not affect quality.Usingδ→0+to imply δ approaching zero from the right, we have a second property:Property 2There is a value T such that for anytc∈[T−δ,T+δ],δ→0+the Approval Voting winner solves both the Maximum Coverage problem and the Median problem. Moreover, for any value oftc≥T+δ,the Median solution also solves the Maximum Coverage problem, but the converse is not necessarily true.From Property 1 we have that XAsolves the Maximum Coverage problem. Thus, in order to prove Property 2 we just need to show that there is an Approval Voting winner XAthat solves the Median problem whentc∈[T−δ,T+δ]for some values of T and δ.Using the notation that XMsolves the Median problem, letT=max{fp(xiXM)|i∈N}. Hence, for a sufficiently small but positive value of δ, iftc∈[T−δ,T+δ]then XMsolves also the Maximum Coverage problem. The second part of the property is straightforward; if the coverage constraint is sufficiently large, then XMand possibly many other candidates maximize coverage.□The point here is that for some particular range of tcvalues, the Coverage problem and the Median problems are equivalent. Beyond this equivalence, which is well known in facility location studies, Property 2 brings up an interesting issue: if the Condorcet Solution is of sufficient quality according to index QM(XC), then the Condorcet winner solves the Median problem. Moreover, it may also solve the Maximum Coverage problem, which would imply that the Condorcet winner would also be the Approval Voting winner.We carry out numerical experiments on randomly generated scenarios to address these issues relating to our research questions.In this section, we generate instances by randomly (uniformly) placing n nodes in a100×100×…×100hypercube inRr. Each node represents a group of voters. The normalized weights (fraction of total population) at each node were randomly generated as well. In the same hypercube, we randomly place m candidate points. Using the coordinates of each node and candidate, and applying an ℓpnorm we solve both optimization problems and find the Condorcet and Approval Voting winners. Calculations of the quality indices follow.We solve 30 random replications for each combination of nodes n ∈ {30, 60}, norm p ∈ {1, 2, 3, 105}—wherep=105is an approximation for the ℓ∞ norm, candidates m ∈ {5, 10, 15}, and dimensions r ∈ {2, 3, 4}. Thus, we have 2160 instances in total. Our choices of n and m values follow a previous study (Drezner & Menezes, 2015) suggesting that departures from 1 in quality indices are more likely when the number of nodes (representing voters) is small and the number of candidates is also small.In Fig. 1, we show an example of a randomly generated instance with 30 nodes representing a group of voters, five candidates, andtc=20(the values of tc∈ {20, 30, 40, 50} vary from a relatively short critical distance to a distance where almost all relevant space could be covered). The instance in Fig. 1 is defined inR2so we can visualize it. We use in this instance the ℓ1 norm, also known as rectilinear or Manhattan distance. Candidates are uniform solid squares. Nodes are solid circles, which vary in size according to the number of voters with similar preferences. The solution for the Median problem is the “M” square near the center; the solution of the Maximum Coverage problem is the “Co” square in the NE quadrant; the Condorcet winner is the “C” square in the SE quadrant. Recall that the solution to Approval Voting coincides with that of the Maximum Coverage problem.Fig. 1 results are calculated usingtc=20. If we increase the critical distance so thattc=30,then the Maximum Coverage solution coincides with the Condorcet winner. If we further increase tcto 50, then the Maximum Coverage solution matches the Median problem solution.Whentc=20,QM(XCo)=QM(XA)=1.19implying that the Approval Voting solution is 19 percent worse than the maximum utility (Median problem) obtained by a centralized decision maker (benevolent dictator). However,QM(XC)=1.03implying that the Condorcet winner is nearly as good as the solution obtained by a benevolent dictator. On the other hand,QCo(XM)=2.93,so the Median solution would match only a third of approvals by Approval Voting. Whentc=30thenQM(XCo)=QM(XA)=QM(XC)=1.03making the Maximum Coverage, Approval Voting and Condorcet solutions the same. Whentc=50,the Median and Maximum Coverage solutions, and the Approval Voting winner coincide. Thus,QM(XCo)=QM(XA)=QCo(XM)=QCo(XA)=1.0. The only difference is the Condorcet winner, even though as aboveQM(XC)=1.03,which is still close to the centralized solution.When the value of p in the ℓpnorm increases, we obtain quality indices closer to 1.0. The number of dimensions that characterize candidates may also play a role in the solutions quality.The experiments yielded nine quality results: one for QM(XC), four for QM(XA), and four for QCo(XC) with tc∈ {20, 30, 40, 50}). Treatments combined four factors (explanatory variables) with 2, 3, 4, and 3 levels of nodes, candidates, norms, and dimensions respectively. Since each treatment was replicated 30 times, the complete experiment generated a 9 × 2160 response matrix.Tables 1 and 2 present descriptive statistics and correlations between outcome variables. In Table 1, N is the number of instances considered, Min and Max refer to the minimum and maximum values, μ is the average quality index, and σ is the standard deviation of the quality index for that particular set of instances. Columns in Table 2 are self-explanatory. The descriptives indicated that Condorcet winners had high quality(μ=1,σ=0.02)when compared with Median solutions. Approval Voting winners fared well based on Median solutions, particularly at higher criticality (tc≥ 40). On the other hand, Condorcet winners often had low Coverage outcomes except whentc=50.Many treatments, particularly at lower criticality levels, did not lead to Condorcet winners (N < 2160) due to paradox effects. Only one correlation was above 0.3, so outcome variables were analyzed independently (recall that a new random set of nodes was created for each combination of treatment and quality response). QCo(XC) indicators had long tails because some Condorcet results covered very few voters. Since quality variables were skewed to the left, they were transformed by the reciprocal to improve normality of residuals from linear regressions. All statistical analyses were carried out in IBM® SPSS® Statistics 20 (SPSS, 2011).Comparisons between factor groups are presented in Table 3where we use similar notation as in the previous tables. Recall that the experiments generated between 1370 and 2160 responses for each quality index (Table 1), and that each response represented a particular combination of the four explanatory variables (n, m, p, and r, which had 2, 3, 4, and 3 levels respectively). Thus, each group in Table 3 summons all responses for a particular level of a factor variable. For example, the first two rows(n=30,n=60)show the means, standard deviations, and sample sizes of two groups of responses: group N1, with responses whenn=30,and group N2, with responses whenn=60. Adding the number of cases in group N1 and N2 (or in groups M1, M2 and M3, etc.) under each quality index equals the total number of valid responses for that quality index.Since quality indices had been transformed by the reciprocal, higher means (bound by one) indicated better quality of the democratic method as compared to the centralized method. For example, in the first index comparing the Condorcet method with the Maximum Coverage problem(tc=20),the mean1Q20Co(XC)of responses withn=30(Group N1) was 0.68, while the mean1Q20Co(XC)of responses withn=60(Group N2) was 0.70. On a preliminary (i.e. visual) basis, these statistics suggested that results with the Condorcet method were better, or closer to the Maximum Coverage results(tc=20)as the number of nodes (n) in the election was higher (60 and not 30). Overall, the mean differences between groups suggested that the quality of democratic methods mostly increased with the number of nodes (comparing groups N1 and N2) and with higher distance norms (comparing groups P1, …, P4), and mostly decreased with the number of candidates (comparing groups M1, …, M3) and utility dimensions (comparing groups R1, …, R3). Those differences were most evident with QCo(XC) indicators. Similar patterns were observed, albeit less markedly, with QM(XA) indicators. No significant patterns seemed evident with the QM(XC) indicator.The statistics in Table 3 suggested that in most cases the quality of voting methods was influenced by the experimental factors. To test the significance of those relationships, we carried out linear regressions between explanatory variables (factors) and outcome variables (quality indices). The models included direct effects (i.e. regression coefficients measuring the main influence of each individual explanatory variable) in step 1, and two-way interactions (i.e. regression coefficients measuring the moderating influence of each multiplication of two explanatory variables) in step 2. Higher level interactions were excluded to improve parsimony (i.e. to avoid entering an excessive number of predictors in the regression models, which complicates the interpretation of results). Explanatory variables were centered before computing interactions to minimize multicollinearity (Jaccard, Wan, & Turrisi, 1990), even though this issue has been minimized in more recent studies (Kromrey & Foster-Johnson, 1998). Results are presented in Table 4. Across all models, the maximum variance inflation factor (VIF) was 1.26 and the maximum condition index (CI) was 1.87 (values of VIF < 10 and CI < 30 suggest no significant multicollinearity in the model (Kennedy, 2008)). We interpreted results based on the significance of F-values (a ratio indicating global model fit (Hair, Black, Babin, & Anderson, 2010)) and regression coefficients. As observed earlier, quality often increased with the number of nodes n and distance norm r but mostly decreased with the number of candidates m and number of utility dimensions r. Two of the six interactions were also significant in many models. The negative n × r coefficients suggested that the effect of number of nodes (mainly in QM(XA)) models was less positive with more utility dimensions. On the other hand, the mostly positive p × r coefficients indicated that the effect of norm was often more positive in QCo(XC) and QM(XA) models with more utility dimensions.Histograms and normal probability plots from the regressions indicated that standardized residuals were closer to normality after outcome variables were transformed. However, they could still not be considered normally distributed. Thus, following recommendations in Kennedy (2008) among others, we carried out non-parametric tests to validate the previous results. We performed Jonckheere–Terpstra tests for ordered samples Terpstra, (1952) (Table 5). Contrary to other procedures, this method tests the hypothesis that a trend (either positive or negative) rather than simple differences exists across groups, even when ranking ties occur Terpstra, (1952). This allowed us to validate results, as our direct and interaction factors had multiple levels. The tests broadly confirmed the regression results. Only one n × r and two r coefficients did not have their significance confirmed by the Jonckheere–Terpstra tests.The following questions were investigated:1.How good are results from Condorcet and Approval Voting compared to the centralized process solutions of Median and Coverage?How do results in question 1 change with different ℓpnorms?Does it matter if a democratic solution is evaluated under Median rather than Coverage objectives?Is quality of a solution better when voters compare candidates based on a few rather than many utility dimensions?Is there any particular class of instances where quality indices are close to one, i.e. methods yield consistently good solutions?We simulated thousands of random instances with different treatments. We analyzed issues not investigated before and explored relationships between well-known optimization problems and democratic election approaches.The study has two main contributions. First, it shows how results from Condorcet and Approval Voting elections compare with two important optimized solutions. Despite their weaknesses, democratic methods remain the only effective option because central planners rarely have complete information and their goal is not necessarily to maximize a population’s utility. “Government in contemporary Western countries is neither omniscient nor benevolent nor dictatorial” (Holcombe, 2012, p. 166). The number of candidates and the distance norm should be considered when comparing election results with alternative methods.Condorcet solutions compared quite favorably in terms of quality with Median solutions. Their quality indices were close to one for all values of n, m, p, and r. As discussed by Drezner and Menezes (2015) and Menezes and Huang (2015), these results suggest that Condorcet solutions are close to Median solutions. Approval Voting solutions also fared quite well when compared to Median solutions. On the other hand, many Condorcet solutions were far from Maximum Coverage solutions. Depending on the critical distance, between 11 percent and 37 percent of instances failed to produce a Condorcet winner. Many Condorcet winners were in hypercube regions that covered very few voters. So, whereas Approval Voting and particularly Condorcet might perform well compared to Median solutions, Condorcet voting might lead to poor Coverage solutions.The critical distance tcfor accepting candidates appeared to influence the quality of Condorcet and Approval Voting solutions. Quality measures improved as tcincreased. With small tcvalues, there were many instances with either no Condorcet winners or winners being close to large nodes, which may be a poor Median objective. However, withtc=50(Condorcet) or tc≥ 40 (Approval Voting), results improved significantly.All four election parameters appeared to influence QCo(XC) and QM(XA) indices. The number of nodes related positively with the quality of democratic methods. This result is consistent with the findings by Drezner and Menezes (2015), and with Plassmann and Tideman (2014) who suggested that in most cases the odds of paradoxes occurring in elections decreased with number of voters. These studies and our result recall Aristotle’s “wisdom of multitude” maxim (Waldron, 1995). However, candidates and dimensions related mostly negatively with quality outcomes. These results suggest that more complex choices make it more difficult for democratic methods to yield the optimal results of centralized methods.We extended the results in Drezner and Menezes (2015) and Menezes and Huang (2015). Menezes and Huang (2015) proved thatQM(XC)≤2assuming candidates were located anywhere in the plane. Drezner and Menezes (2015) showed that when using Euclidean distances, QM(XC) approached 1 when the number of nodes increased. We considered levels of candidates and nodes where Drezner and Menezes (2015) found the worst results. We checked the impact of the norm which was ignored in Menezes and Huang (2015) and only minimally tested in Drezner and Menezes (2015) by checking the ℓpnorm withp=1.78. Neither paper extended the dimensionality beyond two dimensions. The Approval Voting method was not analyzed in Drezner and Menezes (2015); Menezes and Huang (2015), and they did not use Maximum Coverage as a centralized method. Our results were validated by statistical analyses.Overall, results may have clear implications to voting planners. If the election objective is to find the candidate that minimizes the sum of distances, then the Condorcet method is recommended. Approval Voting may also be a good choice as long as the critical distance is large. However, if the objective is to maximize Coverage, then the Condorcet may yield poor results unless the critical distance is large. In this case, using Approval Voting is recommended, as this method will lead to the same winner from the centralized method. Overall, elections may be more successful when involving voters with a wide variety of preferences and a high distance norm, but with a limited number of candidates and dimensions.Models that apply different distance measures between voters and candidates can be explored. We focused on different ℓpnorms because they are the most common functions to estimate utility distance. Other democratic election methods such as Borda and Bucklin (Plassmann & Tideman, 2014) can be investigated in addition to Condorcet and Approval Voting. Cases of games in play (Buenrostro et al., 2013) and non-strategic voting not assuming voter rationality can also be investigated.Recent studies (Gouret et al., 2011; Henry & Mourifié, 2013) suggested that the unique valence of each candidate might influence voters’ preferences in addition to the utility value. A fixed valence component could be introduced in our models. A multiplicative model of valence (Gouret et al., 2011) could also be utilized. However, any factor multiplying the norm could be included in the norm itself. That would change the overall utility but would be captured by the shortest distance matrix between voters and candidates. Consequently, it would not change general conclusions from our experiments.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
