@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Welfare implications of piracy with dynamic pricing and heterogeneous consumers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model information good pricing with piracy and consumer heterogeneity.The dynamic problem is solved by discretisation and demand tracking.Piracy’s effects on welfare depend on whether the market is growing.Piracy can trade-off product launch delay against accelerated sales.Piracy rate preferences are found for consumers, and legal and pirate sellers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in marketing,Dynamic programming,Piracy,Welfare,Pricing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present an information good pricing model with persistently heterogeneous consumers and a rising marginal propensity for them to pirate. The dynamic pricing problem faced by a legal seller is solved using a flexible numerical procedure with demand discretisation and sales tracking. Three offsetting pricing mechanisms occur: skimming, compressing price changes, and delaying product launch. A novel trade-off in piracy’s effect on welfare is identified. We find that piracy quickens sales times and raises welfare in fixed size markets, and does the opposite in growing markets. In our model, consumers benefit from very high rates of piracy, legal sellers always dislike it, and pirate providers like moderate but not very high rates.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Piracy can involve extraction of profits by pirate providers from legal producers, as pirate copies may be offered at prices as or more attractive than those of legal goods. Companies may attempt to avoid piracy’s effects by various means, including using price reductions to capture a larger share of the market. Such a strategy involves lowering prices below those which would be optimal in the absence of piracy. Legal sellers can avoid some of the wealth loss associated with piracy, but their price reductions can transfer surplus to consumers.Skimming on the other hand is a means by which companies can increase profits through successive price reductions. It involves selling at prices equal to the marginal valuations of consumers, first by setting prices to sell only to the highest valuing consumers, then reducing prices to sell only to the next highest valuing consumers, and so on. Companies can thereby extract all surplus from consumers. The surplus transfers due to skimming and piracy prevention can thus go in different directions.In this paper we examine the welfare trade-offs between the two pricing strategies. We address three main questions. Firstly, does piracy raise or lower aggregate welfare when these countervailing strategies operate? Secondly, how does welfare divide between legal sellers, pirate providers, and consumers? Thirdly, how does market growth affect these welfare outcomes?We find that in markets with a fixed size, total welfare rises with the piracy rate. The best way for the legal seller to avoid piracy’s rising impact is to reduce prices early, reducing the discounting on the value of the goods and limiting the extent of skimming. Consumers have a strong preference for high rates of piracy, while pirate providers like moderate rates that do not trigger price responses from legal sellers. Legal sellers are adverse to all piracy.In growing markets, total welfare falls as the piracy rate rises. With higher rates, the legal seller best avoids piracy’s effect by delaying product launch until the market is large. Although skimming becomes less important, the pricing strategy to avoid piracy results in greater delays in sales and incomplete satisfaction of market demand. Consumers benefit from high rates of piracy, but to a lesser extent than in fixed size markets. Pirate providers prefer moderate to moderately high rates, and legal sellers like low rates.Section 2 describes related literature. Section 3 presents our model and Section 4 describes the numerical analysis method. Section 5 looks at pricing, sales time, and welfare in the presence of piracy when market size is fixed, while Section 6 does the same when the market is growing. Section 7 concludes.In this section we briefly look at theoretical literature relating to the main themes in our model. Prior work suggests that piracy may increase or decrease aggregate welfare. An early stream of analysis examines static mechanisms, involving the breaking of a legal seller’s monopoly control by pirate providers and the relative productive efficiencies of legal and pirate sellers. Later writers extend the models in various ways, including examination of the welfare effect of government or company interventions against piracy, and outcomes in dynamic settings. Other writers examine legal sellers’ profits in the presence of piracy, suggesting various mechanisms by which piracy can increase profits. A small number of papers present dynamic models examining the contrasting effects on profits of piracy and intertemporal price discrimination.The short run effect of piracy is analysed in Besen (1986). Production of a good can occur by legal means or pirate means, with their relative efficiencies determining which productive form gives welfare maximising outcomes. When legal sellers are capable of capturing some of the value of pirate resale, effectively making piracy an alternative production technology, piracy may also be profit maximising if it is the more efficient productive technology. Johnson (1985) notes the ambiguity in short run welfare effects due to piracy. Greater inefficiency of pirate production is offset by surplus generated when more agents acquire the good in response to the cost of pirate acquisition being lower than legal prices.Ahn and Shin (2010) look at the welfare consequences of piracy prevention strategies. They find government enforcement of copyright law can be more welfare enhancing than technological protection measures for digital goods. Tsai and Chiou (2012) examine the effects of anti-counterfeiting enforcement on welfare, and find ambiguous outcomes. They decompose welfare into consumer surplus and legal profit, with counterfeiter profit assumed to be zero under a market entry condition.A small number of researchers have looked at how piracy affects welfare in a dynamic framework. In a simulated model, Khouja, Hadzikadic, Rajagopalan, and Tsay (2008) observe that the total number of sales for any level of piracy is close to the total market size, so pirate sales compensate for restrictions on acquisitions due to legal prices. The authors do not calculate discounted welfare although their model allows it, which would be informative about the welfare effects of piracy. In Herings, Peeters, and Yang (2009), the cost of pirate copying declines directly with the number of copiers. Discouraging piracy by increasing its cost reduces welfare. The authors do not present the dynamic patterns of emergence.The effect of piracy on legal sellers’ profits has been studied in the literature, with various mechanisms proposed by which piracy can be profit enhancing. Minniti and Vergari (2010) suggest that if piracy of one good increases the utility derived from purchase of another good, then profits can be increased by it. Banerjee (2013) notes that profits may rise as piracy goes up if network externalities are simultaneously present and sufficiently strong. A number of papers (Givon, Mahajan, & Muller, 1995, 1997; Haruvy, Mahajan, & Prasad, 2004; Liu, Cheng, Tang, & Eryarsoy, 2011; Prasad & Mahajan, 2003) use dynamic analyses to suggest that piracy can benefit legal sellers. A common theme is that piracy can act as a control on diffusion, either to reach a certain diffusion rate or network size. The analyses also generally include assumptions to stop piracy getting out of hand, and have absent or transient consumer heterogeneity.By contrast, Khouja and Smith (2007) present a dynamic model of piracy where consumers exhibit persistent heterogeneity and intertemporal price discrimination can occur. They show that piracy leads to departure from skimming and reductions in profit. In Khouja et al. (2008)’s dynamic analysis, the market for a product consists of a number of individuals each of whom may make a pirate copy from a fixed number of neighbours if the latter have the product. Skimming by the legal seller is profit maximising for low numbers of neighbours (when piracy is less extensive), but is not optimal as the numbers of neighbours rises.In modelling skimming and departures from it in the presence of piracy, Khouja et al. (2008) and Khouja and Smith (2007) overlap with our model and results. However, whereas Khouja et al. (2008) use simulation and Khouja and Smith (2007) use algebraic solution for pricing, we use a flexible numeric solution to solve our dynamic programming model. Their primary concern is not welfare, and Khouja et al. (2008) consider a fixed size market and Khouja and Smith (2007) examine a contracting one, compared with the expanding market we examine and that leads to our dynamic welfare trade-off.In this section, we describe our model of information good pricing in the presence of piracy. Diffusion is divided into acquisitions from a legal seller and pirate providers. The split is decided by competition between the two groups. Potential buyers are heterogeneous in their valuation of the good, so that price acts as a control variable on diffusion. The number of pirate providers rises with the number of previous buyers. Aside from pirate entry, additional dynamics in the model are induced by market growth. The legal seller performs dynamic optimisation over pricing, taking into account the dynamics within the model.There is a single legal producer of an information good. The legal producer is profit maximising and possesses the ability to produce the information good developed from their own research and development. The legal producer can instantly produce copies of the good at a constant unit cost. As the cost of production can be absorbed into net price, we without loss of generality set the cost to zero.At time t, there arektpirate providers of the good. Pirate providers produce copies of the good innovated by a legal seller. They initially get the production technology by acquiring a copy of the good from a legal seller or pirate provider. The technology may be as little as computer software and a DVD burner. Pirate providers are a subset of current good users, so as the number of past acquisitions rises, the number of pirate providers may increase too. We assume that the number of pirate providers is related to the number of goods previously sold by the equationkt=s∑τ=1t-1Sτhfort>1,s>0, andh>0(andk0=0) whereSτis all goods sold at time τ. Fractional numbers of pirate providers are allowed, representing providers who are less active than average. h is the elasticity of the number of pirate providers with respect to past sales. Its precise value does not change the main pricing mechanisms of interest here, so we take it to be one and term the coefficient of proportionality s as the piracy rate (see Khouja & Smith (2007), who present a model where the number of copies pirated in a period is a fixed proportion of past sales). The modifying effects of different values of h are described in the conclusion. The unit cost of pirate production is constant and we absorb it into the net price charged by pirate providers, so again we can without loss of generality set production cost at zero.The population who could have acquired the good by time t is denotedN(t).N(t)includes people who have already acquired the good and those who have not. We term this population as market size, as they are people who will acquire the good if they are offered it at a price below their valuation, but may not yet have been offered at such a price and prior to the product launch may not even be aware of it.N(t)can vary over time, for example with a rise in the number of owners of a technology necessary for the information good’s usage, such as DVD players or computers. A similar approach to growth in market size is used in Givon et al. (1995), and models the number of people who could potentially own the good because they meet the necessary criteria (like DVD player ownership) whether or not they have yet purchased the good (like a DVD). The market size can thus grow independently of the actual market availability of the good. Once the potential adopter has acquired the good, they will not acquire it for a second time.We denote the number of new potential buyers at time t byn(t)=N(t)-N(t-1). Potential buyers are heterogeneous in their willingness to pay for the good. We discriminate between their willingness to pay for the legally supplied and the pirate supplied good. For the legally supplied good, valuations of the good by consumers entering at time t are distributed uniformly over the interval[0,V]for some constant V (similar to the approach in Khouja & Park (2007); Khouja & Wang (2010); Jeong, Khouja, & Zhao (2012); Kogan, Ozinci, & Perlman (2013)). The number of consumers entering the market at time t with a valuation exceeding a pricep(t)is thus(1)∫p(t)Vn(t)Vdv=n(t)1-p(t)VAs V is a constant, we can choose the units onp(t)to absorb it and leave the aggregate demand functionqe,t=n(t)(1-p(t)), whereqe,tis the aggregate quantity demanded at time t and0⩽p(t)⩽1is the price of the legally supplied good at time t. Similarly, the initial consumers in the first period have an aggregate demand function ofqe,1=N(1)(1-p(1)). The aggregate demand at time t arising from both new entrants and previously entered non-users isqt(p(t)).Pirate suppliers price their good atppirate(t)at time t. In using the pirate supplied good, buyers choose to bring the quality up to the quality of a legally supplied good and in doing so must pay a proportion c of the legal pricep(t). We may optionally consider the extra price to be equal to the cost of quality restoration, so thecp(t)is an additional deadweight loss of pirate production. The effective price of acquiring a pirate copy of the good is thusppirate(t)+cp(t). Pirate suppliers price to remain competitive with legal suppliers, and setppirate(t)such thatppirate(t)+cp(t)=p(t), orppirate(t)=(1-c)p(t).Our framework does not explicitly allow for consumers facing piracy risk cost. Although some authors allow for non-zero risk cost (for example Jeong et al. (2012)), we consider zero risk cost to be a reasonable assumption in many markets where consumer use of pirated copies is very widespread and the prospect of individual prosecution is low, even if consumer awareness of the issue exists to any degree. For example BSA (2012) estimates 42 percent of all software products installed worldwide in 2011 were pirate copies, and in some developing countries the rates were much higher. Alternatively, we may consider part of the value reductioncp(t)to be due to the expected value loss due to the risk, and part of the restoration cost to arise from taking measures to avoid detection.Sales at any price are divided so that for each copy sold by the legal seller, each pirate provider sells j copies on average where j may be fractional and less than one. The share of legal sales in total sales is then1/(1+jkt), and the share of pirate sales in total sales isjkt/(1+jkt). Sincekt=s∑τ=1t-1Sτ, we absorb the constant j into the constant s without affecting our results. Hence aggregate legal sales are(2)11+ktp(t)qt(p(t))and aggregate pirate sales are(3)kt1+ktp(t)qt(p(t))The legal seller acts to maximise discounted future profits by setting a price sequence{p(t)}fort=1,…,Tfor some upper time limit T. T measures the period from when the legal seller is first able to sell the good to when demand for the good falls to zero even if some of the initial demand for the good was not satisfied. It is the length of time until a better product emerges and makes the current one obsolete. Because of independent discovery and the general drift in technological improvement (Dasgupta & Maskin, 1987; Merton, 1961), the time T is assumed not to depend on when the product launch occurs. Thus, the legal seller has a finite time in which to exploit their good, and if the seller chooses to price the good so that sales start later than the first period, then the length of sales period is shorter than T. We could assume that the obsolescence date is stochastic, but for clarity about our intended mechanism and for ease of calculation we take the latest possible sales period as fixed at T.In maximising profits, the legal sellers take into account the exogenous dynamics in market size, and the endogenous dynamics in demand preference and pirate emergence. The legal seller is assumed to have perfect knowledge of all parameters and future dynamics. They face a dynamic programming problem whose objective function to be maximised follows from collecting the above expressions:(4)∑t=1Tdt1+ktp(t)qt(p(t))where d is the legal seller’s discount per period.We investigate the theoretical properties of the model by solving the legal seller’s problem in Eq. (4) through discretisation of the demand function and exhaustive search of pricing sequences with tracking of demand structure. We calculate the properties over a five year period with annual price setting and monthly market growth. These time parameters are set for practical and empirical reasons. The annual pricing is intended to reflect the persistence of prices due to contractual agreements, menu costs, and the increase in option values of delaying purchase (so dampening the effectiveness of a price change). When we have a five year horizon, the number of numerical calculations required by our solution algorithm is relatively limited and the solution is quick. We take five years as the lifetime of our information good, following Liu et al. (2011) on software products.In numerical analysis, we discretise the demand function for new entrantsqe,tby dividing then(t)new market entrants into M equal partsn(t)/M,2n(t)/M,…,n(t), with corresponding valuation pricesp1(t),p2(t),…,pM(t). We find pricepm(t)for anym=1,2,…,Mby solving for the price at the mid-point of the band,0.5((m-1)+m)n(t)/M=n(t)(1-pm(t))orpm(t)=1-(m-0.5)/M. Zero demand is obtained atp0(t)=1. We definenm(t)to be the number of new entrants with willingness to pay ofpm(t), form=1,2,…,M-1. Thennm(t)=int(n(t)/M)whereint(x)denotes the integer part of x. We take the lowest valuation whenm=Mas additionally including all rounding errors, sonM(t)=n(t)-∑m=1M-1nm(t). The willingness to pay of the initial consumers at timet=1is similarly discretised. We defineCm(t)as the number of current potential buyers at time t (both from new entrants and previously entered non-users) with willingness to pay ofpm(t).When the unique offer price in the market is from the legal seller and isp(t), the number of individuals valuing the good at more thanp(t)is∑m∈mp(t)Cm(t)wheremp(t)={m:1-(m-0.5)/M⩾p(t)}, which approximates the aggregate demand functionqt(p(t)). We can then approximate Eqs. (2)–(4) for legal sales, pirate sales, and the legal seller’s objective function respectively as(5)11+ktp(t)∑m∈mp(t)Cm(t)(6)kt1+ktp(t)∑m∈mp(t)Cm(t)and(7)∑t=1Tdt1+ktp(t)∑m∈mp(t)Cm(t)The dynamics of the number of potential buyers in each valuation band are given byCm(t+1)=nm(t)if1-(m-0.5)/M⩾p(t)andCm(t+1)=Cm(t)+nm(t)otherwise. The dynamic in the number of pirate providers is described bykt=s∑τ=1t-1∑m∈mp(τ)Cm(τ). Starting values areCm(0)=0for all m andk0=0.The expression (7) for maximisation may be considered a weighted sum of the per period sales, where the weights are themselves endogenously defined as the legal seller’s current shares. The per period sales are constrained by the market growth. This interpretation helps to clarify the subsequent role of piracy, which reduces the weights over time and whose effect depends on the possible set of sales.For a given parameter set, the legal seller’s problem is solved to give a sequence of prices as the control variable and a sequence of sales as the response variable. We solve the problem by a dynamic programming algorithm over the five year period. The algorithm tracks the price sequences that lead to the highest discounted revenue. At each time period, the possible non-user distributions at the start of the period are found by taking the possible distributions at the end of the previous period and increasing market size if growth occurs in the period. The market growth is spread evenly over all valuation points, and increases at the specified speed. For each distribution at the start of the period, new distributions are generated by having the legal seller offer to sell at each possible price. The possible prices at the start of each year are the valuation prices plus a higher price corresponding to no sales, and for all other months are constrained to be the previous month’s price. At each price and each starting distribution, non-users at valuation levels exceeding the price buy the good and leave the non-user distribution. Each resulting distribution has an associated price sequence comprising the price sequence associated with the preceding distribution together with the present price, and a sales sequence generated similarly. We iterate over all periods to obtain final price and sales sequences after five years. The sequence of numbers of pirate sellers is calculated as the specified proportion s of the one period lagged cumulative sales sequence. We retain the pair with the highest discounted revenue, giving the optimal price choices of the legal seller. Discounted revenue to the legal seller is calculated as the legal share of total revenue divided between legal and pirate sellers.In all solutions we hold the monthly discount factor d constant at a rate of1/1.01, equivalent to annual discounting of 12.7 percent. The market growth is specified to be zero or a positive constant. We use five valuation points on the discretised demand distribution (M=5). Table 1summarises the parameter values used. The effects of varying parameter values and assumptions are discussed in Sections 5–7.The estimation was implemented in the R programming language (R Development Core Team, 2009). The code is available from the author’s website.1http://ebasic.easily.co.uk/02E044/05304E/pricing_info_goods_EJOR.html.1Fig. 1shows how dynamic prices change as the piracy rate rises, when market size is held constant (at 100,000). The circles indicate prices when there is no piracy. Prices decline four times between every period, as the legal seller sells to each valuation band in turn. Demand is fully met in the final period as prices reach the lowest valuation band. Triangles indicate pricing at a higher rate of piracy, where piracy’s effect is equivalent to sharing sales with100,000×0.000005=0.5other identical legal sellers at the end of the product life. There are three price declines that occur at the end of the first three years, falling from the second highest valuation band to the lowest in year four. The legal seller then exits the exhausted market. Crosses show pricing when piracy reaches the equivalent of ten legal sellers. Prices fall from the middle to the lowest valuation band after three years, followed by market exit from the fourth period onwards. Considering all the pricing behaviour together, we see that pricing starts at a high valuation band, it finishes in the lowest band with all demand satisfied, and price changes become more compressed near the start of the period as piracy increases.We can rationalise the observations by reference to the legal seller’s profit maximisation. In the absence of piracy, the company can extract all surplus from the market by charging each buyer their highest willingness to pay. The company can do so by practicing intertemporal price discrimination. If discounting is not excessive relative to the gains of intertemporal price discrimination - that is, relative to the gap between valuation bands – then skimming will be practiced.As the piracy rate increases, pirate providers will emerge as competitors in proportion to the number of owners. So sales made in months after earlier sales periods will be reduced in value. The value of strategies that spread sales over long periods, including intertemporal price discrimination, will decline relative to the value of strategies that concentrate sales over smaller timescales. Selecting an optimal pricing strategy balances the returns from intertemporal price discrimination against the losses due to piracy. We can see the selection in Fig. 1. Price changes are increasingly concentrated over smaller periods and occur earlier. The timing of the compressed price changes is determined by the discounting which makes early sales more valuable to the legal seller than late sales.With fixed market size and positive discounting, piracy leads to earlier price declines than under intertemporal price discrimination. Such pricing strategies accelerate sales. We can quantify the acceleration in response to piracy by examining the mean time for sales,(8)∑t=1TtSt∑t=1TStwhereStare the total sales at time t. The formula only includes sales made during the product life. When sales satisfy all market demand, the mean times for sales and diffusion coincide. However, as we will shortly see instances in which diffusion is incomplete and the mean time for diffusion is infinite, we consider the mean time for sales instead.The mean time for sales may be decomposed into time until product launch and mean sales time after launch, in the form(9)∑t=1T(t-L)St∑t=1TSt+Lwhere L is the launch time, that is, the first period of sales.We calculate the launch time and post-launch mean sales time for piracy rates between 0 and 0.0001. The results are shown in Fig. 2. The launch time is always the first month, so the total and post launch mean sales times are just shifted by a single month. They reduce sharply as the piracy rate rises a little, with a further reduction at a higher rate.We now examine welfare. We saw in the last subsection that in our model, sales are accelerated by piracy, so the value people derive from them should be discounted less and welfare should increase. The changing pricing strategy may also be expected to change the division of welfare between company and buyer. In this section, we examine how welfare is divided into profits, consumer surplus, and pirate charges. As it is assumed that profits and charges are net of production costs, pirate charges are surplus captured by producers of the pirate good. We could include non-zero and differential production costs in the model, but the analysis would move us away from timing issues in welfare and towards other theoretical mechanisms (Bae & Choi, 2006; Belleflamme, 2002; Besen, 1986; Johnson, 1985).We have seen that the formula for a company’s discounted profits is given by Eq. (7). The corresponding equation for acquisition charges from pirate sources is(10)∑t=1Tdtkt1+ktp(t)∑m∈mp(t)Cm(t)Then the total cost of adoption from any source is the sum of Eqs. (7) and (10), or(11)∑t=1Tdt∑m∈mp(t)p(t)Cm(t)The total gross value derived from adoption from either legal or pirate sources is the same as the total welfare. Sales occur for buyers with willingness to buy of1-(m-0.5)/Mif and only if1-(m-0.5)/M⩾p(t). Thus, the formula for discounted total value derived from sales (and hence total welfare) is(12)∑t=1Tdt∑m∈mp(t)(1-(m-0.5)/M)Cm(t)Total consumer surplus is the difference between total welfare in Eq. (12) and total acquisition costs in Eq. (11), or(13)∑t=1Tdt∑m∈mp(t)((1-(m-0.5)/M)-p(t))Cm(t)Fig. 3shows welfare and its components as a function of the piracy rate. As expected, total welfare rises as piracy does due to the reduced discounting. The welfare rise is much gentler than the decline in sales time, as most sales acceleration is to buyers with lower valuations. In the mean sales time calculation, only the number of sales matter, whereas in the welfare calculation the valuations are included.Profits account for the entire surplus when piracy is zero as perfect skimming is practiced. When the piracy rate increases a little, profits drop sharply as companies begin to share our their profits with small number of pirate providers over most of their extended sales strategy. As the piracy rate rises, the number of pirating agents who share the income increases linearly, so the legal share declines in inverse proportion and by smaller amounts as the rate rises. Moreover, price changes are more compressed in time at the higher rates of piracy, so that increases in piracy act over small periods of time.As the piracy rate rises from zero, pirate charges rapidly increase their share of total welfare. The rate of increase declines over time, and the share reaches its maximum value at a rate of 0.000075. A general small trend to increase persists thereafter. However, there is a large downward correction in the share of piracy as the rate reaches 0.00008, and as a result pirate charges are smaller when piracy rates are largest compared with more moderate rates.At low levels of piracy, price adjustment is delayed because earlier adjustment reduces the extent of intertemporal price discrimination excessively. So piracy is present when prices are higher during the early skimming, and so pirate providers receive quite a large part of total welfare. As piracy increases, it becomes optimal for the legal seller to reduce prices earlier on, and so pirate providers capture lower shares of total welfare.Consumer surplus is zero at the lowest rates of piracy. It increases by steps as the rate rises. At the higher rates of piracy it accounts for more than pirate charges, at around a quarter of profits. The behaviour may be explained by noting that when the piracy rate is low, perfect intertemporal price discrimination extracts all profits from consumers. The surplus extraction falls as the piracy rate increases and pricing strategy departs from skimming. The large departure from price discrimination that occurs at high piracy rates results in consumer surplus gains.We summarise the preferences for piracy rates by the market participants when market size is fixed. Legal sellers prefer no piracy as they can extract the entire market surplus. Pirate providers prefer a moderately high rate where they can capture as much of the market as possible without triggering the legal seller to reduce prices too steeply and early, leaving the pirate providers with few and low valuing buyers. Consumers like piracy as high as possible because of the price reductions entailed by piracy prevention.In this section, we examine pricing in the presence of piracy when market size starts at zero and increases by 1000 every month. Fig. 4shows the pricing strategy as the piracy rate rises. The circles show pricing when piracy is zero. Prices are held at the highest consumer valuation for two years. Then prices are reduced by three steps, from the highest valuation to the second lowest. The triangles show pricing at a higher piracy rate, so that there are pirate providers equivalent to60×1000×0.00007=4.2legal sellers by the end of the product life. The pricing adjusts so that the legal seller delays its market entry until the start of the fourth year and then reduces its prices over two years. The crosses show pricing when piracy ends up equivalent to six legal sellers. The legal seller holds launch until the last year, and then puts prices at the third lowest valuation.When there is no piracy, the explanation for the pricing is that the legal seller attempts to extract as much available surplus as possible. In the first few years, they sell only at the top valuation price and so capture all surplus from the top valuers. As the market size is growing, the consumers in the top valuation band are replaced and surplus can continue being extracted from them. However, the number of consumers in lower valuation bands also grows and it enhances profits to sell to them after a time.For non-zero piracy, the early sales increase the number of pirate providers who share later revenues. There is an increase in the value of strategies that compress price reductions relative to strategies that stagger them, which we again see in the graph with the compression becoming acuter as the piracy rate rises. The timing of the compression is due to the market growth. Early sales would capture little of the total market emergent over the whole product lifetime, but would expose the legal seller to piracy when market size is much larger. So it is optimal to delay the compression until later in the period, with the delay rising with the piracy rate.We can examine the relation between piracy and market growth by referring again to the legal seller’s optimisation problem. A change in the constant market growth rate altersnm(t)tobnm(t)for some constant b and all t. Since the valuation bands evolve underCm(t+1)=nm(t)if1-(m-0.5)/M⩾p(t)andCm(t+1)=Cm(t)+nm(t)otherwise,Cm(t)is also scaled up by a factor of b for all t and m. Further, as pirate sales are proportional to past sales,kt=s∑τ=1t-1∑m∈mp(τ)Cm(τ)and soktis also increased by a factor of b. Inserting these adjusted functional forms in maximised expression (7), we have(14)∑t=1Tdt1+bs∑τ=1t-1∑m∈mp(τ)Cm(τ)p(t)b∑m∈mp(t)Cm(t)The b multiplying the fraction can be factored out of the objective function entirely and so does not affect decision making. Thus, the effect of a change in the constant growth rate on diffusion is the same as a change in the piracy rate, up to a rescaling of the diffusion curve.Another way of expressing the result is that piracy is a share of past sales, so the effect on piracy of a scaling in sales is equivalent to an increase in the share of pirate sales out of past sales. All income is directly rescaled by the same factor, so does not affect the legal seller’s decision making. Thus, a rescaled market growth is equivalent to a piracy rate change for decision making, and an equivalent rescaling for the overall income. The result is shown graphically in Fig. 5.2Thanks to Paul Fenn for suggesting a graphical interpretation.2CurveC1traces total market size at one rate of growth and curveC2traces market size emerging at a rate b times higher. The sales pathO1is optimal out of many possible paths, with the sum of points on the path giving the sales path’s value to the company. Rescaling piracy by1/band increasing market size by a factor of b maps the set of possible sales paths forC1to the set forC2. Thus, the optimal sales pathO2is just the optimal sales pathO1scaled upwards by b at the revised piracy rate.Fig. 6shows the mean total sales time as a function of the piracy rate, divided into the time until launch and mean sales time after launch. The total sales time initially does not change with a rising piracy rate, but then undergoes small jump increases as the market entry date shifts backwards. The launch date is delayed heavily by rises in the piracy rate. Its movement alternates between large jumps and long periods of no change. The post-launch mean sales time displays the opposite movement. There is initially a long sales time, but the time falls to almost zero at the maximum piracy rate.When we examined sales times for the fixed market size, the post-launch sales time also declined with rising piracy. However, the launch time remained the same for all piracy rates, in contrast to the results for the increasing market size here. The differences in launch time explain the divergent findings on mean total sales time.Fig. 7shows total welfare as a function of the piracy rate, decomposed into consumer surplus, pirate charges, and legal seller profits. The total welfare declines over time, with one very minor decline in welfare (at a rate of 0.00006) and two larger ones. Welfare is unchanging for most rates. Company profits decline rapidly when the piracy rate first starts to increase before the decline slows, as profits are inversely related to the number of pirating agents.Pirate charges are subject to a general increase that is initially rapid and then slows, as the rate of substitution for legal sales declines. However, pirate charges undergo downward revisions of increasing magnitude as the piracy rate increases, with the final revision eradicating most of the pirate charges. The declines are due to compression of price changes and truncation of sales at the end of the product life.Consumer surplus does not change as the piracy rate rises through low and moderate levels. As the rate rises a little further, there is a large increase in welfare as price changes are compressed and more surplus is transferred from providers to buyers. The piracy rate then increases again without any change in surplus, before surplus increases slightly at the highest piracy rate. The surplus increase is a result of two effects: an additional delay leading to increased discounting and reduced consumer surplus, and reduced skimming and surplus extraction by companies. The latter effect is the dominant one.We can again order the preferences for piracy of the market participants based on the welfare they derive. The legal seller prefers no piracy while pirate providers prefer a moderate rate, but do badly at very high rates. Consumers like high piracy rates. Preferences for small changes in piracy rates depend on the current rate. At low rates, it is in the interest of pirate providers to increase rates but against the interest of legal sellers. At two particular rates, consumers benefit from small increases in the rate but pirate providers suffer, but usually consumers are indifferent to the increase and pirate providers benefit.Our model identifies a dynamic welfare trade-off due to piracy. Total welfare increases with the piracy rate when market size is constant, while it declines with the piracy rate when market size is rising. The different welfare outcomes indicate the presence of two competing mechanisms that are differentially activated by the rate of market growth. On one hand, piracy induces compression of price changes that accelerates sales and increases welfare. On the other hand, piracy increases the product launch delay in the presence of market growth, so decelerating sales. If the piracy rate or market growth are very high, product launch may be so delayed that some consumers who would have otherwise purchased it do not buy the product before it becomes obsolescent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
