@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The stability of survival

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Changes in parameter estimates of discrete survival models over time investigated.Decomposed changes in distributions of predicted probability of default.Changes due to cohort of borrowers, macroeconomic conditions and model's parameters.Different debtors are affected differently by same changes in economy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forecasting,Robustness and sensitivity analysis,Macroeconomic variables,Structural change,Probability forecasting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Using a large portfolio of credit card loans observed between 2002 and 2011 provided by a major UK bank, we investigate the stability of the parameter estimates of discrete survival models, especially since the start of the credit crisis of 2008. Two survival models are developed for accounts that were accepted before and since the crisis. We find that the two sets of parameter estimates are statistically different from each other. By applying the estimated parameters onto a common test set, we also show that they give different predictions of probabilities of default. The changes in the predicted probability distributions are then investigated. We theorise them to be due to the quality of the cohort accepted under different economic conditions, or due to the drastically different economic conditions that was seen in the UK economy, or a combination of both. We test for each effect.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The application of survival analysis models onto credit-related problems is not new (for example, see Banasik, Crook, & Thomas, 1999; Pennington-Cross, 2010) and is welcomed for its ability to take into account factors that are inherent in the modelling of credit risk and the prediction of credit events, where regression methods are unable to. First, survival models are able to account for censoring, which allows for a realistic and practical model to be developed. Second, they are able to incorporate time-dependent variables with ease, which will allow the inclusion of time-dependent account-specific covariates as well as time-dependent macroeconomic variables in credit models. When this is combined with simulation, a plausible platform for stress testing is created, as proposed by Rodriguez and Trucharte (2007), Leow, Mues, and Thomas (2011) and Bellotti and Crook (2013, 2014). Third, and most crucially, survival models are able to generate probabilities of how likely an event is to occur over time, conditional on the event not having occurred before, and this provides a dynamic framework for the prediction of credit events (e.g. default or customer churn of credit loans, repossession or early-prepayment for mortgage loans). Because the likelihood of the credit event occurring over time can be estimated, the corresponding losses (Mcdonald, Matuszyk, & Thomas, 2010) or profits (Ma, Crook, & Ansell, 2010) can also be predicted. In terms of how well survival models predict, there has been some work done specifically to compare its prediction to that of regression models: Stepanova and Thomas (2002) looked at the model performances in the prediction of early prepayment and default of personal loans; Bellotti and Crook (2009) looked at model performances in the prediction of default of credit card loans. Both papers found that survival models are able to predict better than static regression models.This work does not attempt to revisit the advantages of survival models over their regression counterparts – that much has been established in the literature over different retail products. The work here differs from the existing literature in two ways. First, we have a rich source of credit card loan data that goes from 2002 to 2011, and so encompasses the credit crisis from 2008, which is not commonly available. Macroeconomic indicators over time will show a large difference in values, and it would be interesting to explore how these large and unexpected changes would affect default models and their predictions. Second, we investigate the stability of survival model parameter estimates before and after the credit crisis. Using a portfolio of active credit cards observed between January 2002 and March 2011, we investigate whether parameter estimates change over the crisis period, and whether the inclusion of time-varying covariates representing the economy are able to adequately account for changes to debtors’ propensity to default. By separately and independently estimating a survival model for periods before and since the start of the credit crisis, i.e. 2002–2007 and 2008–2011 respectively, we use the Chow test (more details in Section 4.1) to check for statistical differences between the two sets of parameter estimates. To illustrate how the two sets of parameter estimates are different, we apply each survival model developed onto a common test set to get the average predicted probabilities over the (duration) time of the loan.During the course of this work, population drift, and how it might affect parameter estimates, is also considered as a related issue, due to the differing types of debtors securing credit accounts before and during the credit crisis. However, because of the large variations in macroeconomic conditions that was seen in our period of interest, it is also possible that changes in distributions of probabilities are due to the changes in these macroeconomic variables. We investigate the effects of either by selecting two cohorts, representing a set of accounts accepted during a non-downturn period and a downturn period, and estimating a survival model for each period. We then create test sets based on each training set, by holding constant either the cohort quality or the macroeconomic conditions, and compare the distribution of predicted probabilities to see how the distributions shift due to changes in cohort quality or economic conditions. We find macroeconomic conditions do affect probabilities of default, and could affect different groups of debtors in different ways.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
