@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
DEA production games

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Owen’s linear production game is extended to non-parametric production technology.Several organizations, possibly with different technologies, may cooperate.Resources can be pooled and their production technologies shared.Cooperation increases the total revenue that can be obtained.Cooperative game theory is proposed for allocating this revenue surplus.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Linear production games,Data Envelopment Analysis,Resource pooling,Technology sharing,Cooperative games,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, linear production games are extended so that instead of assuming a linear production technology with fixed technological coefficients, the more general, non-parametric, DEA production technology is considered. Different organizations are assumed to possess their own technology and the cooperative game arises from the possibility of pooling their available inputs, collectively processing them and sharing the revenues. Two possibilities are considered: using a joint production technology that results from merging their respective technologies or each cooperating organization keeping its own technology. This gives rise to two different DEA production games, both of which are totally balanced and have a non-empty core. A simple way of computing a stable solution, using the optimal dual solution for the grand coalition, is presented. The full cooperation scenario clearly produces more benefits for the organizations involved although the implied technology sharing is not always possible. Examples of applications of the proposed approach are given.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Owen (1975) used cooperative game theory to study a general class of Linear Production (LP) games in which multiple decision makers (i.e. players) can decide whether or not to pool their available resources to produce some goods. The main characteristic of this type of production game is that it assumes a linear production function. Thus, for each observed (or possible) operation point(x¯j,y¯j), a linear relationship holdsy¯j=Ax¯jwhere A is a matrix of the corresponding dimensions. Geometrically, this means that all the input–output vectors lie on a single hyperplane, given by matrix A. This linear production relationship is often expressed asBy¯j=x¯j, which computes the amount of resourcesx¯jrequired to produce a given vectory¯j. In the Operations Research literature the elements of matrix B are called technological coefficients and represent the amounts of each resource that are consumed in the production of one unit of each output product.Many researchers have extended Owen’s LP game in different directions. Thus, for example, Granot (1986) studied generalized linear production games in which the resources vector of a coalition is not necessarily the sum of the resources of each of the coalition members. Feltkamp et al. (1993) have studied linear production games with the transport of products and resources. van Gellekom et al. (2000) give an axiomatic characterization of the Owen set solution concept. Nishizaki and Sakawa (2000) consider linear production games in which the data coefficients are fuzzy while Fukuda et al. (2005) have studied linear production games with fuzzy coalitions.However, the two most relevant extensions of linear production games are the Linear Transformation of Products (LTP) games of Timmer et al. (2000) and the Non-Centralized Linear Production (NCLP) games of Fernández et al. (2005). LTP games consider that each producer has the possibility of using different input–output transformation techniques that are linear in nature. A coalition of producers can use all the resources and transformation techniques of its members to maximize its joint profit. They assume that not only final products but also input resources are marketable and that producers are price-takers. On the other hand, NCLP games distinguish between the centralized LP game of Owen (1975), in which all the resources are pooled and production takes place in a single facility (which can be one of the producers, for example), and the NCLP game, in which each producer maintains its own plant, using its own linear production technology and selling the products at its own set of prices.In this paper, we will consider a piecewise-linear production function estimated through Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). DEA is a non-parametric approach for assessing the relative efficiency of a set of similar units, generally designated as Decision Making Units (DMUs). The DEA production function derives from the Production Possibility Set (PPS), also known as production technology (T). This set is formed by all feasible input–output bundles and it is inferred from the input–output data of the observed DMUs.Note that if the observed DMUs follow a linear production function, i.e.y¯j=Ax¯j∀j∈Dthen the hyperplane on which all the DMUs lie coincides with the one identified by the efficient frontier estimated by DEA under Constant Returns to Scale (CRS). Hence, it can be argued that DEA is a more general production function, that allows different Returns To Scale assumptions and does not require the existence of fixed technological coefficients or any other functional specification at all. Actually, in DEA there is no such concept as technological coefficients since, in general, the amount of each input consumed to produce each output cannot be traced because the inputs are shared in the production processes of the different outputs. The only information required in DEA is the total amount of each input consumed and of each output produced by each DMU. However, the DEA axiom of scalability allows the observed input–output bundles to have the same function as the linear transformation techniques in Timmer et al. (2000) or the linear production technologies in Owen (1975) or Fernández et al. (2005). The fact that scalability is an optional axiom in DEA means that the proposed DEA production games are a generalization of these linear production games with which they may coincide in the CRS case.A number of DEA games have been proposed in the literature. Some of them are two-person zero-sum games (e.g. Banker, 1980; Banker et al., 1989; Rousseau and Semple, 1995; Semple, 1996; Hao et al., 2000a, 2000b). Other researchers have used a Nash equilibrium approach (e.g. Liang et al., 2008a; Wu et al., 2009b) or Stackelberg games (e.g. Liang et al., 2008b; Zha and Liang, 2010). Finally, Nash bargaining (Wu et al., 2009c; Du et al., 2011) and other DEA cooperative game theory approaches (e.g. Wu et al., 2009a; Lozano, 2012) have also been proposed.Other strands of related DEA research are those of structural efficiency, merger analysis and resource reallocation. In the case of structural efficiency its aim is to measure the extent to which an industry keeps up with the performance of its own best firms (e.g. Farrell, 1957; Førsund and Hjalmarsson, 1979). In the case of mergers, a number of researchers have looked at the potential gains that can be obtained through horizontal mergers (e.g. Bogetoft et al., 2003; Bogetoft and Wang, 2005; Lozano and Villa, 2010). Finally, resource reallocation is another sensible way of enhancing the efficient use of limited resources (e.g. Pachkova, 2009; Lozano et al., 2009).As for potential applications of the collaborative games proposed in this paper, there are many. Take, for example, the possibility of hospitals and clinics in an urban area collaborating and sharing their resources and best practices. Or consider a group of farmers sharing their resources and technology. Another field that might benefit from this type of horizontal collaboration schemes is that of construction and civil works. In general, whenever some organizations are not fully using their resources or do not have the most productive technology or have a mutually complementary efficient input–output mix, pooling their resources and technology may lead to synergies that translate into higher aggregated revenue. But to facilitate the collaboration a fair method of sharing the gains from the collaboration must be established first. Our proposal is to use collaborative game theory for that end.Thus, in this paper two variants of a DEA production game that generalizes the class of linear production games are presented. The structure of the paper is the following. In Section 2 the two DEA production games are introduced and formulated. In Section 3 some properties (such as superadditivity and total balancedness) of this type of game are studied and a procedure to find a solution that lies in the core of the game is presented. In Section 4 an illustration of the proposed approach is described and discussed. Finally, the last section summarizes and concludes.Let us consider as a starting point the LP game in Owen (1975). There are n decision makers (i.e. players), with each player p possessing its own resourceb¯Pvector that it can use, alone or in a coalition with other players, to produce certain productsy¯using a linear production function with technological matrix B. The price vectorw¯of the different products is known so that the total revenue can be maximized using a simple linear programming model. Thus, let S be a coalition formed by one or more players that decide to cooperate and pool their respective resource vectors. The total resource vector available to the coalition S is, thus,b¯S=∑p∈Sb¯p. The total revenue that can be obtained by coalition S is(1)v(S)=Maxw¯·y¯Ss.t.By¯S⩽b¯Sy¯S⩾0That is, the coalition S must decide how much to produce of each product so that the available resources are not exceeded and the total revenue maximized. The total revenue v(S) is the characteristic function that assigns to each coalition its worth. The question arises of how to divide the worth of the grand coalition (i.e. the one formed by all players, denoted N) among the players. Owen (1975) proved that this cooperative game is balanced and, therefore, has a non-empty core. He also showed how to compute a stable payoff allocation using the optimal dual solution of the above model. Recall that a payoff allocation is stable if no coalition is interested in leaving the grand coalition and that the core is the set of payoff allocations that are stable. Therefore, it is important that the core is not empty. One way of finding that out is proving that the game is balanced since the well-known Bondareva–Shapley theorem states that a cooperative game is balanced if, and only if, its core is not empty (Shapley, 1967).Let us denote byxˆpandyˆp, the resource consumption and output vector, respectively, of the producer (i.e. player)p,w¯pits corresponding unit output prices vector and Bpthe linear production technology of producer p. The NCLP game in Fernández et al. (2005) can be formulated as:(2)v′(S)=Max∑p∈Sw¯p·yˆps.t.Bpyˆp⩽xˆp∀p∈S∑p∈Sxˆp⩽b¯Sw¯p·yˆp⩾v({p})∀p∈Sxˆp,yˆp⩾0∀p∈SNote that v({p}) represents the maximum revenue that producer p can obtain on its own, i.e. without entering into any coalition. This value corresponds to the solution of model (1) for S={p}. That amount also coincides with v′({p}), i.e. with the value of model (2) for S={p}. The corresponding constraints in model (2) impose that, when entering into a coalition S, each producer p must keep on obtaining for its production at least the same revenue that it can obtain when producing on its own. These constraints may be unnecessarily restrictive, constraining the resource flows between producers. Therefore, in Section 2.3, in order to be comparable with the proposed DEA production games, which do not impose such restrictions, this constraint will be dropped from the above model. Note, in this respect, that what is important is not so much the value of the production of each player but the share of the total revenue of the coalition that will be assigned to each player by the game solution adopted.Finally, in order to formulate the extended LTP game in Timmer et al. (2000), let T(p) represent the set of (linear) transformation techniques available to player/producer p andI¯pthe vector of initial inventory (i.e. before production takes place) of the output products of player p. Recall that this game considers an initial endowment of resources and output products, and that not only output products are marketable (at pricew¯)but also input resources can be sold (at priceω¯). Each transformation technique r is specified by two vectors(x¯r,y¯r). The decision variables γrcorrespond to the activity levels of each available production technique. Multiplying the technological vectors(x¯r,y¯r)by γr, the corresponding resource consumptionγrx¯rand output productionγry¯rcan be computed. Finally, letI¯S=∑p∈SI¯pbe the sum of the initial inventories of the different members of the coalition. The resulting characteristic function optimization model is then:(3)v″(S)=Maxω¯·b¯S-∑p∈S∑r∈T(p)x¯rγr+w¯·I¯S+∑p∈S∑r∈T(p)y¯rγrs.t.∑p∈S∑r∈T(p)x¯rγr⩽b¯Sγr⩾0∀p∈S∀r∈T(p)In Section 2.3, in order to compare the above model with the proposed DEA production games, which, without loss of generality, do not consider either initial inventories of output products or marketable inputs, it will be assumed thatI¯p=0∀pandω¯=0.The aim is to extend the above linear production games considering the following DEA context. Let us assume that there are n organizations (i.e. players). Each organization p has a set D (p) of recorded observationsx¯j,y¯jof the production process and has a set F(p) of production facilities which use that production process and whose input and output levels(xˆf,yˆf)for a given time horizon and for each facility f∈F(p) must be planned. The outputs of each facility can be sold at the prices given by a vectorw¯fthat are different for each facility f. Each organization p has a total amount of inputs available, given by vectorb¯p.Before introducing the possibility of cooperation, let us consider how an organization p, acting on its own, could plan its operations to maximize its revenue, using superindex 0 to denote that situation. This is a centralized resource allocation problem (e.g. Lozano and Villa, 2004) and can be formulated, assuming VRS, as(4)R0({p})=Max∑f∈F(p)w¯f·yˆfs.t.∑j∈D(p)λjfx¯j⩽xˆf∀f∈F(p)∑j∈D(p)λjfy¯j⩾yˆf∀f∈F(p)∑f∈F(p)xˆf⩽b¯p∑j∈D(p)λjf=1∀f∈F(p)λjf⩾0∀j∀f∈F(p)This linear programming model corresponds to the total revenue that organization p can obtain from its available inputs and using its own technology. But, what if organization p has the possibility of reaching a horizontal cooperation agreement with other organizations, so that they pool their available inputs to jointly plan their operations and share the total revenues? In that case we would have a DEA production game in which each coalition would have a worth that can be computed by solving a linear programming model that will be formulated below.But before that, we need to differentiate two scenarios, which will lead to two variants of the DEA production game. In scenario I, let us label it technology-sharing, the cooperating players, in addition to pooling their available inputs, share their best practices so that the facilities of all of them can operate at operation points that are feasible in the expanded joint technology that results from merging their respective technologies. In that case, the total revenue of a coalition S can be computed as(5)RI(S)=Max∑p∈S∑f∈F(p)w¯f·yˆfs.t.∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λjfx¯j⩽xˆf∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λjfy¯j⩾yˆf∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)∑p∈S∑f∈F(p)xˆf⩽∑p∈Sb¯p∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λjf=1∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)λjf⩾0∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)∀p′∈S∀j∈D(p′)Note that this optimization model computes the target operating point of each facility (belonging to any player p) using a convex linear combination of the observed DMUs of all players p′ participating in the coalition. The total amount of resource consumed cannot however exceed the total amount resulting from the pooling of the resources available to the coalition.Scenario I is the most beneficial for the coalition (in the sense that it would allow them to achieve the largest revenue) but it is also the most difficult to reach since it requires a higher level of trust and involvement in the cooperation. The second scenario, which may be labeled resource-pooling-only, requires a lower level of commitment on the part of the cooperating organizations. In this case, the organizations jointly plan their operations, allocating their pooled available inputs among them but each organization must decide the input–output bundles of its facilities using only its own technology. The corresponding linear programming model is(6)RII(S)=Max∑p∈S∑f∈F(p)w¯f·yˆfs.t.∑j∈D(p)λjfx¯j⩽xˆf∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)∑j∈D(p)λjfy¯j⩾yˆf∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)∑p∈S∑f∈F(p)xˆf⩽∑p∈Sb¯p∑j∈D(p)λjf=1∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)λjf⩾0∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)∀j∈D(p)As it can be seen, the differences between the above two DEA models are subtle but important. Basically, the differences are in the multipliers that intervene in the convex linear combination that defines the target inputs and outputs of each facility. In scenario I, for each facility of any organization, all the observation sets D(p) of all the organizations can be used to form the convex linear combination. On the other hand, in scenario II, for a given facility f belonging to a certain organization p(f), only the DMUs in its own set of observations D(p(f)) can be used to form the convex linear combination.In this section, the proposed DEA production games are shown to be proper generalizations of the related linear production games presented in Section 2.1. However, some additional notation must be introduced first. For each output Letδ¯jbe a unit vector of dimensionality equal to the number of products, with all its components equal to zero except the jth component, which is equal to unity. Given a technological matrix B, let (B)jdenote its jth column vector. This can be computed as(B)j=Bδ¯j. Let also m be the number of columns of matrix B, which is equal to the number of output products considered in the corresponding linear production game.Proposition 1Given any instance of the LP game inOwen (1975), with characteristic function given by model(1)above, equivalent DEA production games (N,RI) and (N,RII) can be defined with the following characteristics:•CRS are assumedw¯f=w¯∀p∀f∈F(p)D(p)={(Bδ¯j,δ¯j),j=1,2,…,m}=D∀p∣F(1)∣=1∣F(p)∣=0∀p≠1With the specified characteristics, model (5) becomes(7)RI(S)=Maxw¯·yˆ1s.t.∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λj1Bδ¯j⩽xˆ1∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λj1δ¯j⩾yˆ1xˆ1⩽∑p∈Sb¯pλj1⩾0∀p′∈S∀j∈D(p′)Since the constraints that define the target output vectoryˆ1hold as equalities, this value can be substituted in the objective function. Also, since it can be easily checked that there is an optimal solution to the above model in which the constraints that define the target inputxˆ1also hold as equalities, the available input resource constraints can be compacted and the model becomes(8)RI(S)=Maxw¯·∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λj1δ¯js.t.B∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λj1δ¯j⩽b¯Sλj1⩾0∀p′∈S∀j∈D(p′)which is equivalent to model (1) just defining the variablesy¯S=∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λj1δ¯j⩾0. The proof for the case of game (N,RII) is analogous and is shown in the online annex. □Therefore, the equivalent DEA production games defined in Proposition 1 consider that all players have the same set of observed DMUs D, which are computed from the technological matrix B using the output vectorsδ¯j. In addition, since the LP game in Owen (1975) is of a centralized nature, the equivalent DEA production games assume that there is only one facility to be planned. This facility has been arbitrarily assigned to player 1. Summarizing, since each LP game has an equivalent DEA production game, but not the contrary, the set of LP games is a proper subset of DEA production games, i.e. DEA production games are a generalization of LP games.Proposition 2Given any instance of the comparable NCLP game inFernández et al. (2005)(characteristic function given by model(2)above, but without constraintsw¯p·yˆp⩾v({p})∀p∈S), an equivalent DEA production game (N,RII) can be defined with the following characteristics:•CRS are assumedw¯f=w¯p∀p∀f∈F(p)D(p)={(Bpδ¯j,δ¯j),j=1,2,…,m}∀p∣F(p)∣=1∀pWith the specified characteristics, and denoting with index f (p) the single facility within each set F (p), model (6) becomes(9)RII(S)=Max∑p∈Sw¯p·yˆf(p)s.t.∑j∈D(p)λjf(p)Bpδ¯j⩽xˆf(p)∀p∈S∑j∈D(p)λjf(p)δ¯j⩾yˆf(p)∀p∈S∑p∈Sxˆf(p)⩽∑p∈Sb¯pλjf(p)⩾0∀p∈S∀j∈D(p)Since the constraints that define the target output vectors,yˆf(p)hold as equalities, by substituting these values in the constraints that define the target input vectorsx¯f(p), the model becomes(10)RII(S)=Max∑p∈Sw¯p·yˆf(p)s.t.Bpyˆf(p)⩽xˆf(p)∀p∈S∑p∈Sxˆf(p)⩽b¯Syˆf(p)⩾0∀p∈Swhich is equivalent to model (2) without the constraints that impose a lower bound v({p}) on the value of the output production of each player p, constraints that, as we have mentioned in the text, are not considered in the proposed DEA production games because they are unnecessarily restrictive. □Note that, in the case of Proposition 2, each player has a different set of observed DMUs, which is also computed from its technological matrix Bpusing the unit output vectorsδ¯j. Since NCLP is a non-centralized LP game, this time each player has one facility whose production is to be planned. Finally, note that, in this case, since in the NCLP game each producer can only use its own technological matrix, technology-sharing is not feasible and therefore an equivalent (N,RI) DEA production game cannot be defined. In the case of the basic LP game, as stated in Proposition 1, both types of DEA production game could be defined. That is because, in that case, all players had the same technological matrix and, consequently, the same set of observed DMUs. Therefore, in that case, sharing the technology was in principle feasible (although unnecessary because it did not change the production possibility set of the different producers). Summarizing, the proposed resource-pooling DEA production game is a proper generalization of the comparable NCLP game in Fernández et al. (2005).Proposition 3Given any instance of the comparable extended LTP game inTimmer et al. (2000)(characteristic function given by model(3)above, withI¯p=0∀pandω¯=0), equivalent DEA production games (N,RI) and (N,RII) can be defined with the following characteristics:•CRS are assumedw¯f=w¯∀p∀f∈F(p)D(p)=T(p)∀p∣F(p)∣=1∀pWith the specified characteristics, and denoting with index f(p) the single facility within each set F(p), model (5) becomes(11)RI(S)=Max∑p∈Sw¯·yˆf(p)s.t.∑p′∈S∑j∈T(p′)λjf(p)x¯j⩽xˆf(p)∀p∈S∑p′∈S∑j∈T(p′)λjf(p)y¯j⩾yˆf(p)∀p∈S∑p∈Sxˆf(p)⩽∑p∈Sb¯pλjf(p)⩾0∀p∈S∀j∈T(p)Since the constraints that define the target input and output vectors,xˆf(p)andyˆf(p), respectively, hold as equalities in an optimal solution, the model can be simplified to(12)RI(S)=Maxw¯·∑p∈S∑p′∈S∑j∈T(p′)λjf(p)y¯js.t.∑p∈S∑p′∈S∑j∈T(p′)λjf(p)x¯j⩽b¯Sλjf(p)⩾0∀p∈S∀p′∈S∀j∈T(p′)which is equivalent to model (3), withI¯p=0∀pandω¯=0, just equating the activity level variablesγr=∑p∈Sλrf(p)∀p′∈S∀r∈T(p′). The proof for the case of game (N,RII) is analogous and is shown in the online annex. □In the case of Proposition 3, each player also has a different set of observed DMUs, which coincides with the set T(p) that contains the vectors(x¯r,y¯r)corresponding to the transformation techniques available to that player (see Section 2.1.). Since, in the end, in model (3) what matters is the activity levels of all the transformation techniques of the players in the coalition, for both scenarios, equivalent DEA production games, (N,RI) and (N,RII) respectively, can be defined. And, therefore, the proposed DEA production games can be considered proper generalizations of the comparable extended LTP games in Timmer et al. (2000).It is easy to check that when the coalition S consists of a single organization p, i.e. S={p}, then models (5) and (6) coincide between them and also with the one that organization p would use if producing on its own (model 4). Mathematically, RI({p})=RII({p})=R0({p}). However, the three models generally lead to different optimal revenue values. Specifically, since any feasible solution of model (6) is also feasible in model (5) and both models have the same objective function, it follows that RI(S)⩾RII(S)∀S⊆N. Analogously, since the optimal solutions to model (4) for p∈S give a feasible solution to model (6), it follows thatRII(S)⩾∑p∈SR0({p})∀S⊆N.Another property that is obvious is that both games, (N,RI) and (N,RII), are monotonic i.e. the larger the coalition, the higher its worth. MathematicallyRI(S)⩽RI(T)∀S⊂TRII(S)⩽RII(T)∀S⊂TThe proposed DEA production games have some additional properties.Proposition 4Both DEA production games, (N,RI) and (N,RII), are superadditive, i.e.RI(S)+RI(T)⩽RI(S∪T)∀S,T:S∩T=∅RII(S)+RII(T)⩽RII(S∪T)∀S,T:S∩T=∅We will prove the proposition for the case of scenario I. The proof for the other scenario is analogous. LetλjfS∗,(yˆf)S∗,(xˆf)S∗andλjfT∗,(yˆf)T∗,(xˆf)T∗be the optimal solutions of model (5) for the two disjoint coalitions S and T, respectively. Let p′(j) be the organization to which a certain DMU j belongs, i.e. j∈D(p′(j)). The solutionλjf,yˆf,xˆfwhereλjf=λjfS∗ifp(f)∈SANDp′(j)∈SλjfT∗ifp(f)∈TANDp′(j)∈T0otherwiseyˆf=(yˆf)S∗ifp(f)∈S(yˆf)T∗ifp(f)∈Txˆf=(xˆf)S∗ifp(f)∈S(xˆf)T∗ifp(f)∈Tis feasible in model (5) for the coalition S∪T. Therefore, its corresponding objective function value in model (5), given by∑p∈S∪T∑f∈F(p)w¯f·yˆf=∑p∈S∑f∈F(p)w¯f·yˆf+∑p∈T∑f∈F(p)w¯f·yˆf=RI(S)+RI(T)is lower than (or at most equal to) the maximum objective function value of model (5), which is, precisely, RI(S∪T). □Both DEA production games, (N,RI) and (N,RII), are balanced.To prove that (N,RI) and (N,RII) are balanced, it is sufficient to prove that they have non-empty cores. That will be done showing that, in each case, the game has a stable solution. Such a stable solution can be computed based on the optimal dual solution for the grand coalition. Before formulating the dual of models (5) and (6), let us reformulate them, using sub-indices k and i for outputs and inputs, respectively. Thus, model (5) is equivalent to(13)RI(S)=Max∑p∈S∑f∈F(p)∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)∑kwkfλjfykjs.t.∑p∈S∑f∈F(p)∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λjfxij⩽biS∀i∑p′∈S∑j∈D(p′)λjf=1∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)λjf⩾0∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)∀p′∈S∀j∈D(p′)In this equivalent formulation, it has been taken into account that:(a)the constraints that define the target outputs of each facility f, i.e.yˆfhold as equalities in any optimal solution of model (5), andthere exists an optimal solution of model (5) for which also the corresponding constraints that define the target inputs of each facility f, i.e.xˆf, also hold as equalities.The dual of model (13) is(14)RI(S)=Min∑ibiSμi+∑p∈S∑f∈F(p)ξfs.t.∑ixijμi+ξf⩾∑kwkfykj∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)∀p′∈S∀j∈D(p′)μi⩾0∀iξffree∀p∈S∀f∈F(p)Let (μ∗,ξ∗) be the optimal solution of the dual model (14) for the case of the grand coalition N and consider the payoff vectorzp=∑ibipμi∗+∑f∈F(p)ξf∗, i.e. each player p receives the value of the input resources it brings to the coalition plus the sum of the free variablesξf∗of its different facilities. Of course, these free variables do not exist in the CRS case. To show that this payoff vector is a stable solution of game (N,RI) note that•∑p∈Nzp=∑p∈N∑ibipμi∗+∑p∈N∑f∈F(p)ξf∗=∑ibiNμi∗+∑p∈N∑f∈F(p)ξf∗=RI(N)(μ∗,ξ∗) is feasible in model (14) for any coalition S⊂N since it is feasible for the grand coalition N and the constraints for any S⊂N are a subset of those for N. Therefore, its corresponding objective function value in model (14) for S must be greater than (or at most equal to) the optimal value of model (14) for coalition S, i.e.The constructive proof of proposition 5, by showing how to compute a stable solution for both (N,RI) and (N,RII), proves that both DEA production games are balanced. Moreover, since each subgame (S,RI) and (S,RII), i.e. the proposed DEA production games but restricted just to the players in any given coalition S, is also another DEA production game to which the above result also applies, the proposed DEA production games are totally balanced.In order to be able to graphically represent the synergistic effects of the pooling of resources and, especially, of technology sharing, a single input, single output dataset will be used to illustrate the proposed approach. Four organizations, labeled A, B, C and D, are considered, with five observed DMUs each. The observed DMUs’ input and output data were randomly generated xj∈[10,40], yj∈[30,50] and are shown in Table 1. The table also shows, for the sake of comparison, the technical efficiency (with output orientation) of the observed DMUs, which indicates that two of the three efficient units belong to organization A and the third to organization C.Fig. 1shows the PPS of each organization and, superimposed, in lighter gray, the joint technology that results from merging the four technologies. The technologies of organizations A and C are more advanced than those of B and D. On the other hand, their respective technologies allow organizations B and C to operate larger facilities (i.e. with a higher output) than those that A and D can operate.Let us assume that each organization has two plants and an available amount of input of 40 units in the case of organizations A and C and 50 units in the case of organizations B and D. For simplicity, let us assume that the output price of all facilities is unity, which means that the revenue coincides with the amount of output produced. Table 2shows the target input and outputs and corresponding revenue of each organization if they do not cooperate at all, i.e. if they do not pool their available inputs and use only their own technology. Note that even though organizations A and C have the same amount of available inputs, their total revenues are different and the same occurs with organizations B and D. The reason is that they have different technologies. Note that some organizations (namely, A and D) would not use all their available inputs. Finally, note that some organizations compute the same input and output targets for the two plants. This type of replication of operation units with the Most Productive Scale Size (Banker, 1984) occurs often in centralized resource allocation (Lozano and Villa, 2004).Compare the above results with those of Table 3, which shows the optimal decisions if all organizations fully cooperate, pooling their inputs and sharing their technologies. Note that the aggregated revenues would increase by 7.5% (from 367.7 to 395.2) at the same time that the unused input would increase 11.1% (from 10.8 to 12.0). The four organizations would benefit from the expanded technology. Note that all plants would operate at the same, maximum-capacity operating point.Let us now analyze the resource-pooling-only scenario in which the organizations cooperate but only partially, since they do not share their technologies. Thus, Table 4shows the optimal decisions if all organizations use their own technology but share their available inputs. In this case, the benefits of the cooperation are small (a revenue increase of just 1.0%) since the saturation of the capacity of all organizations means that they cannot make use of all available inputs. Paradoxically, had the amount of available resources been smaller, the benefits of this type of cooperation might have been larger. In any case, it is clear that this scenario does not generate as much synergy as the technology-sharing one, although it is equally true that it also requires lower commitment and negotiation effort.About the question of how to share the revenue jointly produced by the grand coalition, Table 5shows, for the case of the game (N,RI) the worth of the 15(=24−1) coalitions and the amounts that would correspond to each organization according to the nucleolus (Schmeidler, 1969; Maschler et al., 1979), the Shapley value (Shapley, 1953), the τ-value (computed using TUGlab, Mirás Calvo and Sánchez Rodríguez, 2006) and the Owen set solution (computed as described in the proof of Proposition 5). The corresponding satisfaction (i.e. the negative of the excess) of the different coalitions is also shown, indicating that all solutions except the Shapley value belong to the core of the game. While in the Owen set solution all organizations receive the same share of the total revenue, the other solutions assign this revenue differently, with organization C benefiting the most. That is fair since its contribution to the enlargement of the joint technology is the most important in the sense that it allows the other organizations to increase the capacity of their operations. Organization C is the one whose technology, especially its efficient frontier, is more similar to the merged technology of the grand coalition, something which can be clearly seen in Fig. 1. Note that the organization that receives the second largest share of revenues is organization B. Even if its technology is less advanced than that of organization C, it has large capacity operation points, something which is more important in the case of excess available resources. Should there be fewer available resources, then, instead of organization B, it would be the more advanced efficient frontier of organization A which would play a larger role and receive a higher share of revenues. About the relatively high payoff of organization D in this scenario, given its relative inefficient technology, the explanation lies in the fact that it supplies 50 units of resources, the same as B, but more than A or C.Table 6shows the results of game (N,RII). In this scenario, the payoffs received by all organizations are lower than in the technology-sharing scenario, although the difference is rather small in the case of organization B and much larger for the rest. Organization C still receives the highest payoff, followed, not far behind, by organization B. Organizations A and D receive smaller payoffs. Actually, in the case of the nucleolus, Owen set and τ-value (the three solutions coincide since in this case the core contains a single solution) they receive the same payoff that they would obtain if they did not cooperate but acted on their own. In other words, for this game, the stability requires that all the benefits of the cooperation be allocated to organizations B and C only.This paper extends, linear production games to allow for a general production function and for the presence of inefficiency in the observed input–output data. The best tool to handle that context is DEA. Hence the name: DEA production games.In this type of collaborative game, the different organizations can pool their available resources to maximize the revenue of the output produced in their plants. There are two variants of the game, depending on the level and strength of the cooperation. In the full-cooperation scenario, the organizations share their best practices resulting in all of them having the same, merged technology. In the partial-cooperation scenario, each organization maintains its technology and only the pooling of resources occurs. The two variants differ greatly in their capacity to generate synergies from the cooperation. Thus, limited cooperation leads to limited gains, while full cooperation allows for a collective technology sharing that greatly benefits all parties, especially those with a less advanced technology. The sharing of the benefits of the cooperation must therefore take into account the relative contribution of the different organizations. The proposed DEA models allow the computation of the worth of any coalition and from them, using cooperative game theory, fair revenue shares can be determined.The proposed DEA production games have been shown to be proper generalizations of several existing linear production games. They have also been shown to be superadditive and totally balanced. Moreover, a simple way of computing a stable solution from the dual prices corresponding to the grand coalition has been presented. Other, more complex, solution concepts, such as the nucleolus, the Shapley value or the τ-value, can also be considered.An implicit assumption of this study is that inputs can be transferred between organizations. However, it often occurs that some inputs are transferable while others are not (see Bogetoft and Otto, 2011 for a discussion of this in the context of mergers). Constraints such as minimum or maximum output levels at a facility can also be imposed without the game losing its properties. The proposed DEA production game can also be extended in a multi-objective direction, as Fernández et al. (2002) extended the linear production game. In that case the characteristic function would be set-valued instead of a scalar function, i.e. the players’ payoffs would be vectors instead of scalars.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
