@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cooperative advertising models in supply chain management: A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review OR literature on (vertical) cooperative advertising.We give a comprehensive survey on relevant mathematical models.Main criteria are general model setting, demand functions and game-theoretic concepts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in marketing,Cooperative advertising,Literature review,Game theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper reviews articles on cooperative advertising, a topic which has gained substantial interest in the recent years. Thereby, we first briefly distinguish five different definitions of cooperative advertising which can be found in operations research literature. After that, we concentrate on vertical cooperative advertising, which is the most common object of investigation and is understood as a financial agreement where a manufacturer offers to pay a certain share of his retailer’s advertising expenditures. In total, we identified 58 scientific papers considering mathematical modeling of vertical cooperative advertising. These articles are then analyzed with regard to their general model setting (e.g., the underlying supply chain structure and design of the cooperative advertising program). After that, we explain the different demand and cost functions that are employed, whereupon we distinguish between static and dynamic models. The last dimension of our review is dedicated to the game-theoretic concepts which are mostly used to reflect different forms of distribution of power within the channel.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A steadily growing stream in operational research literature addresses the interaction of the various members of a supply chain. Thereby, the application of game theory is very common, because it allows to characterize different players’ behavior or channel power during decision making. For a general overview of this field of research and methods in use, we refer the reader to Cachon and Netessine (2004, chap. 2) and Wang and Parlar (1989). Leng and Parlar (2005) identify four different classes of research: two classes referring to inventory games, a third one related to production and pricing competition, and a fourth category named “Games with other attributes”, where one can find game-theoretic analyses of capacity, service, product quality, and advertising decisions. While research in the first categories has been conducted (and reviewed) extensively in the past decades, we want to turn the reader’s attention to the latter. The scope of this paper is to give a review of studies which consider the mathematical modeling of cooperative advertising, a field which gained substantial interest in the recent years’ operations research literature. However, existing surveys concentrate on reflecting only singular papers (see, e.g., Taboubi & Zaccour (2005, chap. 3.3 & 4.2), Leng & Parlar (2005, chap. 6.4), and, more recently, Xie & Zhang (2011, chap. 9)). Therefore, we intend to fill this gap and provide the reader with a broad summary and classification, which also contains recent studies missing in the aforementioned works.To identify the relevant articles, we performed searches in the databases ScienceDirect, Business Source Complete, Web of Knowledge, and Google scholar related to the criteria “cooperative advertising” (and the common abbreviations “co-op advertising” respectively “co-op ad”) as well as “advertising coordination”. After screening the articles thus obtained, we furthermore used the bibliographic details given in order to complement our data set. Hence, we are confident that it comprehensively reflects the state of research concerning the mathematical modeling of cooperative advertising.Through our investigation, we found 110 scientific articles, conference papers, and working papers of scientific institutions in English language dealing with cooperative advertising, with the major part published in academic journals. Though articles were published in altogether 51 Journals, Fig. 1indicates that especially the European Journal of Operational Research is a popular platform for related publications, followed by Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications and Marketing Letters. The number of publications per year is depicted in Fig. 2and clearly shows the increased interest in this research subject in the recent years.We found five different meanings of the term cooperative advertising, which are briefly described in the following:–Vertical cooperative advertising: This is the most common comprehension of cooperative advertising (used in 68 papers) and describes a financial agreement, where a manufacturer offers to share a certain percentage of his retailer’s advertising expenditures (see, e.g., Bergen & John (1997)). To emphasize the fraction of articles following this understanding, we highlighted these by a black bar in Figs. 1 and 2, while the gray bars refer to all definitions found through the review process.Cooperative advertising in franchising: A concept similar to the latter is also used in franchisor–franchisee relationships. However, advertising campaigns are mostly implemented by franchisors in order to guarantee uniformity between the different franchisees, who, for their part, participate in the resulting costs by an advertising fee, which is stipulated in the franchise contract. Related studies are, e.g., Bhattacharyya and Lafontaine (1995), Sen (1995), Dant and Berger (1996), Desai (1997), Rao and Srinivasan (2001), Michael (2002), Hempelmann (2006), and Sigué and Chintagunta (2009).Horizontal cooperative/ generic advertising vs. brand advertising: In contrast to the previous definitions, this group of articles considers collaboration in terms of advertising of firms belonging to the same echelon of the supply chain, which normally act as competitors. Generic advertising is meant as promoting a whole category of products instead of brand-related advertising of single manufacturers (see, e.g., Chakravarti & Janiszewski (2004)). Studies are mostly applied to farming and agricultural sector. See, e.g., Alston, Freebairn, and James (2001), Bass, Krishnamoorthy, Prasad, and Sethi (2005), Chakravarti and Janiszewski (2004), Crespi and James (2007), Depken, Kamerschen, and Snow (2002), Kinnucan (1997), Krishnamurthy (2001), Krishnamurthy (2000), LeVay (1981), Lu, Thompson, and Tu (2007), Miles, White, and Munilla (1997), Simonin and Ruth (1998), Varadarajan (1986), and Ward and Dixon (1989).Cooperative advertising vs. predatory advertising: Following the definition of Church and Ware (2000), cooperative advertising positively influences the own demand as well as the demand faced by the competitors, while predatory advertising detracts consumers from competitors in order to increase own demand. Studies referring to this definition are, e.g., Amrouche, Martín-Herrán, and Zaccour (2008), Depken and Snow (2008), Erickson (2009), Friedman (1983), Karray and Martín-Herrán (2008), Karray and Martín-Herrán (2009), Ma and Ulph (2012), Mariel and Sandonís (2004), Piga (1998), Slade (1995), Viscolani (2012), and Viscolani and Zaccour (2009).Joint advertising decisions: The last group we were confronted with simply uses the term cooperative advertising to describe a cooperative (or collusive) decision making concerning the advertising expenditures, which may occur both in inner-echelon as well as inter-echelon competition, in order to maximize the joint profit. Some authors propose either contracts or incentive strategies in order to ensure that all players stick to the agreements made. This approach can be found in, e.g., Buratto and Zaccour (2009), Forbes (1986), El Ouardighi, Jørgensen, and Pasin (2008), Jørgensen, Sigué, and Zaccour (2001a), Jørgensen and Zaccour (2003b), Jørgensen and Zaccour (2003a), Karray (2011), and Simbanegavi (2009).In the following, we concentrate our review on the first group of articles, which analyses vertical cooperative advertising programs between manufacturer(s) and retailer(s). For the sake of simplicity, we may dispense the prefix vertical and refer solely to cooperative advertising. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we provide a theoretical basis of cooperative advertising, together with empirical data on the diffusion and design of such programs in practice. Subsequently, we review mathematical models dealing with cooperative advertising in Section 3 with regard to different possibilities for categorization, i.e., the general setting (3.1), the demand functions (3.2), and the game-theoretic concepts used (3.3). In Section 4, we summarize our findings and give possible directions for future research.In this section, our scope is to give a brief summary of the theoretical foundations of cooperative advertising as well as on some empirical data on the usage of those programs in practice. For a more elaborate discussion, we refer the interested reader to the books of Crimmins (1970, 1984), Hutchins (1953), and Young and Greyser (1983), which also comprise case studies as well as an overview of the legal restrictions due to antitrust legislation like, especially, the Robinson-Patman Act (for the legal aspects, see also Moran (1973)).Vertical cooperative advertising belongs to promotional support programs which some manufacturers provide to their retailers. More specifically, a manufacturer offers to pay a certain fraction of the advertising cost of his retailer. Thereby, the advertising is mostly prepared and organized by the retailer (cf. Sorenson (1970)), while the manufacturer solely sets some guidelines like, e.g., the permitted media etc. After that, the retailer can claim a reimbursement of his expenditures within the predetermined conditions (cf. Young & Greyser (1983)). Crimmins (1970, 1984) explicitly emphasizes that cooperative advertising does not represent an own type of advertising, but rather a financial agreement on the sharing of related cost.The reasons for such a cooperation between manufacturer and retailer can be manifold. Hutchins (1953) argues that manufacturers adopt cooperative advertising, because it generates immediate sales. To understand this reason, one has to consider the different character and effects of advertising, which depend on the supply chain echelon it emanates from. While manufacturer’s global advertising creates a brand image and is more general and nationwide than retailer’s local advertising, the latter treats more of promotions and prices. Hence, global advertising makes for publicity and reputation of the product, but does not necessarily lead to real consumer demand (cf. Herrington & Dempsey (2005) and Young & Greyser (1983)). Due to these complementary goals and effects, manufacturers are somehow reliant on a certain degree of local advertising. However, it may occur that the retailer’s advertising level is not sufficient from the manufacturer’s point of view (cf. Somers, Gupta, & Harriot (1990)). In this case, a cooperative advertising program can stimulate the retailer’s advertising expenditures to a sufficient level. Another reason that can induce a manufacturer to offer a cooperative advertising program is the competition for shelf spaces, which allows retailers to demand promotion support from their manufacturer, or a simple financial consideration: On the one hand, manufacturers mostly do not bear all costs for local advertising, so that the retailer has to take his own share on his part; on the other hand, rates for local advertising may be more economical than rates for global advertising, like, e.g., in the case of newspapers (cf. Young & Greyser (1983)).Vertical cooperative advertising programs are widely spread in practice. However, empirical data strongly depends on the source it is taken from and is therefore not completely consistent. Nevertheless, the data collected in Table 1clearly shows an increasing trend of cooperative advertising in practice. Berger, Lee, and Weinberg (2006) furthermore reports on ca. 4000 existing programs in 52 different product classes, while Dant and Berger (1996) state that 25–40% of retailers’ local advertising is financed by cooperative advertising programs. Two extensive field studies with 2156 respectively 2286 firms conducted by Dutta, Bergen, John, and Rao (1995) and Nagler (2006) however reveal that most manufacturers offer participation rates of 50% or 100%. This may give the impression that most firms determine their participation rate rather arbitrarily than based on detailed analysis and clearly underlines the necessity of a scientific discussion.To the best of our knowledge, the first mathematical discussion on cooperative advertising was published by Berger (1972), who showed that profits may be increased significantly by quantitative analysis compared to the simplistic fifty–fifty cost sharing which is often used in practice. After this elementary model, where a manufacturer shares his retailer’s advertising costs through price discount, several articles picked up this subject and proposed various expansions. In total, 58 of the 68 articles stated in Section 1 address mathematical modeling of cooperative advertising (see Table 2for a complete listing), while the remaining works are engaged in empirical studies or conceptual theory. In the following, we will give a survey of these models, with particular respect to the general setting of the supply chain, the cooperative advertising program and the mathematical model, to the formulation of the customer demand, and to the game-theoretic concepts which are used.We first consider the general setting of the supply chains and models under examination which is used in the articles. From the second column of Table 2, we can see that approximately half of the authors limit their analysis to the determination of players’ optimal advertising, while the residual additionally includes further decisions variables. Here, the most prevalent topic is pricing, while only few discuss questions concerning product quality, the provision of additional services, remanufacturing, or inventory and order management. As the simultaneous analysis of more than one decision variable provides, e.g., insights into the interdependencies of different marketing instruments on consumer demand, future research will supposedly focus on mainly that direction.The next two criteria refer to general properties of the mathematical formulation, i.e., whether model parameters and variables are time-dependent (dynamic) or not (static) and known before (deterministic) or not (stochastic). Especially the distinction between static and dynamic formulations allows to divide the existing articles in two research streams, as we will discuss later on in Section 3.2. While, for the most part, dynamic articles consider time as a continuous variable, only Lei, Sun, and Yang (2009) and Xiao, Yan, and Zhao (2010) propose a multi-period model. Aside from that, it is visible that most studies assume a deterministic environment, though the integration of stochastic influences could improve the accuracy of the results attained. This is clearly a topic for future research, which was recently picked up by Chen (2011), He, Krishnamoorthy, Prasad, and Sethi (2011), Tsao and Sheen (2012), and Xiao et al. (2010).The predominant supply chain composition is a bilateral monopoly consisting of one manufacturer and one retailer (please note that we do not distinguish the terms “manufacturer”, “supplier”, and “seller” as well as “retailer” and “buyer” for the sake of uniformity), while only 14 papers analyze the interaction of more than two players. Interestingly, only Karray and Zaccour (2007) and Kim and Staelin (1999) introduced a second manufacturer, whereas one can find more authors that concentrate on retail competition. Nevertheless, also competition between two manufacturers could be an promising topic, e.g., when both offer different cooperative advertising programs or, especially, in combination with differences regarding product quality. Seldom, brand competition between a manufacturer’s brand and a retailer’s store brand is considered (see Chen (2010), Karray & Zaccour (2005, chap. 11), & Karray & Zaccour (2006)). Furthermore, there is no contribution with a three-echelon supply chain consisting of supplier, manufacturer, and retailer, like, e.g., proposed by Chung, Talluri, and Narasimhan (2011) for a pricing game. When combined with the analysis of more than two decision variables like, e.g., advertising, pricing, and quality, this could also be a promising research area.Many authors refer to the different effects of global and local advertising pointed out in Section 2. Closely related to that is also the interpretation of the advertising variable, i.e., what the players decide on: Besides two exceptions (see Berger & Magliozzi (1992) and Kali (1998)), advertising variables represent either advertising expenditures (investment) or advertising level (efforts). Here, by advertising expenditures, we mean a financial amount which is spent on advertising, while an advertising level firstly describes a degree or intensity, which has to be translated into costs afterwards. Please note that the classification in Table 2 follows this dissociation of terms, even if this strict differentiation is not always applied throughout the respective articles.Another distinctive factor is the cooperative advertising scheme, i.e., the manner in which the financial participation is modeled, as well as the role allocation within this cooperation. Besides the most commonly used participation rate, where a percentage of the actual advertising costs is shared, we also found a price discount offered by the manufacturer to his retailer (see Berger (1972)), or general advertising allowances (see Jørgensen, Taboubi, & Zaccour (2006)), which do not necessarily have to be spent on advertising completely (see Kim & Staelin (1999)). Another form is proposed by De Giovanni (2011a), where the manufacturer tries to motivate the retailer to spend more on advertising by means of a revenue sharing contract. Though mentioned by Bergen and John (1997), an accrual rate has not been studied so far. This is an upper limit often used in practice which relates the maximum advertising participation with, e.g., the previous year’s sales (cf. Young & Greyser (1983)). Concerning the role allocation, we observed that mostly the manufacturer is assumed to share his retailer’s advertising cost, while only three articles allow a bilateral participation, where the retailer may support his manufacturer’s advertising program as well (see Kunter (2012), Zhang, Gou, Liang, & Huang (2013a), and Zhang, Xie, & Chen (2013b)).Among the most important distinctive features of the aforementioned articles is the underlying demand function, which relates consumer demand with the players’ advertising (and pricing). As the demand function strongly depends on the distinction between static and dynamic model formulations, it seems to be appropriate to distinguish these in the following discussion.Table 3lists the static approaches and specifies the shape of the advertising demand and the advertising cost function. Due to the relatively high share of papers also including pricing in their analysis, we also add a classification of the used price demand function where appropriate. As already adumbrated in Section 3.1, the functional design is also influenced by the advertising variable itself, i.e., whether it is meant as advertising expenditure or as advertising level. Hence, we separated these two ways by a dashed line in order to make the listing more coherent. Please note that Berger and Magliozzi (1992) and Kali (1998) are not included into the table because they do not consider demand functions comparable to the residual papers. Furthermore, the two articles with multi-period models are also included in this table, because Lei et al. (2009) first propose a static model, which is adapted to n periods afterwards, and Xiao et al. (2010) indeed consider a two-period model, but the demand is only generated in the first period, while the second period is exclusively used for reordering.One may recognize that most authors either use a square root function or a power function to characterize the form of the consumer demand related to advertising expenditures, while only few apply a linear or exponential sales response function. Therefore, we limit ourself to the most common functions and refer the reader to Hanssens, Parsons, and Schultz (2002, chap. 3) for an extensive explanation on mathematical modeling of sales response.Letting a denote local and A denote global advertising expenditures, Xie and Wei (2009) define a square root advertising demand function of a manufacturer-retailer supply chain as(1)S(A,a)=kmA+kraand justify this with the advertising saturation effect, which indicates a diminishing marginal demand for increasing advertising expenditures. Thereby, the two parameters kmand krcan be interpreted as effectiveness of the corresponding advertising. The same structure was also picked up by Aust and Buscher (2012), Karray (2013), Kunter (2012), SeyedEsfahani, Biazaran, and Gharakhani (2011), Yan (2010), and Zhang et al. (2013b).Zhang and Xie (2012) expand this function to a supply chain with n retailers,(2)Si(A,ai)=αiβi+A+kriai,i=1,…,n,where the two new parameters αiand βidetermine base demand and market size, respectively, of retailer i. Obviously, it is assumed that each retailer’s local advertising expenditures only affect his own demand and has no effects on his competitors’ demand.Most studies adopt a power model, which was at first introduced by Huang and Li (2001) to the field of cooperative advertising:(3)S(A,a)=α-βa-γA-δ.In contrast to Eq. (1), this function depends on four parameters α, β, γ, and δ, which denote the sales saturate asymptote, the impact of advertising on the market demand, and the quasi-elasticity of retailer’s and manufacturer’s advertising expenditures, respectively (cf. Ahmadi-Javid & Hoseinpour (2011)). Hence, one is able to control the speed of converging to the saturation level more precisely compared to Eq. (1).An expansion of Eq. (3) to a retailer duopoly was proposed by Wang, Zhou, Min, and Zhong (2011):(4)S(A,ai,a3-i)=αi-βai-ua3-iv(1+A)-δ,i=1,2.Thereby, parameters u and v stand for the sensitivity to changes in the own (u) and in the competitor’s advertising expenditures (v), where own advertising increases and competitor’s advertising decreases the resulting consumer demand. Hence, this kind of formulation explicitly refers to rivaling effects of competitors’ advertising.Another formulation of the demand function of a retailer duopoly with similar characteristics can be found in Ghadimi, Szidarovszky, Farahani, and Khiabani (2013),(5)S(ai,a3-i)=αi-βiai-u-β3-ia3-iv,i=1,2.where demand depends solely on local advertising and the impact of advertising βimay differ for aiand a3−i.Emanating from an advertising level instead of advertising expenditures, we mostly find linear sales response functions. Interestingly, Karray and Zaccour (2007) and Zhang and Zhong (2011) assume that also competitor’s demand is positively influenced by advertising.Concerning the mathematical modeling of advertising costs, it is obvious that a linear integration is generally used in terms of advertising expenditures, while a quadratically shaped cost function is applied when the advertising variable corresponds to an advertising level. Thus, we can distinguish two cases of handling advertising in (static) mathematical models: Either, advertising expenditures are considered, which go along with a decreasing rise of consumer demand and a linear cost function, or, when talking about advertising level, this causes a linear influence on consumer demand, but a quadratic slope of the advertising cost function.Altogether, we can summarize that the assumption of diminishing returns on advertising investment is widely accepted among static models, regardless of which type of advertising variable is used. The two approaches solely differ in the fact whether this is taken into account in the demand or in the cost function. However, there are different approaches to treat effects of advertising between competitors.Lastly, we briefly review the price demand function applied in the articles listed in Table 3 (for a more comprehensive comparison of price demand functions, we refer the reader to Lau & Lau (2003)). One may observe that most authors constrain their analysis to simple linear demand functions of the form P(p)=α−βp, which are widely used in marketing literature. Recently, SeyedEsfahani et al. (2011) proposed an extension of this function, i.e., P(p)= (α−βp)1/ν, where the new parameter ν controls the demand curve’s shape in order to obtain a linear, convex, or concave function, which enables a better adjustment to the actual market properties.One disadvantage of the static models discussed in the previous subsection is the lack of a real distinction between the effects of global and local advertising. As explained in Section 2, global advertising builds up a long-term brand image, while local advertising tends to generate short-term demand. Obviously, the effectiveness or elasticity parameters used in Eqs. (1)–(5) cannot reflect these properties entirely due to the missing time dependence. Here, dynamic models have the advantage that time is explicitly included into analysis, like we will show in the sequel. As pointed out in a review of dynamic advertising research by Huang, Leng, and Liang (2012), dynamic studies can be classified into six categories according to the demand model they base on: Nerlove–Arrow model, Vidale–Wolfe model, Lanchester model, diffusion models, dynamic advertising competition models with other attributes, and empirical studies of dynamic advertising problems. During our search, we found that cooperative advertising articles only use three of them (see Table 4), which are described in the following.The first (and biggest) group refers to a demand model proposed by Nerlove and Arrow (1962), which explicitly allows for different time-dependent effects of advertising. Besides the impact on present demand (that is similar to the static approach), also effects of advertising on future demand are considered. Therefore, the authors introduce a so-called goodwill stock, which depends on past advertising and by this means allows to separate long-term and short-term effects of firms’ advertising on consumer demand. As is visible from Table 4, this is the most common dynamic demand model used in cooperative advertising research. We start our discussion with Jørgensen, Sigué, and Zaccour (2000), who were the first to propose a dynamic cooperative advertising model. They assume that both the manufacturer (i=m) and the retailer (i=r) can adopt short-term (ai(t)) and long-term advertising level (Ai(t)), where the first type directly affects consumer demand and the latter builds up goodwill. Hence, they define the time-dependent stock of goodwill G(t) by the following dynamic equation:(6)dG(t)/dt=λmAm(t)+λrAr(t)-δG(t).Thereby, the two parameters λmand λrdescribe the effectiveness of the players long term advertising, while parameter δ denotes the decay rate of goodwill, i.e., the rate in which existing goodwill fades away over time. The demand function is then given by(7)S(am,ar,G)=(kmam(t)+krar(t))G(t),where kmand krcan be interpreted analogously to Eq. (1). Alternatively to this formulation, some articles assume that global advertising level only influences goodwill, which then goes into the demand function together with local advertising (see, e.g., Jørgensen, Taboubi, & Zaccour (2001b)). Another interesting approach can be found in Jørgensen, Taboubi, and Zaccour (2003), where retailer’s local advertising not only impacts on demand, but also negatively influences the goodwill. Furthermore, other variables like pricing (see, e.g., De Giovanni & Roselli (2012)) or quality (see, e.g., De Giovanni (2011b)) can also be included into this Nerlove-Arrow framework.The second group of articles uses a demand model, which was proposed by Vidale and Wolfe (1957) and expanded by Sethi (1983). The underlying idea is that advertising generates future consumer awareness, which, however, diminishes over time. More precisely, He, Prasad, and Sethi (2009) define a so-called awareness share x(t) as a fraction of the total market (please note that we neglect the stochastic term for the sake of simplicity)(8)dx(t)/dt=ρa(t)1-x(t)-δx(t),where ρ determines the effectiveness of advertising effort a(t), and δ is the decay rate of customer awareness. This share is then multiplied with the solely price-dependent demand function in order to determine sales. He et al. (2011, 2012) extended this bilateral monopoly formulation to a retailer duopoly with the following dynamic equation for the market share of retailer 1 (please note that He et al. (2011) use ρ1=ρ2=ρ as well as δ1=δ2=δ):(9)dx(t)/dt=ρ1a1(t)1-x(t)-ρ2a2(t)x(t)-δ1x(t)+δ2(1-x(t)).As the market is completely divided between the two retailers, the market share of retailer 2 is given by 1−x(t). Hence, the market share of retailer 1 is increased by his own advertising and decreased by advertising of retailer 2, while the decay of customer awareness can be interpreted contrariwise. Please note that this way of dealing with retail competition may also be categorized into the third group of articles, which base on the Lanchester model. This model was introduced by Kimball (1957) and may be perceived “as an extension of the V–W [Vidale–Wolfe] model to the duopoly setting with advertising competition” Huang et al. (2012).Another formulation of retail competition can be found in Chutani and Sethi (2012a), who adopt a model which traces back to extensions of the Vidale–Wolfe model made by Sethi, Prasad, and He (2008) and Krishnamoorthy, Prasad, and Sethi (2010):(10)dxi(t)/dt=ρiai(t)Di(pi(t))1-x1(t)-x2(t),i=1,2.In contrast to the previous function given in Eq. (8), the market share here also depends on price-induced consumer demand and the authors do not consider a decay of consumer awareness during time. The latter aspect was though again considered in Chutani and Sethi (2012b), who picked up an extension by Erickson (2009):(11)dxi(t)/dt=ρiai(t)1-x1(t)-x2(t)-δixi(t),i=1,2.Taking the above discussion into consideration, we can state that all dynamic models are able to account for time-related effects of advertising. Thereby, the goodwill-oriented models basing on Nerlove and Arrow (1962) rather focus on the distinction of short-term and long-term advertising effects (which corresponds well to the commonly made distinction of local and global advertising), while the models referring to Vidale and Wolfe (1957) concentrate on the decay of customer awareness which occurs over time. Interestingly, we can conclude from Table 4 that all dynamic models consider advertising levels as decision variable, while the static approaches discussed in Section 3.2.1 mostly determine advertising expenditures. This always attended by a quadratic shape of the advertising cost function. Concerning the price demand, we only found linear demand functions (where applicable).Lastly, we consider the solution method which is used in order to determine the channel members optimal decisions regarding advertising (and pricing). As explained in Section 1, game theory is a popular technique in operations research, because it allows to analyze the channel members’ behavior subjected to different relationships and distributions of power within the supply chain. This also holds true for studies on vertical cooperative advertising included into our review, which invariably apply game-theoretic methods with except two cases with similar approaches, that are not explicitly denominated game theory, but are calculated in the same manner (see Berger, 1972, 1973).Generally, one can differentiate non-cooperative and cooperative game theory, which mainly differ in the approach which is used to describe a problem: Non-cooperative game theory focuses on the players’ actions and strategies which lead to a certain outcome in the end. In contrast, cooperative game theory concentrates on the distribution of possible outcomes between the players and the appendant formation of coalitions without considering the actions which are necessary to achieve them (cf. Cachon & Netessine (2004) and Nagarajan & Sošić (2008)). Our analysis reveals that almost all articles on cooperative advertising apply non-cooperative game theory, i.e., they tend to determine players optimal decisions in order to maximize their profits. The use of cooperative game theory is limited to bargaining models, which are employed to allocate profits in case of a cooperation, with only two exceptions: (Marchi & Cohen (2009)) propose a biform-game based on the Shaplay value (see Shapley (1953)), which can be understood as a combination of a non-cooperative and a cooperative game (we refer the reader to Brandenburger & Stuart (2007) for further reading). Furthermore, Ghadimi et al. (2013) construct a three-person cooperative game in addition to their non-cooperative approach, which is also solved by means of the Shapley value.Hence, we will first consider non-cooperative games which are applied in cooperative advertising literature. Thereby, we differentiate two groups of articles, which are listed in Tables 5 and 6, respectively: The first group only considers vertical (inter-echelon) interaction, i.e., the interaction between manufacturer(s) and retailer(s), while the second group also takes horizontal (inner-echelon) competition between two or more manufacturers or retailers into consideration. After that, we will go into articles that use bargaining models in their analysis (see Table 7).In general, we can distinguish three game-theoretic concepts which are used in the articles listed in Table 5: First, a Nash equilibrium, which traces back to Nash (1951) and is used to determine a solution of a non-cooperative and simultaneous decision making of two or more equal players. Mathematically, the equilibrium can be calculated by separately setting the first order derivatives of the players’ profit function to zero and solving the resulting system of equations.In contrast, a Stackelberg game (see von Stackelberg (1934)) describes a sequential process, where one player acts as a leader and first sets his decision. Thereby, he is assumed to have perfect information about the second player’s reaction, which he can thus incorporate into his decision making. After that, in a second step, the follower tries to find his best decision within the framework set by the leader. This equilibrium is calculated via backward induction: The follower’s response function, which is determined by setting the first order derivative(s) to zero and solving the resulting equations for the follower’s decision variables, has to be inserted into the leader’s profit function before calculating the first order derivative(s).The third is not necessarily a game-theoretic concept, though it is often used in this context: Cooperation (also denoted as Vertical Integration or Centralized Coordination) between the players can be understood as a joint profit maximization, where the players act like being coordinated by a superior decision maker. This situation is simply calculated by summing up the individual profit functions before setting the correspondent first order derivatives to zero and solving the resulting equation system.As is apparent from Table 5, the most prevalent setting in vertical interaction is a Manufacturer Stackelberg game, i.e., a situation where the manufacturer obtains the channel leadership and the retailer acts as follower. This is a common assumption in marketing literature and is often justified by large manufacturers which dominated their retailers in the past. However, this relationship was subjected to changes (cf. Achenbaum & Mitchell (1987), Buzzell, Quelch, & Salmon (1990), and Kumar (1996)). An often-cited example is the relationship between the manufacturer Proctor & Gamble and the retail chain Wal-Mart (see, e.g, Huang, Li, & Mahajan (2002)), which evolved into a partnership in the recent years. This change also led to a rethinking in research on cooperative advertising: (Huang & Li (2001)) were the first that refer to this new situation and included a Vertical Nash equilibrium into their consideration, which, at least, can be seen as an equal distribution of power between manufacturer and retailer. This was followed by Li, Huang, Zhu, and Chau (2002), who analyzed a game where both players cooperate and tend to maximize the total profit of the supply chain. Interestingly, only few articles really take into account a Retailer Stackelberg game, where the retailer dominates the manufacturer (see Xie & Neyret (2009) for the first static and Buratto, Grosset, & Viscolani (2007) for the first dynamic approach).Another interesting approach is proposed by Karray (2013): In addition to the classical sequential moving which emanates from a Stackelberg game, where each player sets all of his decision variables simultaneously, the model also analyzes sequential decision making like, e.g., the players first set prices and advertising expenditures afterwards.Concerning the influence of the underlying game-theoretic concept on the design of a cooperative advertising program, it is interesting to mention that all studies arrive at the conclusion that a manufacturer is only willing to participate in his retailer’s advertising expenditures in case of a Manufacturer Stackelberg equilibrium or a Cooperation (see, e.g., Aust & Buscher (2012) and SeyedEsfahani et al. (2011)). Please note that this holds true only for models where the manufacturer sets the participation rate on his own. Buratto et al. (2007) use a different setting and let the retailer decide on the participation rate under a Retailer Stackelberg equilibrium. This approach could be helpful to study cooperative advertising under a dominant retailer in the future. However, it first of all has to be ensured if such an arrangement is possible (and reasonable) in practice.For the sake of completeness, we again distinguish between static and dynamic games, because there exist two types of dynamic equilibria, which are given in the last two columns of Table 5: One can distinguish open loop equilibria and feedback equilibria, which differ in the underlying information structure. In the first group, the players decisions only depend on the time t and on the initial conditions at time t0, while the latter assumes that players are able to incorporate the actual condition at time t into their decision-making for time t (cf. He, Prasad, Sethi, & Gutierrez (2007)). Though the determination of feedback equilibria is more challenging, most authors use this information structure when studying cooperative advertising.Now we pass on to articles which involve not only vertical, but also horizontal competition. Please note that this does not only apply for models with more than two players, but also for models which consider competition between two or more retail channels (which may be opened up by one single firm like, e.g., a traditional channel and a online channel). The type of competition is thus indicated in Table 6. Here, we can see that most studies focus on retail competition, as we already noticed in Section 3.1.In principle, the same game-theoretic concepts are used in horizontal as in vertical interaction, which have already been illustrated in the previous subsection. Please note that though different notations for the horizontal simultaneous move game with equal players are in use, we only employ the term Horizontal Nash instead of Bertrand or Cournot game. As is visible, this is mostly used for studying horizontal interaction in cooperative advertising. This can be probably explained by the comparatively simple calculation. However, especially an inner-echelon Stackelberg game in combination with an inter-echelon Stackelberg game may lead to very interesting results. This is clearly a task for future research. Furthermore, the study of Ghadimi et al. (2013) has to be pointed out, as it firstly applies the concept of partial cooperation introduced by Cyert and DeGroot (1973) to a cooperative advertising model.As indicated at the beginning of Section 3.3, some articles which mainly concentrate on non-cooperative games also apply bargaining models, though these belong to the class of cooperative games. In this context, mostly bargaining games are used to determine a fair distribution of the total supply chain profit which results from a Cooperation between manufacturer and retailer (see, e.g., Huang & Li (2001)). Another possible method for profit allocation was recently introduced by Yue, Austin, Huang, and Chen (2013), who assume that each player’s profit is linearly related to its bargaining power, without applying a bargaining game explicitely.A bargaining game generally consists of two components (see Table 7), which mainly determine the parameters like, e.g., players’ bargaining power or risk attitude, which can be incorporated into the problem-solving: First, one has to decide which utility function is assumed for the players participating in the bargaining and, attendant to that, which risk attitude they have. During our research, we found three types of utility functions which are assumed in cooperative advertising models. The simplest one is a linear function of the shape(12)U(Π)=Π,where U(Π) denotes the utility related to a profit Π. Here, the player is assumed to be risk neutral. In contrast, a power utility function(13)U(Π)=Πμ,allows for risk neutral, risk averse, and risk loving players depending on the risk parameter μ. Lastly, an exponential function like(14)U(Π)=1-exp(-μΠ),can be used for solely risk averse players, where the degree of risk aversion depends also on parameter μ.The second component of a bargaining game is the underlying bargaining model. Here, we found the Symmetrical Nash model by Nash (1950), the Asymmetrical Nash model by Harsanyi and Selten (1972) and Kalai (1977), and the Eliashberg model by Eliashberg (1986). These models differ in the way the total utility UTof both players is calculated. E.g., the Symmetrical Nash model simply assumes a multiplication of the two single utilities U1(Π1) and U2(Π2):(15)UT(Π1,Π2)=U1(Π1)U2(Π2).Hence, there is no possibility to include other variables like, e.g., bargaining power during the determination of a distribution of profits which is acceptable for both players. If one also wants to take account of bargaining power, either the Asymmetrical Nash model(16)UT(Π1,Π2)=U1(Π1)λ1U2(Π2)λ2,or the Eliashberg model(17)UT(Π1,Π2)=λ1U1(Π1)+λ2U2(Π2),both with λ1+λ2=1, can be used.Whether the obtained solution respects risk attitude and/or bargaining power of the parties involved, thus depends on the combination of utility function and bargaining model. As is obvious from Table 7, there are only two pairs that allow to consider both: an exponential utility function with the Eliashberg model (as used in Huang et al. (2002), Li et al. (2002), Yue, Austin, Wang, & Huang (2006)) as well as power utility function with the Asymmetrical Nash model (as used in Aust & Buscher (2012)). Particular attention has to be paid to Wang et al. (2011), who, for the first time, apply bargaining to a single-manufacturer two-retailer cooperative advertising model, while the residual solely consider bilateral monopolies. In this context, coalition forming could be an interesting research topic (we refer the reader to Nagarajan & Sošić (2008) for further reading).In this paper, we provide a review of mathematical models on cooperative advertising, which enjoy a certain popularity in the recent years’ operations research literature. Therefore, we conducted a literature research, which revealed that there exist different meanings of the term cooperative advertising. After a short disambiguation, we concentrated our analysis on vertical cooperative advertising, which is meant as a financial agreement, where the manufacturer offers to bear a certain share of his retailer’s advertising cost. By this means, he is able to benefit from the complementary properties of retailer’s local advertising compared to his own global advertising.Our analysis of the general model setting shows that, though many authors consider solely firms’ advertising decisions, there is a growing part that includes other demand-relevant variables like price, product quality, or service into their models. We expect that future research will primarily focus on models of that ilk, likely even with more than two variables, as these provide more insights into consumer behavior. Another future task is to further concentrate on models consisting of more than two players, i.e., to integrate manufacturer and/or retailer competition. However, first approaches already show a considerably increased complexity of calculus, which may render necessary computer-based algorithms or metaheuristics (see, e.g., Sadigh, Mozafari, & Karimi (2012) and Yu & Huang (2010)). The cooperative advertising program is commonly modeled by a participation rate, which denotes the manufacturer’s share in the retailer’s advertising. Interestingly, we also found few articles, where the retailer can also participate in manufacturer’s advertising, though this clearly represents a minority. However, as Zhang et al. (2013b) showed in their analysis, bilateral participation may lead to channel coordination, an objective which apparently has almost been neglected in cooperative advertising literature so far. Future studies could therefore search for other instruments which can improve channel efficiency, like it has been done in literature on pricing to a great extent.After that, we discussed the demand and cost functions on which the models base on. Due to the diverse approaches, we differentiated between static and dynamic games, whereupon the majority clearly belongs to the first group. Here, the prevalent assumption is that advertising expenditures have diminishing returns, which are commonly expressed by square root or power functions. Comparable assumptions can also be found in dynamic models, which in addition have the advantage that time is taken into account. A popular model traces back on Nerlove and Arrow (1962), who proposed that advertising causes a certain degree of goodwill, which creates future demand and, however, decays over time. In our opinion, this approach well allows to respect the different effects of local and global advertising expenditures.The last subject of our review was game theory, which is used to analyze the interaction of the supply chain members with different underlying power structures. Most studies are limited to vertical competition between one manufacturer and one retailer, but there also exist articles with horizontal (and mainly retail) competition. Here, the prevalent setting assumes that the manufacturer owns the channel leadership and dominates the retailers, which is a very common assumption in marketing literature. Though, more and more authors refer to the growth of large retail chains and the related changes of the distribution of power and consider an equal distribution of power with or without cooperation or even a retailer-dominated channel. This clearly should be continued in future research, presumably with a focus on more complex game structures like Stackelberg games both within an echelon and between the echelons.Though substantial work has been done regarding different power structures within the supply chain, there is no study which analyzes the effects of information asymmetry or information sharing on the decisions and profits of the supply chain members. As some of the game-theoretic studies already revealed, the manufacturer is only disposed to offer a cooperative advertising program when he acts as a leader and, hence, is aware of the local advertising expenditures his retailer is planning. Therefore, the application of principal-agent theory, where the retailer takes on the agent’s role, may certainly be of interest.Lastly, besides these possible extensions of mathematical modeling, further empirical analyses on cooperative advertising programs and related decision processes are of absolute necessity in order to understand the real practical needs and problems which may result from the introduction of a cooperative advertising program.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
