@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Shared resource capacity expansion decisions for multiple products with quantity discounts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The resource capacity decision for products with quantity discounts is analyzed.The model can accommodate virtually any form of capacity cost.Both all-units and incremental quantity discounts can be accommodated.The algorithms can handle simultaneous decisions for thousands of products.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Purchasing,Quantity discounts,Capacity expansion,Lot sizing,Inventory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When multiple products compete for the same storage space, their optimal individual lot sizes may need to be reduced to accommodate the storage needs of other products. This challenge is exacerbated with the presence of quantity discounts, which tend to entice larger lot sizes. Under such circumstances, firms may wish to consider storage capacity expansion as an option to take full advantage of quantity discounts. This paper aims to simultaneously determine the optimal storage capacity level along with individual lot sizes for multiple products being offered quantity discounts (either all-units discounts, incremental discounts, or a mixture of both). By utilizing Lagrangian techniques along with a piecewise-linear approximation for capacity cost, our algorithms can generate precise solutions regardless of the functional form of capacity cost (i.e., concave or convex). The algorithms can incorporate simultaneous lot-sizing decisions for thousands of products in a reasonable solution time. We utilize numerical examples and sensitivity analysis to understand the key factors that influence the capacity expansion decision and the performance of the algorithms. The primary characteristic that influences the capacity expansion decision is the size of the quantity discount offered, but variability in demand and capacity per unit influence the expansion decision as well. Furthermore, we discover that all-units quantity discounts are more likely to lead to capacity expansion compared to incremental quantity discounts. Our analysis illuminates the potential for significant savings available to companies willing to explore the option of increasing storage capacity to take advantage of quantity discount offerings for their purchased products.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With ever-shrinking margins in today's marketplace, proper inventory management has become more vital than ever before. Purchasing managers typically procure many products simultaneously, often subject to an inventory-based resource constraint (e.g., warehouse space). Basic inventory models, such as the economic order quantity (EOQ) model, assume that procurement decisions relate to a single product with no constraints on the order size. These basic models are well-known and easy to solve analytically. However, the addition of a common resource constraint, multiple products, and quantity discounts significantly complicates the determination of optimal order quantities.Inventory-based common resource constraints typically come in one of two forms: warehouse constraints or financial constraints. A warehouse can be constrained in terms of volume (or square footage), weight, or number of units. The most common warehouse constraint is square footage, as the drive toward “lean” in many industries today severely limits available warehouse space. Financial constraints might arise, for example, from a maximum inventory value that insurance covers or from a credit line available to purchase inventory. A natural, but often forgotten, question is, “Would it be valuable for our firm to increase the capacity of our common resource?” Too often managers may simply assume that capacity is fixed, but in reality, more warehouse space may be available for purchase, or unused warehouse space may be convertible for lease.Any expansion decision comes with a cost, so what is the benefit? The vast majority of businesses have opportunities to receive quantity discounts for at least some of their purchased products (Munson & Rosenblatt, 1998). By increasing the resource capacity, firms open up more opportunities to take advantage of quantity discounts. The model in this paper accommodates both of the common quantity discount forms: all-units and incremental (Hadley & Whitin, 1963). Specifically, we address the following research question: When a firm faces all-units or incremental quantity discount schedules for multiple products in a common resource-constrained inventory system, how much capacity should exist, and how many units of each item should the firm order given that capacity limitation?This paper provides purchasing managers with solution algorithms to answer these questions. Specifically, the algorithms simultaneously determine best order quantities for each product along with the optimal common resource capacity level when the firm receives all-units and/or incremental quantity discounts from its suppliers. While previous research has examined the multiple-product lot-sizing decision with a fixed capacity, to the best of our knowledge this study is the first that treats capacity as a decision variable in the presence of quantity discounts. Furthermore, while previous literature restricts the functional form of capacity cost (e.g., convex or linear), our model accommodates any functional form (e.g., concave, convex–concave, concave-convex, etc.), which increases applicability by accurately modeling the many different ways in which capacity expansion may create costs. Through the numerical studies developed in Section 6, it becomes clear that the introduction of the common resource capacity as a decision variable presents opportunities for considerable savings from quantity discounts that may outweigh the corresponding increase in cost associated with capacity expansion. This especially holds true in the presence of all-units quantity discounts compared to incremental quantity discounts. We find that the size of the quantity discount offered, along with variability in demand and capacity per unit, have the most influence on the capacity expansion decision. The modeling concept of treating capacity expansion as a decision variable opens up directions for future research involving quantity discounts and joint replenishment inventory problems.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review relevant literature on quantity discounts and the capacitated common resource problem. In Section 3, we introduce the baseline model and algorithm when facing all-units quantity discounts. This is followed in Section 4 by an extension of the baseline model to incorporate capacity reduction decisions (leading to potential capacity cost savings) along with capacity expansion decisions. The model and solution algorithm are then modified to handle incremental quantity discounts in Section 5. In Section 6, we describe numerical studies that test the performance of the algorithms along with sensitivity analysis that identifies the key parameters influencing the capacity expansion decision. Finally, in Section 7, we conclude the study and identify directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We provide an approximation technique to determine efficient solutions for a constrained, multi-product lot-sizing problem that incorporates all-units and/or incremental quantity discounts and considers resource capacity as a decision variable. To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first to consider quantity discounts for multiple products while simultaneously allowing capacity to be a decision variable. This provides purchasing managers a more realistic algorithm, where they have multiple levers to manage their inventory at the lowest cost possible. A second key contribution of our study is the ability of our solution algorithm to incorporate any functional form of capacity cost. Previous models in the literature restrict the functional form of capacity cost (e.g., convex or linear), which in turn limits the model's applicability. Our algorithms allow for any form of capacity cost function (e.g., concave, convex–concave, concave–convex, etc.). Concave functions, in particular, can incorporate annualized economies-of-scale benefits often seen in larger expansions. A third contribution is the ability of our algorithms to incorporate a mix of all-units and incremental quantity discounts on the items being purchased. This is especially critical for firms that work with numerous suppliers. Inevitably, with a large supplier base the firm will see a mix of quantity discounts forms. Our algorithms allow for a mix of two of the most common forms of quantity discounts simultaneously all under a single common resource constraint.Our algorithms can accommodate practical problems incorporating simultaneous lot-sizing decisions for thousands of items in real time. In addition, the capacity cost functions can be parsed into several hundred piecewise-linear segments without seriously impacting the run time for decision makers.As with all models, there are limiting assumptions required to achieve analytical tractability. Future researchers can extend our work by removing some of the typical EOQ assumptions such as deterministic demand, infinite production rate, zero lead time, and no backorders. There are two other natural areas of extension to explore. First, “What if the form of quantity discount was changed to business volume discounts?” Second, “What if the order timing was changed to having all products on a fixed cycle length?” Prior literature considers these extensions in isolation, but not along with quantity discounts and a flexible common resource capacity.Similar to the way in which the Japanese made just-in-time production economically viable by converting setup cost from a fixed parameter into a decision variable that could be reduced, this paper takes a previously fixed constraint (capacity level) and converts it into a decision. Future researchers and managers are encouraged to examine all operations problems through such a lens. Spending money to relax a fixed constraint may well open a floodgate of new opportunities to increase profits.For the Benton Example, Si= $5, and hi= 100%, ∀i. For the Fortune 500 Example, Si= $125, and hi= 36%, ∀i.Table B.1,Table B.2,Table B.3,Table B.4,Table B.5