@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Carbon efficiency evaluation: An analytical framework using fuzzy DEA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine DEA models with asymmetric inputs-outputs in the energy context.The model accounts for both crisp and fuzzy efficiency measures across α-levels.The model handles undesirable outputs without producing overly optimistic results.The computation of the proposed model requires fewer procedures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Energy efficiency,Data envelopment analysis,Fuzzy expected interval,Fuzzy expected value,Fuzzy ranking approach,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) is a powerful analytical technique for measuring the relative efficiency of alternatives based on their inputs and outputs. The alternatives can be in the form of countries who attempt to enhance their productivity and environmental efficiencies concurrently. However, when desirable outputs such as productivity increases, undesirable outputs increase as well (e.g. carbon emissions), thus making the performance evaluation questionable. In addition, traditional environmental efficiency has been typically measured by crisp input and output (desirable and undesirable). However, the input and output data, such as CO2 emissions, in real-world evaluation problems are often imprecise or ambiguous. This paper proposes a DEA-based framework where the input and output data are characterized by symmetrical and asymmetrical fuzzy numbers. The proposed method allows the environmental evaluation to be assessed at different levels of certainty. The validity of the proposed model has been tested and its usefulness is illustrated using two numerical examples. An application of energy efficiency among 23 European Union (EU) member countries is further presented to show the applicability and efficacy of the proposed approach under asymmetric fuzzy numbers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Research on sustainability and environmental efficiency aims to change consumption habits and economic structure at the global level. This necessitates the ability to discern the impact of energy consumption of various economic activities. Given that driving such activities has been greatly dependent on fossil fuels, such resources have a limited supply and would ultimately increase the cost along the supply chain and global trade. To limit such effects in the foreseeable future, researchers use the proxy of energy consumption in the form of CO2 emissions in dictating sustainability performance. Aside from the European Union or North America, there is also a brewing interest on sustainability development in towards developing countries such as China, India, Taiwan, Middle East and North Africa (Ramanathan, 2005; Zhou, Chung, & Zhang, 2013). This is understandable as downstream activities have been outsourced to more cost competitive countries and markets have been more globalized.There is a misconception that curbing carbon emissions will result in the productivity reduction of a nation. If this is so, curbing emissions will not benefit developing countries such as India and China who require continuous growth sustained by higher productivity consumption. This seems unfair as the growth enjoyed by developed nations today was an indirect result of the lax carbon emissions control in the past. Hence, the main contention is lesser in curbing emissions but more towards whether those emissions are warranted in terms of efficiency, and whether one can innovate and possess technological progress without having to generate higher levels of carbon emissions. In short, this form of environmental management should be seen more as a stimulus of innovation and not merely a regulatory compliance (Zhu & Sarkis, 2006).There is also a concern on whether there is a limit on the effects of reducing energy consumption through improving energy efficiency. This argument stems from the notion that being energy efficient would contribute to economic growth that in turn would raise the demand for energy. Thus, it is believed that energy savings by being efficient is only a partial outlook on reducing energy consumption (see Madlener & Alcott, 2009; Recalde & Martin, 2012). Hence, there should be a framework that can holistically account for energy efficiency without impeding on productivity.This is made more difficult when there is no single measure that could capture sustainable development in its entirety, and their various indicators may address a number of different interpretations on sustainability (Hanley, Moffatt, Faichney, & Wilson, 1999). Researchers have often focused on one of the following efficiency measures: environmental, energy or economic perspectives. Nonetheless, the fundamental aspect of efficiency evaluation is to strive for higher outputs, given the same level of inputs (Sarkis & Weinrach, 2001). As such, Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), first proposed by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), provides a readily available framework for evaluating a set of decision making units (DMUs) based on multiple input and output measures. DEA's rapid growth in the past three decades has been excellently documented in Cook and Seiford (2009). A full bibliography on applications of DEA is also reported by Emrouznejad, Parker, and Tavares (2008).However, it is not so straight forward as outputs in environmental efficiency models make up both desirable and undesirable outputs. For instance, higher GDP (Gross domestic product) index tend to come with higher CO2 emissions. This means that desirable outputs have to be sacrificed so that inputs can be reallocated for minimization of undesirable outputs (Hernandez-Sancho, Picazo-Tadeo, & Reig-Martinez, 2000).Despite the challenges related to modeling undesirable and desirable outputs, there are still a large number of DEA applications in environmental performance, especially at the national level (see Zhou, Ang, & Poh, 2008). Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, and Pasurka (1989) first proposed an environmental assessment model based on a nonparametric DEA framework, which considered both desirable and undesirable outputs together. Since then, many researchers began to provide a variation of one of the following carbon measures: CO2 emission intensity, CO2 emissions per capita, carbonization index, energy intensity, and including those in the form of linguistic preferences (see Ang, 1999; Fan, Liu, Wu, Tsai, & Wei, 2007; Mielnik & Goldemberg, 1999; Sun, 2005; Tseng, 2011, 2013). Zhang, Bi, Fan, Yuan, and Ge (2008) provided resource and environmental efficiency analysis using the DEA model for 30 provinces in China. They modeled undesirable outputs as inputs in the constant returns to scale technology. Recently, Feng, Chu, Ding, Bi, and Liang (2015) considered compensation schemes for carbon allocation with an empirical investigation on OECD countries. In the eco-efficient assessment, Rashidi, Shabani, and Saen (2015) modeled energy inputs and extended the slacks-based measure (SBM) and range adjusted measure (RAM) to include non-discretionary and undesirable factors. Mahdiloo, Tavana, Saen, and Noorizadeh (2014) integrated the technical efficiency, ecological efficiency and their newly formed process environmental quality efficiency into a single overall efficiency score through the aid of game theory.Since traditional DEA models do not account for subjective input and output values, another class of DEA models emerged; that is, fuzzy DEA models. Existing fuzzy DEA models exhibit some shortcomings. We briefly review three of these shortcomings that are inferred from the fuzzy DEA literature.Most of the proposed methods in existing fuzzy DEA models only cater to crisp efficiency measures (see Saati, Memariani, & Jahanshahloo, 2002; Lertworasirikul, Fang, Joines, & Nuttle, 2003). In other words, the proposed methods in the literature may not be able to calculate crisp and fuzzy efficiency measures together. Although crisp efficiency measures can provide ease of ranking, fuzzy observations are more informative and realistic in real-world modeling and decision making. It avoids results that are over optimistic and pessimistic.The second drawback of existing fuzzy DEA models is requires significantly more computational procedure, i.e. the Guo and Tanaka's fuzzy ranking approach (Guo & Tanaka, 2001) needs two linear programming problems to obtain the efficiency value of a given DMU, in which the optimal value of the objective function of the primary linear programming problem is used in the secondary linear programing problem. In the possibility approach proposed by Lertworasirikul et al. (2003), all fuzzy constraints are defined with different possibility level. In the case of five levels of possibility, there are 5n+2 linear programming problems to be solved. This also means that the model would suffer from complicated computational procedure.The third drawback in existing fuzzy DEA models is its ability to only cater to either triangular fuzzy numbers (see León, Liern, Ruiz, & Sirvent, 2003) or symmetrical triangular fuzzy numbers (see Guo & Tanaka, 2001).In this study, we propose a DEA-based framework for evaluating the carbon efficiency in which the input-output data are described by the symmetrical and asymmetrical fuzzy numbers. The proposed model avoids the unnecessary step of converting a set of undesirable outputs into inputs, or the need to form a new variable to capture the undesirable outputs, which are common in environmental models. The proposed model also accounts for inputs and outputs which are imprecise in nature. This has yet to be investigated in the context of carbon efficiency models. This study circumvents the existing drawbacks in the fuzzy DEA literature, while having the ability to provide crisp and fuzzy efficiency measures across different α-levels by only solving only one linear programming problem.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief background on the methodology of DEA and Fuzzy DEA models. Section 3 covers the development of the proposed model. Section 4 illustrates the method with two established numerical examples, which includes model comparisons. Section 5 applies the proposed model to an energy dependency model among 23 EU member countries, and the results statistically validated. Section 6 concludes the study and provides route for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
