@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evolutionary multi-objective resource allocation and scheduling in the Chinese navigation satellite system project

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The problem formulation is based on a real-world Chinese aerospace project.Each individual resource unit can have a different resource efficiency.The uncertainty of an activity duration is time-dependent (efficiency-dependent).A new co-evolutionary multi-objective optimization heuristic.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolutionary multiobjective optimization,Resource allocation and scheduling,Time-dependent uncertainty,Cooperative coevolutionary algorithm,Aerospace project,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The development of appropriate project management techniques for Research and Development (R&D) projects has received significant academic and practical attention over the past few decades. Project managers typically face the problem of allocating resources and scheduling activities, for which the underlying combinatorial problem is NP-hard. The inherent uncertainty in many R&D environments increases the complexity of the problem.This paper addresses the problem of resource allocation and activity scheduling with a focus on R&D projects. The work is different from the existing literature in at least three aspects: (1) the problem formulation is based on a real-world Chinese aerospace project, (2) each individual resource unit can have a different resource efficiency, and (3) the uncertainty of the duration of an activity is time-dependent (efficiency-dependent) in nature.The problem is formulated as a multi-objective optimization model with simultaneous consideration of makespan and balance of resource efficiency. A cooperative coevolutionary multi-objective algorithm (CCMOA) is designed to produce high-quality solutions. Two chromosome representations and three resource selection policies are tested for the algorithm. The proposed CCMOA is found to be competitive when compared to MOEA/D and NSGA–II, which are two popular algorithms for multi-objective optimization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Large aerospace projects are typical complex Research and Development (R&D) projects and are characterized by a complex structure, reliance on intensive high-tech, and exposure to considerable uncertainty and risk. In recent years, one of the Chinese aerospace projects under development has been the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System (BD-NSS, China Satellite Navigation Office 2012), which is a global navigation satellite system compatible with other navigation satellite systems worldwide. The BD-NSS is comprised of three major components, space constellation, ground control segment and user terminals, and the following three phases.•Phase 1: BeiDou Navigation Satellite Demonstration System (1994–2003)Phase 2: BeiDou Navigation Satellite (regional) System (2004–2012)Phase 3: BeiDou Navigation Satellite System with global coverage (2013–2020)By the end of 2012, 16 BeiDou satellites were successfully launched and already formed the basic system, which can provide services for most parts of the Asia–Pacific region. However, expanding to a global satellite system in the near future is not an easy task. Compared with only technical competence, management competency – in the form of planning and scheduling – plays a more important role to the success of a project in the aerospace industry (Bauer, 2005). Following the general phases of complex product development (Abdelsalam & Bao, 2006), the design and planning process of the BeiDou project mainly includes the following stages: (1) defining the system requirements, (2) defining the system boundary, (3) decomposing the system into smaller activities (components), (4) defining the relationship among activities, and (5) sequencing the activities to form a production plan. Project managers will face the problem of deciding how to schedule the sequence of activities. In the first two phases of the BeiDou project, traditional project management techniques, such as Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) (Malcolm, Roseboom, Clark, & Fazar, 1959) and Critical Chain (Rand, 2000), were employed to develop a project schedule.The practice of the BeiDou project shows, however, that the management of complex R&D projects needs more efficient models and tools. For planning and scheduling, project managers have to face the following four managerial challenges. (1) Resource allocation and scheduling: the project consists of a set of activities which need the collaboration of different teams with various specialities and from different departments. Project managers should simultaneously consider how to allocate resources and how to effectively schedule activities. (2) Uncertain activity durations: most of the activities in the BeiDou project are new for project managers and the Chinese aerospace industrial departments. Uncertain internal and external environments increase the difficulty of activity duration evaluation. The actual duration is typically known only when the activity is completed. (3) Time dependency: during the development of the project, related factors are evolving with time. For instance, organization efficiency improves with practical and hands-on experience, and technology risk tends to decrease as experience accumulates and technological maturity grows. (4) Conflicting objectives: similar to other complex projects, the BeiDou project involves multiple conflicting objectives, such as minimization of makespan, maximization of the competency of selected group members and minimization of risk.Unfortunately, little (if any) work has focused on the above-mentioned characteristics in the scheduling of complex projects. For the BeiDou project, a useful optimization and decision support model can provide project managers with effective candidate solutions to shorten the development cycle, save cost and improve team efficiency. This paper develops a multi-objective model for scheduling the BeiDou project in an uncertain environment. In the proposed model, decisions regarding resource allocation and activity sequencing are simultaneously considered. The impact of uncertainty on activity duration and the nature of time dependency are both taken into account in the proposed multi-objective model. Two objectives are to be optimized: minimization of makespan and maximization of resource balance. To solve the optimization problem, a cooperative coevolutionary approach is designed and two important aspects are investigated in the proposed algorithm: 1 representation of activity sequence and 2) resource allocation strategy for population initialization. Full data for all phases of the BeiDou project cannot be disclosed for reasons of confidentiality, but we present a case study on a selected subproject of the BeiDou program to clearly illustrate the addressed problem and to examine the output of the proposed algorithms.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief review of related work. A problem description and formulation is presented in Section 3. The proposed cooperative coevolutionary multi-objective algorithm is described in Section 4. A case study of a selected subproject of the BeiDou project is reported in Section 5. Additionally, in Section 6, we provide test results for a subset of a standard academic benchmark dataset for project scheduling, to verify whether the good performance observed for our algorithm for the BeiDou project can be transferred to a more general and standardized setting. In the same section, we also compare the performance of the proposed algorithm with two other popular algorithms for multi-objective optimization. Finally, and summary and some conclusions are provided in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
