@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic resource allocation: A flexible and tractable modeling framework

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A framework for modeling dynamic resource allocation problems is described.Encouraging computational results on three widely studied problems are reported.Several polyhedral results that offer insights on its effectiveness are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Applications of integer optimization,Resource allocation,Scheduling,Fairness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a binary optimization framework for modeling dynamic resource allocation problems. The framework (a) allows modeling flexibility by incorporating different objective functions, alternative sets of resources and fairness controls; (b) is widely applicable in a variety of problems in transportation, services and engineering; and (c) is tractable, i.e., provides near optimal solutions fast for large-scale instances. To justify these assertions, we model and report encouraging computational results on three widely studied problems – the Air Traffic Flow Management, the Aircraft Maintenance Problems and Job Shop Scheduling. Finally, we provide several polyhedral results that offer insights on its effectiveness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Allocation of resources over time is a problem of significant importance that many organizations in industry, government and education face. Correspondingly, resource allocation problems have received considerable attention in the Operations Research literature. In real world applications of resource allocation problems, specific issues arise: assignment of requests to resources over time, allowing the flexibility of utilizing alternative resources to complete the requests, fairness issues among different requests, among others. There has been extensive work on specific examples of resource allocation problems (for example, the extensive literature on Job Shop Scheduling). Still, to the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of a unified approach that can be easily modified to accommodate variations, while simultaneously being computationally tractable for large scale instances. On the contrary, it is widely believed that optimization might not be the right approach for certain classes of resource allocation problems such as scheduling for example. In fact, commercial solvers like ILOG for scheduling problems are typically not optimization based, but rather rule based.Our aspiration in this paper is to develop a widely applicable, flexible and tractable modeling framework based on binary optimization that is capable of modeling and solving large scale instances for a variety of resource allocation problems over time. The paper has its intellectual origins with the work of Bertsimas and Stock (1998) on air traffic flow management, which is a resource allocation problem over time. In this problem, the resources are airports and sectors of the airspace, the requests are flights and the objective is to minimize delays in the system. To this date, within the scope of air traffic flow management, this modeling approach has proven successful, as it continues to be used extensively by several researchers and practitioners around the world. Two significant generalizations of the model in the context of air traffic flow management that suggest flexibility include: (a) the work of Bertsimas and Gupta (submitted for publication) that shows how fairness issues among airlines can be modeled in a computationally effective way, and (b) the work of Bertsimas, Lulli, and Odoni (2011) that allows the use of alternative routing of flights, when the current resources decrease possibly because of bad weather. Given the success of this modeling approach to air traffic flow management, it is natural to ask:(a)Can we develop a modeling approach to general dynamic resource allocation problems that is flexible, tractable and widely applicable?Can we give some insights (both theoretical and empirical) on the reasons of the approach effectiveness in the context of resource allocation?The broad framework we have in mind for Dynamic Resource Allocation Problem (DRAP) is as follows. The primitive quantities are: a set of resourcesRand a set of requestsIbelonging to a set of ownersOthat need to be processed by these resources over a time horizonT. Each request i needs to be completed by certain time and it can be completed by using alternative sets of resourcesRi1,…,Rini. Different allocations of resources to requests over time result in delays if the request is completed after its desired time. The overall goal is to allocate resources to requests over time in order to complete the requests as efficiently as possible (minimum delay), potentially using alternative resources and ensuring that the distribution of delays amongst these requests (and implicitly to their owners) is fair.In the opening sentence of his 1963 book Linear Programming and Extensions (Dantzig, 1963), George Dantzig writes: “the final test of any theory is its capacity to solve the problems which originated it”. Motivated by this philosophy, we first present the modeling framework, and then use it to model and solve the following three widely-studied problems:1.Air Traffic Flow Management (ATFM). Air Traffic Flow Management aims to prevent local demand-capacity imbalances by adjusting the flows of aircraft on a national or regional basis. ATFM models optimize for each flight the time of departure, the route selected, the time required to traverse each sector, and the time of arrival at the destination airport, taking into account the capacity of all the elements of the air traffic management system. In our generalization, each request will represent a scheduled sector-based path from takeoff through landing of a flight. The resources are the runways for takeoff and landing as well as the en-route airspace sectors. The fairness controls will be imposed at the destination airports where the final flight sequences are desired to be as close to the original scheduled sequence as possible. Finally, the alternative resources allows the option of flying a different origin–destination route for each aircraft.Aircraft Maintenance Problem (ACM). The Aircraft Maintenance Problem is an important dynamic resource allocation problem in the airline industry. In this problem, an aircraft requests a large number of inspection and repair activities for which resources like equipments, sophisticated tools and highly specialized skills are used over several months.Job Shop Scheduling (JSP). Job Shop Scheduling is one of the most notoriously hard combinatorial optimization problem. It entails processing a set of jobs on machines with the objective of minimizing some function of the completion times of the jobs (examples include the makespan, i.e., the maximum completion time and the minsum, i.e., the average completion time), subject to two requirements: (a) the sequence of machines for each job is prescribed; and (b) each machine can process at most one job at a time, and the schedule must be non-preemptive. In this paper, we model this problem within our framework and solve it for the two most widely applicable objective functions we mentioned earlier, makespan and minsum.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have presented a binary optimization framework for modeling a broad class of dynamic resource allocation problems. The key advantages of our framework are (a) modeling flexibility; (b) wide applicability; and (c) tractability. Furthermore, we developed an optimization-based iterative procedure to further improve upon its efficiency and/or optimality.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.10.063.