@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal two-phase vaccine allocation to geographically different regions under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A two-phase vaccination policy is proposed and compared to the continuous vaccination policy.Some easy to implement heuristics for vaccine allocation are proposed and evaluated.Evaluation of vaccination outcome in a two-phase vaccination policy might considerably reduce vaccination cost.Early vaccination (as the first phase of a two-phase vaccination policy) considerably reduces the disease attack rate.Information about the disease progression in larger regions is more valuable than smaller regions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Epidemic control,Two-phase vaccine allocation,Stochastic linear program,Newsvendor model,Value of stochastic solution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this article, we consider a decision process in which vaccination is performed in two phases to contain the outbreak of an infectious disease in a set of geographic regions. In the first phase, a limited number of vaccine doses are allocated to each region; in the second phase, additional doses may be allocated to regions in which the epidemic has not been contained. We develop a simulation model to capture the epidemic dynamics in each region for different vaccination levels. We formulate the vaccine allocation problem as a two-stage stochastic linear program (2-SLP) and use the special problem structure to reduce it to a linear program with a similar size to that of the first stage problem. We also present a Newsvendor model formulation of the problem which provides a closed form solution for the optimal allocation. We construct test cases motivated by vaccine planning for seasonal influenza in the state of North Carolina. Using the 2-SLP formulation, we estimate the value of the stochastic solution and the expected value of perfect information. We also propose and test an easy to implement heuristic for vaccine allocation. We show that our proposed two-phase vaccination policy potentially results in a lower attack rate and a considerable saving in vaccine production and administration cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In case of an outbreak of an infectious disease, such as influenza, one of the most effective interventions is vaccinating the susceptible population. Vaccination is known to be more effective at the beginning of the epidemic (Khazeni, Hutton, Garber, Hupert, & Owens, 2009; Yarmand, 2010; Yarmand & Ivy, 2013; Yarmand & Ivy, in press; Yarmand, Ivy, & Roberts, in press). However, it is not always possible to vaccinate a large population in a short time due to insufficient available vaccine doses or limited capacity. For instance, during the 2010–2011 flu season in the United States influenza vaccine doses were administered continuously from August 2010 through May 2011 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2011a). The national vaccination coverage was estimated at 30% by the end of October and 43% by the end of May (the situation was similar for flu season 2009–2010) (CDC, 2011a). These observations suggest a new vaccination policy: to have two (or more) phases of vaccination in geographically different regions when the first phase occurs at the beginning of the epidemic (to have the maximum effect) and the vaccination level in the second phase in each region depends on the outcome of vaccination in the first phase in that region. Under this policy, which we refer to as the “two-phase vaccination policy”, one critical question is “how many vaccine doses should be allocated to each region in each phase?”.The main advantage of the two-phase vaccination policy is to allow evaluation of the vaccination outcome after the first phase. Therefore phase two might not be necessary in some regions resulting in a potential decrease in vaccine production as well as possibility of redistribution of vaccine doses among regions which need the second phase. Note that this two-phase model is a special case of a more general multi-phase model. However having two phases is a reasonable assumption since it is unlikely such allocation decisions would be made on a frequent basis. Furthermore, evaluating the two-phase model provides a conservative estimate of the benefits of a more general multi-phase model.In the United States, vaccine stockpiles in each state are centralized and controlled by the state health department. Under a two-phase vaccination policy the state health department would need to decide how many vaccine doses to allocate to each region (e.g., each county) in each phase, and hence how many vaccine doses to order for production. The allocation in the first phase is challenging because of uncertainty about the epidemic dynamics. The epidemic may progress, or die out in some regions with limited vaccination, or even without any vaccination. Due to uncertainty, we formulate the problem of allocating vaccine doses to different regions in different phases of vaccination as a stochastic resource allocation problem.In this article, we consider seasonal influenza in geographically different regions (e.g., counties within a state). We present numerical results based on the 100 counties of the state of North Carolina. We examine the two-phase vaccination policy for a range of choices of model input parameters. We assume that health care officials have decided to have vaccination in two distinct time periods referred to as Phase-I and Phase-II. Based on the probability that the epidemic is contained in Phase-I in each region (estimated from the disease spread model discussed in Section 3.1), we formulate a two-stage stochastic linear program (2-SLP). The Phase-I vaccine allocation is determined in the first stage while the second stage determines Phase-II vaccine allocation according to the realizations of epidemic containment in different regions in Phase-I, hence providing flexibility in the Phase-II vaccine allocation. We use the special problem structure to reduce the developed 2-SLP to a linear program (LP) with a similar size to that of the first stage problem and therefore find the optimal allocation very efficiently.We use our model for three purposes: (i) Estimating the saving in vaccine doses and the associated cost as a result of implementing the two-phase vaccination policy compared to the current continuous vaccination policy, (ii) estimating the optimal number of vaccine doses that should be ordered for production prior to the flu season, and (iii) estimating the associated value of the stochastic solution (VSS) and the expected value of perfect information (EVPI). The VSS provides an estimate of the usefulness of considering the stochastic nature of the problem while the EVPI provides an estimate of the value of epidemic detection and forecast systems. We also propose a heuristic for vaccine allocation based on our numerical results.In addition to the 2-SLP formulation, we will also present a Newsvendor formulation of this problem. The Newsvendor formulation allows the identification of a closed form solution for the optimal allocation. It also provides insight into the structure of the optimal allocation that is not provided by the 2-SLP model; however, as we show this comes at the expense of requiring the complete distribution of demand, as opposed to just the mean demand for the 2-SLP mode (after it is reduced to an LP).The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present a review of relevant research. In Section 3 we present the problem definition and assumptions and present the 2-SLP and Newsvendor model formulations along with our solution methodology. In Section 4 we present and analyze the numerical results. Finally in Section 5 we conclude this article with summarizing the main findings and suggesting some directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed a two-phase vaccination policy to contain an epidemic with Phase-I in the early stages of the epidemic and Phase-II in the middle of the epidemic after observing the outcome of Phase-I vaccination. This two-phase vaccination policy not only results in a considerable reduction in the number of vaccine doses required to contain the epidemic (up to 50%), and hence the vaccine production cost, but also results in a lower attack rate and also allows for redistribution of vaccine doses after Phase-I to use the vaccine doses more efficiently.We considered two alternative formulations of the vaccine allocation problem. We formulated the problem of optimal allocation of vaccine doses to different regions in each phase as a 2-SLP and used the special problem structure to reduce it to an LP with a similar size to that of the first stage problem. We obtained structural properties which helped speed up computation. We also presented a Newsvendor formulation of the vaccine allocation problem which allowed us to give a closed-form solution for the optimal allocation. The Newsvendor formulation provided additional insight into the optimal allocation.To illustrate the advantage of the two-phase vaccination policy over the continuous vaccination policy we considered 100 counties of North Carolina in case of seasonal influenza. We solved the problem for different values of v0 (Phase-I coverage), ART (attack rate threshold), and r (percentage increase in vaccination cost in Phase-II) and found the optimal Phase-I allocation for different values of ART and r. We developed a disease spread simulation model based on the stochastic SEIR model to estimate the probability of epidemic containment with Phase-I vaccination in each region for different values of v0 and ART.The attack rate and the expected cost depend on the value of ART determined by health care officials. For ART=5%, 10%, and 15%, the corresponding optimal Phase-I allocations are vaccination ofv0∗=40%, 25%, and 15% of each county population, respectively. These vaccination policies yield a statewide attack rate of 4.44%, 8.27%, and 13.04%, while saving a total of 476,774, 1,830,813, and 2,650,864 vaccine doses, on average, and 3.8, 17.9, and 25.2 million dollars in vaccine production and administration, respectively. This is in comparison with the current continuous vaccination policy with a statewide coverage of 45% in North Carolina. The (expected) statewide coverage in each case (i.e., 40.6%, 25.8%, and 17.2%, respectively) can be used as an estimate for the optimal number of vaccine doses which should be ordered for production prior to the flu season. The abovementioned optimal Phase-I allocations for different values of ART assign the same coverage in Phase-I to all counties, and therefore, equity among different counties is respected. Further, our results show that the optimal Phase-I allocation is insensitive to the increase in vaccination cost in Phase-II in comparison with Phase-I at least in the considered range of r=0–60%.We used the developed 2-SLP to calculate VSS and EVPI. To calculate VSS, we considered three reference scenarios: the best case scenario (the epidemic is contained in Phase-I in all regions), the worst case scenario (the epidemic is not contained in Phase-I in any region), and the round scenario (the epidemic is contained in Phase-I only in regions with epidemic containment probability greater than 0.5). We used VSS to examine the performance of the associated optimal Phase-I allocations, and accordingly, to propose an effective heuristic for vaccine allocation.In our model, EVPI gives an estimate of the value of accurate information about the outcome of Phase-I vaccination with respect to epidemic containment. It provides an upper bound on the value of epidemic detection and alerting systems that could help public health officials in determining how much should be invested for providing such systems. Our results show that epidemic alerting and detection systems are more valuable (i.e., the associated EVPI will be higher) if the vaccination coverage in Phase-I is relatively low.When there is an epidemic in the community, usually other interventions, such as antiviral prophylaxis and treatment, and also non-pharmaceutical interventions, such as isolation, are implemented in addition to vaccination. In our model, the impact of these interventions are reflected in the value of the basic reproduction number, R0, which determines the effective contact rate among individuals. Further, the cost of these interventions are related to the number of infectives, and hence, the attack rate. There might also be constraints on resources other than vaccine doses, such as human and facility resources, which are related to the attack rate as well. Therefore, ART can be used to account for these other constraints as well. Furthermore, ART can be used to limit the attack rate, which is of course an important decision factor in addition to cost.There are some limitations to our study. First, we only considered two vaccination phases in our model. In reality, there could be more than two vaccination phases, in which case the problem can be formulated as a multi-stage stochastic program. Intuitively, with more vaccination phases the saving in vaccine doses and the associated monetary value should be larger provided that there is enough time between different phases to evaluate the impact of previous phases with sufficient accuracy. Nevertheless, our results provide conservative estimates of the potential benefits of using a sequential decision making process for vaccine allocation. A second limitation of our modeling approach is that in calculating the monetary benefit of early vaccination in Phase-I we only considered the monetary saving in vaccine production. However, there are other monetary benefits as a result of a lower attack rate, such as work loss, treatment, and hospitalization costs associated with the averted cases. This results in an underestimation of monetary benefits of the proposed two-phase vaccination policy. A third limitation is the way we have accounted for transportation of infectives between regions in the disease spread model. We did not explicitly simulate the individual-by-individual travel of infectives between regions. Instead, we considered a general daily travel rate into different regions. Finally, we assumed the probability of epidemic containment corresponding to the minimum required vaccination in Phase-I (i.e.,Fi(v0),i∈N) for tractability. But the coverage in Phase-I might be higher than the minimum required level (i.e., v0). However, this assumption is not restrictive with respect to finding the optimal allocation because at the optimal Phase-I coverage (i.e.,v0∗) only the minimum required doses are allocated to all regions. Therefore the probability of epidemic containment is indeedFi(v0∗),i∈N, at the optimal coverage. This is also true for coverage levels higher than the optimal coverage.