@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pollution accumulation and abatement policy in a supply chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper assesses the impact of decentralized decision-making on pollution accumulation.The cooperative supply chain emits more pollution than a decentralized supply chain.Double marginalization reduces polluting emissions and heightens abatement efforts.Supply chain coordination generates more eco-friendly social welfare under specific conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Double marginalization,Pollution accumulation,Abatement efforts,Supply chain,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper seeks to determine how the double marginalization phenomenon affects the tradeoff between polluting emissions and abatement activities related to pollution accumulation in a supply chain composed of one manufacturer and one retailer. The environmental consequence of this inefficiency, which emerges in a non-cooperative vertical setting governed by a single-parameter contract, is overlooked in the literature on pollution control. In the setup of a two-stage game, we investigate the impact of double marginalization for non-cooperative equilibrium. To check whether there are differences between dynamic and strategic effects of double marginalization on pollution accumulation, both the open-loop and feedback Nash equilibria are derived over a finite time horizon, with the cooperative solution as a benchmark.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The environmental economics literature has dealt extensively with the horizontal impact of decentralized decision-making on pollution accumulation, which consists in improper internalization of the social cost of pollution by firms or nations (for recent surveys, see Benchekroun & Long, 2011; Jørgensen, Martín-Herrán, & Zaccour, 2010; Long, 2010). Accordingly, strategy types (Dockner, Jørgensen, Van Long, & Sorger, 2000) in pollution dynamic game models are strongly influential in that commitment (that is, open-loop Nash equilibrium) strategies result in a lower steady state pollution stock than contingent (or feedback Nash equilibrium) strategies do.In contrast, the vertical impact of decentralized decision-making in a bilateral monopoly (supply chain) on pollution accumulation has been under-investigated in both the economics and management literatures. It is well-known that poor supply chain coordination creates a common inefficiency: the double marginalization effect is maximized under conventional wholesale price contracts (Spengler, 1950). Accordingly, retailers pay suppliers a fixed transfer price per unit ordered, and mark-ups applied by both firms increase consumer prices, lower consumer demand, and reduce overall profits compared with centralized decision-making (Bresnahan & Reiss, 1985).Because double marginalization decreases both channel profit and consumer surplus, it should be eliminated from the supply chain. Supply chain coordination has been advocated and can be induced via mechanisms like contracts (e.g., El Ouardighi, 2014; Hu, Caldentey, & Vulcano, 2013).How does double marginalization affect pollution accumulation in a supply chain? The general perception is that greater collaboration and integration within a supply chain would also enhance firms’ environmental practices (Handfield, Walton, Seegers, & Melnyk, 1997; Hollos, Blome, & Foerstl, 2012; Klassen & Vachon, 2003; Lee, 2010; Simpson, 2010). Thus, compared with a non-cooperative supply chain, the mitigation of double marginalization in a cooperative supply chain intensifies greater abatement efforts by eliminating the underinvestment problem in a decentralized context. However, considering that mitigating double marginalization ultimately increases consumer demand and thus the absolute volume of pollution emissions as a by-product of production activities, it is unclear whether the increase in abatement efforts in a cooperative supply chain driven by the increase in revenues would far outweigh the increase in emission volumes. Put differently, double marginalization purportedly lowers the pollution stock due to lower consumer demand, yet because the underinvestment problem typically occurs in a decentralized context, the decentralized supply chain with double marginalization putatively expends less effort on pollution abatement. Therefore, the tradeoff between emissions and abatement is not straightforward.A primary goal in this paper is to determine how double marginalization affects the tradeoff between polluting emissions and abatement efforts related to pollution accumulation in a supply chain. In particular, we investigate whether the virtue of supply chain coordination would be still valid from an environmental standpoint. Given the increasing importance of environmental sustainability and the traditional emphasis on supply chain coordination, this linkage deserves thorough examination. Should regulators encourage supply chain coordination to enhance environmental performance and social welfare? What would an optimal abatement strategy be for profit maximizing firms, along with optimal emissions in a cooperative or non-cooperative supply chain? Although the impact of double marginalization has been widely discussed in the literature, little research has addressed these issues simultaneously. To fill this gap and to respond to Tang and Zhou's (2012) call for future research on vertical interactions between supply chain members in the context of environmentally/socially sustainable operations, we address the following research questions:-What is the impact of double marginalization in a supply chain from the environmental perspective, specifically on the tradeoff between emissions and abatement decisions?From a broader perspective that considers social welfare and cumulative pollution, is the centralized supply chain more beneficial than the decentralized chain?To investigate this issue, we use a non-cooperative two-stage game model of a simple supply chain with one manufacturer that sells a finished good to one retailer, which resells it to a final consumer. As a key component of the problem, pollution is interpreted as a stock variable in which pollutants would be generated per unit output as a by-product of the production process. However, it is reduced by the firm's abatement efforts throughout the planning horizon. Production is determined by price-dependent consumer demand: a make-to-order system is assumed in this paper. We analyze the supply chain's pricing and abatement effort decisions under a wholesale price contract. In this setup, the optimal transfer price is determined at the first stage of the game by the manufacturer, which presumably maximizes its best interest. The optimal contract can be reached by both firms if their resulting payoffs are positive. Due to the cumulative nature of pollution, a differential game of finite duration is played during the second stage of the game. To investigate optimal strategies and their dynamic effects on the environment, a differential game is often adopted in environment-related studies (e.g., Bertinelli, Camacho, & Zou, 2014; Boucekkine, Krawczyk, & Vallée, 2011; Chen & Sheu, 2009; for a review, see Jørgensen et al., 2010). Jørgensen et al. (2010) also explained that a differential game approach is particularly useful to model environmental issues that are intrinsically dynamic and influenced by interactions between firms over time, not just one-shot phenomena. To check whether there are differences between dynamic and strategic effects of double marginalization on pollution accumulation, both the open-loop and feedback Nash equilibria are derived over finite time horizons, with the cooperative solution as a benchmark.The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature. Section 3 develops the game model. Sections 4–6 present the cooperative, open-loop and feedback Nash equilibrium strategies, respectively. In Section 7, we compare the results. Section 8 provides numerical illustrations. Section 9 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper assessed the impact of decentralized decision-making on pollution accumulation in a supply chain composed of one manufacturer and one retailer under a conventional wholesale price contract. To do so, we suggested a differential game model of vertical pollution control with nonexistent natural abatement of the pollution stock.We showed that the game allows a unique and subgame perfect equilibrium irrespective of whether moves are simultaneous or sequential, and that the influence of the double marginalization effect on pollution accumulation is unaffected by strategy types, that is, open-loop vs. feedback Nash equilibrium strategies. While the pricing strategy is farsighted in the cooperative case, it is myopic in the non-cooperative case because the retailer does not internalize the cost of pollution. In the cooperative case, the abatement effort path generally shapes the consumer price path. Further, greater abatement efforts reduce consumer demand (and emissions). In the non-cooperative case, abatement efforts are negatively influenced by the transfer price, which in turn positively affects the consumer price. As a result, double marginalization is amplified because lower abatements are concomitant with lower emissions.This paper contributes to the literature first by bringing the double marginalization effect in a vertical supply chain explicitly to environmental economics. Although the virtue of supply chain coordination has been widely accepted, we show that this statement is only partially correct when an environmental aspect is considered. The cooperative supply chain results in lower sales price and consequently higher consumer demand in general. Also, it indeed leads to higher cumulative abatement efforts as is commonly believed, driven by an increase in revenue. However, these efforts are not sufficient to offset the greater emissions as by-products from higher production activities in the centralized supply chain because abatement efforts often require substantial investments in environment-friendly technologies, facilities and processes (Krass et al., 2013). As a result, the cooperative supply chain emits more cumulative pollution and pollution per unit output than a decentralized chain and compromises on environmental performance until it increases the supply chain profit. In the non-cooperative supply chain, however, this problem is less apparent because the level of required abatement effort is lower due to low polluting emissions. In addition, abatement efforts might be higher in the non-cooperative supply chain during the initial periods under the particular configurations involving high price-sensitive demand or low effectiveness of abatement efforts. Stated differently, although the non-cooperative supply chain ruled by a wholesale price contract and its corollary, the double marginalization effect, have been commonly recognized as inefficient, they have environmental virtue because they not only reduce polluting emissions via lower production, but also heighten manufacturer's abatement efforts.Next, we introduced a notion of eco-friendly social welfare, measured as social welfare per unit of pollution stock, to explore the impact of double marginalization from a broader perspective including supply chain profit, consumer surplus and environmental performance. We find that the elimination of double marginalization in the cooperative supply chain generates higher eco-friendly social welfare only in some cases. When demand is highly sensitive to the sales price, a cooperative supply chain often generates greater eco-friendly social welfare than a non-cooperative chain. However, a decentralized supply chain and the presence of double marginalization tend to be more socially desirable in the converse case.We also provide several insights for regulators. First, the general perception that a centralized supply chain is more socially desirable should be reexamined if an environmental aspect is considered. Which supply chain configuration (i.e., centralized vs decentralized) should be promoted varies depending on the priorities. If regulators intend to maximize social welfare only (i.e., firms’ profits and consumer surplus), they should facilitate a centralized supply chain. Yet if their main goal is to reduce emissions, then regulators should encourage a decentralized supply chain rather than supply chain coordination, because the elimination of double marginalization in a centralized supply chain results in greater cumulative emissions and higher emissions per unit output despite higher abatement efforts. This could be particularly relevant to industries where pollution is the most urgent issue and significant emission reduction is crucial. Moreover, if the regulators consider broader aspects of the entire economic system, including not only the environment but also both firms’ profits and consumer surplus, the optimal supply chain configuration would vary depending on the market characteristics. Specifically, regulators should encourage supply chain coordination to increase eco-friendly social welfare only when the market is price-sensitive enough. Otherwise, it might be more effective to focus on maintaining a double marginalization effect in a supply chain.Our findings also imply that the benefits of supply chain coordination might vary depending on the firm's objective. If the goal of the firm is purely profit-seeking, managers should try to move toward a centralized supply chain. Yet if the profit-maximizing firm also cares about long-term environmental sustainability, then managers should be aware of a downside of supply chain coordination: lower environmental performance. Managers should learn how to overcome this environmental issue in a coordinated supply chain and find ways to balance short-term profit maximization and long-term environmental sustainability.This paper has demonstrated the importance of double marginalization on pollution accumulation. For future research, our vertical pollution game can be extended to account for price competition in a bilateral duopoly. This important topic is high on our research agenda.