@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impact of liquidity risk on variations in efficiency and productivity: A panel gamma simulated maximum likelihood estimation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The relationship between random error and one-side error is linked to productivity and efficiency, respectively. This helps to evaluate the importance of financial risks on efficiency and productivity independently.An alternative panel estimator of normal-gamma stochastic frontier model is proposed using simulated maximum likelihood estimation techniques. This can be extended to alternative distributions.Empirical estimates indicate difference in the parameter coefficients of gamma stochastic production function, and heterogeneity function variables between the pooled and the Swamy–Arora panel estimator.Finally, the study indicates short and long run variations in liquidity risk play an important role in explaining the variance in inefficiency and productivity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Swamy–Arora panel random effect,Gamma stochastic frontier analysis,SML,Financial liquidity risk,U.S. agriculture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this study is to assess the importance of short- and long-run liquidity or debt risk on technical inefficiency and productivity. An alternative panel estimator of normal-gamma stochastic frontier model is proposed using a simulated maximum likelihood estimation technique. Empirical estimates indicate a difference in the parameter coefficients of gamma stochastic production function, and heterogeneity function variables between the pooled and the Swamy–Arora panel models. The results from this study show short and long run risk or variations in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio play an important role in explaining the variance in efficiency and productivity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The importance of the financial crisis on the world and regional economies including the banking sector, fixed-income markets, markets/regulations and risk analysis have been addressed (Andersen, Häger, Maberg, Naess, & Tungland, 2012; Aouni, Colapinto, & Torre, 2014; Claessens, Demirgüc-Kunt, & Moshirian, 2009; Demyanyk & Hasan, 2010; Dwyer & Tkac, 2009; Grundke & Polle, 2012; Moshirian, 2011). The crisis is also expected to take its toll on efficiency as well as the productivity and income growth of countries, industry and individual firms. Agriculture efficiency and productivity is not immune from recent financial crises facing the economy. In particular, changes in the working capital requirements and greater use of external financing (debt capital) as reflected in financial ratios have been noticed in the agriculture sector through time.11The financial ratios are developed from relationships of variables within an income statement and balance sheet as well as relationships between variables from an income statement and balance sheet. A number of ratios related to liquidity, solvency, efficiency and profitability financial measures have been found to be useful indicators of farm financial progress and risk-bearing ability. According to United States Department of Agriculture’s Economic Research Service, the liquidity ratio measures the farm business’ ability to pay its debts as they become due. The solvency ratio measures debt pledged against farm business assets, indicating overall financial risk. The efficiency ratios measure the proportion of gross cash farm income absorbed by fixed expenses. Finally, the profitability ratios measure how efficiently the farm business uses its assets.These financial ratios compliment producers’ efforts at realizing economics of production for better financial performance of farms. Further, the financial ratios are used by farmers and managers to make sound financial, production, and marketing decisions to be efficient and productive. In this study, the focus is to evaluate the importance of liquidity or debt-servicing ratio on efficiency and productivity using an alternative two-way random effects panel stochastic frontier analysis.22The authors have also examined the importance of other financial liquidity, solvency, profitability and efficiency financial ratios. As Andy Swenson, faculty member in our department with over 20 years of experience would call it sweet sixteen financial ratios.Liquidity or debt-servicing ratio, defined as the ratio of interest payments plus principal to gross cash farm income, is a measure of liquidity risk.33Trends in liquidity is commonly used and reported by financial institutions including the United States Department of Agriculture to track changes in the financial structure of the agricultural sector. For example, the United States Department of Agriculture’s Economic Research Service publishes the Agricultural Income and Finance Outlook report of the agricultural sector each year. In addition the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System publishes the Agricultural Finance Databook that tracks the volume of commercial agriculture loans, interest rates, and farm credit conditions in the agricultural sector. These reports are used to gauge a pulse of the economic conditions in the farming sector.In particular, the debt-servicing ratio reflecting liquidity measures the share of the farm business’s gross income needed to service the debt. Lenders, to determine whether one is creditworthy for a mortgage, operating loan, machinery loans, debt restructuring, and charge accounts commonly use liquidity or debt-servicing ratio. It has been argued that debt can alter the selection of enterprise, production level, and income. In addition, according to Barry, Baker, and Sanint (1981), “liquidity management is a principal means by which farmers cope with variations in cash flows that arise of uncertain commodity prices, yields and production costs.” Trends in liquidity or debt, along with short- and long-term variations in liquidity or debt, are noticed in the agricultural sector across states through time (Fig. 1).A small body of literature has been devoted to the study of the importance of financial ratios, financial characteristics and debt relative to assets on efficiency and productivity using stochastic frontier analysis and data envelopment analysis (Blancard, Boussemart, Briec, & Kerstens, 2006; Cooper, Kingyens, & Paradi, 2014; Valladao, Veiga, & Veiga, 2014). Past literature has examined the importance of financial variables on the volatility and returns to agriculture economic growth (Davidova & Latruffe, 2003; Paul, Johnston, & Frengley, 2000; Whittaker & Morehart, 1991). Further, past studies suggest a positive and negative results depending upon the methodology – stochastic frontier analysis or the data envelopment analysis; and the use of cross-section, time-series or panel data under primal or dual approach.The importance of liquidity or debt risk on the variance of technical efficiency and variance of productivity has yet to be documented. Additionally, does the increased use of capital and debt as reflected in the short- and long-run variations in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio have differential effects on technical efficiency and productivity? Studies in the technical efficiency and productivity analyses have used two-stage linear programming followed by the discrete choice Tobit model to examine the relationship between the financial variable and technical efficiency measures using primal production function. The two-step process has been the subject of analysis by earlier researchers. However, the two-step process might be biased due to omitted variables (see Wang & Schmidt, 2002) or heteroskedasticity (Greene, 2004). Hence, following Greene (2004), a heterogeneity stochastic frontier model is used to assess the impact of liquidity or debt-servicing ratio risk on the variation in technical inefficiency and productivity.Second, the research extends the time-series normal-gamma stochastic frontier model to a two-way random effect panel stochastic frontier model to account for the cross-section time-series data. Panel statistical procedures have several advantages over conventional cross-section or time-series statistical methods (see Hsiao, 2003). The advantages include the reduction in collinearity among exogenous variables, allow complicated models, parsimonious, and finally account for temporal and spatial random variation. An alternative panel estimator of the normal-gamma stochastic frontier model is proposed using simulated maximum likelihood estimation techniques. In addition, a link is established between one-sided efficiency and random errors of the stochastic frontier analysis to inefficiency and productivity measures, respectively.In Section 2, we first extend Greene (2003) normal-gamma Simulated Maximum Likelihood (SML) stochastic frontier methodology to examine the above objective. The Swamy–Arora (SA) two-way random effects panel estimator of normal-gamma SML stochastic frontier model is presented.44Additional alternative estimators including Wallace–Hussian, Amemiya and Nerlove panel stochastic frontier analysis is estimated and available from the authors.Section 3 provides details of the panel data (48 state level data from 1960 to 2003) used in the analysis. An application of the SA two-way random effects panel estimator of normal-gamma SML stochastic frontier is presented in Section 4. Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section 5.The risk or variability in financial liquidity or debt affects producers’ decision to produce different types of goods, purchase inputs and the availability of capital. This might affect the structure and organization of farm production including the technical efficiency and productivity of the farm. An ability to quantify changes in financial liquidity risk or variability in the short-term and long-term could help not only farmers and managers to make sound financial, production, and marketing decisions, but also, policy makers. For example, a producer’s decision to invest in a new technology that could increase efficiency and productivity is dependent upon the lenders. The lenders use the liquidity or debt-servicing ratio to determine whether the producer is creditworthy for a mortgage, operating loan, equipment loans, debt restructuring, and charge accounts. Further, risk or variability in the debt relative to assets and liquidity or debt-servicing ratio might lead to variations in the technical efficiency or inefficiency, and productivity. Not only is risk or variability in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio important for the producer, but also it is a major concern among trading partners, bankers and policy makers.Fig. 1 shows a trend in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio and short and long-term risk or variability in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio from 1960 to 2003 to gauge the importance of variability. The short-run debt-servicing ratio risk or variability is measured as the window rolling standard deviation of debt-servicing ratio for the last 5 years. The long run risk or variability is measured as the cumulative rolling variation in debt-servicing ratio starting with 5 years and cumulating over 44 years. All countries’ short-term and long-term risk or variability is positive suggesting the existence of variation in debt-servicing ratio not only in the short run, but also in the long run. Evaluating this debt-servicing ratio variability or risk in the short-term and long-term across 48 states of the United State of America from 1960 to 2003 could help in understanding the debt-servicing ratio constraints and implications of changes in technical efficiency and productivity measures.The stochastic frontier model, introduced in 1977 by Aigner, Lovell, and Schmidt; Meeusen and van den Broeck and Battese and Corra decomposes the error term, ɛ into random error, v and inefficiency, u. Stochastic frontier analysis has become a popular tool to model the production relationship between input and output quantities and has been primarily used to estimate the technical efficiency.55The efficiency concept introduced by Farrell (1957) is defined as the distance of the observation from the production frontier and measured by the observed output of a firm, state or country relative to realized output, i.e., output that could be produced if it were 100 percent efficient from a given set of inputs.In 1982, Jondrow, Materov, Lovell, and Schmidt suggested a method to estimate firm specific inefficiency measures. Since it was introduced in 1977, the stochastic frontier analysis has been evolving theoretically with a surge in empirical application. Furthermore, progress has been made on extending to fixed effects, random effects and random parameter panel models, time invariant and time variant models, correcting for heteroskedasticity and heterogeneity and alternative distributions (normal-half normal, normal-exponential and normal-gamma) of technical efficiency term. Additionally, research has investigated the influence of a broader set of determinants of technical efficiency, namely geographic variables, market structure conduct and performance hypothesis, policy variables and size of the firm.Greene (2003) proposed a simulated maximum likelihood (SML) estimation procedure to estimate normal-gamma stochastic frontier model to overcome the complexity associated with the log likelihood function. This is based on his earlier work (Greene, 1990). According to Greene (2003), the normal-gamma model provides a richer and more flexible parameterization of the efficiency distribution in the stochastic frontier model than either of the canonical forms, normal-half normal and normal-exponential.Following Greene (2003), the gamma SML stochastic frontier model is used to represent a Cobb–Douglas production function as:(1)y=f(x;β)+v−uwhere y is the output in logs and x is a vector of inputs in logs used in the production function,βis a vector coefficient associated with inputs, v represents the random error and u, represents the one-sided efficiency and can be represented with alternative distributions including normal-gamma with a scale q and a shape parameter p. The normal-gamma distribution of the inefficiency, u, following Greene (2003) is defined as:(2)f(u)=qpexp(−qu)up−1G(p).Equation (1) with normal-gamma distribution can be extended by introducing heterogeneity in the random error, and the one-sided inefficiency, u, as:(3)y=f(x;β)+v−uσu2=exp(z;δu)σv2=exp(z;δv)where the variance in the inefficiency errors and random errors isσu2andσv2,respectively. The variances in the inefficiency and random error terms is modeled as a function of short and long run risk or variability of liquidity or debt-servicing ratio. The efficiency and random error variances in Eq. (3) can be paraphrased as the variance in inefficiency and productivity measures.Productivity or total factor productivity(TFP)is defined as the ratio of inputs over outputs. Mathematically, the production function assuming inefficiency can be represented asy=f(x˜;β)+v,wheref(x˜;β)is equal to f(x;β) − u. This production function, assuming efficiency, can be used to representTFPasv=y/f(x˜;β). The productivity concept could be incorporated into the stochastic frontier production function (y = f(x;β) + v − u), where v the conventional random error represents total factor productivity and u the one-side disturbance that is distributed as normal-gamma represents efficiency. The stochastic frontier production function with heteroskedasticity (Eq. (3)) is used to examine the importance of short and long run variations in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio on variations in inefficiency and productivity. Specifically, the model is represented as:(4)y=f(x;β)+v−u…Outputσinefficiency2=exp(z;δu)…efficiencyσproductivity2=exp(z;δv)…Productivity.Next, the time-series stochastic frontier production function with heteroskedasticity is extended to account for the temporal and spatial variation using the Swamy–Arora alternative two-way panel estimator.To estimate the two-way random effects stochastic frontier production function with heterogeneity in the random error (vit) and the one-sided inefficiency (uit) is represented as:(5)yit=f(xit;β)−uit+vitσu,it2=exp(zit;δu)σv,it2=exp(zit;δv)where i = 1, …, N and t = 1, …, T.In the traditional two-way random effects panel model, the random error vitis decomposed into spatial variation, temporal variation and the remaining residual variation. Unlike earlier research, that attempts to jointly model random and one-sided efficiency errors for panel estimator, the emphasis of this research, is the use one-sided efficiencyuitto transform the endogenous and exogenous variables.The proposed alternative two-way random effects panel stochastic frontier estimator is based on the traditional random effects panel model with the exception of using one-sided efficiencyuit. The transformation is based on the decomposition of the one-sided efficiency variationuitinto spatial efficiency variation (μi), temporal efficiency variation (λt) and the remaining residual efficiency variation(ɛit)for two-way random effects panel model. This is represented as:(6)uit=μi+λt+ɛit.The two-way random effects panel model random error components with zero mean and covariance matrix:(7)E(μλɛ)(μ′λ′ɛ′)=(σμ2000σλ2000σɛ2).The one-sided efficiency error variance-covariance (Ω) of the gamma SML stochastic frontier production function can be represented as:(8)Ω≡σu2=σμ2+σλ2+σɛ2.Finally, to estimate the two-way error component gamma SML stochastic frontier model with heterogeneity in the random error and the one-sided inefficiency, Eq. (5) needs to be transformed as:(9)yit*=f(xit*;β)−uit+vitσu,it2=exp(zit*;δu)σv,it2=exp(zit*;δv)whereyit*=Ω−1/2yit;xit*=Ω−1/2xitwith (Ω) defined in Eq. (8) oryit*=yit−θ1yi.−θ2y.t+θ3y..; andθ1=1−(σɛφ21/2),θ2=1−(σɛφ31/2)andθ3=θ1+θ2+(σɛφ41/2)−1,with yi ., y.  tand y. . in the above equation represent the cross-section, time-series, and the overall mean of the variable and computed asyi.=∑t=1Tyit/T,y.t=∑n=1Nyit/Nandy..=∑n=1N∑t=1Tyit/NT,respectively. The phi’sφ^2=Tσμ2+σɛ2,φ^3=Nσλ2+σɛ2andφ^4==Tσμ2+Nσλ2+σɛ2are obtained variances of between cross-section, between time-period and within cross-section time-period errors. The phi’s used in the computation of the thetas (θ1, θ2, and θ3) can be estimated using within, between cross-section and between time-series gamma SML stochastic frontier model efficiency – Swamy–Arora (SA) approach (1972).The empirical application of the above concept and methods is simple and straightforward. Further, it is easy to estimate the two-way random effects gamma SML stochastic frontier production function by using the frontier module of LIMDEP (2007) package:(1)Estimate pooled, within, between cross-sections, and between time-series system gamma SML stochastic frontier production function models with heterogeneity in the random error(vit)and the one-sided inefficiency(uit)using standard LIMDEP package. Specifically, estimate gamma SML stochastic frontier model ofyiton  xit and  zit for pooled;y˜itonx˜itandz˜itfor within, wherey˜it=yit−yi.−y.t+y..; and yi .  on  xi .  and  zi . (y. ton  z. tand  z. t) for between cross-section (between time-series).Compute estimates of σɛ, σμand σλas described above.Obtain the variances σɛ, σμand σλto developφ^2,φ^3andφ^4to estimate the thetas, θ1, θ2, θ3 in order to transform the output and input variables,yit*,andxit*respectively, i.e.,yit*=yit−θ1yi.−θ2y.t+θ3y...Finally, estimate the gamma SML stochastic frontier model with heterogeneity in the random error (v) and the one-sided inefficiency (u) on this transformed model as represented in Eq. (9).The United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service constructs and publishes the state and aggregate production accounts for the farm sector. The data is available at www.ers.usda.gov/data/agproductivity/. The features of the state and national production accounts are consistent with the gross output model of production and are well documented in Ball, Gollop, Kelly-Hawke, and Swinand (1999). The aggregate output quantity index and six input quantity indexes are used to estimate the primal production function using SFA. The six inputs include − land, labor, capital, chemicals, energy and material input quantity indexes. All inputs are quantity index, with 1960 = 100.The United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service (www.ers.usda.gov/data/farmbalancesheet/fbsdmu.htm) provides financial liquidity or debt servicing ratio. Liquidity or debt servicing ratio, defined as the ratio of interest payments plus principal to gross cash farm income, is a measure of liquidity risk. In particular, the debt servicing ratio reflecting liquidity, measures the share of the farm business’s gross income needed to service the debt. The short and long run debt servicing ratio risk or variability is measured as the standard deviations through time. The short run debt servicing ratio risk or variability is measured as the window rolling standard deviation of debt servicing ratio for the last 5 years. The long run risk or variability is measured as the cumulative rolling variation in debt servicing ratio starting with 5 years and accumulating over 44 years.Table 1presents the summary statistics of the output, inputs, and financial liquidity or debt servicing ratio based on 48 states from 1960 to 2003.We specified a Cobb–Douglas66Prior to determining to use a Cobb–Douglas functional form, the possibility of using a translog (TL) functional form specification was rejected based on (a) log-likelihood ratio test; (b) wrong skewness of the efficiency term which would have implied the presence of no ‘inefficiency’; and (c) even in the presence of convergence, the parameter coefficients of TL would have tended to violate the theory of production function as some of the estimated parameter coefficients had negative signs.functional form for the pooled and SA panel gamma SML stochastic frontier models with heterogeneity in the random error (v) and the one-sided inefficiency (u). The long- and short run variance of liquidity was specified in the efficiency and productivity heteroskedasticity variance function. Further, we estimated the SML function with 50 Halton draws for all the models. The Cobb–Douglas functional form with heteroskedasticity is specified as:(10)Outputit=β0+β1Capitalit+β2Landit+β3Laborit+β4Chemicalsit+β5Energyit+β6Materialsit+β7Year+vit−uitσu2=γ1,uLRriskit+γ2,uSRriskitσv2=γ1,vLRriskit+γ2,vSRriskitwhereLRriskthe long-run risk is defined as the cumulative standard deviation of the financial exposure variable andSRriskthe short-run risk is defined as a five-year moving standard deviation of the financial liquidity or debt-servicing ratio.To examine the importance of short and long variation in liquidity or debt servicing ratios on efficiency and productivity variance, pooled gamma SML stochastic frontier model with heterogeneity in the random error and the one-sided efficiency as defined in Eq. (5) is estimated. Second, the SA two-way random effects panel gamma SML stochastic frontier production function with heterogeneity in the random error(vit)and the one-sided inefficiency(uit)as defined by Eq. (8) is also estimated. Gamma SML stochastic frontier analysis of the production function with heteroskedasticity is estimated following Greene (2007).The input and output variables in the production function equation is estimated using the logs, while the short and long run variation in liquidity or debt servicing ratios in the efficiency and productivity variance function is estimated in levels.The parameter estimates of pooled and SA two-way random effects panel gamma SML stochastic frontier production function along with heterogeneity in the random error, v (productivity) and the one-sided inefficiency, u (efficiency) are presented in Table 2. In addition to showing the input variable relation to production function, the table also presents the impact of short and long run variations in liquidity or debt servicing ratio. Since the production function independent and dependent variables are in logarithms, the production function input coefficients represent elasticity of endogenous variable with respect to an exogenous variation.The estimated theta, sigma (v) and shape parameter p as defined in Eq. (2) for pooled and SA panel gamma SML stochastic frontier production function with heteroskedasticity is significant at 1 percent level of significance (Table 2). This result indicates a good fit of the gamma SML pooled and panel model. A larger value of shape parameter, p, (greater than 1) allows the mass of the efficiency distribution to move away from zero. Results indicate that for the pooled and panel models, the value of shape parameter, p, was greater than 1.The production function input elasticities obtained from the SA two-way random effects panel gamma SML stochastic frontier model indicate capital, land, labor, chemicals, energy and material input are positive and statistically significant. This is consistent with primal production theory, that is, an increase in the input quantities would lead to higher output. Based on the input elasticities in Table 2, a 10 percent increase in capital, land, labor, chemicals, energy and material input is expected to increase output production by 0.52, 1.48, 0.96, 0.53, 0.60 and 4.60 percent, respectively. The year, a proxy for technology, is positively related to agricultural output and return to scale is about 0.88 with the inclusion of technology. This suggest a decreasing returns to scale agricultural production across 48 state from 1960 to 2003.Of all the inputs, material input with an elasticity of 0.46 has the greatest impact on agricultural production. This suggests a 100 percent increase in the use of material input increases output by 46 percent. The second factor with a significant impact on agricultural production is land. Results in Table 2 indicate land elasticity of 0.148 indicating that a 100 percent increase in the use land input would increase the output by 14.8 percent. The next important factor with a significant impact on agricultural production is farm labor. Farm labor use, with an input elasticity of 0.09, indicates a 100 percent increase in the use of farm labor would increase the output by 9.6 percent. Energy, with an elasticity of 0.06, indicates a 100 percent increase in energy use would increase agricultural output by 6 percent. Finally, the impact of capital and chemicals on agricultural output is about 0.05 percent (Table 2).The production function input elasticities obtained from the pooled gamma SML stochastic frontier model indicate capital, land, labor, chemicals, energy and material input are positive and statistically significant as well. Of all the inputs, material input with an elasticity of 0.45 has the greatest impact on agricultural production. This suggests a 100 percent increase in the use of material input increases output by 45.5 percent. The second factor with a significant impact on agricultural production is land. Results in Table 2 indicate land elasticity of 0.128 indicating that a 100 percent increase in the use land input would increase the output by 12.8 percent. The next important factor with a significant impact on agricultural production is energy. Energy use, with an input elasticity of 0.119, indicates a 100 percent increase in the use of energy would increase the output by 11.9 percent. Farm labor, with an elasticity of 0.08, indicates a 100 percent increase in labor input would increase agricultural output by 8 percent. Finally, the impact of capital and chemicals on agricultural output is somewhat similar. In the case of chemical the elasticity is 0.05 percent, while for capital input the elasticity is about 0.06 percent (Table 2).Comparing of the production function input elasticities between pooled and panel gamma SML stochastic frontier production function suggest differences in the estimates. For example, the pooled model overestimates the capital and energy elasticities to the magnitude of 12.66 percent and 97.94 percent, respectively. The pooled model underestimated the land, labor, chemicals, material input and year elasticity to the magnitude of 13.33 percent, 12.2 percent, 6.3 percent, 1.13 percent and 3.4 percent, respectively. The difference across pooled and panel model estimators is due to the accounting of spatial and temporal variation.In the efficiency equation(σu2it),the variation in inefficiency or inverse of efficiency is defined as the endogenous variable and the short and long run risk or variability in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio as the exogenous variables. In the efficiency equation, the short and long run variations in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio is positive and significant at the 5 percent level of significance. This suggest an increase in the short and long run variation of liquidity or debt-servicing (interest payments plus principal) relative to the gross cash farm income will increase the variation in the inverse of efficiency measures. Alternatively, as the variation in the debt-servicing increase so does the variation in the efficiency of agriculture production. Results indicate that long run compared to short-run variations in liquidity or debt-servicing would increase the variability in agricultural efficiency with higher magnitude due to bigger parameter coefficient values (Table 2). The variations in farm debt are due to real estate debt driven by a rise in farmland values. This rise in farm debt is concentrated among large farming operations growing crops rather than livestock. So producers with a larger farming operation and growing crops are expected be faced with a higher variation in efficiency of agriculture production. Additionally, the impact of long run risk is higher in magnitude as it reflects sustained variation in liquidity or debt servicing ratio unlike the short run risk.In the productivity equation(σv2it),the variation in the random errors or productivity is defined as an endogenous variable with the short and long run variations in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio as the exogenous variables. The short-run variations in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio are negative and significantly related to productivity. This suggests an increase in short-term variation in debt-servicing will reduce variation in agricultural productivity. However, the long-run variations in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio are positive and significant at the 5 percent level of significance. This suggests an increase in the long-run variation of debt-servicing will increase the variation in the productivity measures. Additionally, the long run risk or variation in the debt-servicing reflecting the sustained variations leads to higher variation in agriculture productivity.When comparing the impact of short- and long-run variations in liquidity or debt-servicing ratio on technical efficiency and productivity in the case of panel models, the findings are different in magnitude compared to those obtained in pooled analysis. The difference in the short and long-run liquidity or debt-servicing ratio also exists in the efficiency variance equation and productivity variance equation. The pooled model overestimates the parameters by 4.37 percent and 19.45 percent in the long-run and short-run variation, respectively. In contrast, the pooled model underestimates the parameters by 13.47 percent and 12.83 percent in the long-run and short-run variation, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
