@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hub location under competition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed two competitive hub location models for the leader and follower.Investigated their computational complexities.Proposed mixed integer linear formulations for these problems.Proposed enumeration based solution algorithms for leader’s problem.Conducted computational experiments for both problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hub location,Competition models,Competitive location,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hubs are consolidation and dissemination points in many-to-many flow networks. Hub location problem is to locate hubs among available nodes and allocate non-hub nodes to these hubs. The mainstream hub location studies focus on optimal decisions of one decision-maker with respect to some objective(s) even though the markets that benefit hubbing are oligopolies. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a competitive hub location problem where the market is assumed to be a duopoly. Two decision-makers (or firms) sequentially decide locations of their hubs and then customers choose one firm with respect to provided service levels. Each decision-maker aims to maximize his/her own market share. We propose two problems for the leader (former decision-maker) and follower (latter decision-maker):(r|Xp)hub−medianoidand(r|p)hub−centroidproblems, respectively. Both problems are proven to be NP-complete. Linear programming models are presented for these problems as well as exact solution algorithms for the(r|p)hub−centroidproblem. The performance of models and algorithms are tested by computational analysis conducted on CAB and TR data sets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hubs are consolidation and dissemination points in many-to-many flow networks. Consolidation generates economies of scale and thus, unit transportation cost is discounted between hubs. Hubbing also reduces number of required links to ensure that each flow is routed to its desired destination. Hub networks are used in many applications in airline, cargo and telecom industries.The hub location problem is to determine location of hubs and allocation of non-hub nodes to these hubs with respect to a given allocation structure and objective(s). A single decision-maker can determine locations of hubs depending on problem parameters such as amount of flow and unit transportation cost between each pair of nodes, interhub transportation discount factor, allocation strategy (single- or multiple-allocation), and structure of hub network (incomplete, star network etc.). In single-allocation case, whole flow originating from and destined to a node is routed via a unique hub. On the other hand, in multiple-allocation case, different hubs can be used to route different flows with same origin. However, in a competitive environment, a decision-maker should also consider decisions of his/her rivals and customer preferences. In this study, we consider a duopolistic market -a special case of oligopoly- where there are two operating firms. The decision-maker who makes the initial location decision is called leader and the other one is called as follower. We assume a multiple-allocation structure.Then by combining retail location from marketing, spatial competition in economics and location theory in operations research, in this paper, we propose a discrete Stackelberg hub location problem where firms make sequential decisions. Each decision-maker (or firm) decides location of hubs and allocation of non-hub nodes to maximize their market share.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a duopoly model where two competitors sequentially choose hub locations and aim to maximize their own market share under Stackelberg competition. Although competitive location has attracted attention of economists and OR practitioners, hub location studies considering competition are rare in the literature. Therefore, formal definitions of terminology and problem were deficiencies in both competitive location and hub location literature. It is assumed that both players have perfect information of the environment. It is also assumed that both players are rational which means that they aim to maximize their market share. The market share of firms is determined by captured flow. Although choice of customers depend on many attributes, we assume that customers prefer the firm which offers a better service level.From the view of the follower the problem is a maximum cover problem rather than a competitive model. On the other hand, the competition issue becomes important from perspective of the leader. After the leader makes his/her decisions, the follower takes action and then the markets shares are determined. Therefore, the leader’s problem has a bilevel nature. We then propose a bilevel model and an equivalent mathematical model as well as computational complexity results for the problems. Mathematical model of the leader can only be solvable for very small instances and solving the bilevel model is much harder. However, proposed enumeration-based algorithms can solve the problem for relatively bigger instances even though the worst-case complexity tends to complete enumeration. On the other hand, UMApHM can be a promising solution for the leader when solving(r|p)hub−centroidrequires higher amount of CPU time and memory.Solving the(r|p)hub−centroidproblem exactly or near-optimally is an open research direction. Exact methods such as column generation or branch-and-price can be thought of as possible ideas. Also, some meta-heuristic approaches can be employed to solve the problem within an acceptable optimality gap.