@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Understanding behaviour in problem structuring methods interventions with activity theory

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Paper presents a conceptual framework and methodological guide for researching and understanding OR interventions.The paper outlines the main theoretical and methodological concerns that need to be appreciated in studying PSM interventions.The paper explores activity theory as an approach to study them.A case study describing the use of this approach is provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Problem structuring methods,Behavioural OR,Activity theory,Collective intentionality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article argues that OR interventions, particularly problem structuring methods (PSM), are complex events that cannot be understood by conventional methods alone. In this paper an alternative approach is introduced, where the units of analysis are the activity systems constituted by and constitutive of PSM interventions. The paper outlines the main theoretical and methodological concerns that need to be appreciated in studying PSM interventions. The paper then explores activity theory as an approach to study them. A case study describing the use of this approach is provided.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Organizations and organizing are increasingly accomplished through the complex interaction of people, artefacts, instruments and practices (Clegg, Cunha, & Cunha, 2002). Operational Research (OR) interventions are exemplary in this regard, but there is a gap in our knowledge in understanding the effect on people/outcomes, and the interventions in situ (Hämäläinen, Luoma, & Saarinen, 2013; Keys, 1997). In particular, there has been a dearth of strong theoretical and empirical studies on understanding OR interventions in the literature. Recently, however, there has been some attention on studying the effectiveness of OR interventions from social-constructivist and socio-material process perspectives (Franco, 2013; Keys, 1995; White, 2006, 2009), leading to important agendas regarding theory, behaviour and outcomes pertaining to (particularly soft) OR processes. We note that these studies have recognized that interventions are both temporally enacted affairs and concerned with becoming coordinated practices through the performance of using models as objects, but the studies are not adequate in developing the notion of behaviour in interventions. Therefore, some significant methodological and epistemological challenges remain (Connell, 2001; Eden, 1995; Packer & Goioechea, 2000; White, 2006, 2009).We address the above challenges in the following ways. First, we build on recent interest in behaviour and OR, and in particular the interest in the concept of collective behaviour as a means for understanding how individuals working together perform effectively as an ensemble through the mediating role of models. Second, we introduce and explore the use of activity theory (AT) as one means to study interventions as complex interactions of people, objects, artefacts, and instruments in context. Specifically, our socio-material perspective differs from other approaches in that it introduces a view on the power dynamics in the unit of analysis of an activity system, which we believe helps to differentiate it from other methodologies.Finally, we take as our example a case study of the participatory planning of smart city interventions for energy efficient city district redevelopment. Here we offer a focus on the level of proof, where many scholars of OR will agree that the nature of the link between OR processes, behaviour and outcomes has yet to be definitively established. Specifically, since a great deal of OR interventions are one-off (Keys, 1997), and attempt to tackle wicked problems (Rittel & Weber, 1973) it becomes necessary to devise systematic techniques to ensure an adequate test of the efficacy of the approaches. We draw on an in-depth method using ethnomethodological techniques, including video analysis, to study the micro-processes of how the intervention under study was developing and used among the stakeholders involved (Heath, 1997; Paroutis, Franco, & Papadopoulos, 2015).Overall, we test the idea that OR interventions create the conditions for collective behaviour. In doing so, we contribute to the literature on understanding behaviour in OR processes, by employing the concepts from AT to explain the complex outcomes of (collective) OR processes, namely social learning.As with all soft OR methods, the practice of building representations of the problem is conducted in a group, where the process is consultative and iterative. Behaviourally, the process provides a succession of models providing different perspectives, which contribute to a deepening understanding of the problem as new insight emerges. Also, the process uses the sense of unease among the problem owners about the present representation of the problem as a signal that further modelling may be needed. The question is: how can this practice (the relation between process, model and outcomes) be understood?The study of OR interventions has taken many forms in recent years, including at the theoretical level focusing on the “Process of OR” through the lens of critical realism, constructivism and pragmatism (see Keys, 1995; Mingers, 2000; Ormerod, 2006; Taket & White, 2000a; White, 2006; Mingers and Rosenhead, 2004, to name but a few), and at the practical level through concerns for organizational learning (Sterman, 1989), shared mental models (Kunc & Morecroft, 2009), and more recently behavioural research (Hämäläinen et al., 2013). Such studies variously emphasize the complexity of OR methods and the significance of doing as well as of deciding, the social processes through which concepts and actions are negotiated, and the creative ways in which people use even the most abstract models and representations. However, few studies have tackled the foundational ideas underlying these processes directly (White, 2014), leaving the concept as largely metaphorical (Ackermann & Eden, 2011). The current work reviews some of the debates around the conceptual components of OR interventions to serve as a basis to position future research.At a broader level, in organisational studies, most theories of interventions assume that individual and organizational behaviour is logical, goal seeking and self-interested (Powell & DiMaggio, 2012). However, in studies on soft OR interventions it is not difficult to show that neither individuals nor organisations are likely to act in such a way very often. Yet the expectation is for interventions to be intendedly rational and there is pressure for the stakeholders to act in a prospectively rational manner particularly where performance is visible and easily monitored. In contrast, there have been few attempts to articulate alternative views; the task is not simply an intellectual challenge but a practical one.Phillips (1984) was one of the first to conceive of an alternative orientation for OR interventions. He introduced the term “requisite models” to distinguish a form of representation from descriptive, normative, optimal or satisficing modelling. He claimed that a model is requisite when “it is a representation of the problem deemed sufficiently adequate by the decision makers to provide them with a useful guide to thinking about the problem” (Phillips, 1982). In this way, requisite models do not prescribe action, – they are a guide to action, where action is a collective activity aiming at systems level improvement. This idea has been important in a number of OR studies, for example, Franco and Montibeller (2010) state that “A consequence of considering a model as a facilitative learning mechanism is the challenge of assessing what constitutes a valid model and a good model solution. Probably the best answer to this issue is to employ the concept of building a requisite model (Phillips, 1984): one that contains sufficient knowledge and information to help the client group find a way forward”.Phillips's (1984) argument for requisite models (and to focus on collective behaviour) was to counter the then in vogue research on judgement and decision making drawing on the classic work of behavioural economics (Hogarth, 1981; Kahneman & Tversky, 1984; Simon, 1955). The basis of their work is not that people have no idea how to take some decisions, but that they think they know, but are wrong by the conventional standards of rationality. The usual response is; if they are to do better, they first have to see the error of their ways. Indeed, many behavioural scholars think that the appropriate thing to do is to guide people in the direction they would want to bind themselves after taking expert advice. Thus, equipped with an understanding of behavioural findings of bounded rationality and bounded self-control, experts should attempt to nudge people's choices in certain directions without eliminating freedom of choice (Sunstein & Thaler, 2003).Other scholars have been critical of Kahneman and Tversky's work, including Gigerenzer (2006), who suggested that most behavioural research rather than focusing on “plausible heuristics that explain everything and nothing—not even the conditions that trigger one heuristic rather than another” (Gigerenzer, 1996), should be focusing on developing models that reveal mental processes that explain judgement. Similarly, Phillips claimed that the work of classical behavioural economics not only sees people as limited and biased in their judgements, but the research itself is limited and biased in its presumption that what people do is all that they can do. He argues that in the processes that search for requisite models, it is assumed that people are capable of constructing futures that deal adequately with uncertainty, risk and the complexity they face. Phillip's view is to focus on a more positive interpretation of behaviour that aims to meet the challenge of finding the conditions in which people can be “intellectual athletes rather than intellectual cripples”, i.e. to create a notion of behaviour in OR on what people can do; and to encourage a “science of better” if you will (Mingers, 2007).The idea that OR methods can mediate positive behaviour within groups is not a new idea. This has been acknowledged to some degree, for example by Ackermann (2012) who suggested that models in soft OR represent a facilitative device. Also, Montibeller and Franco (2007) discuss models as boundary objects. However, these are examples of a loose coupling of models and the actual situation, and therefore it is difficult to infer any theory of behaviour through representation.In a further refinement, Franco (2013) applied the concept of boundary objects (based on Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995) to facilitate the micro-level study of the dynamics in OR interventions. He suggested that the notion of cognitive affordances, based on the ecological psychology of Gibson (1979), may be useful for understanding the role of models in collective soft OR interventions (Franco, 2013). The idea is that the use of models that instantiate thought through systems of representation (e.g. Menary, 2006) may supply certain enduring material aspects which may play a special role in enabling the system to possess a given mental state (Clark, 2008). Franco discusses model affordances (Franco, 2013) as a source of behavioural consideration. However, there are some limitations. First, given the focus on stakeholder engagement (Eden & Ackermann, 2013), the study could not adequately address the issues of power and contradiction (see Nicolini, Mengis, & Swan, 2012). Second, Franco's study while connecting the idea of boundary objects to learning, did not explore this at the collective level. When in fact Gibson sought to extend his ecological theory of affordances to the societal realm, he emphasised the need to reflect on collective behaviour: “Social learning is inevitably moral, in an elementary sense of the term, and it is probably a mistake first to construct a behaviour theory without reference to social interaction, and then attach it only at the end “(Gibson, 1950, p. 155). This is why we suggest that the concept of reflections on OR interventions requires an embedding in a theory and method that extends and enables a more reflexive attitude in order that power and collective behaviour can be explored.In dealing with these limitations, the analytical interest thus could turn towards the staging and orchestrating of problem structuring interventions that makes accountable, authoritative decision-making on behalf of clients and prospective users possible (Goodman, 2013). This line of inquiry may serve to encourage the interrogation of various ‘representatives’ and ‘representations’ in, of, and around OR practice (White, 2009). Could this lead to a possible distinctive behavioural issue around representation as mediating the form and content of an intervention? There could also be a focus on political representation that seeks to establish whether the system of representation has conferred agency to the represented, i.e. whether the representation process has distributed agency throughout a system. In this way, the political sense of ‘representation’—as the delegation of authority to speak and act on behalf of others (Latour, 1987; Taket & White, 2000b; White & Taket, 2000) is taken to be merged with a semiotic conception of a sign ‘speaking’ on behalf of its object (see Taket & White, 1994).Models as semiotic resources form an increasingly important part of our understanding of the process, reflecting what some have termed the emergence of a problem structuring culture (Ackermann, 2012; Eden & Ackermann, 2013). This has also been referred to as the material agency of models and is an important part of the performativity of problem structuring processes (Franco, 2013; White, 2006) and provides coordination of interventions, often without those upon whom they are taking effect being knowledgeable (White, 2009). Models as such, do not cause or require action, but they may make some behaviours more likely than others (Kaptelinin, 1996). Given the attention on models and modelling in the soft OR community, in developing a theoretical lens for the behavioural study of OR interventions, a strong analytical approach to objects and artefacts, such as ‘documents, spaces, tools, and bodies that intervene in the production of identities, responsibilities, and capacities of project constituents’ (Goodman, 2013) would thus be desirable.Actor-network theory (ANT), an approach developed by Callon, Latour and Law, within social studies of science has been extensively drawn on in the study of complex situations (Callon, 1986; Latour, 1992; Law, 1992). It takes as its primary focus the relationship between natural entities and social actors and seeks to recast our understanding of this relationship within a new epistemology. ANT considers both people and technologies as enacted through networks, in particular in terms of what people and things become as a result of their position in a network, and the power that emerges (Callon, 1986; Latour, 1992). Actor-networks are often highly dynamic and inherently unstable. They can be stabilised to some extent when people, technologies, roles, routines, and so on are aligned. This alignment is achieved through ‘translation’ (Latour, 1992). Actor-networks are heterogeneous and organically evolving open systems, and inscription devices (for example, models) may help to stabilise the network and thus shape and constrain the network. Researchers have used ANT to describe the engagement of groups of actors who have sought to define and inscribe particular codes and standards into particular technologies, and shown how once these have become part of the network, they are hard to reverse.Following the arguments from Keys (1995), it is no surprise to find that some scholars of OR have been drawn to ANT as an example of socio-material analysis of interventions. ANT recommends that we locate interventions in a heterogeneous network of humans and non-humans actors (Latour, 1987, 1992) and it is the observable patterns of mutual interaction between actors that constitute the phenomena that Latour directs us to study. In response to the network building concept of Latour and his concept of immutable mobiles, Star and Griesemer (1989) proposed more mutable ‘boundary objects’ that facilitate translation efforts amongst different viewpoints and agendas in collective work. This has been taken up recently by OR researchers (e.g. Franco, 2013). The ability to enable cooperation without consensus makes boundary objects attractive for the study of work across heterogeneous organisations.Research incorporating ANT and boundary objects understands that interventions are not fixed, determining, or a mediating platform through which people interact and complete tasks, but are dynamic and entangled assemblages of the social and the technical, continually produced in practice (Orlikowski, 2005). These lenses offer analytical traction in viewing interventions with less focus on whether or how we use models to produce certain outcomes, and more on how stakeholders and models are interrelated in practice to produce (more or less) stable outcomes with certain effects in the world.A criticism of ANT is that it has a ‘flat ontology’. ANT holds that there are no pre-existing layers (such as ‘structure’ and ‘agency’). By refusing more conceptually differentiated and refined analyses of institutional sources of power and inequality, ANT appears to have little to say about the systematic exclusion that prevents some social groups from having a voice in the design and use of technologies. Another criticism is ANT's assumption of ‘symmetry’ between humans and things. Assigning humans a comparable agentic status to technologies has led to concerns that human motives, desires and virtues could be beyond the analytic frame and that ethical questions may be evaded (Mutch, 2002). Yet, ANT's emphasis on the dynamic and relational aspects of an intervention is a useful lens for studying change and the unintended outcomes of interventions – including the complex and unpredictable interventions that are known to OR interventions (Keys, 1995; White, 2009). Thus, whilst ANT can help map the network and consider certain aspects of how power flows within it, it may not be the most suitable lens to answer micro-causal questions such as why – that is, through whose agency and enabled and constrained by which social structures – did the phenomenon in question emerge? For researchers who seek to answer such questions, ANT may provide conceptual tools and inspiration, but not without providing a theory of either human agency or the generative causality of social structures.These important and recognized boundaries of the ANT and boundary object perspectives are important to address, especially, given the interest in generative behaviour in OR interventions. A central concern needs to be how relations of power are enacted-performed-(re)produced through discursive practices-representations-evocations (Traweek, 1992, p. 441). Whilst it is recognized that none of the abovementioned perspectives provides conclusive suggestions for the treatment of power (Kontinen, 2013; Law, 2009; Star & Griesemer, 1989, p. 413), we introduce AT here that foregrounds a socio-cultural analysis of human activity and the analysis of micro-level political dynamics in workshop settings. AT draws attention to culturally and historically derived constructs such as rules, divison of labour and community which are dynamically related in the unit of analysis, the activity system, with the subject, the mediating artefacts and the activity object. Furthermore, in AT“activity and the overlapping systems of activity are viewed as sites of domination, accommodation and resistance, as well as struggle […]. The notion of dialectical contradictions is central to [AT] and individual perspectives and interests are constantly at play in negotiating these contradictions”. (Fenwick, Richard, & Sawchuk, 2015, p. 12)In these features, it can be argued, that AT may retain a more humanist orientation than ANT (Fenwick et al., 2015, p. 12). AT's emphasis on the generative (creative and voluntary) potential of human actors to develop problem resolution approaches is also evidenced “in the clear delineation of non-human artefacts as bounded, distinct from humans, and while embedded in cultural histories, releated to the notion of mediating human activity” (Fenwick, 2010). As such, to attend to the dynamics of PSM interventions, our theoretical approach draws on AT. We introduce AT as a novel way11AT has been previously instrumentalised in a ‘soft dialectics’ approach combining SSM and AT (Bratteteig & Øgrim, 1994), however without taking an enactment view on workshop activity (process) and only focusing on the problem structuring method.of understanding representing and intervening through PSMs. Our use of AT is that primarily framed within the Scandinavian AT strand, developed by Engeström and colleagues (see Engeström, 1987). It enables the analysis of processes of knowledge co-creation (Blackler, 1995) and it is thus a powerful lens through which we can analyse most forms of human activity, including OR interventions.With its background in psychology, AT also provides an adequate theoretical lens to conceptualise behaviour, particularly, intentionality and reflexivity, i.e. the “intermediate institutional anatomy of each central actant” and “the historically accumulated durability, the interactive dynamics and the inner contradictions of local activity systems” (Engeström, 2005a, p. 55; Kaptelinin & Nardi, 2006). The goal of AT then is to understand the mental capabilities of actors and to analyse the cultural and technical aspects of human actions. AT also tries to trace the causes for problems in an activity system by exploring the contradicting/problematic relations between the elements in an activity system and the influence of these contradictions on the results of activity (outcome). The insights it provides into an activity, the role it ascribes to active participation, and the significance it attributes to incoherency and dilemma provide the basis for a framework for understanding OR interventions and behaviour.In the following, we further develop our theoretical perspective by first discussing the aspect of AT relevant to our research problem. We subsequently build our approach to studying OR interventions by focusing on how collective or social learning is enacted in the on-going processes and use of models as artefacts. We extend this aspect of AT to study behaviour in OR interventions by focusing on intentionality. In particular we draw on insights into collective intentionality.The central concerns of AT are the relationships between material action, mind and society; the approach explores links between thought, behaviour, individual actions and collective practices. Thus, AT is seen as rooted in practice (Schatzki, 2008). Practices constrain and enable the processes through which activity can occur, they influence how recognition of action is accorded and what types of relationship may be formed in an activity context (Packer & Goicoechea, 2000). The notion of ‘activity’ in AT is a more general concept than either the notion of an operation or action. The concept of activity draws attention to relationships between motives and the contexts of action, and invites enquiry into the processes through which people enact the actions in which they participate. For scholars of AT, the interest is in the relationship between mind and culture, where activity is the smallest unit of analysis possible, which preserves the link between mind in society and the coherence of different actions. The link this general approach promises with the current study on understanding OR processes is clear: the settings for different activities are not determined by objective features but are provided by those who engage in them. OR interventions are thus activities imposed on different situations by the participants themselves (Franco, 2013; White, 2006).As stated earlier, we adopt Engeström's (1987) version of AT, which emphasizes how analysis of activity must develop from the study of material actions and communication processes. Engeström's version of AT locates human agents, their objectives, and the tools and language they use, within their broader social and structural settings.Fig. 1depicts these relations. Here, it can be seen that in AT, the construction of the person as a subject occurs through engagement in an activity, in which interaction with others and with the world are mediated by different forms of representation, including language, conceptual models and other material artefacts. Subjects are thus constructed in social contexts, formed through practical activity and in relationships of aspiration and recognition (Packer & Goicoechea, 2000). Engeström distinguishes between different types of artefacts:“The first type is what artefacts, used to identify and describe objects. The second type is how artefacts, used to guide and direct processes and procedures on, within, or between objects. The third type is why artefacts, used to diagnose and explain the properties and behaviour of objects. Finally, the fourth type is where to artefacts, used to envision the future state of potential development of objects, including institutions and social systems”. (Engeström, 2005a, p. 320)A further distinction between different types of mediating artefacts is made, based on the differentiation between primary (directly used in production), secondary (internal and external representations of primary artefacts) and tertiary artefacts (imaginary artefacts) (Wartofsky, 1979) (Table 1).OR interventions can thus be considered as clusters of primary, secondary and tertiary artefacts, each class simultaneously mediating different elements of the intervention process (Bertelsen, 1998). Through the conceptual distinction between operation, action and activity AT can conceptualise reflexivity:“Working up from actions to activity we may begin to grasp “the part of ourselves which we least understand and which answers the question ‘Why do we act as we do?’”. (Harré, Clarke, & DeCarlo, 1985, p. 30 in Engeström, 1996)Furthermore, the distinction provides us with an analytical approach to get at the dynamic mechanisms in an OR workshop setting.The idea of mediation via models is central to AT (Kaptelinin, 1996). At one level, models may include tools that mediate people's thoughts and behaviour. Conversely, people's thoughts also shape the artefacts produced and their usage. Mental models are artificial formations and social by nature (Vygotsky, 1981). They comprise language, mnemonic techniques, schemes, maps, drawings, signs, and other mental artefacts (John-Steiner & Mahn, 1996). In AT, the relationships between the subject(s) and activity, artefacts or tools always mediate the object (i.e. it occurs in the activity). The mediating artefacts or tools are always required when a subject interacts with the world. Thus, the notion of mediation is central to Engeström's theory (Engeström, 1987). Mediation in this sense should not be understood to imply that the development of tools or language simply makes it easier to do things that were somehow going to get done anyway. On the contrary, the notion points to the occurrence of qualitatively new events, events that would not otherwise have been possible. Language is an important aspect of analysis of interventions because it may become ‘materialised’ in artefacts (Froschauer, 2009), and it may stabilise activity objects, for example through metaphorical objects (collective symbols) with drawing power for collective behaviour (Chiva & Alegre, 2005; Jäger, 2012). The complementary use of “ideas from sociolinguistics and from the tradition of critical discourse analysis” may be fruitful in “connecting the general principles of studying power and the actual analysis of interaction in encounters” (Kontinen, 2007, p. 142) and so to trace inscribed motivations and power struggles (Kontinen, 2013). Power in AT is understood as “relational and emergent in different strategies and tactics used in negotiation that bring together different interpretations, interests, and motivations of the actors participating in negotiations” (Kontinen, 2007).We suggest that PSMs are a form of social practice that could be understood as model-mediated activity (see Leontiev, 1981). In Engeström's model of AT (Engeström, 1987), there are three processes of mediation; of tools between subject and object, of rules between community and subject, and of the division of labour between community and object. These are presented as transforming the nature of the contexts within which people act. Where AT is unique, however, is in the emphasis it places on the suggestion that symbol-mediated activity should not be studied as if it were ‘for the mind alone’. As Engeström emphasizes, people act practically, moulding their material environments, and they do this not alone but in co-operation with others. Engeström (1987) introduced the notion of community as the collective that is interested in an object, rules which mediate the relationship between a community and the subject of an activity, and division of labour as the way the community is related to the object of the activity. Therefore, AT employs a collective, artefact-mediated and object-oriented view of activity systems (see Fig. 2) (Cole, Engestrom, & Vasquez, 1997; Engeström, 1999). Accordingly, central to AT is the conception of collective or social learning. This is a creative accomplishment, which can only be achieved by active participation (see Bandura, 1990). The suggestion is that learning occurs as people do more than they yet know how to do. The approach suggests that the ambiguities, uncertainties, and contradictions that are characteristics of the human condition can provide key opportunities for individual and collective development. This is also linked to a view of learning conceptualised as a collective activity ‘when psychological functions contribute to the development of qualitatively new social functions’ (Schaal, 2009).Necessary circumstances for such learning processes arise from the ambiguities and conflicts that can be found within and between activity systems. For example, Fig. 2 shows two interacting activity systems, the minimum number required for activity system networks to evolve (Engeström, 1999). The activity object is a collective project that is stabilized by the shared tools, signs and procedures of the activity system. The activity object (object 3 in Fig. 2) acts as a boundary object between the two activity systems. It is also conceptualised as “visible, accessible, and cumulable – allowing participants to return time and again. There must be effective feedback from and exchange among the participants acting on the object” (Engeström, 2009).Finally, change and order in activity systems are continually negotiated in the multi-voiced and historicised social practices and the emerging activities that are aimed at overcoming contradictions (Engeström & Blackler, 2005). Contradictions may take place either inside the key constructs (e.g. subject) or between them (Engeström, 1999), or they may arise in networks of activity systems with respect to the object of the activity.In sum, AT offers a powerful set of ideas that serves to integrate social constructivist developments in the understanding of OR (Keys, 1995; White, 2006), boundary object (Franco & Montibeller, 2010) and affordance-oriented perspectives (Franco, 2013). To summarize, the key aspects are:(1)The concept of activity. People do not just think, they act on the world and they do this collectively. AT bridges the gap between motivation and action through processes of acting in the world (Kaptelinin & Nardi, 2006).The nature of activity systems. Mediating mechanisms, such as tools, models, language, social rules and the division of labour, transform the relationships between individuals and communities in collective activity. Such mechanisms are interwoven in a complex web of mutual interactions.Active participation. Actors learn by participating in activities and activity systems. This is a creative and interpretative and reflexive process. Such learning is likely to be tacit rather than explicit (Tsoukas, 2003). Collective or social learning occurs when the community of actors constructs new conceptions of their actions and develops new activity systems.The prevalence of contradiction and dilemma. These are integral features of activity systems. They offer major opportunities for collective learning.Our objective is to understand OR interventions in terms of behavioural issues. We wish to show that AT offers a theoretical lens to relate empirical data to the scaffolding of social (or collective) learning. However, Engeström's AT orientation is only partially theorized in linking activity and behaviour. Building on the suggestion of other scholars (see Tomasello, 2009) the behavioural aspect of activity could be further explored through the notion of collective intentionality (Gordon & Theiner, in press; Tuomela & Miller, 2009). It is suggested that collective intentionality enables the reaching out that occurs when people operate across the boundaries of discrete activity systems. This was partially explored by Engeström in the AT literature as ‘Collaborative intentionality capital’ (Engeström, 2005b; 2008). We follow the suggestion that tracing the dynamics in ‘Objects of Activity’ constitutes a way of exploring the development of collective intentionality (Tuomela, 2005):“The idea of we-intentionality is that humans have the capacity to not only recognise another agent's intention but that humans can join intentions thus making cooperation not an accidental by product of behaviour or an aberration of behaviour, forced by the threat of punishment. Rather, humans are hard wired to cooperate, sharing goals and making plans together to achieve those common goals”. (Tomasello, 2009)Collective intentionality in this sense thus means “thinking and acting (e.g. believing, intending, performing joint actions) as members of a group (however fleeting)” (Tuomela, 2005) (see also Tuomela, 1995) through collaborative interactions in which participants have a shared goal and coordinated action roles for pursuing that shared goal. A we-intention (Tuomela & Miller, 1988) “consists of the intention of an individual to do her or his part in some prospective action of the group, along with some belief about the we-intentions of the other members of the group and about the opportunities for actions. These we-intentions make intentional joint action possible” (Preston, 2013). We suggest that AT may help to understand how subjects and communities develop collective intentionality through activity aimed towards a ‘partially fragmented and partially disputed’ activity object (Miettinen & Virkkunen, 2005), mediated by artefacts, rules and division of labour. This is further expanded upon in the case analysis section of this paper.Finally, before moving towards our empirical case, it is worth summarising the similarities and differences between AT and ANT. Without a doubt, there are many points of contact between ANT and AT (Miettinen, 1999; Schaal, 2009; Shaffer & Clinton, 2005, 2006). They both comprise a unique combination of material, mental, social, institutional and historical factors and provide analytical tools to understand the nature of the reciprocal action-shaping of humans and nonhumans (Andrade & Ekundayo, 2011). Theoretically, AT if not similar, is very close to ANT, particularly in the adoption of theories of language and semiotics (Latour, 1987; Miettinen, 1995; Miettinen & Virkkunen, 2005), where humans create a sign system which, in the first place, is used to co-ordinate actions with those of others. This provides the essential link through which activity theorists explore the mediated relationships between culture and mental functioning.One of the most significant differences for the study of soft OR interventions lies in ANT's principle of generalised symmetry and its consequences for understanding agency and intentionality in humans and non-humans (Engeström, 1996; Latour, 1996a, 1996b; Lynch, 1996). In ANT, both humans and objects can modify a state of affairs, however, only humans are empowered with intentionality (Andrade, 2012; Andrade & Urquhart, 2010). The ANT principle of symmetry appears to lead away from specific human capacities such as “intentionality, expression, powers of invention and ‘fabulation’” (Turner, 2011) as “any thing or human being, human intention, consciousness, desire, etc. emerges and oscillates through various translations at play in material network effects” (Fenwick, 2010).From the point of view of AT, ANT's conceptualisation of intentionality as a network effect contrasts sharply with the emphasis of the creative, generative competence of human actors (Strübing, 2005, p. 333). In a social psychological view of intentionality, a human agent is characterised as one that can “intentionally make things happen by one's action” (Bandura, 2001, p. 2). According to Bandura (2001, p. 1), the core features of agency are “intentionality, forethought, self-regulation […] and self-reflectiveness”. Applied to collective social learning, AT thus highlights human intentionality as a pre-requisite for the collective generative struggle with contradictions.“Collective intentions to perform something together involve intentional dependencies between agents. These can vary in strength, but the central tenet here is that the participants voluntarily create relevant action-dependency”. (Tuomela, 2000)In Nardi's (1996) view, AT's view about the primacy of human agency has a number of benefits over a symmetrical view of human and nonhuman agency:“The activity theory position would seem to hold greater potential for leading to a more responsible technology design in which people are viewed as active beings in control of their tools for creative purposes rather than as automatons whose operations are to be automated away, or nodes whose rights to privacy and dignity are not guaranteed”. (Nardi, 1996, p. 87)In place of ANT's symmetrical human and nonhuman actants, AT offers a stratified approach to analysing agency arising in performances in workshop settings. Fig. 3shows a possible overlay of ANT's mediators and intermediaries on AT's activity system notation to illustrate how AT spans open a field of analytic opportunities by conceptualising an embedded human subject in a field of relationships between mediators and intermediaries.Engeström suggests that both the vertical and horizontal relations in activity systems and activity networks should be studied, so that institutional anatomy of each actor is revealed – i.e. the historically accumulated durability, the interactive dynamic and the internal contradictions of local activity systems.Overall, ANT and AT offer different – and at times potentially complementary (Andrade & Ekundayo, 2012) – analytical ‘toolboxes’ to study how goal-directed collective behaviour, mediated by and inscribed into emerging artefacts, may be brought about through problem structuring interventions. An additional comparative overview of key concepts in AT, ANT and comparing those with boundary objects, is provided in Appendix A [Table A1].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
