@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pricing, relaxing and fixing under lot sizing and scheduling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New models are formulated for the CLSD with non-triangular sequence dependent setups.Based on the models we have developed an innovative matheuristic to solve the CSLD.We matheuristic merges column generation and MIP-based approaches.The matheuristic outperformed the previous solution approaches in the literature.The method is applicable to other lotsizing problems or even outside this domain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lot sizing and scheduling,Sequence-dependent setups,Non-triangular setups,Column generation,MIP-based heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a novel mathematical model and a mathematical programming based approach to deliver superior quality solutions for the single machine capacitated lot sizing and scheduling problem with sequence-dependent setup times and costs. The formulation explores the idea of scheduling products based on the selection of known production sequences. The model is the basis of a matheuristic, which embeds pricing principles within construction and improvement MIP-based heuristics. A partial exploration of distinct neighborhood structures avoids local entrapment and is conducted on a rule-based neighbor selection principle. We compare the performance of this approach to other heuristics proposed in the literature. The computational study carried out on different sets of benchmark instances shows the ability of the matheuristic to cope with several model extensions while maintaining a very effective search. Although the techniques described were developed in the context of the problem studied, the method is applicable to other lot sizing problems or even to problems outside this domain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many production environments, production planning problems involve the determination of production lot sizes and sequence of different products on a single capacitated machine. Production lot sizes are driven by deterministic demand over the planning horizon. Switching between production runs of two different products triggers operations, such as machine adjustments and cleaning procedures, which consume scarce production time and can cause costs due, for example, to losses in materials. Under these conditions, production sequencing must explicitly take into account for these sequence-dependent setup times and costs. In this context, the need for simultaneous lot sizing and scheduling decisions arises. Production plans are created with the objective of minimizing the overall costs consisting mainly of holding and setup costs, while satisfying the available capacity in each time period from which the expenditure in setup times is deducted. Examples of industries where these decisions must be taken concurrently are chemicals, drugs and pharmaceuticals, pulp and paper, textiles, foundries, glass container, and food and beverage, among many others (see Clark et al. (2011)).Tackling real world problems requires to address special cases that may occur by introducing additional features into mathematical models. Among these realistic features are changeovers that do not respect the triangle inequality. When setups obey the triangle inequality with respect to both the setup time and costs, i.e. it is more efficient to change directly between two products than via a third product, at most one setup for each product per time period occurs. In some industries, contamination occurs when changing from one product to another implying additional cleaning operations. If a ‘cleaning’ or shortcut product can absorb contamination while being produced, replacing the cleaning operations, non-triangular setups appear. In their presence, models have to allow for more than one production run of each product per time period as it potentially reduces setup times and costs. Many examples of this type are known in the chemical, pharmaceutical, food and dyeing industries.Mixed integer programming (MIP) models are unable to solve relevant size instances of the problem, suffering from its computational intractability (they are NP-hard by Bitran and Yanasse (1992)). State-of-the-art optimization engines either fail to generate feasible solutions to this problem or take a prohibitively large amount of computational time, as the computational experiments presented herein attest. Therefore, solving this class of problems requires the use of efficient solution approaches. Mathematical programming-based heuristics (Ball, 2011), also known as matheuristics (Maniezzo et al., 2010), are algorithms which integrate exact and heuristic search techniques. Exact algorithms probably achieve optimal or quasi-optimal solutions, yet the size of tractable problems is limited. On the other hand, metaheuristics (heuristic search) are tailored to solve large-scale combinatorial optimization problems exploring large size neighborhoods efficiently. The underlaying idea of matheuritics is to seek the best trade-off between the efficacy of exact approaches and the efficiency of metaheuristics. Furthermore, in general, these algorithms are flexible enough to cope with different model extensions and new features.The motivation for this work is the development of a flexible solution methodology integrating exact and approximate methods able to solve lot sizing and scheduling problems of relevant sizes and features present in real world applications. We introduce a new MIP model for the single machine capacitated lot sizing and scheduling problem (CLSD) that accommodates non-triangular settings. The model schedules production based on the selection of feasible production sequences. We develop a pricing heuristic (SeqSearch) to generate the sequences to be incorporated in the model since including all possible sequences is intractable as its number grows exponentially with the number of products. To obtain superior quality solutions to the CLSD, we develop a construction and improvement heuristics combining SeqSearch with mathematical programming-based heuristics. The construction heuristic (Relax-Price-Fix) uses a rolling horizon approach to sequentially construct a solution to the problem, while the improvement heuristic (Fix-Price-Optimize) attempts to partially optimize a feasible solution by solving small MIP subproblems. Different neighborhood structures are explored during the local search to avoid local entrapment. The two driving principles of neighborhood structures definition are to consider subproblems having a small number of consecutive time periods with all products or a small set of products over a larger portion of the planning horizon.Our contributions are as follows. To the best of our knowledge, the new MIP model is the first to capture non-triangular settings based on the selection of a single sequence from a pre-determined set in each time period. This is a non-trivial extension since products can repeat. An important ingredient of our solution methodology is a formulation that combines a compact and an extended formulation within a single model. This formulation trades-off accuracy and computational complexity. On the algorithmic front, we create a new MIP-based construction heuristic using this hybrid formulation. Another very important contribution concerns our novel ideas to use column generation for local search within lot sizing problems. The methodology exposed in this paper can be generalized to different lot sizing problems or even to problems outside this research field.The remainder of this paper has the following structure. In Section 2 we overview the most relevant literature in the context of this work. Section 3 presents the new formulation for the CLSD. Section 4 describes our solution approach to solve the CLSD and its main building blocks. A series of computational experiments with different problem sets having distinct features are shown in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 is devoted to final remarks, conclusions from this work and some future research directions are pinpointed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we present a novel mixed integer programming formulation for the single machine capacitated lot sizing and scheduling problem. An important cause of computational intractability of large bucket models for lot sizing and sequencing often comes from the sequencing problem that has to be solved within each time period. The underlying idea of our model is to simplify the scheduling part by defining, for each time period, a limited pool of feasible production sequences. Afterwards, the model selects the most adequate one for each time period. The formulation handles non-triangular setups times and costs, as well as minimum and maximum lot sizes.Based on the model we have developed a mathematical programming based solution approach that handles large size instances. It is composed of three main blocks: a pricing heuristic, a construction heuristic, and an improvement heuristic. The pricing heuristic, SeqSearch, is used to manage the sequence pool of each time period, since a direct implementation considering all possible production sequences would require the use of an exponential number of variables. Both the construction and improvement heuristics are the outcome of combining the pricing heuristic with mathematical programming based heuristics. The key principle behind these procedures is the selection of smaller subproblems which are easier to tackle. The construction heuristic, Relax-Price-Fix, generates a feasible solution by introducing column generation within the relax-and-fix framework. A series of partially relaxed MIPs are solved until a feasible solution is obtained. An important innovation is the combination of a compact and extended formulation in a single model during the construction phase to relief the computational burden of the procedure. Fix-Price-Optimize, our improvement heuristic, escapes from local minima by re-optimizing a feasible solution over a small subset of the original problem. These partitions are explored in a systematic framework and SeqSearch is embedded during re-optimization to discover new production sequences.In our computational tests we show the flexibility of using mathematical programming based heuristics by tackling different features of the problem. The benchmark sets solved ranged from the case of triangular setups to non-triangular setups with minimum and maximum lot size restrictions. The approach outperformed the state-of-the-art algorithms for large problems. Using parallel CPLEX 12.1 on a compact formulation revealed to be the dominant method for small and low setup cost instances, but as the instances become bigger and harder both variants of P&MIP are a better approach. The results on the set of real-world problems solved have shown the practical application of the approach.Our insights also indicate that to conduct a partial exploration of the neighborhood of an incumbent solution, devising a rule for neighbor selection has a positive effect regarding the quality of the solution.One of the interesting topics for future research is the subproblem which arises in the pricing heuristic. In this paper, it is solved using exact approaches (branch-and-cut), however for instances having a large number of products to be scheduled, an approximate approach can save computational time. Even so, such an approach would slow the convergence of the column generation algorithm, hence the benefit is still to be studied and assessed. In addition, regarding the pricing heuristic, the diving scheme can be modified to improve the search for production sequences.The techniques described in this paper aim to solve the problem under consideration, nevertheless most of the ideas can be applied to different lot sizing problems or to problems beyond this research subject.