@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of seat allocation and overbooking decisions with hybrid information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a robust revenue management model with hybrid information.We show that nested policies are optimal among all deterministic policies in our model.We apply model-based methods to solve the problem numerically.We conduct numerical experiments to show the benefits of our method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Revenue management,Competitive analysis,Regret,Cross entropy method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We investigate a single-leg airline revenue management problem where an airline has limited demand information and uncensored no-show information. To use such hybrid information for simultaneous overbooking and booking control decisions, we combine expected overbooking cost with revenue. Then we take a robust optimization approach with a regret-based criterion. While the criterion is defined on a myriad of possible demand scenarios, we show that only a small number of them are necessary to compute the objective. We also prove that nested booking control policies are optimal among all deterministic ones. We further develop an effective computational method to find the optimal policy and compare our policy to others proposed in the literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Revenue management (RM), with its initial applications in the airline and hospitality industries, shows how scientific methods can be successfully used to improve decision making. Airlines and hotels sell their (perishable) seat and room inventories, respectively, well in advance of the actual service time while changing the prices of their inventory (or changing the availability to different customer segments/groups). There is a significant body of research in RM that proposes tactics, models, and methods to control these advance bookings in order to maximize revenues. The oldest tactic is overbooking. American Airlines reported in 1990 that the benefit of overbooking to the airline exceeded $225 million (Smith, Leimkuhler, Darrow, & Samuels, 1992). US Airways reported in 2006 that the company would have lost $1 billion of its $11.56 billion revenue if the airline had not overbooked its flights (Bailey, 2007). In the US, more than 595 million passengers were boarded by major airlines and close to 1.5 million were denied boarding voluntarily or involuntarily in 2010 (BTS, 2010). Note that all the no-show and boarding information is recorded by airlines. Airlines use such information to develop statistical methods to predict the no-show rates.Another critical problem in RM is capacity control, also referred to as fare-class allocation or seat inventory control. We refer the reader to Talluri and Ryzin (2004) and Phillips (2005) for more information on the research models and methods developed in this area. Classical models of seat inventory control rely on several assumptions about demand such as independence and stationarity, and assume knowledge of probability distributions. However, demand forecasting has always been a big challenge, even if there is plenty of historic data. When there is little data, accurate forecast is virtually impossible and one has to rely on expert opinions. Even in industries such as airline and hospitality, where RM has been actively used for decades, inaccuracy in demand forecasting is a persistent problem in spite of readily available data. The need for developing accurate forecasting systems in successful RM implementations, and challenges associated with lack of data or naive forecasts are emphasized by Lahoti (2002) and Lennon (2004). There are many complicating factors that cause inaccurate forecasting, such as non-stationarity of demand over time, unrealistic assumptions on independence, and model selection. An important common reason is that the demand data is censored due to booking and capacity limits. Despite the development of quite a few techniques to uncensor the demand data, forecasting remains a challenge (Queenan, Ferguson, Higbie, & Kapoor, 2007; McGill & Ryzin, 1999; Weatherford & Pölt, 2002). We resort to robust optimization and formulate a model that does not need a probabilistic model on demand. By providing such a model we forgo the underlying probabilistic demand and risk neutrality assumptions of the traditional models, and substantially lower the requirements on demand forecasting, with little sacrifice on revenue performance.In this paper, we consider the classical single resource problem in RM and provide methods to determine overbooking levels and capacity controls. This paper makes research contributions on modeling, analysis, and computational methods: First, we develop a new practical approach to the combined fare-class allocation and overbooking problem. Our approach is oriented to the case where demand forecasting is challenging and unreliable but accurate probabilistic information is available regarding no-shows. We introduce a hybrid model for optimization under uncertainties to integrate both information. Our model uses a regret criterion for the revenue performance net of the expected overbooking cost associated with no-shows. Second, we investigate structural properties of the hybrid model: We prove that nested booking control policies that are widely used in the RM practice and well studied in the literature, are optimal among all deterministic policies for our hybrid model. Finally, the structural properties of the problem in turn enable us to develop a practical model-based computational procedure to compute the optimal policy for our model, which contributes to the body of knowledge on model-based methods. While earlier work (see Ball & Queyranne, 2006; Lan, Gao, Ball, & Karaesmen, 2008, 2011) produced closed-form solutions for booking control policies, the more complex problem we analyze here leads to a challenging nonlinear stochastic optimization problem. Plainly evaluating the objective function is computationally intensive, as it involves worst-case analysis with a measure of regret that needs to consider a myriad of scenarios in its calculation. Based on the structural properties, we are able to reduce the number of necessary scenarios and develop an effective model-based method to solve the nonlinear optimization problem.The focus of a model-based method is on models of probability distribution as likelihood of optimality over the entire solution space. Rather than working from one candidate solution to another, model-based methods look for better models in an iterative procedure. The cross-entropy (CE) method (Rubinstein, 1999) is among the earliest varieties of model-based methods. It starts with an initial distribution model, and a systematic approach is employed to improve the model iteratively. At each iteration, a number of sample solutions are first drawn randomly from the current distribution model. Then a small fraction of the random samples with the best objective values are selected to be in the so-called “elite set”. Next the model is improved in such a way so as to increase the likelihood of producing the solutions in the elite set. This whole process can start over again from this newly obtained model for further improvement. Iteration by iteration, the procedure keeps improving the model until a stopping criterion is met. In the ideal case, the series of improved models eventually converge to a degenerate one with all the probability mass collapsing into the optimal solution.We provide extensive computational experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our hybrid model as a stand-alone approach. We also point out that our approach produces overbooking levels that can be used as an input to any existing seat inventory control optimization model that assumes no cancellations. This is of practical importance: In practice, a virtual capacity (also known as pseudo capacity) – physical capacity plus an overbooking pad based on the no-show rate, cost of overbooking and/or service measures – is determined separately, and then used as an input to seat inventory control optimization. Phillips (2005) mentions that this approach has practical advantages in terms of being able to mix-and-match different methods of overbooking and seat inventory control optimization. In addition to other applications of RM, our hybrid approach can potentially be applied to a range of decision problems where there are varying degrees of information accuracy or uncertainty regarding problem parameters (e.g. inventory planning for production systems with random yield where both production quantities and demand are subject to uncertainty).The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a literature review in Section 2. Section 3 introduces the problem and describes our approach. Optimality of nested policies is discussed in Section 4. In Section 5, we develop a numerical optimization procedure to find the optimal policies in our models and compare our new revenue management policies with existing approaches. We conclude in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
