@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Preferences for contractual forms in supply chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Upstream and downstream supply chain members’ preferences for contractual forms are not often aligned.Supply chain members can have a congruent preference for contract type.A seemingly inefficient wholesale price-only contract can be preferred by both sides of supply chains.Supply chain structure is important in determining its members’ preferences for contractual forms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Competition,Contracting preferences,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The supply chain contracting literature has focused on incentive contracts designed to align supply chain members’ individual interests. A key finding of this literature is that members’ preferences for contractual forms are often at odds: the upstream supplier prefers relatively complex contracts that can coordinate the supply chain; however, the downstream retailer prefers a wholesale price-only contract because it leaves more surplus (than does a coordinating contract), which the retailer can capture. This paper addresses the following question: Under what circumstances do suppliers and retailers prefer the same contractual form? We study supply chain members’ preferences for contractual forms under three different competitive settings in which multiple supply chains compete to sell substitutable products in the same market. Our analysis suggests that both upstream and downstream sides of the supply chain may prefer the same “quantity discount” contract, which would eliminate the conflicts of interest that otherwise typify contracting situations. More interesting still is that both sides may also prefer the wholesale price-only contract; this finding provides a theoretical explanation for why that inefficient (but simple) contract is widely adopted in supply chain transactions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Contracts are commonly used in supply chains to coordinate the activities of parties whose local objectives are not always perfectly aligned with one another. It is widely recognized that the wholesale price-only (or “WP”) contract fails to achieve full supply chain efficiency. In the most common setting—a single supply chain wherein a supplier makes a contract offer to a retailer—the supplier can coordinate the supply chain by inducing the retailer to make decisions that are optimal for the supply chain as a whole. Such contracts may take a nonlinear form (e.g., quantity discount contracts) or include a fixed-payment component in addition to the wholesale price (e.g., two-part tariff contracts).Although contract design has been extensively studied in the supply chain contracting literature, little attention has been paid to the contractual form preferences of supply chain members. When supply chain members are profit maximizers, they should prefer a contractual form that yields the highest profits. As a consequence, a profit-seeking supplier should prefer more sophisticated coordinating contracts to simple wholesale price-only contracts; with the former, the supplier can extract the entire supply chain surplus and leave none to the retailer. In contrast, the retailer should prefer the WP contract because it allows him to secure a positive surplus (a result of the double marginalization effect). Thus, existing studies suggest that the contractual form preferences of supplier and retailer are not aligned and so there exist conflicts of interest among supply chain members with respect to contract design.This paper focuses on the congruence of members’ contractual form preferences. In particular, we focus on a market environment characterized by deterministic demand and study the circumstances under which suppliers and retailers share the same preferences for a certain type of contract. Our analytical results suggest that both suppliers and retailers can be simultaneously better-off when using wholesale price-only contracts than when using other contractual forms. Hence supplier and retailer preferences can be coordinated via WP contracts. That being said, there are also situations in which both suppliers and retailers may be better served by more complex contracts. We describe the conditions under which supply chain members share the same preferences for a particular contract type, whether it be a wholesale price-only contract or quantity discount (QD) contract.The structure of a supply chain affords its members different degrees of market power. In order to understand how supply chain members’ preferences change across different settings, we consider three forms of supply chain structure. In each structure, the same number of products are sold but the number of suppliers and retailers is varied. Thus, we consider: (i) an n-supplier and n-retailer supply chain in which each supplier has an exclusive retailer; (ii) an n-supplier and 1-retailer supply chain in which all suppliers sell through a common retailer; and (iii) a 1-supplier and n-retailer supply chain in which one supplier sells through multiple retailers. The supply chain members in these three settings hold different levels of market power as determined by the (horizontal) competition among multiple members.We start by analyzing optimal decisions at the retailer level. We then analyze equilibrium decisions at the supplier level for a given type of contract while accounting for retailers’ responses. We choose two types of contracts for our analysis: the wholesale price-only contract and the quantity discount contract. Studies of a single supply chain have shown the QD contract to be more efficient but also more complex. Our analysis reveals that if all supply chains are restricted to a common contractual form (i.e., either a QD or a WP contract), then suppliers and retailers may both prefer either of these contract types—provided that (a) the intensity of competition (as measured by the rate of product substitution) falls within a certain range and (b) the number of supply chains is large. Thus the structure of the supply chain network plays a crucial role in determining which type of contract is preferred by supply chain members.This paper makes the following contributions. First, we develop an industry equilibrium analysis for competing supply chains under two commonly used contractual forms in three supply chain settings. More importantly, we show that—unlike contracting in a 1-supplier and 1-retailer supply chain—suppliers and retailers may both prefer the wholesale price-only contract to more complex and efficient contracts (or vice versa) depending on the supply chain structure. Hence our study offers a theoretical explanation for a long-standing dilemma: although the theoretical literature has shown that coordinating contracts are more efficient, in practice the wholesale price-only contract is more popular. Supplier and retailer contract preferences may coincide for a wide range of parameters when the number of competing supply chains is large. This study identifies the characteristics (e.g., supply chain structure, extent of product substitution, number of horizontal competitors) that play a key role in determining whether the preferences of supply chain members are congruent—and in explaining the observed prevalence of certain contractual forms.The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature related to our study. In Section 3, we present a model of supply chain competition and contractual forms. This is followed in Section 4 by an analysis of symmetric supply chains. Section 5 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
