@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A bi-objective model for the location of landfills for municipal solid waste

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We formulate a bi-objective model that minimizes costs and pollution.We apply this model to real-world data in Chile.We provide insight into how the two objectives influence location patterns.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Landfill location,Transfer stations,Capacity allocation,Pollution decay,Case study,Solid waste management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper models the locations of landfills and transfer stations and simultaneously determines the sizes of the landfills that are to be established. The model is formulated as a bi-objective mixed integer optimization problem, in which one objective is the usual cost-minimization, while the other minimizes pollution. As a matter of fact, pollution is dealt with a two-pronged approach: on the one hand, the model includes constraints that enforce legislated limits on pollution, while one of the objective functions attempts to minimize pollution effects, even though solutions may formally satisfy the letter of the law. The model is formulated and solved for the data of a region in Chile. Computational results for a variety of parameter choices are provided. These results are expected to aid decision makers in the choice of excluding and choosing sites for solid waste facilities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For a long time, locations of facilities have been discussed by geographers, mathematicians, computer scientists, economists, and, last, but not least, operations researchers. However, it was only in the 1970s that researchers formally realized that not all facilities are desirable and customers find it beneficial to be close to them. In particular, the contribution of Church and Garfinkel (1978) was the introduction of the concept of “obnoxious” facilities. Later discussions realized that most facilities are neither entirely desirable nor entirely undesirable: a nearby supermarket is certainly beneficial to the people living in its proximity, but those very close by will not be too pleased by the early morning deliveries that are inevitably accompanied by noise and other sorts of pollution.Similarly, not all polluting facilities are the same. Early contributions to the field distinguished between noxious and obnoxious facilities, even though the distinction was purely semantic and was not reflected in the model. Erkut and Neuman (1989) suggested instead the more general term “undesirable facilities,” which has been more or less universally accepted today. However, such unification of models may not necessarily be warranted. As an example, consider a nuclear power plant and a truck reloading station. Both are arguable undesirable facilities (in the sense that most people would not want to have them very close to their home), but they differ to a large degree by the actual risk they pose. While the nuclear power plant poses a tiny, but disastrous risk, the transfer station does not. From a modeling point of view, a mathematical model that locates a truck reloading station will have to address pollution, whereas it is typically not required to consider risk, which would not only be minimal, but also marginal. On the other hand, ignoring risk in a model that locates nuclear power plants would be foolish.Landfills that accept municipal solid waste, the subject of this investigation, are facilities that pose some environmental risks. Other than freak accidents such as the explosion of the Istanbul landfill in 1993 that claimed 39 lives, (Harriyet Daily News, 2012), risk is mostly due to pollution of ground and surface water, and, to a lesser degree, air and noise pollution. These issues are typically taken care of in constraints that simply do not allow the location of landfills in areas that do not have appropriate soil types (compacted clay with low hydraulic conductivity) or are in 100-year flood plains, and those that specify smallest acceptable distances between landfills and populated areas. Similarly, if a potential location does not have appropriate access to the existing highway system, does not have desirable topographical features (e.g., the terrain is too steep), or does not have required soil properties, overlays in GIS systems can be used to simply not consider any such location.However, residents today are no longer happy with enduring industrial or commercial facilities, even if they are not in direct vicinity of their property. They will complain about health hazards, environmental pollution, noise, truck traffic, and decrease in property values. The NIMBY (not in my back yard), NIMTO (not in my term of office), LULU (locally undesirable land use), and BANANA (build absolutely nothing anywhere near anything) and other, similar, syndromes are a clear testament to that sentiment. The model presented in this paper will add one more item to the alphabet soup: the L-SOUP, i.e., the location of socially undesirable premises.The duality of regulations and general sentiment in the population has caused us to use an approach that deals with pollution on two levels. The “hard” side of pollution will be dealt with by means of constraints, while the “soft” side is put into an objective function. For a discussion of soft and hard requirements, see e.g., Eiselt and Laporte (1987). The constraints will reflect what laws, bylaws, and other regulations prescribe in terms of maximal allowable pollution levels. In addition to that, the objective function that deals with pollution will attempt to minimize the detrimental effects generated by landfills and transfer stations.Even though most people would consider a landfill a necessary, but undesirable facility, it is rarely treated as such from a formal point of view. As Eiselt and Marianov (2012) demonstrate, early contributions mostly use cost minimization to arrive at optimal landfill locations (Marks & Liebman, 1971; Fuertes, Hudson, & Marks, 1974; Gottinger, 1988 and others). The idea behind this is that while landfills are inherently undesirable to neighbors close by, the undesirable effects diminish fairly rapidly with distance. On the other hand, since the costs of collection, treatment, and disposal are eventually borne by the population at large, their interest is to have the treatment and disposal sites not too close, but sufficiently close to be reasonably cost-efficient, making it a model with a “pull” objective (see Eiselt & Laporte, 1995, for different classes of objectives) and “forbidden areas”, i.e., a areas near the population center, in which it is prohibited to locate a facility. An interesting contribution that does take the populations sentiment directly into account is by Fernández, Fernández, and Pelegrín (2000), who locate a single facility in such a way as to minimize population opposition, which is modeled by a sigmoid repulsion function.Most models that site solid waste facilities have a few features in common. They feature population centers at known and fixed locations with fixed and known numbers of people living there, a finite or infinite number of potential locations at which landfills and/or transfer stations can be located, and distances between them. As far as the choice of metric is concerned, many network models use shortest distances between customers and facilities, while models in the plane use Euclidean or some other Minkowski distance. In reality, we will have to distinguish between the distance between points when it comes to transportation (for which road distances are relevant), and the straight line or Euclidean distances representing how the pollution more likely moves. In order to avoid having multiple distance measures in the same model, many authors use Euclidean distances for both, transportation and pollution. This is not only an approximation for transportation, but it also approximates pollution, as the propagation of pollutants depends on the medium: models that involve air pollution typically use Gaussian plumes, while pollution in ground water follows the aquifer (see, e.g., Daly & Zannetti, 2007, chap. 2 for air pollution, and Persson & Destouni, 2009, or Stuart, Lapworth, Crane, & Hart, 2012 for groundwater pollution).The last two decades have seen many new models and approaches. However, a common theme is to use mathematical (cost-) optimization to find approximate locations of the proposed landfill, and then employ tools from the toolkit of multicriteria decision making to incorporate different and, at least partially, contradicting criteria. Examples for such approaches are Lahdelma, Salminen, and Hokkanen (2002), Kontos, Komilis, and Halvadakis (2003), Sumathi, Natesan, and Sarkar (2008), and Xi et al. (2010).From a macro point of view, the number of landfills has decreased dramatically throughout the last decades. For instances, while there were close to 8000 landfills and dumps in the United States in 1988, there were only 1908 in 2010 (van Haaren, Themelis, & Goldstein, 2010). This means that existing and new landfills will have larger capacities (thus increasing the level of undesirability) and many population centers will no longer have a landfill in their direct vicinity, thus necessitating long transportation routes. In order to mitigate the latter effects, waste transfer stations have been established, to which garbage is hauled in collection vehicles, where the waste is compacted and reloaded onto larger and more efficient transfer truck, which haul the waste to the treatment facility or the landfill. This means that landfills and treatment centers on the one hand, and transfer stations on the other, have to be included in one comprehensive model, as the location of one such facility will influence the location of the other.There are very few contributions that plan the location and the size of a landfill in one comprehensive model. One of the difficulties of such a plan is that the model tends to become not only integer, but also nonlinear, thus tremendously increasing the degree of difficulty. To see this, suppose that Qjdenotes the size of a landfill at potential site j, and yjis a binary variable that indicates whether or not a landfill is going to be constructed at site j, both Qjand yjare variables. The capacity of the landfill at site j is then Qjyj, a nonlinear expression. One possibility is to use only a finite number of potential landfill sizes, i.e., discretize the landfill size. Although it increases the size of the model, this is the approach we are using.One of the few contributions that simultaneously optimize location and capacity is by André, Velasco, and González-Abril (2009). That paper locates a sequence of facilities on a plane, one at a time, over a time horizon, avoiding forbidden regions around population nodes, and precluding location of a new landfill within a preset distance of a closing landfill.Our contribution is a linear integer model that addresses the location and sizing of landfills and, simultaneously, locates transfer stations. We minimize costs and pollution, the latter emanating from all facilities that are located and measured at all populated centers. The model considers economies of scale, i.e., larger landfills are less expensive per unit of received waste. By using discrete sizes, we can deal with economies of scale in a linear model. We also consider a policy consisting of defining saturation zones (or exclusion zones) around each facility, so that a populated point cannot fall in more than one such exclusion zone. The idea is that a customer, being relatively close to a polluting facility, is “saturated with pollution”, and cannot be subjected to additional pollution from any facility that belongs to the system that handles municipal solid waste. While the size of an exclusion zone for a landfill depends on the landfill’s capacity (assuming that a larger landfill will have more traffic and thus more pollution), the exclusion zone around a transfer station is assumed to be constant. Finally, since a common policy is to limit the allowable pollution imposed on any populated center, we add a constraint that establishes upper bounds on pollution at every such populated center.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model, which includes the location of landfills and transfer stations, as well as capacities of landfills. Section 3 introduces the region of study and delineates our computational results with a variety of sensitivity analyses. Section 4 summarizes our findings and provides some thoughts regarding future research.Consider a region, in which population centers are located at known sites i=1,…,m. Typically, population is aggregated at these centers, so as to keep the size of the model manageable. We assume wicustomers are located at site i, each one generating γ tons of garbage per year, so that we have to deal with γwitons of garbage at site i. Furthermore, the search for suitable sites has narrowed down the choices for landfills to a finite number of sites at j=1,…,n, while transfer stations may be located at candidate sites ℓ=1,…,s. While a site may be suitable for both, a transfer station and a landfill, it can only house at most one of these facilities.The remaining parameters of the model are as follows. Whenever it applies, the capacity units are tons in one year, written simply as (ton):Qjkcapacity (ton) of landfill at site j with capacity level kfjLfixed annualized cost to establish and operate a landfill at site jΔfjkLcapacity-dependent annual cost ($/ton) to establish and operate a landfill of capacity level k at site j. This cost is a nonlinear, decreasing function of the capacityfℓTfixed annualized cost to establish & operate a transfer station at siteℓΔfℓTvolume-dependent annual cost ($/ton) to establish and operate a transfer station at siteℓπL, πTpollution factors for landfills and transfer stations (kilometers2/ton)Pcmaximum allowable pollution at any populated centertij, tiℓunit transportation costs ($/ton) from customer i directly to landfill j, and from customer i to transfer stationℓ, along any predetermined route. These two unit costs should be the same per distance unit, as we haul by collection truck in both casestˆℓjUnit transportation costs (by transfer truck) ($/ton) between transfer stationℓand landfill j. Note that all transportation costs are expressed in terms of ($/ton), i.e., they indicate what it costs to ship one ton on the entire routedij, diℓEuclidean distances between customer i, transfer stationℓ, and landfill j. Note that these distances are not used for cost computations, but for the assessment of pollution at individual customer sitesThe location variables in this model areyjka zero-one variable that assumes a value of one, if we open a landfill at site j with capacity level k, andvℓa zero-one variable that assumes the value of one, if we open a transfer station at siteℓThe assignment or shipment variables we use in this model arezija zero-one variable that equals 1, if all garbage from customer i is shipped directly to landfill j, andxiℓa zero-one variable, which equals 1, if all waste from customer i is shipped to transfer station ℓ.As far as the shipment variables are concerned, we first make the single-destination assumption. In other words, we assume that garbage collected at one customer site will be hauled in its entirety to one landfill or to one transfer station, rather than being split. This appears to be a reasonable assumption regarding the practicality of the collection operation.We also define a variable for the shipments between transfer stations and landfills:uℓjthis continuous variables measures the garbage quantity (ton) that is shipped from transfer station ℓ to landfill jWe can now formulate the mathematical model that involves two objective functions, viz., the costs of establishing waste treatment facilities and hauling garbage from the customers to the landfill, and a second objective that minimizes pollution at the customer sites.First consider the cost objective. The total cost zccan be written as(1)Minzc=∑j∑kfjL+ΔfjkLQjkyjk+∑ℓfℓTνℓ+∑iΔfℓTγwixiℓ+∑i∑ℓtiℓγwixiℓ+∑i∑jtijγwizij+∑ℓ∑jtˆℓjuℓj,where the costs in expression (1) comprise•The annualized costs to establish and operate a landfill at site j. These costs have a fixed component and a capacity dependent component. As the capacity of the landfill increases, the costΔfjkLper capacity unit decreases according to a negative exponential curve, as explained in the Section 3.The annualized costs to establish and operate a transfer station at any site ℓ. These costs have a fixed component and a component related to the volume of garbage processed per year,The transportation costs from customer i to transfer station ℓ (via collection truck),The transportation costs for shipments between all customer-landfill pairs (also by collection truck), andThe transportation costs of compacted garbage between all pairs of transfer stations ℓ and landfills j.The second objective concerns pollution. In our model, we use a gravity expression that assumes that the ill effects of pollution decrease with the square of the distance to the polluting facility, while it increases linearly with increasing amounts of waste. This paper only considers the part of the pollution at customer site i that derives from the landfills and the transfer stations. The pollution emitted from a landfill may be expressed as a function of the quantity of waste deposited at that landfill. In our model, the total flow of waste to landfill j is∑iγwizij+∑ℓuℓj, so that the pollution at customer k’s site, due to a landfill located at j, isπL∑iγwizij+∑ℓuℓj(dkj+ε)2and the pollution at that customer, from all landfills, is∑jπL∑iγwizij+∑ℓuℓj(dkj+ε)2. Similarly, given that the amount of garbage processed by a transfer station is∑iγwixiℓ, the pollution that reaches customer k’s site from a transfer station at ℓ isπT∑iγwixiℓ(dkℓ+ε)2, and the pollution at that customer, from all transfer stations is∑ℓπT∑iγwixiℓ(dkℓ+ε)2. Then, the total pollution a customer k is exposed to is∑jπL∑iγwizij+∑ℓuℓj(dkj+ε)2+∑ℓπT∑iγwixiℓ(dkℓ+ε)2. Given that there are wkcustomers at site k, the total population-weighted pollution at site k can obtained by multiplying this expression by wk, and the total pollution that all customers are exposed to can then be defined as(2)Minzp=∑kwk∑jπL∑iγwizij+∑ℓuℓj(dkj+ε)2+∑ℓπT∑iγwixiℓ(dkℓ+ε)2This is the second objective function (the pollution objective).Consider now the constraints. In addition to the pollution objective, we assume that around each landfill site j, and around each transfer station ℓ, there is an exclusion zone. Defining such exclusion zone allows avoiding population centers being in the vicinity of more than one undesirable facility. In other words, locating a facility “saturates” a surrounding area, as defined, for example, in Chilean regulation (CONAMA, 2007), and population centers cannot belong to more than one such area.This exclusion zone could have any shape, as long as it can be defined by a level curve of an “undesirability” function that is non-increasing with distance from the landfill. The size of the exclusion zone is usually larger than the size of the area directly affected by pollution, and besides the pollution itself, it has a relationship to public perception of obnoxiousness or nuisance. Furthermore, we assume that the larger the capacity of the landfill, the larger the size of the exclusion zone.The first set of constraints ensures that no customer is located in more than one exclusion zone generated by either a landfill or a transfer station. For that purpose, defineNiLas the set of all (landfill site j, capacity level k) pairs that pollute customer i beyond the permissible level. Similarly defineNiTas the set of transfer stations that pollute customer i beyond what is permitted by law. The set of constraints that states that each customer i can be in at most one exclusion zone that individually pollutes him beyond what is desired, can be written as(3)∑(j,k)∈NiLyjk+∑ℓ∈NiTνℓ⩽1∀iWe also include a constraint that limits the pollution at any populated center:(4)∑jπL∑kγwkzkj+∑ℓuℓj(dij+ε)2+∑ℓπT∑kγwkxkℓ(diℓ+ε)2⩽Pc∀iThe next two sets of constraints guarantee that shipments are only made to facilities, if these actually exist. In particular, we formulate(5)zij⩽∑kyjk∀i,j,which states that a customer at site i can only choose a direct route to landfill j, if a landfill of any capacity exists at site j, and(6)xiℓ⩽νℓ∀i,ℓ,which guarantees that a customer i can only choose a route to a transfer station ℓ, if a transfer station at site ℓ actually exists. Constraints that ensure that shipments from transfer stations are directed only to existing landfills are formulated below.The next set of constraints guarantees that the aforementioned single-destination assumption is satisfied. In particular, consider one customer i at a time. This constraint allows exactly one route to be chosen, either to a transfer station or directly to a landfill.(7)∑jzij+∑ℓxiℓ=1∀iNow the conservation equation. It considers transfer station ℓ and states that the flow from transfer station ℓ to all landfills (the left-hand side) equals the quantity of the inflow into transfer station ℓ from all customers. In particular, we can write(8)∑juℓj=∑iwiγxiℓ∀ℓThe next set of constraints comprises capacity constraints at landfills. More specifically, consider the landfill at candidate site j. The inflow to the landfill is the flow from customer i to landfill j, and the waste flow from transfer station ℓ to landfill j. This total inflow to landfill j cannot exceed the capacity available at landfill site j, which is expressed as the sum of all capacities established at site j. The fact that only a single facility may exist at any candidate site is formulated below. Note that if no landfill exists at site j at all, the right-hand side of the expression is zero, so that no flows are hauled to site j.(9)∑iwiγzij+∑ℓuℓj⩽∑kQjkyjk∀jThe last set of constraints guarantees that at each candidate site j, there can be no more than one transfer station or a landfill of one capacity. Note that sites that do not allow either landfill or transfer station do not generate a constraint. Sites j that only allow landfills, have vj=0, while sites j that allow only transfer stations have yjk=0 ∀j, k.(10)νj+∑kyjk⩽1∀jWhat follows are specifications of the variables. Note that all variables are binary, except for the flow variables from transfer stations to landfills.(11)yjk,νℓ,zij,xiℓ∈{1,0};uℓj≥0∀i,j,k.Once this problem is solved—more about that in Section 3—it will, in addition to the values of the variables, also provide numerical values for p, the number of landfills, and q, the number of transfer stations.The model was applied to the location of landfills and transfer stations for serving the Biobío region in the south of Chile, which size is around 300kilometers by 300kilometers square. In this region, there are 128 cities, towns and villages with a population larger than 500 inhabitants, which we consider as the population to be served. These population concentrations account for over a 90% of the total population. The remaining 10% of the population is distributed in small, scattered hamlets (Chilean Census, 2002). The total population under consideration is 1,565,227 people. In order to find good candidates for the location of the landfills, we considered 45 points, scattered across the region. Graphs with the distribution of populated areas and candidate locations are shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1a shows the distribution of towns and villages in the region, where the size of the dot is related to the population of the town. Fig. 1b shows the 45 candidate landfill and transfer station locations.We have chosen to use the following parameters. The daily per-capita waste generation γ is about 3lbs per day, which amounts to about half a ton annually. The weights wiare the population of the city or village multiplied by half a ton in the objective, thus indicating the demand for service at a customer point. Similarly, the maximal annual capacity of the system is half a ton multiplied by the total population of 1,565,227 for the amount of 782,614tons. Landfills can have one of 20 possible discrete capacities, uniformly distributed within the range 39,131 to 782,614tons. The transportation cost per ton per km, from customers to landfills or transfer stations, is $0.4286, while the transportation cost from transfer stations to landfills, per ton per km is $0.1429 (EPA, 2002). The fixed annualized cost of establishing and operating a transfer station is $100,000, while the variable cost per annual ton is $10. The fixed cost per landfill is $300,000, while the variable component is given by the curve in Fig. 2.This curve was elaborated using information data from actual costs in Australia (BDA Group Economics, 2009). The function relating cost and capacity, for each possible capacity isΔfjkL=586.38(Qjk)-0.209($/ton). Finally, πL=0.1 and πT=0.025.As far the solution method is concerned, we use a two-pronged approach. To get a general idea about the tradeoffs between cost and pollution, we employ Cohon’s (1978) weighting method with weights on cost and pollutionλcλp>0andλc=1-λp, respectively. The composite objective in this approach is thenMinz=λczc+λpzp,where zcand zpare as shown in relations (1) and (2).It is well known, though, that the weighting method, if applied to non-convex optimization problems (as is the case here), will find only supported non-dominated points. In other words, non-supported non-dominated points will not be found with this method. Remedies have been suggested by Soland (1979), Cohon (1978) and, more recently, Özlen and Azizoǧlu (2009), Coutinho-Rodrigues, Tralhão, and Alçada-Almeida (2012), and Gomes da Silva and Clímaco (2013). After having found supported non-dominated points with the regular weighting method, we “zoom in” and investigate a small interval further. This approach, referred to as the epsilon-constraint method, was suggested by Soland (1979). It optimizes one of the objectives (the pollution, in this case) and constrains the remaining objective (total cost) to a value Ck, viz.,∑j∑kfjL+ΔfjkLQjkyjk+∑ℓfℓTνℓ+∑iΔfℓTγwixiℓ+∑i∑ℓtiℓγwixiℓ+∑i∑jtijγwizij+∑ℓ∑jtˆℓjuℓj⩽CkThis model is then run a number of times, so as to further investigate the specific area of the tradeoff curve.As far as exclusion zones are concerned, we define a circle-shaped exclusion zone around each transfer station and landfill. Furthermore, since our model includes multiple types of pollution, we use Euclidean distances as an approximation. As already mentioned earlier, the exclusion zone for a transfer station was chosen to be 4kilometers irrespective of the traffic the station encounters. For landfills, we assume a minimal radius of the exclusion zone is also 4kilometers, regardless of the size of the landfill. With increasing capacity, the radius of the exclusion zone is assumed to increase linearly as shown in Fig. 3to a maximum value of 100kilometers for a full sized landfill.The model was run on a 64-bit PC Intel Core i7 machine with 2.8gigahertz and 4gigabyte RAM. The solver of choice was CPLEX 12.5 (IBM, 2012). Our benchmark problems are those that allow a maximal pollution of 10,000 and have a maximal exclusion radius of 100. Given those parameter settings, Table 1shows the number of landfills and transfer stations in the solutions, the fixed and variable costs, as well as the pollution levels for a variety of weights on the cost and pollution objectives.It is noteworthy that the number of landfills is very stable throughout the range of observations. Ignoring the extremes, we could recommend a single landfill to be located. On the other hand, the number of transfer stations varies quite a bit with changing importance of costs and pollution. In the entire range, though, the problem is solvable to optimality without difficulties.The resulting tradeoff curve is shown in Fig. 4.While the shape of the tradeoff curve is standard, its very steep shape was unexpected. In other words, starting with very high weights on the cost objective (i.e., practically ignoring pollution), the pollution level is very high, which, again, is not unexpected. However, solutions with slightly lower weight of the cost objective increase the costs only marginally, while dramatically reducing pollution. For instance, starting with the solution that results from λc=.999, a cost increase of less than 3% will reduce pollution by close to 75%. After that, an additional 8% cost increase buys another 73% decrease in pollution. Beyond this point, the pollution decreases are somewhat more moderate, even though another 5.7% in costs result in another 22% decrease of pollution.Next, consider the actual location patterns of the landfills and transfer stations. Fig. 5a–d shows the patterns for the above series of tests. Customers are shown by small dots, transfer stations are denoted by bigger dots, and landfills are shown as dots with a circle around them. The size of the circle indicates the size of the landfill. The lines show the allocation of the customers to landfills or transfer stations.Fig. 5a shows the solution that essentially minimizes costs and ignores pollution. There are one large and one small landfill, along with two transfer stations. Note that the landfills and transfer stations are located pretty much central in relation to the customers, a clear result of the almost pure cost minimization (pull) objective. As the weight on the cost objective decreases and thus pollution is deemed more important, the landfill moves farther away from the populated areas, and the cost is maintained low by opening several transfer stations (Fig. 5c). From then on, the number of facilities decreases and they stay far away from the populated areas. More specifically, for λc=0.75 and lower, the facilities are far outside of the population agglomerations, so that the circle of affected areas includes only a 90 degree cone that includes all customers in the circle. Further reductions in the importance of costs do not even mitigate the loss of proximity of customers to landfills by any significant number of transfer stations. In practice, decision makers will probably want to avoid such extreme situations that are good on pollution, but are very costly and are not likely to be realized.For additional computational tests, we first fixed the weight of costs at the level λc=0.75 and considered decreasing limits on allowable pollution per customer. Starting with very high limits on allowable pollution, the optimal solution includes only a single landfill, apparently due to the strong economies-of-scale. As pollution limits are tightened, transfer stations are introduced (this is similar to the present situation that can be observed in many developed nations), the landfill moves away from the most populated area, and, given that the pollution limits are tightened even further, the single, large, very polluting landfill is replaced by small landfills, since a large landfill pollutes close by populated areas beyond the allowed limits, no matter where it is located. Given the costs of the environmental controls required for landfills, solutions in this last part do not appear practical and implementable. A similar, but even more pronounced, trend prevails for λc=.1.At this point, we ran the model several times, allowing the parameter Ckto move in a range in which new non-dominated non-supported solutions are expected to exist. In our case, we explored the range between the last two solutions in Table 1, i.e., the parameter Cktook values in [70,235,953;71,101,822]. We swept the range by taking the largest cost (71,101,822) and multiplying it each time by 0.999, until we recovered the least cost solution in the range (70,235,953). We found 12 solutions, shown in Table 2.All solutions in this range locate one landfill and one transfer station. In all these solutions, the location of the facilities is the same: they differ only in the allocation of the demand points to facilities. In other words, the solutions more or less look like the solution shown in Fig. 5d.As Table 2 shows, the running time of the model for each new solution is a few seconds, so even if non-supported solutions have to be found, the method is still fast and should not present a stumbling block to analysts or planners (most certainly in view of the fact that we locate a multimillion dollar waste management system). The average time that it took for each run was slightly over 29seconds.This paper proposes a model that, in addition to the usual cost-minimizing objective, includes a second objective that minimizes the pollution any member of the population is exposed to. In addition, constraints ensure that nobody is exposed to pollution levels beyond some maximum acceptable level by more than one facility. Results for the Biobío region in Chile demonstrate that•practical problems of this type can be solved to optimality within a fairly short period of timetremendous reductions of pollution are possible at very reasonable cost, andlocation patterns for reasonable choices of weights will include few large landfills and some transfer stations.Potential extensions of the model include the incorporation of pollution along the transportation routes. This feature is reminiscent of transportation risks in models that deal with the management of hazardous materials. Other extensions include the inclusion of different waste management systems, such as incineration facilities (including waste-to-energy technologies) and recycling centers. One pertinent question concerns collection, particularly whether or not recyclables should be collected simultaneously with regular waste.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
