@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new distance measure including the weak preference relation: Application to the multiple criteria aggregation procedure for mixed evaluations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new measure of distance between preorders including the weak preference relation.Multiple criteria aggregation procedure for mixed evaluations with weak preference relation.Stochastic dominance concepts extended to “distributional dominance”.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple criteria analysis,Uncertainty modeling,Preference relations,Stochastic dominance,Distance measure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We introduce a new distance measure between two preorders that captures indifference, strict preference, weak preference and incomparability relations. This measure is the first to capture weak preference relations. We illustrate how this distance measure affords decision makers greater modeling power to capture their preferences, or uncertainty and ambiguity around them, by using our proposed distance measure in a multiple criteria aggregation procedure for mixed evaluations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An abundant literature exists addressing the problem of appropriate distance measures between two preorders. The context of much of this literature is group decision making where individual preorders have to be reconciled into a collective or compromised preorder. Kemeny and Snell (1962) were the first to use a distance-based model for this purpose, presenting a set of conditions that a distance measure must satisfy. Many authors, such as Cook and Seiford (1978), Cook and Kress (1985) amongst others, have proposed similar conditions to those of Kemeny and Snell (1962) to construct different distance measures between two total preorders (including the indifference and the preference relations). However, few studies have examined the case of partial preorders (including the incomparability relation). Bogart (1975) generalized the model of Kemeny and Snell (1962) to accommodate partial preorders but excluded the indifference relation. Cook, Kress, and Seiford (1986a, 1986b) included the indifference relation presenting a set of axioms showing the existence and uniqueness of a distance measure between two individual preorders. Yet they did not address the aggregation problem for determining a collective preorder. In a multicriteria decision-aiding context, the aggregation problem with partial preorders was addressed by constructing convex cones to partially order the set of alternatives (Dehnokhalaji, Korhonen, Köksalan, Nasrabadi, & Wallenius, 2011). In a multicriteria analysis on water supply systems, Roy and Slowinski (1993) were the first to introduce the idea of a distance measure between pairs of binary relations. Their approach was adapted by Ben Khélifa and Martel (2001) to tackle the aggregation problem and an algorithm proposed to determine a total collective preorder from partial individual preorders. Jabeur, Martel, and Ben Khélifa (2004) presented a new distance measure considered to improve these previous models. Indeed, they proposed a minimal set of conditions to construct a metric. Recently, they used the same set of conditions to assign new values to their distance measure (Jabeur & Martel, 2010). Other approaches to measure the distance between preference relations have been proposed but they do not include the incomparability relation (Meskanen & Nurmi, 2006; Nitzan, 1981).We introduce a new distance measure between preorders, including the weak preference relation, extending the work of Jabeur et al. (2004). The weak preference relation (Q) is an intermediate relation between preference and indifference first introduced by Roy (1978) with the ELECTRE III method. It is meant to capture situations where distinguishing between preference and indifference is problematic because of ambiguity and/or uncertainty.Section 2 presents the new distance measure D including the weak preference relation. It is used in the Multiple Criteria Aggregation Procedure (MCAP) for mixed evaluations (Ben Amor, Jabeur, & Martel, 2007) to aggregate n unicriterion (local) preorders into a multicriterion (global) preorder. The MCAP is extended here to include the weak preference relation to afford the decision maker greater modeling power to elucidate preferences. Several changes required for this purpose and an illustrative numerical example, are presented in Section 3. Conclusions and future work follow in Section 4.Let A be a finite set of objects (alternatives, options or actions in this context) and (ai,ak) an ordered pair of objects belonging to A. In order to set a preference between aiand aj, four binary relations are considered: the strict preference (P), the weak preference (Q), the indifference (I) and the incomparability (?). For the sake of convenience, we use ai P−1akfor ak P aiand ai Q−1akfor ak Q ai, P−1 and Q−1 stand for the inverse strict preference and the inverse weak preference respectively. Based on Jabeur et al. (2004), we propose a set of seven “logical” conditions (an axiomatic) allowing to compare the distance between each pair of binary relations{P,P-1,Q,Q-1,I,?}. If distance D satisfies these conditions, it can be easily proven that D is a metric, i.e., it verifies the non-negativity, the symmetry and the triangular inequality properties.Condition 1: (C1).(1)D(P,?)=D(P-1,?)andD(P,I)=D(P-1,I)(2)D(Q,?)=D(Q-1,?)andD(Q,I)=D(Q-1,I)(3)D(P,Q-1)=D(Q,P-1)This condition is natural since the strict preference P and the inverse strict preference P−1, as the weak preference Q and the inverse weak preference Q−1 are symmetrical to each other (aiPak⇔akP-1aiandaiQak⇔akQ-1ai).Condition 2: (C2).(4)D(P,P-1)=Max{D(O,U)/O,U∈{P,P-1,Q,Q-1,I,?}}Eq. (4) indicates that the strict preference and the inverse strict preference relations are the most discordant relations.Condition 3: (C3).(5)D(O,U)>0ifO≠UandD(O,U)=0ifO≡UwhenO,U∈{P,P-1,Q,Q-1,I,?}This condition states that the minimum distance between two distinct relations is positive. It is null in the opposite case.Condition 4: (C4).(6)D(P,?)=D(Q,?)=D(I,?)Following the interpretation of several authors including Roy and Bouyssou (1993) and Schärlig (1996), the incomparability is seen as the affirmation of the incapacity to establish the relation type: there is no indifference, no weak preference and no strict preference between the two alternatives under consideration. Thus, in the absence of any additional information, the incomparability relation should be considered as equidistant from the other preference relations, in this case {P,P−1,Q,Q−1,I}. This consideration relies on the insufficient reason principle of Laplace.1The Principle of Insufficient Reason states that if there is no reason to believe that out of a set of possible, mutually exclusive events no one event is more likely to occur than any other, then one should assume that all events have the same objective probability (Laplace, 1814).1Jabeur et al. (2004) also followed this line of argument. They considered that the incomparability relation is equidistant from the indifference, the strict preference and the inverse strict preference relations. Roy and Slowinski (1993) as well as Ben Khélifa and Martel (2001) stipulated that the passage from indifference to incomparability is less demanding than the passage from preference to incomparability, i.e., D(P,?)⩾D(I,?).Condition 5: (C5).(7)D(Q,P)=D(Q,I)This condition states that the weak preference is at an equal distance from the indifference and the strict preference. One can easily state that the weak preference relation lies between the indifference and the strict preference relation. The hypothesis about equidistance is reasonable if one thinks of the weak preference relation as a state of mind expressing hesitation between indifference and strict preference (Roy, 1978). No reason exists to place the weak preference relation in a closer position to one or the other of the two preference relations considered here. Consequently, Laplace’s principle of insufficient reason can be invoked to justify equidistance.Condition 6: (C6).(8)D(P,?)⩾D(P,I)(9)D(?,I)⩾D(P,I)(10)D(P,I)⩾D(Q,I)(11)D(Q-1,P)⩾D(Q,P)(12)D(P,Q-1)⩾D(P,I)(13)D(P,Q-1)⩾D(Q,Q-1)(14)D(I,?)⩾D(Q,Q-1)Inequality (8) was justified by Jabeur et al. (2004). Eq. (9) follows considering condition 4, while inequalities (10)–(13) are consistent conditions considering the preference relations at hand. For instance, the passage from strict preference to indifference is more demanding than the passage from weak preference to indifference. For the sake of consistency and without loss of generality, we assume that Eq. (14) holds with strict inequality.Graphically, the previous conditions are illustrated in Fig. 1where:•D(P,?)=D(Q,?)=D(I,?)=D(?,Q−1)=D(?,P−1)=x (by C4).D(P,Q)=D(Q,I)=D(I,Q−1)=D(Q−1,P−1)=a (by C1 and C5).D(P,I)=D(P−1,I)=b (by C1).D(P,Q−1)=D(Q,P−1)=c (by C1).D(P,P−1)=y.D(Q,Q−1)=b′.The conditions C1–C6 induce the following partial ordering:(15)y⩾{c,x}⩾{b,b′}⩾a⩾0,Recalling that a distance measure must fulfill the triangular (metric) inequality, we obtain the following relations, together termed condition 7. Note that we have pruned the list of redundant relations.Condition 7: (C7).(16)y⩽2b,(17)b⩽2a,(18)b′⩽2a,(19)b⩽a+c,(20)b′⩽a+c,(21)c⩽a+b,(22)c⩽a+b′We note that (19) and (20) are redundant as the inequalities in (15) are more restrictive. It can be shown that any combination of values (a, b, b′, c, x, y) which satisfies relations (15)–(22) corresponds to a metric. Indeed, the non-negativity property is a direct consequence of condition C3. The symmetry property is obviously satisfied by definition of distance values. Inequalities (16)–(22) follow directly from the triangular inequality property requirement.To obtain a particular metric, we believe that the centroid M within the 5-polytope resulting from the system of inequalities above constitutes a “reasonable” choice (Jabeur & Martel, 2010; Ben Khélifa & Martel, 2001; Jabeur et al., 2004; Roy & Slowinski, 1993). To determine the centroid M, we use the end-point method (Caron, McDonald, & Ponic, 1989) of the polyhedron defined by the set of inequalities (without loss of generality, we assume that a=1).The numerical values obtained are bM=1.263; b′M=1.474; cM=1.895; xM=1.579 and yM=2. Table 1summarizes the values assigned to D.The MCAP for mixed evaluations (Ben Amor et al., 2007) is designed to deal with a large spectrum of mixed evaluation types including deterministic, fuzzy (linguistic), stochastic, possibilistic, evidential and missing evaluations. It leads to non-valued global (multicriterion) preference relations where the p.r.s. consists of the strict preference, the indifference and the incomparability relations. In fact, numerical values associated with global preference relations can be difficult to interpret considering the mixed nature of the data. Non-valued global preference relations are then privileged. One limitation of the current MCAP for mixed evaluations is that it includes a single level of preference (strict preference). We propose to distinguish between strict and weak preference relations to provide decision makers more flexibility and nuance while expressing their preferences. The weak preference relation is meant to capture situations where distinguishing between preference and indifference is problematic (Roy, 1978). Our MCAP is based on the (A,X,E) model for discrete multiple criteria where A={a1,…,ai,…,am} is a set of potential alternatives, X={X1,…,Xj,…,Xn} is a finite set of attributes (or criteria) and E is an evaluation matrix where evaluations eijcan be stochastic, possibilistic, “evidential” or fuzzy. Each attribute/criterion Xjis associated with a coefficient of relative importance (or weight) wj, where∑j=1nwj=1.The first phase of the procedure consists in constructing local preference relations between two alternatives. Let Hjbe the local relation between two alternatives aiand akon a criterion Xj. We have: aiHjakwhereHj={P,P-1,Q,Q-1,I,?}with I the indifference, P the strict preference, P−1 the inverse strict preference, Q the weak preference, Q−1 the inverse weak preference and?the incomparability relations.The stochastic dominance concept was extended to a more general dominance structure called “distributional dominance”, to include non-stochastic attributes (Ben Amor et al., 2007). The distributional dominance results are adapted in the following way to incorporate the weak preference relation in the p.r.s. The indifference relation is defined as in Ben Amor et al. (2007). We conclude the strict preference in the case of a first order dominance (FDD), the weak preference in the case of a second or third order dominance (SDD or TDD and non FDD), while incomparability is obtained when none of the three dominance types is verified. Once the local preference relations are established, the second stage aims at aggregating n binary relations (aiHjak) in order to obtain a global binary relation (aiHak) by considering the relative importance of the criteria.To achieve this aggregation, the algorithm (AL3) developed by Jabeur and Martel (2007) in a group decision-making context is adapted to handle the weak preference relation. The divergence index ΦH(ai,ak) where H∊{P,P-1,Q,Q-1,I,?}, is calculated for each global binary relation H, using the weighted sum (by the criteria weights) of the distances between H and the local binary relations Hjrelating the pair of alternatives on each criterion. These distances are based on the extended measure of distance D and numerical values in Table 1.Once the divergence indexes have been computed, we identify, for each pair of alternatives (ai,ak), the set of the global relations H∗that minimizes (subject is ‘the set’) the indexes of divergence. If H∗a singleton, i.e., there is only one global relation H∗that minimizes the indexes of divergence ΦH(ai,ak), then H∗will be retained for the pair of alternatives (ai,ak) globally. In the opposite case, i.e., more that one distinct relation minimizes the indexes of divergence ΦH(ai,ak), priority rules have to be applied between the binary relations{P,P-1,Q,Q-1,I,?}. We extend the two priority rules used in Ben Amor et al. (2007) to include weak preference. One can consider that the preference relation has higher priority than the indifference relation, which has higher priority than the weak preference relation. The latter stands as we consider the weak preference relation as a state of hesitation between strict preference and indifference. Obviously, other priority rules can be reasonably adopted.After applying the priority rules, we analyze the cardinality of H∗. If H∗contains a unique relation H∗, then H∗will be retained for the pair of alternatives (ai,ak) globally. In the opposite case, i.e., when H∗contains two relations of the same priority (necessarily (P) and (P−1) or (Q) and (Q−1)), we extend the intersection rule used by Roy (1978) to combine two complete orders, and conclude to the incomparability relation globally (H∗≡?).Once the global p.r.s. is determined, it can be exploited according to different decisional problematics (choice, ranking or sorting). For the choice problematic, for instance, Ben Amor et al. (2007) adopted the procedure based on the alternative performance concept (Jabeur & Martel, 2007). An extension to this procedure enabling the handling of the weak preference relation is proposed here.This procedure aims at constructing a subset of the “best” alternatives, called Θ, based on their performance. Performance is assessed using a performance index Π(ai)which is modified as follows. For each ai∊A/Nisol,(23)Π(ai)=card(Ψ++(ai))-card(Ψ--(ai))+0.5(card(Ψ+(ai))-card(Ψ-(ai)))where•Ψ++(ai) and Ψ−−(ai) are the successors’ and predecessors’ set:•Ψ+(ai) and Ψ−(ai) are the weak successors’ and weak predecessors’ set:Further steps and calculations to determine Θ follow as indicated in Ben Amor et al. (2007). The last step in the exploitation procedure consists in “purifying” Θ. That is, any alternative aisuch as∃ak∈Θandak∊Ψ−−(ai), has to be removed from the prs-graph engendered by Θ.Numerical example:A={a1,a2,a3,a4} and X={X1,X2,X3,X4} where X1 is a stochastic attribute, X2 is an evidential attribute, X3 is a possibilistic attribute2Evidential and possibilistic attributes are attributes where prior information about subsets of evaluations is represented by belief (or plausibility) and possibility (or necessity) functions respectively (Ben Amor et al., 2007).2and X4 is a fuzzy attribute. For each attribute, the inputs consist of the performance matrix, a priori information, and the indifference threshold (Ben Amor et al., 2007). Applying the MCAP including the weak preference relation leads to the global preference relations displayed in Fig. 2.The exploitation procedure based on the alternative performance resulted in Θ={a1,a2} asΠ^(a1)=Π^(a2)=1.5. Conducting the purification operation in this case did not affect Θ as a1 and a2 are indifferent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
