@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dedicated vs product flexible production technology: Strategic capacity investment choice

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A sequential game never leads to the equilibrium with two dedicated firms.The (dedicated) commitment value can dominates the incumbent’s value of flexibility.For high uncertainty, the entrant surprisingly chooses for the dedicated capacity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Flexible manufacturing systems,Strategic capacity investment,Commitment value,Demand uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies the optimal investment strategies of an incumbent and a potential entrant that can both choose between a product flexible and dedicated technology, in a two-product market characterized by uncertain demand. The product flexible production technology has certain advantages, especially when the economic environment is uncertain. On the other hand, the dedicated production technology allows a firm to commit to production quantities. This gives strategic advantages, which can outweigh the ‘value of flexibility’. It turns out that both firms prefer, for some scenarios, the dedicated production technology. However, we find that in a game with sequential technology choices, both firms investing dedicated, will not be an equilibrium. Especially when the economic environment is more uncertain, the incumbent overinvests in product flexible capacity to force the entrant to choose the dedicated technology. Then, the incumbent is the only firm with the product flexible production technology, which results in a high payoff.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Just two decades ago it was standard in the American and European automotive industries to install separate production lines for each vehicle type that was produced. Nowadays, most automotive manufacturers have started to invest in Flexible Manufacturing Systems (FMS) that allow production of multiple car types on a single production line. Flexible manufacturing systems were first introduced by Japanese car manufacturers that developed this new way of manufacturing when they entered the car industry. It is believed that their increased market share in the automotive market is partly due to FMS (Goyal, Netessine, and Randall, 2006). The response of the American car industry was to also start investing in flexibility. When demand of a vehicle type drops, the firm can easily decide to shift a bigger part of the production capacity to another type of car that is produced on the same production line. This type of flexibility is in general referred to as product flexibility. The most important reason that induces manufacturers to invest in FMS is that it is a good hedge against uncertainty. In addition FMS is a way to respond to changes in competition. Goyal et al. (2006) find that “automotive manufacturers use flexibility as a ‘competitive weapon’; flexibility is deployed in market segments in which there are a larger number of flexible competitors”.However, there are many other industries in which product flexibility can evoke several efficiencies in production. Think for example about bikes or television sets. Within these industries, the manufactured products are quite similar. Therefore, it is possible to produce them on the same production line. The products in these industries are furthermore characterized by strongly fluctuating sales. In the television industry for example, innovations occur on a regular base. Within a very short time frame the sales of a certain type of television sets can drop enormously, if an improved model is introduced. Therefore, it is very desirable for a firm to be able to easily adapt the corresponding production line for the production of a different television set.This paper proposes a three stage game, where in the first stage an incumbent invests in the optimal capacity amount of either a product flexible or a dedicated production technology. The product flexible production technology allows a firm to produce both products on a single machine or production line. An entrant has the option to enter the market in the second stage. Given that the entrant invests, it will choose its optimal production technology and capacity amount. These capacity decisions are made before demand uncertainty is resolved (see Van Mieghem (2003) for a review of capacity management). After the investment decision of the entrant, the market can go ‘up’ or ‘down’ with equal probability. In the final stage, the demand curve is revealed, and a production game will be played.Research on various types of flexibility is among others surveyed in Kroll and Wasden (1990) and Karwowski and Rahimi (1990). This paper considers product flexibility. Most of the literature on product flexibility primarily focuses on monopoly cases. Firms have to determine the optimal investment type (flexible/dedicated), the optimal (lumpy/incremental) capacity to invest in, and/or the utilization rate of the capacity. Papers that discuss the value of flexibility of a monopolist are Fine and Freud (1990), Van Mieghem (1998), Bish and Wang (2004), Chod and Rudi (2005), Tomlin and Wang (2005) and Ceryan, Sahin, and Duenyas (2012). Fine and Freud (1990) consider a n-product firm that assembles an optimal mix of flexible and dedicated capacities, where uncertainty is modeled through a revenue function with a discrete set of possible scenarios. They find that optimal capacity and expected profit is increasing in demand variance, which is consistent with our results. Bish and Wang (2004) and Chod and Rudi (2005) confirm the result of Van Mieghem (1998) that in a two-product market flexible capacity can be preferred due to financial reasons when products are perfectly positively correlated.All these contributions consider monopolies, where the strategic effect is not taken into account when determining the choice between investing in flexible or dedicated manufacturing systems. Van Mieghem and Dada (1999) extend their monopoly model to a competition model where each firm makes three decisions about capacity investment, production quantity and price. A firm is flexible in deciding which decision is postponed until after uncertainty is resolved. Patel, Terjesen, and Li (2012) empirically investigate how some firms are able to develop more effective responses to environmental uncertainty using manufacturing flexibility. Their findings show that environmental uncertainty affects firms’ performance directly and indirectly through manufacturing flexibility and that operational absorptive capacity (the extend to which a firm’s operational units can acquire, assimilate, and transform external information) and operational ambidexterity (pursuing both exploration and exploitation) positively moderate these mediated relationships. Considering product flexibility, Goyal and Netessine (2007) find that also under competition each firm is willing to pay more for flexibility under high demand uncertainty. For low levels of uncertainty, none of the firms will invest in flexibility, while for inbetween levels of uncertainty, the firms decide to invest in opposing production technologies. Goyal et al. (2006) explain that when there is a high demand correlation between products, the value of flexibility will be limited. Also Roller and Tombak (1990), and He, Ding, and Hua (2011) consider the strategic value of product flexibility. However, in those papers it is assumed that firms decide about their technology choice simultaneously. Therefore they cannot analyze the concept of ’entry deterrence’. We extend this approach by considering an incumbent–entrant situation.Tseng (2004), Dewit and Leahy (2003) and Chang (1993) discuss flexibility in an incumbent–entrant setting. However, they do not consider product flexibility. Chang (1993) models an incumbent–entrant situation and shows that an incumbent can use product design flexibility to deter entry. The incumbent has an extra incentive to be flexible compared to a situation without a potential entrant. Contrary to Chang (1993), we consider product flexibility. We show that producing flexible makes it more difficult for the incumbent to deter entry in comparison to producing dedicated. This is due to the fact that a dedicated incumbent can commit to a certain production quantity.The paper most closely related to our analysis is Anand and Girotra (2007). They consider two firms that have the opportunity to produce in a monopoly market and a competitive market. By employing early differentiation, a firm chooses the quantities for the monopoly market and the competitive market, before demand uncertainty is resolved. Delayed differentiation gives the firm the opportunity to initially produce an intermediate version of the product. Once demand uncertainty is resolved, the product will be differentiated for sale in either the monopoly market or the competitive market. They find that, when an incumbent faces a potential entrant in one of its markets, early differentiation is a better entry deterrence strategy than delayed differentiation. However, this result is found under the assumption of only one competitive market, while we assume that there are two competitive markets for the two firms. In an extension of Anand and Girotra (2007), they consider the issue of two competitive markets, where they find that early differentiation is, for a range of parameter values, the dominant strategy. This is however not shown under the assumption of sequential investments. Another important difference to Anand and Girotra (2007) is that, in our heterogeneous product market, the product quantity in one market influences the price of the other product. Anand and Girotra (2007) consider a different type of heterogeneity: they introduce correlation in the demand intercept, between the monopoly market and the competitive market.Similar to Anand and Girotra (2007), we show that investing in dedicated production capacity could give the incumbent a higher (expected) profit than investing in flexible production capacity. The ability to commit oneself to production quantities gives strategic advantages. In particular, we find that the incumbent chooses the dedicated technology when demand uncertainty is low, products are equally profitable and not too competitive. The ‘value of commitment’, indicating that it can give value to a firm in a competitive setting to make credible commitments, has long been advocated in the literature (Caves and Porter, 1977). This could e.g. be in the form of a contract (Rey and Salanie, 1990) or investments in a large capacity. Most important is that competitors believe that the commitment is credible and it will become very difficult to refrain from it. This gives the committed firm value or makes it able to deter possible entrants.Besides this form of commitment, which is known in the literature, we find that in some scenarios also the entrant can benefit from being committed. In particular, when uncertainty is sufficiently low, products are equally profitable and product substitutability is low, an entrant that faces a flexible incumbent prefers investment in dedicated capacity. In such a situation, the incumbent cannot influence the entrant’s production choice in the last stage, which results in a relatively high profit for the entrant. In a similar situation (low substitutability and equally profitable products), but a more uncertain economic environment, the entrant also prefers the dedicated production choice. A higher uncertainty leads to a larger value of flexibility, i.e. high enough for the incumbent to prefer to be the only firm benefiting from the advantages of flexibility in the market. Therefore, the incumbent makes a sufficiently large capacity investment so that the entrant prefers to invest in the dedicated capacity.Furthermore, we show that two dedicated firms cannot occur in an equilibrium, in a sequential game. This is contrary to Goyal and Netessine (2007) that make the assumption of a simultaneous technology choice. An entrant that observes a dedicated incumbent has no incentive to commit to its production quantities.The paper is organized as follows. The general model is presented in Section 2. In Section 3 the game is solved under appropriate assumptions. Results are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.We consider a three stage game with two firms, an incumbent (I) and a potential entrant (E). The profit maximizing firms are assumed to be risk neutral, have full information and compete in a Cournot fashion. Demand of the two products in the market, i.e. product 1 and product 2, is uncertain. At time t = 0, the incumbent has to choose between a dedicated and a flexible production technology. With the dedicated technology it has to produce each product on a separate production line. The flexible production technology allows to produce two products with a single production capacity. The incumbent will also make its capacity decision at time t = 0. At time t = 1, the entrant determines whether it is profitable to enter the market. If the entrant enters the market, it will also decide about the flexible/dedicated production capacity at time t = 1. At time t = 2, demand uncertainty is resolved.At time t = 0, demand is uncertain. The inverse demand functions are given by:(1)P1(q1,E,q2,E,q1,I,q2,I)=θ−(q1,E+q1,I)−γ(q2,E+q2,I),(2)P2(q1,E,q2,E,q1,I,q2,I)=αθ−(q2,E+q2,I)−γ(q1,E+q1,I),where qi, Edenotes the quantity of product i produced by the entrant and qi, Ithe quantity of product i produced by the incumbent, for i = {1, 2}. γ ∈ (0, 1) is the substitutability parameter. Since flexible capacity tends to be used for substitutable products, we assume this parameter to be positive (Chod and Rudi, 2005; Hagspiel, 2011). α ∈ [0, 1] is a measure of the profitability of product 2. Product 1 is without loss of generality assumed to be the more profitable product, except for the case of α = 1, when products 1 and 2 are equally profitable. The demand intercept dynamics are as follows: At time t = 0, the incumbent observes demand intercept parameter θ0. Uncertainty is present in the sense that the demand intercept θ can go ‘up’ or ‘down’ after period 1. More specifically: θ could go ‘up’ or ‘down’ by an amount equal to h, both with probabilityp=12. For tractability reasons this probability is fixed, we do not intent to make the model more involved than necessary. An upward(downwards) shift of the demand intercept parameter will have a positive(negative) effect on the price, and thus on the profit. Notice that the difference in the intercept θ between an upward shift and a downward shift is equal to 2h. Eqs. (1) and (2) give the inverse demand functions (also known as the net-price functions). Variable production costs are denoted by parameter c. Subtracting the variable costs from gross-price functions, one obtains the net-price functions, denoted by P1 = p1 − c for product 1 and P2 = p2 − c for product 2, with P1 and P2 formulated in Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively.We denote the flexible capacity level by KF, j, while K1, j(K2, j) is the dedicated capacity level corresponding to product 1 (2) of firm j ∈ {I, E} where I(E) denotes the incumbent (entrant). The costs corresponding to the investment in the flexible (dedicated) production technology are given by CF(CD) per unit of capacity. For the analysis in Section 4, we assume that CF= CDin order to analyze the a firm’s technology choice, irrespective of the corresponding capacity cost. Total investment cost will be denoted by CFKF, jif firm j ∈ {I, E} chooses the flexible production capacity, and by CD(K1, j+ K2, j) if it invests in the dedicated capacity.When the entrant enters, it incurs an additional cost equal to f. These fixed entry costs summarize potential costs arising from schooling, a new marketing plan, or licenses that need to be purchased before being able to start producing (see e.g. Tirole, 1988).We impose the following assumption with its justifications below.Assumption 1Both firms produce up to capacity. For a dedicated firm this means that q1, j= K1, jand q2, j= K2, j, with j ∈ {I, E} where I (E) denotes the incumbent (entrant). For a flexible firm we assume that q1, j+ q2, j= KF, j.Assumption 1, often called the ’market clearance assumption’, is widely used in the literature (Anand and Girotra, 2007; Chod and Rudi, 2005; Deneckere, Marvel, and Peck, 1997; Goyal and Netessine, 2007). This assumption holds for instance in case of large fixed costs. In such scenarios it can be very costly to produce below the capacity level. Besides that, also knowledge will be lost. Strict labor laws prevent that employees can easily be fired, and often a high amount of money has to be paid for letting employees go. The car industry is just one example where firms often prefer to cut prices and keep production equal to full capacity, rather than underproducing (Mackintosh, 2003).Both firms have to choose between a flexible and a dedicated production capacity. The production and capacity optimization problem considering a dedicated capacity choice of firm j ∈ {I, E} is given by:Capacity choice:Πj=MaxK1,j,K2,j{Eθ(πj)−CD(K1,j+K2,j)−1{j=E}f}Production choice:πj=Maxq1,j,q2,j{(θ−(q1,E+q1,I)−γ(q2,E+q2,I))q1,j+(αθ−(q2,E+q2,I)−γ(q1,E+q1,I))q2,j}s.t.q1,I=K1,I≥0,q2,I=K2,I≥0,j∈{I,E}.The production and capacity optimization problem when firm j ∈ {I, E} invests flexible is given by:Capacity choice:Πj=MaxKF,j{Eθ(πj)−CFKF,j)−1{j=E}f}Production choice:πj=Maxq1,j,q2,j{(θ−(q1,E+q1,I)−γ(q2,E+q2,I))q1,j+(αθ−(q2,E+q2,I)−γ(q1,E+q1,I))q2,j}s.t.0≤q1,I+q2,I=KF,I,j∈{I,E}.At time t = 0, the incumbent has two options, investing dedicated or investing flexible. The game-tree in Fig. 1illustrates the choices of the incumbent and the entrant. In the following two sections, we look at both scenarios separately. Section 3.1 derives the optimal capacity and quantity decisions for the two firms when the incumbent invests dedicated. Section 3.2 solves the game-tree when the incumbent chooses for the flexible capacity.Assume that the incumbent decides at time t = 0 to invest in the dedicated production technology. At this time it also has to decide about the optimal size of capacity to invest in. One time period later, at time t = 1, the entrant has the choice whether to enter with the dedicated or flexible production technology, or to stay out of the market. If the entrant enters, it will decide about the optimal capacity size at time t = 1. Notice that this setup corresponds to a Stackelberg game. Since the incumbent chooses its dedicated capacity at time t = 0, it fixes its production quantity before the entrant could do so. This will give the incumbent a first mover advantage. At time t = 2 a production game takes place where both firms optimize their production quantities. Obviously, the production amounts of the incumbent are fixed to its dedicated capacity levels. This will also be the case for the entrant, if it chooses for the dedicated capacity. If the entrant invests in the flexible production technology, it has to determine the optimal production quantities.Fig. 2shows the game tree in case the incumbent has chosen for the dedicated production technology. There are eight possible outcomes for the firms, each denoted by a letter. Six of the outcomes correspond to the situation where the entrant enters (A, B, C, D, E, F), and two correspond to the case where the entrant does not enter (G, H). After the investment decision of the entrant, the market can go ‘up’ or ‘down’, due to demand uncertainty. The entrant needs to have a strategy for both possible outcomes (‘up’ or ‘down’). A flexible entrant has the possibility to produce only one of the products or both products. It could for instance decide to produce only one of the products in case the market goes ‘up’ in period 2, and produce both products if the market goes ‘down’ in period 2. This strategy is labeled with AD.In case the entrant decides to undertake investment, there are four possible capacity amounts that it could potentially invest in, depending on the strategy it would choose later. That is, it invests in capacity amount KF, AC, when it uses strategy AC in combination with the product flexible capacity choice. Similarly, it would invest in capacity amount KF, ADor KF, BDif it uses strategy AD or BD respectively after investment in the product flexibility. The entrant invests in (K1, EF, K2, EF) if it chooses for the dedicated production technology. Notice that strategy BC is an infeasible strategy (see Lemma 1 in the online appendix). It occurs that a flexible firm rather wants to produce both products in the down-scenario and only one product in the up-scenario. Hagspiel (2011) explains that a firm will make use of the downside potential to produce both products in order to increase total market size, when it faces low demand. If the entrant decides not to invest, it uses strategy GH.In order to solve this game-tree, we follow the subsequent steps that specify how to derive the optimal production and capacity decision of the entrant and the optimal capacity decision of the incumbent. The game (see game-tree in Fig. 2) is solved backward, since we consider an incumbent–entrant situation. Therefore, we start with the optimal decisions of the entrant.1.Given the capacity choice of the incumbent (K1, Iand K2, I), we derive expressions for optimal quantities and capacities of the entrant. Recall that, given the dedicated technology choice of the incumbent, only the entrant has the choice between strategies: i.e. strategy AD, AC, BD, EF or GH. The entrant’s profit for each possible outcome can be derived and subsequently the expected profit for each of its strategy choices. For each strategy, it will optimize its corresponding capacity and quantities.Identify the feasibility conditions of the entrant’s strategies as a function ofK1, Iand K2, I. The capacity choice of the incumbent determines if a strategy from the entrant is feasible. There are two criteria for a strategy to be feasible. First, given K1, Iand K2, I, the entrant’s endogenously determined optimal capacit(y)(ies) and quantit(y)(ies), that correspond to this strategy, should be positive. Secondly, given K1, Iand K2, I, a feasible strategy gives the entrant a higher profit than any of its other strategies. As a consequence, the (K1, I, K2, I)-plane can be divided in five regions, where each region corresponds to a feasible strategy of the entrant. Notice, even though the entrant makes optimal decisions for each potential incumbent’s capacity choice that it can face (strategy choice, quantity and capacity optimization), it is the incumbent that determines the strategy choice of the entrant by choosing its capacities! This is due to the leaders first movers advantage.The incumbent finds the optimal(K1,I*,K2,I*)in all five regions. This leads to five possible candidates for the optimal incumbent’s capacity choice corresponding to each of the entrant’s strategies.Given(K1,I*,K2,I*)for all five regions, choose the region (i.e. strategy of the entrant) that gives the incumbent the highest profit.The following proposition represents the first and second steps for the derivation of an optimal solution. It states the optimal capacities and production quantities of the entrant. Those are derived by maximizing the respective expected profit functions for strategy EF, BD, AD and AC. It also formulates the conditions that should hold for each of the entrant’s strategies to be feasible. (All proofs of subsequent propositions can be found in the online appendix.) Preferably, we would like to present concise feasibility conditions in Table 1, however due to messy expressions of the entrants expected optimal profit, this is impossible.Proposition 1Table 1 presents for each strategy the entrant’s optimal capacities, optimal quantities and feasibility conditions as a function of the incumbents capacities K1, Iand K2, I. In case the entrant decides not to invest, i.e. strategy GH, its profit and capacities are equal to zero. This strategy is optimal when K1, Iand K2, Iare such high that the other strategies result in a negative profit for the entrant.The entrant chooses its optimal feasible strategy for each possible capacity choice of the incumbent, however it is the investment decision of the incumbent, (K1, I, K2, I), that will eventually determine which of the strategies the entrant will choose. Hence, the incumbent can ‘manipulate’ the strategy choice of the entrant. In the third step toward the optimal solution, the incumbent finds, within each feasible region for a strategy of the entrant, the capacity choice that gives a maximal profit. As an illustration, let us consider strategy BD, which is a possible strategy when the entrant invests in the flexible capacity. This illustration subsequently explains why we are forces to bend toward numerical analysis, the analytical expressions get so messy that it does not lead to valuable conclusions. There are two possibilities: the optimal capacity choice of the incumbent lays either within the interior of region BD, or it results in one of the following possible boundary solutions:1.The production quantity of product 2 of the entrant is zero.The total flexible capacity of the entrant is zero.The total profit of the entrant is zero.The following proposition introduces the possible capacity choices of the incumbent considering the entrant’s strategy BD.Proposition 2(i) If the optimal capacities of the incumbent lie within the interior of region BD, the optimal capacities are given by:(3)K1,I*=12(1−γα)θ(1−γ)(1+γ)+12CF−CD1+γ,(4)K2,I*=12(α−γ)θ(1−γ)(1+γ)+12CF−CD1+γ.(ii) If the optimal capacities resulting from (3) and (4) lie outside region BD, the optimal capacities are equal to one of the following boundary solutions: The boundary solution for the case that the production quantity of product 2 of the entrant is zero is equal toK1,I*=0.5θ+γK2,I*−CD+0.5CF,K2,I*=(α−γ)θ1−γ2−0.5(1−α)h1−γ−CF1+γ.The boundary solution for the case that the capacity of the entrant is equal to zero is given by:K1,I*=(0.5γ−1,5)+α(1.5γ−0.5)2(1−γ)θ−CF1+γ,K2,I*=(1+α)θ−2CF1+γ−K1,I*.The boundary solution for the case that the entrant’s profit is equal to zero is implicitly determined by the following equation∂πBD,I(K1,I,K2,I(K1,I))∂K1,I=∂πBD,I∂K1,I+∂πBD,I∂K2,I∂K2,I∂K1,I=0,whereK2,I=−(CF+γK1,I−αθ)−14(1−γ2)(16(1−γ2)2(CF+γK1,I−αθ)2−8(1−γ2)(4CF(1−γ)(CF+K1,I(1+γ)−θ(1+α))+(1−α)2h2(1+γ)+2θ2(1+α2−2αγ)+(1−γ2)(2K1,I2−4K1,Iθ−8f)))12,andπI,BD=12(K1,I+αK2,I)θ−12(K1,I2+K2,I2−2γK1,IK2,I)+(K1,I+K2,I)(12CF−CD).For the other four regions the optimal capacities of the incumbent can be derived in a similar way. In fact the optimization process of the incumbent’s capacity is analytically quite involved due to the messy expressions and the many cases that arise. Therefore, we use the software program Mathematica to numerically solve the restricted optimization problem of the incumbent within each region.When the incumbent invests in the flexible production technology, the production amounts of the incumbent are not predetermined. When the entrant also invests in the flexible production technology, both firms choose simultaneously optimal production quantities at the last stage. Therefore, one has to determine a Nash equilibrium in this case, instead of a Stackelberg equilibrium.Fig. 3illustrates the 16 possible outcomes that could occur when the incumbent invests in the flexible production technology (I − Y). Considering that there is uncertainty about an up- or downward shift of the market, 24 possible scenarios11For the case where the incumbent invests dedicated, the production decisions of the entrant in case of an up- and downward demand shift is well defined by a strategy. The entrant knows for each strategy what the outcome in the market will be. In case the incumbent invests flexible however, the incumbent and the entrant decide simultaneously about the outcome in a Nash equilibrium. For each production decision of the entrant, there are several possible market outcomes, depending on the production decision of the incumbent. Therefore, for the case that the incumbent invests flexible, we introduce the notion “scenario”. A scenario is defined to be the combination of two possible outcomes, corresponding to an up and downwards shift of the market, when demand realization is not yet resolved.arise. If the firms choose outcome J in case the market goes ‘up’ and outcome N in case the market goes ‘down’, the combination is called scenario JN. Notice that some of these scenarios can be eliminated immediately. As was proved beforehand (see online appendix), a flexible firm would never produce both products in the ‘up’ situation and only one product in the ‘down’ situation. This case is always dominated by producing both products in both the ‘up’ and ‘down’ scenarios. Eliminating the corresponding scenarios leads to 15 remaining scenarios given in Table 2.Given each of the remaining feasible scenarios, the incumbent and the entrant simultaneously optimize their respective production quantities. Table 3summarizes the equilibrium production quantities for all feasible scenarios for the incumbent and entrant. However, one should realize that even though the firms simultaneously optimize production quantities, they are not symmetric due to the incumbent–entrant setting. Hence, first we optimize for each scenario the optimal capacity size for the entrant, given the corresponding optimal production quantities. These are stated in Table 4.In order to solve the production game, the following game in normal-form has to be solved in the ‘up’ and ‘down’ situation respectively:Up:DecisionentrantF1F2D0DecisionincumbentF1F2((πI,I,πI,E)(πJ,I,πJ,E)(πQ,I,πQ,E)(πU,I,πU,E)(πK,I,πK,E)(πL,I,πL,E)(πR,I,πR,E)(πV,I,πV,E))Down:DecisionentrantF1F2D0DecisionincumbentF1F2((πM,I,πM,E)(πN,I,πN,E)(πS,I,πS,E)(πX,I,πX,E)(πO,I,πO,E)(πP,I,πP,E)(πT,I,πT,E)(πY,I,πY,E))In the production game, the incumbent decides whether it produces only one (F1) or both (F2) products. The entrant has four options: produce only one (F1) or both (F2) products with the flexible capacity, produce up to the dedicated capacity (D), or stay out of the market and produce nothing (0). No firm should have the incentive to deviate from the occurring outcome. Therefore, all Nash equilibria of this game have to be determined. The equilibrium where the market ends up in, will satisfy that both the optimal capacities of the firms, as well as the equilibrium quantities of the second product, have to be positive (Tables 3 and 4). Proposition 3 summarizes the feasibility conditions for each strategy that have to be satisfied to be a feasible Nash equilibrium.Proposition 3For the case that the incumbent invests in product flexibility, the feasibility conditions for scenario JN is stated in Table 5. Feasibility conditions for the other scenario’s can be obtained similarly. This table takes information from to optimal quantity and capacity expressions stated in Tables 3 and 4. The equilibrium production capacities of the entrant are stated in Table 3. Table 4 gives the unique equilibrium quantities of product 2 for both firms.The incumbent first chooses its capacity. Hence, the incumbent again enjoys the first mover advantage with respect to the capacity choice (note that the production game is played simultaneously). As in Section 3.1, each scenario gives the incumbent many different boundary and interior solutions, of which it chooses the optimal. Besides that, also expected profit expressions are messy, which makes an analytical solution for the incumbents optimal capacity choice impossible. We solve this using the software program Mathematica.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper employs a three-stage game with two firms and two products considering uncertain demand. In the first stage, the incumbent invests in a product flexible or a dedicated production technology. The product flexible production technology gives the incumbent the opportunity to assign the available capacity freely to either one of the products. With the dedicated production technology, it will produce both products, each on a separate production line. In the second stage the entrant decides whether it will also invest in this market and if so, it chooses its optimal production technology and capacity level. After that, demand is revealed and a production game will be played in the last stage. The product flexible firm(s) optimize(s) the(ir) production amounts, given that the firms produce up to the capacity level.Our results differ for two situations: a more uncertain and a less uncertain economic environment. When the economic environment is not very uncertain, we confirm the results of Anand and Girotra (2007), that investing dedicated can give an incumbent such a high ‘commitment value’, that the dedicated production technology is preferred over the product flexible production technology. Here the entrant always chooses for the product flexible technology. The commitment of the dedicated incumbent to its production quantities implies that the entrant has to optimize its production quantities given the (fixed) production quantities of the incumbent. Therefore, it is easier for the incumbent to deter the product flexible entrant with the dedicated production technology than with the product flexible production technology.When the economic environment is more uncertain, the entrant surprisingly chooses for the dedicated production technology. A higher demand uncertainty results in a higher value of flexibility that is large enough for the incumbent to prefer to be the only firm in the market profiting from the advantages of flexibility. Therefore, the incumbent makes a sufficiently large capacity investment that places the entrant in an unattractive production scenario. Therefore, the dedicated capacity is more profitable for the entrant, because it gives the entrant the first mover advantage in the production game.Goyal and Netessine (2007) show that two dedicated firms can be the equilibrium if the firms simultaneously make their capacity and technology choice. However, we show that this situation will never occur when the firms make these choices sequentially. The only reason for the entrant to invest in the dedicated technology is that it gives the firm a first mover advantage in the production game. This advantage disappears when the incumbent already invested dedicated. When, however, the entrant faces a product flexible incumbent, we show that for some scenarios also the entrant can profit from the value of commitment. If the entrant uses the dedicated capacity, the incumbent cannot influence the entrant’s production choice in the last stage. This results in a higher profit for the entrant compared to the choice of a product flexible capacity.Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2015.01.007.