@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Should retail stores also RFID-tag ‘cheap’ items?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider the price (cheap vs. expensive) of the RFID-tagged item.Cheap and expensive are relative to the unit cost of RFID-tagging an item.It is advisable to RFID-tag even cheap items under certain conditions.We derive the conditions under which cheap items should be RFID tagged.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RFID,Partial and complete tagging,Retailing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite their implementations in a wide variety of applications, there are very few instances where every item sold at a retail store is RFID-tagged. While the business case for expensive items to be RFID tagged may be somewhat clear, we claim that even ‘cheap’ items (i.e., those that cost less than an RFID tag) should be RFID tagged for retailers to benefit from efficiencies associated with item-level visibility. We study the relative price premiums a retailer with RFID tagged items can command as well as the retailer’s profit to illustrate the significance of item-level RFID-tagging both cheap and expensive items at a retail store. Our results indicate that, under certain conditions, item-level RFID tagging of items that cost less than an RFID tag has the potential to generate significant benefits to the retailer. The retailer is also better off tagging all items regardless of their relative price with respect to that of an RFID tag compared to the case where only the expensive item is RFID-tagged.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A majority of item-level applications of RFID (Radio-Frequency IDentification) tags in the retail supply chain are implemented only on an isolated few items (e.g., Gillette razor blades, Philadelphia cream cheese, and Pantene Shampoo products at the Metro Future Store in Rheinberg Germany; Wrangler jeans at Wal-Mart stores in the US), although exceptions do exist (e.g., American Apparel and Trasluz stores where every item is or soon will be RFID-tagged). There is, clearly, a push toward automating processes in retail stores, as is evident from the number of self-service check-out facilities (e.g., Home Depot, Lowe’s, Kroger’s bar code scan tunnel that aims to reduce the number of product touches). There are also other automation initiatives such as those in smartstores (e.g., those with smart shelves, smart carts, smart cards). RFID technology plays a significant role in several of these implementations due to its advantageous characteristics including read speed, read ease, damage resistance, better inventory management through item-level visibility and reduced shrinkage and ability to locally store a richer set of data.Unit cost is often cited as one of the main reasons for the slow deployment of item-level RFID tags in supply chains and retail store environment (Zhou, 2009). Nevertheless, in order to still benefit from RFID tags, an overwhelming majority of RFID applications in retail environment are at the case- or pallet- level. Not surprisingly, there have been several studies that explicitly compute the threshold value of unit RFID tag cost, below which item-level RFID tag implementations are deemed to be unprofitable (e.g., Bottani & Rizzi, 2008; de Kok, Donselaar, & Woensel, 2008). These studies consider item-level RFID-tagging as an isolated event where the unit cost of an RFID tag is (determined to be) clearly much lower than the cost of the substrate item. I.e., implicit here is the fact that items that cost less than the unit cost of RFID tags are not considered even though these items could comprise a sizable fraction of all items in retail stores. What is also missing in these studies is the fact that a retail store cannot afford to deal with a scenario where only a partial set of all its products are item-level RFID-tagged since this would simultaneously require necessary infrastructure for both RFID and bar code as well as related decrease in benefits due to the loss in synergy that is present when every item is RFID-tagged. We claim that, under certain circumstances, a retail store would benefit by placing item-level RFID tags on all items regardless of the monetary value of these items. The store should place RFID tags on the entire spectrum of items that it carries, including those that cost less than the cost of an RFID tag. The rationale here is that, overall, the RFID-tagged expensive items subsidize RFID-tagging of inexpensive items through the benefits generated from complete item-level visibility of all items at the store (e.g., reduced shrinkage, less spoilage of perishables, ability to guarantee in-store stock) as well as through the synergies in related process automation (e.g., inventory management, check-out). For example, Gruen, Corsten, and Bharadwaj (2002) find that about 25% of out-of-stock situations arise due to shelving and replenishment practices where the product is at the store but not on the shelf. They also find that retailers are likely to lose almost one-half of the intended purchases when a consumer confronts an out-of-stock situation.To our knowledge, extant literature does not consider the synergy between item-level RFID-tagged expensive and cheap items from a retailer’s perspective. The reason for the absence of published literature in this area is most likely due to (1) the paucity of literature on ROI related to RFID investments and/or (2) the difficulty associated with the justification of item-level tagging of even just the expensive items. The former will resolve by itself as more and more item-level RFID implementations are put into place in a wide variety of application areas. The latter is challenging since (a) not all retail stores carry only expensive items and (b) intuitively it does not make sense to place item-level RFID tags on only a partial (i.e., expensive) set of items at any given retail store. Clearly, in order to reap the complete set of benefits associated with RFID tags, retail stores need to place item-level RFID tags on all its items. Partially tagging only a fraction of all the items would lead to unnecessary inefficiencies and, in the worst case, a set-up where the benefits of item-level RFID-tagged items wash away by necessary additional work (e.g., simultaneous implementation of both bar code and RFID scanners, inefficient placement of RFID readers across the entire store when only a fraction of the store contains item-level RFID-tagged items, etc.). We also believe that item-level RFID tagging of both cheap and expensive items brings with it benefits and synergy that are more than the arithmetic sum of benefits obtained by item-level RFID-tagging just the cheap or just the expensive items.We attempt to address this gap by studying the dynamics associated with placing item-level RFID tags on cheap and/or expensive items at a retail store. We consider several different scenarios where the customer buys only the cheap and/or expensive items and compare these with the base case where the retailer does not place RFID tag on any item. To compare different scenarios, we use the unit selling price as a proxy since it gives us a good approximation on the price the customer is willing to pay for any given item under equilibrium conditions. We use a Hotelling line of unit length to operationalize this study. Our analysis using the Hotelling model is structurally similar to those in the loss leader literature (e.g., Lal & Matutes, 1988; DeGraba, 2006).The hotelling location model (Hotelling, 1929) illustrates the relationship between location and pricing behavior of firms using a line of fixed length. This model assumes that identical customers are uniformly distributed on the (e.g., unit) line between two firms that compete based on price and not on product variations. This was later extended to include variations in customer attributes as well as service differences between the firms.Throughout this paper, we do not restrict our analysis to any specific type (e.g., active, semi-passive, passive) of RFID tag. Our results, and consequently their policy implications, apply to the type of RFID tag as dictated by the application of interest. For example, a ‘cheap’ item for a basic $0.15 passive RFID tag (Ashton, 2011) could be a pencil or an eraser at a retail store. Similarly, for a slightly expensive semi-passive RFID tag with appropriate sensor(s), a ‘cheap’ item could be a small container of yogurt. It should be noted that, to the retail store, the effective cost of a tag includes the cost of the tag as well as infrastructure necessary for its effective use. Such infrastructure includes the appropriate number and type (e.g., hand-held or fixed, those that are mobile as well as those at check-out counters, store shelves, or back-room) of RFID readers and back-end systems. The back-end systems necessary for processing RFID-generated item-level information are inherently complex (vs. those used for bar code systems) due to (1) the need to process item-level information (vs. class-level bar code information), (2) the sheer amount of data generated in these systems both in terms of the number of times communication occurs with each tag in the system as well as the amount of data involved in each such communication and (3) the richness of real-time information that necessitates appropriate (e.g., through data mining to learn) real-time response for effective operation of the overall system. While readers in such an infrastructure may last for several years without appreciable additional cost, the back-end system needs to be continually and appropriately managed by specialized personnel and have the ability to scale up as necessary. Although the general infrastructure and associated overall cost are shared by all the tags in the store, given that this overall (fixed+variable) cost is not a trivial amount, the share per unit RFID tag is not insignificant (vs. unit cost of a tag) by any measure. Moreover, the overall cost of the infrastructure increases drastically as the entire system gravitates toward complete automation (e.g., automated inventory management, automated check-out). Therefore, in the end, even a $0.15 passive tag ends up costing the retail store a few orders of its magnitude.While a large number of (hand-held) RFID readers that are currently used in retail stores possess the ability to read bar codes, an item with bar code alone (without RFID tag) loses out on the benefits (i.e., it cannot be read when not in direct line-of-sight of the reader, it cannot be read as a batch, it cannot have associated sensors, etc.). Moreover, the usefulness of bar codes diminishes in automated situations such as those used in RFID-based inventory management and check-out.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: given that, to our knowledge, this is the first paper that simultaneously considers items that are on both sides of the price spectrum of RFID tags, we provide a very brief review of a few tangentially related literature in Section 2. In Section 3, we present our analyses of various scenarios related to RFID-tagged items that the stores sell as well as the items that are bought by customers. We conclude the paper with a discussion of results in Section 4.There is an extensive set of literature on RFID in retail settings (e.g., Fleisch & Tellkamp, 2005; Gaukler, Seifert, & Hausman, 2007; Whang, 2010). A majority of existing literature consider the dynamics of RFID-generated information in retail stores as well as related supply chains (e.g., Emerson, Zhou, & Piramuthu, 2009; Piramuthu, Farahani, & Grunow, 2013; Sari, 2010; Xu, Jiang, Feng, & Tian, 2012). Since, to our knowledge, existing literature does not report on the synergies of simultaneously placing item-level RFID tags on cheap and expensive items, we briefly discuss a few papers that are only tangentially related to our paper. We divide this literature into those that compute the ROI or determine the unit cost at which RFID tags on pallets or items become profitable and those on general loss-leader products. We first consider the former followed by the latter.Through surveys, Bottani and Rizzi (2008) assess economic feasibility of RFID tags for logistics processes in a three-echelon fast-moving consumer goods supply chain comprising manufacturers, distributors, and retailers. They considered non-integrated and integrated scenarios where information is not-shared and shared respectively among different members of the supply chain. They also considered only pallet- and case-level RFID tags and did not study the cost of the items on these pallets or cases. They conclude that pallet-level RFID tags are beneficial at all echelons of the supply chain, while case-level RFID tags result in losses for the manufacturer. The generalization of this study to other domains (e.g., other than fast moving consumer goods) is questionable because of the design and restricted domain of this study as well as the operationalization (i.e., questionnaires) since it was based on only 15 cases – all based in Italy.de Kok et al. (2008) assume a periodic review based stock policy and model the fraction of items that disappear due to shrinkage, misplacement, among others. They analytically compare a scenario with RFID and one without RFID in terms of costs, and derive the break-even price of an RFID tag using simulation. Their results indicate that the break-even prices are highly related to the value of the items that are lost, the shrinkage fraction and the remaining shrinkage after implementing RFID. Since they assume that all items considered are identical, it is difficult to generalize results from this study to other products and application domains where the environment consists of a mixed set of products with different unit prices, which is more realistic in a retailing scenario.Doerr, Gates, and Mutty (2006) interviewed five knowledgeable people to obtain necessary information and then performed Monte Carlo simulations as well as AHP modeling to evaluate RFID technology for ordnance (US Marine Corps, US Navy) inventory. Their results suggest that implementing RFID on ammunition containers would result in massive cost savings. As in the other two studies mentioned above, Doerr et al. utilize simulation and consider a very narrow (military) application domain. The relevance of their results for retail setting is therefore questionable.Kim and Sohn (2009) propose a decision support system for infrastructure construction cost of ownership model for a ubiquitous city (u-city). They consider several plausible scenarios and illustrate the benefits of the most profitable RFID-based logistic system using sensitivity analysis.While there is some merit to case studies and studies that use simulation, there is a need for analytical studies that can readily be generalized to other domains and application contexts. This was also stressed by Lee and Özer (2007, p. 42): “Analytically-based models are still the best vehicle to develop analysis that can be of more general applicability.”Rekik (2011) analytically considers various shrinkage mechanisms and RFID’s ability to deter or provide visibility in these cases. Results from his study illustrate the beneficial aspects of RFID under several types of shrinkage scenarios.Whang (2010) considers RFID adoption decision in a supply chain and evaluates the dynamics when either the upstream or the downstream player invests in RFID technology. Specifically, he considers the free-rider problem that arises when the upstream player implements RFID and the downstream player benefits from this while not directly incurring related costs. He concludes that technology coordination and splitting the cost of RFID implementation between upstream and downstream players mitigate the free-rider problem.Overall, very few published papers specifically address the issue of relative unit cost of RFID tags and the RFID-tagged items. As mentioned above, a few of those (e.g., de Kok et al., 2008) that consider this cost as a part of an overall analysis of RFID investment decision conclude the selling price of an RFID-tagged item has to be clearly more than the unit cost of an RFID tag.A scenario where an item is sold for less than its cost is that of loss leader pricing. The concept of loss leader products has been studied and reported extensively in the Marketing literature (e.g., DeGraba, 2006; Hess & Gerstner, 1987; Lal & Matutes, 1988). Loss leader products are generally priced at very low or negative margin to divert traffic away from competitors. The loss on loss leader products is more than compensated, or at least that is the rationale, by profits from other products that are purchased by these customers. Methodologically, a majority of these studies use the unit Hotelling line modeling approach where the retailer with the loss leader product and the one without are located at opposite ends of this line. For example,Lal and Matutes (1988) consider two types of customers (rich and poor) and model competition between two firms that advertise lower prices on some items and the customers decide on which store(s) to visit for their purchase(s). Their results show that no Nash equilibrium exists when transportation costs are minimal and that when transportation costs are large, only the lower reservation price good is used as the loss leader.DeGraba (2006) considers multi-product firms that compete for their most profitable customers through lower margins on products that are primarily purchased by these customers. He uses the example of turkeys as loss leaders during Thanksgiving, where customers who purchase turkeys also purchase several other items that are profitable to the store.Although tangentially related, our study does not assume loss leader pricing of the cheap item for the same reasons as earlier studies in the strict sense. Nevertheless, we explicitly assume that the item-level RFID-tagged cheap item results in loss to the store when considered by itself since the cost of tagging exceeds the selling price of the item. Another related area is that of bundling products or services. However, our study does not require the customer to buy both expensive and cheap items as a bundle. We explicitly model the case where the customer purchases only the cheap item. We present our analysis of various possible scenarios next.We are interested in exploring the dynamics associated with RFID-tagging ‘cheap’ and/or ‘expensive’ items vs. the case where neither of these are RFID-tagged. To operationalize this, we consider two competing retailers (i=0,1) who both sell two similar items – one ‘expensive’ and the other ‘cheap’ – with one or both of these two items RFID-tagged at only one of the retailers. The other retailer does not use RFID tags. Since ‘expensive’ and ‘cheap’ are relative terms, we define the expensive item’s unit price to be much higher than the unit cost of an RFID tag and the cheap item’s unit price to be lower than the unit cost of an RFID tag. Moreover, our model with exactly one expensive and one cheap item can readily be generalized to a case with several expensive and cheap items by considering the cost of an individual RFID tag (in our model) as the fractional cost of RFID-tagging several expensive and cheap items.We use the following notations.RUnit cost of RFID tagPeRPrice of expensive item that is RFID-tagged and sold by retaileroPe′Price of expensive item that is not RFID-tagged and sold by retaileroPePrice of expensive item that is not RFID-tagged and sold by retailer1PcRPrice of cheap item that is RFID-tagged and sold by retaileroPc′Price of cheap item that is not RFID-tagged and sold by retaileroPcPrice of cheap item that is not RFID-tagged and sold by retailer1pFraction of items that are of type expensive in the customer’s market basket (0⩽p⩽1)(1−p)Fraction of items that are of type cheap in the customer’s market basketαPerceived benefit to customer when both items are RFID-tagged (α>0)αePerceived benefit to customer when only the expensive item is RFID-tagged (αe>0)αcPerceived benefit to customer when only the cheap item is RFID-tagged (αc>0)βBenefit to store of RFID-tagged item (β>0)tUnit travel cost for customer (t>0)lCustomer locationΠ, ΠRProfit function for retailers without and with RFID respectivelyΠ∗,ΠR∗Optimum profit for retailers without and with RFID respectivelyWe do not differentiate between the types of RFID tags that could possibly be used in such an application – i.e., we assume that, when tagged, the items are item-level tagged with the same type of (e.g., passive, semi-passive, active) RFID tags that cost the same. We do not consider higher levels of RFID-tagging granularity such as case-, pallet-, and container-levels since they introduce other (unnecessary to this study) degrees of complexity (e.g., the number of items per pallet/case/container need not be the same for expensive and cheap items). However, the dynamic could possibly be somewhat different under these different scenarios. The composite unit cost of RFID tag (i.e., R) we model comprises both fixed cost of the tag and related variable costs (e.g., RFID readers and back-end systems that include necessary databases) at a unit level.Similar to the Hotelling models presented in Lal and Matutes (1988), DeGraba (2006), for example, we model the scenario where the retailers are located on opposite ends of a Hotelling line of length 1. The customer is located uniformly along the line and encounters linear travel cost (t), which is a significant number when compared to the difference in unit price of items sold by the retailers.PeR-Pe<tandPcR-Pc<tsince the unit travel cost determines the willingness of the customer to travel to both the retailers to determine the price of the items. Without loss of generality, we assume the retailers’ marginal cost of these items to be zero.With the incorporation of item-level RFID tags, the retail store benefits from improved inventory management and reduced shrinkage due to theft, misplacement, and process characteristics (e.g., Rekik, 2011; Zhou & Piramuthu, 2013). In the presence of item-level RFID tags, their associated item-level visibility has been shown to deter theft since items that enter and leave an area are logged in the system. Moreover, in critical applications (e.g., hospitals), both the person entering or leaving an area along with the item as well as the time-stamp are also logged. As for misplacement, a misplaced RFID-tagged entity in a store can be easily located with the help of readers that are distributed around the store. Shrinkage that arises due to process characteristics when bar codes are used are completely eliminated with item-level RFID tags. For example, when the price of each 6oz. yogurt container is the same, it is not uncommon to scan one of these and multiply its price by the total number of 6oz. yogurt containers at check-out even when each of these different containers have different flavors. When all items are item-level RFID-tagged, the store also experiences other benefits including those associated with reduced bullwhip effect, fewer or zero manual scans and therefore reduction in needed manpower as well as improved (instantaneous item-level) visibility, ease (location identification) of storage and retrieval of items, ease of verification of proper handling of perishable food items in the supply chain, among others. We model these as an aggregate term (β). The cost to the store are included in the composite RFID tag cost.We also model the benefits for the customer due to item-level RFID tags as an aggregate (α) that arises directly (e.g., facilitates inclusion and revelation of pedigree information, in-store stock guarantee) or indirectly due to better store inventory management and therefore knowledge of items present at the store at any given point in time (e.g., Lee & Özer, 2007). Since item-level RFID tagging helps prevent stock-out situations as well as ease of location of items present in the store front or back of the store, the customer benefits with the assurance that the store (a) more than likely has the item in stock and (b) can readily locate the item even if it’s misplaced anywhere within the store. We do not consider cost associated with privacy and security related issues (Rieback, 2008).All results presented in this paper are based on equilibrium conditions, when the customer is indifferent between the retailers at either end of the unit line segment. We assumePeR,Pe,Pe′≫RandPcR,Pc,Pc′<R.The customer is indifferent between the stores (the one with RFID-tagged items and the one with non-RFID-tagged items) whenpPeR+(1-p)PcR+tl-α=pPe+(1-p)Pc+t(1-l)The left hand side and right hand side of this equation model the retailers with RFID-tagged and non-RFID-tagged items respectively. Here p (respectively, (1−p)) is the fraction of items that are of the expensive (respectively, cheap) type in a customer’s market basket. We assume that this fraction representing the customer’s interest in purchasing the cheap and expensive items (i.e., 1−p and p) are independent of the retailer. We also assume that the benefits experienced by the customer (as modeled by α) depends on the type of item(s) purchased by the customer that are RFID-tagged. The customer’s perceived benefit is more when an item is RFID-tagged since (a) that increases the probability of availability of the item at the store (e.g., due to reduced stock-outs), (b) the possibility of incorporating product pedigree information, and (c) the possibility of automating check-out procedure, among others. We claim the following relationship – α>αe>αc– since the customer benefits more when an expensive item is RFID-tagged (e.g., lower chance for counterfeit) and when the customer wants to buy both the items, the synergy obtained is more than the benefits of either the cheap or the expensive item.The customer’s location (l∗) corresponding to the above is given by:(1)l∗=12+pPe-PeR+(1-p)Pc-PcR+α2tFor the retailer with RFID-tagged items, the objective is to maximize the profit function given by:(2)ΠR=p(1+β)PeR-R+(1-p)(1+β)PcR-Rl∗The above expression (i.e., (2)) has two parts in the square bracket – one for the expensive item and the other for the cheap item respectively. When considering the benefits associated with RFID-tagged items, as discussed earlier, these primarily arise from (1) reduction in shrinkage, (2) improved inventory management (e.g., less wastage of perishable items, complete item-level visibility at the store, reduction in stock-out situations), and (3) automated check-out process. Among these, the magnitude of benefit for the store from the first two directly depend on the unit price of the item of interest. While (3) is somewhat independent of the price of the item (i.e., cheap vs. expensive), it is related to inventory management (e.g., in avoiding issues related to incorrect scanning at check-out) and, therefore, indirectly to the unit price of the item. Hence, we decided to model the profit function with the incorporation of RFID’s benefits using a single term (i.e., β) as a proxy. We model the benefit of RFID tagging simply as a product of β and the ‘revenue’ term (to model the dominant effect of item price) – separately for the expensive and cheap items, and then add these terms (disregarding any interaction effects that might exist). Our intention here is to get a good baseline approximation for the RFID-tagged item which can only be better when interaction effects are also considered. To reduce the complexity of the resulting expressions, we model the benefit to the retailer in RFID-tagging the cheap item as (1+β) even thoughPcR-Ris negative. The results from this study would provide an even stronger case for RFID-tagging the cheap item with (1−β) instead.Taking the first derivative of (2) with respect toPeRand solving forPeR, we get:(3)PeR=(1-p)Pc-2PcR+pPe+α+t+R2pWe verify the concavity of (2) with its second-derivative (-p2(1+β)t<0, since β, t>0 and p⩾0).Taking the first derivative of (2) with respect toPcRand solving forPcR, we get:(4)PcR=pPe-2PeR+(1-p)Pc+α+t+R2(1-p)We again verify the concavity of (2) with its second-derivative with respect toPcR(-(1-p)2(1+β)t<0, since β, t>0 and 0⩽p⩽ 1).We begin by considering the point at which placing RFID tags on even the cheap items would be profitable to the retailer. Clearly, it is difficult to justify placing RFID tags when the retailer sells only items that cost less than the unit cost of an RFID tag. At the other extreme, when a retailer sells only items that cost much more than the unit cost of an RFID tag, it is relatively easy to justify placing RFID tags on every item.Lemma 3.1The retailer selling both cheap and expensive items should place RFID tags on every item when the ratio of the fraction of expensive to cheap items bought by the customer is at leastR-PcRPeR-R.We obtain this result by setting ΠR=0 in (2). □Lemma 3.1 states the minimum necessary value for the ratio of expensive and cheap items bought by the customer at a retail store that would result in profit (or, at least, no loss) to the retailer. The relative unit price of both cheap and expensive RFID-tagged items with respect to the unit RFID tag cost determines this ratio.We now consider the price the retailer can charge for the items.Lemma 3.2Ceteris paribus, the retailer with both the items RFID-tagged can decrease the price of the expensive item uniformly with an increase in the price of the cheap item as long aspPe+α+t+R+(1-p)Pc-2pR2(1-p)>PcRis satisfied.This follows directly from (3) and the assumption thatPeR≫Rand thereforePeR≫PcRsinceR>PcR. □Lemma 3.2 signifies that the price of the RFID-tagged expensive item can be reduced (untilpPe+α+t+R+(1-p)Pc-2pR2(1-p)>PcRat the limit) in equilibrium, with its ‘expense’ to the retail store compensated by the cheap item.Lemma 3.3Ceteris paribus, the retailer with both the items RFID-tagged can decrease the price of the cheap item uniformly with an increase in the price of the expensive item.This follows directly from (4). □Lemma 3.3 signifies that the price of the RFID-tagged cheap item can be reduced (until it is zero, which occurs whenPeR=(1-p)Pc+α+t+R2p+Pe2, which is non-negative) in equilibrium, with its ‘expense’ to the retail store compensated by the expensive item. Although in reality a product’s individual price can be negative when it is ‘bundled’ with another product that the customer pays for, we do not consider such a scenario in this study. The customer buys the expensive and cheap items independent of each other.We now consider all possible variants of the above-considered scenario and derive optimal profit as well as the corresponding price. We then evaluate these to derive our results.So far, we considered only the case where the retailer places RFID tags on both the (expensive and cheap) items and the customer buys both these items. However, there are scenarios where the customer may not be interested in buying both the items and the retailer may not be interested in placing RFID tags on both the items. We now derive the unit selling price for various such scenarios under equilibrium conditions. For brevity’s sake, we only list the l∗, ΠR(or, Π, as appropriate), and P values for the scenarios considered.The customer’s location under equilibrium conditions when the customer is indifferent between the stores is given by:(5)l∗=12Pe-PeR+αet+1Here, in (5), the benefit the customer experiences is proportional to the proportion the customer purchases that is RFID-tagged (i.e., p). For the retailer with RFID-tagged items, the objective is to maximize the profit function given by:(6)ΠR=(1+β)PeR-Rl∗since p=1 for this scenario. The first order condition results in:(7)PeR=Pe+αe+t+R2From (5)–(7), we get the optimal profit for this scenario:(8)ΠR∗=1+β8t(Pe+αe+t-R)2(9)l∗=12Pc-PcR+αct+1Similar to (5), we model the benefit the customer experiences to be proportional to the proportion the customer purchases that is RFID-tagged (i.e., 1−p). For the retailer with RFID-tagged items, the objective is to maximize the profit function given by:(10)ΠR=(1+β)PcR-Rl∗since p=0 for this scenario. The first order condition results in:(11)PcR=Pc+αc+t+R2From (9)–(11), we get the optimal profit for this scenario:(12)ΠR∗=1+β8t(Pc+αc+t-R)2(13)l∗=12+Pc-Pc′2tFor the retailer with RFID-tagged items, the objective is to maximize the profit function given by:(14)ΠR=Pc′-Rl∗since p=0 and the retailer still incurs the cost of RFID tag even though its benefits are not completely realized by the retailer and customer. First order condition of (14) results in:(15)Pc′=Pc+t+R2From (13)–(15), we get the optimal profit for this scenario:(16)ΠR∗=18t(Pc+t-R)2(17)l∗=12+Pe-Pe′2tFor the retailer with RFID-tagged items, the objective is to maximize the profit function given by:(18)ΠR=Pe′-Rl∗since p=1 and similar to a previous scenario (i.e., that represented by (14)), the retailer incurs the RFID cost, and (18) results in:(19)Pe′=Pe+t+R2From (17)–(19), we get the optimal profit for this scenario:(20)ΠR∗=18t(Pe+t-R)2(21)l∗=12+pPe-PeR+(1-p)Pc-Pc′+αe2tFor the retailer with RFID-tagged items, the objective is to maximize the profit function given by:(22)ΠR=p(1+β)PeR-R+(1-p)Pc′l∗since the benefits of RFID (i.e., β) are realized only for the expensive item. The first order conditions result in:(23)PeR=(1-p)Pc-Pc′+pPe+αe+t+pR-(1-p)Pc′1+β2pand:(24)Pc′=pPe-PeR+(1-p)Pc+αe-p(1+β)PeR-R+t2(1-p)(25)l∗=12+pPe-Pe′+(1-p)Pc-PcR+αc2tFor the retailer with RFID-tagged items, the objective is to maximize the profit function given by:(26)ΠR=pPe′+(1-p)(1+β)PcR-Rl∗since (unlike (22)) the benefits of RFID (i.e., β) are realized only for the cheap item. The first order conditions result in:(27)Pe′=(1-p)Pc-PcR+pPe+αc+t-(1-p)(1+β)PcR-Rpand(28)PcR=αc+t+pPe-Pe′(1-p)-pPe′(1+β)(1-p)+R+Pc(29)l∗=12+pPe-Pe′+(1-p)Pc-Pc′2t(30)Π=pPe′+(1-p)Pc′l∗since none of the items are RFID tagged (i.e., R=0) and the benefits of RFID are not realized for any of the items (i.e., β=0). The first order conditions result in:(31)Pe′=p(Pe-Pc)+Pc-2(1-p)Pc′+t2pand:(32)Pc′=pPe-2pPe′+(1-p)Pc+t2(1-p)(33)l∗=Pe-Pe′+t2t(34)Π=Pe′l∗which is similar to (30) for p=1, and this results in:(35)Pe′=Pe+t2From (33)–(35), we get the optimal profit for this scenario:(36)Π∗=(Pe+t)28t(37)l∗=Pc-Pc′+t2t(38)Π=Pc′l∗which is similar to (30) for p=0, and this results in:(39)Pc′=Pc+t2From (37)–(39), we get the optimal profit for this scenario:(40)Π∗=(Pc+t)28t(41)l∗=Pe-PeR+t+αe2t(42)ΠR=(1+β)PeR-Rl∗since p=1, and the first order condition of this results in:(43)PeR=Pe+R+αe+t2From (41)–(43), we get the optimal profit for this scenario:(44)ΠR∗=1+β8t(Pe+αe+t-R)2(45)l∗=Pc-PcR+t+αc2t(46)ΠR=(1+β)PcR-Rl∗since p=0, and the first order condition of this results in:(47)PcR=Pc+R+αc+t2From (45)–(47), we get the optimal profit for this scenario:(48)ΠR∗=1+β8t(Pc+αc+t-R)2We summarize the expressions for these scenarios in Table 1.Now that we have derived the optimal price and profit expressions, we analyze these next. We first consider the scenarios where the customer buys both the items. We then consider those where the customer buys only the expensive item followed by those where the customer buys only the cheap item.We begin by considering the point at which placing RFID tag on only the cheap item would still be profitable to the retailer.Lemma 3.4When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, the retailer can place RFID tag on only the cheap item when the ratio of the fraction of expensive to cheap items bought by the customer is at least(1+β)R-PcRPe′.We obtain this result by setting ΠR=0 in (26). □Lemma 3.4 states the minimum necessary value for the ratio of expensive and cheap items bought by the customer at a retail store that would result in profit (or, at least, no loss) to the retailer. The relative unit price of the cheap RFID-tagged items with respect to the unit RFID tag cost, the benefit to the store from the RFID-tagged cheap item, and the unit price of the expensive (non-RFID-tagged) item determine this ratio. It is worth noting that unlike Lemma 3.1, the ratio here depends on the benefit to the store (i.e., β) due to the cheap item being RFID-tagged.When we compare the case in which both the items are RFID-tagged vs. that where neither of the items are RFID-tagged, we get the following result.Lemma 3.5When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, the retailer is better off placing RFID tags on both the items (vs. no RFID tag on both items) when the ratio of the fraction of expensive to cheap items bought by the customer is at least(1+β)R-PcR+Pc′(1+β)PeR-R-Pe′We obtain this result by comparing (2) and (30). □Lemma 3.5 states the minimum necessary value for the ratio of expensive and cheap items bought by the customer at a retail store that would result in profit (or, at least, no loss) to the retailer who places RFID tags on both items (vs. a retailer with none of the items RFID-tagged). This expression, which is positive, provides a guideline for a retailer who is interested in placing RFID tags on all items.We now consider the relative prices that the retailer can charge under various scenarios when the customer buys both the items.Theorem 3.6When the customer buys both the items, ceteris paribus, the retailer with both cheap and expensive items RFID-tagged can charge more for the (cheap and expensive) items than the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged.We consider the two possible cases:Case 1:When the customer buys both the items, the retailer with both cheap and expensive items RFID-tagged can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged. This follows from (3) and (23). We getαep+R+Pc′+Pc′1+β>2PcRsinceR>Pc′,PcR.When the customer buys both the items, the retailer with both cheap and expensive items RFID-tagged can charge more for the cheap item than the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged. This follows from (4) and (24). After simplification, we getαep+R+pβPeR>αe+pR+pβRsince p⩽1 andPeR≫R.□Theorem 3.6 illustrates the synergistic effect of RFID-tagging all items in the retail store. This can be attributed to the fact that these stores (1) are less likely to encounter stock-out situations, (2) can readily provide conveniences such as automated check-outs, and thereby avoiding issues related to waiting in long check-out queues, (3) can easily locate an item that is present either in the store or at the back of the store, (4) can provide detailed pedigree information on items when available, among others. This result presents a strong case for placing RFID-tags on both cheap and expensive items compared to just the expensive items. When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, it can be shown that the retailer’s overall profit is also higher when both items are RFID-tagged (vs. only the expensive item RFID-tagged), using Theorem 3.6, Eqs. (1)–(4) and Eqs. (21)–(24).Theorem 3.7When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, the retailer with either the cheap, expensive, or both items RFID-tagged can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged.We show this by separately considering the three cases:Case 1:When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, the retailer with both cheap and expensive items RFID-tagged can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged. Comparing (3) and (31), we get2(1-p)Pc′+α+R>2(1-p)PcRsinceR>Pc′,PcR.When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged. Comparing (23) and (31), we getαe+pR+β(1-p)Pc′1+β>0since all the left hand side terms are positive.When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, the retailer with only the cheap item RFID-tagged can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged. Comparing (27) and (31), we getPc′+Pc2+2αc+t+pPe2(1-p)+R(1+β)>PcR(2+β), which holds sincePe,R≫PcR. □Theorem 3.7 states that regardless of what (cheap, expensive, or both) is item-level RFID-tagged, as long as at least one of the two items are RFID-tagged, the retailer can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer who does not RFID-tag any item. This result indicates a spill-over effect from the cheap to the expensive item when the expensive item is not RFID-tagged. It also indicates that the customer experiences only partial regret over the untagged item, especially when it is unavailable (missing, out-of-stock, misplaced).Lemma 3.8When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged cannot charge more for the cheap item than the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged.Comparing (24) and (32), we get2PeR+βPeR>2Pe′+αep+R(1+β), sincePeR≫R. □Lemma 3.8 states that there is a negative effect of the RFID-tagged expensive item on the cheap item that is not RFID-tagged, that the latter has to be sold at a lower price (vs. that at the retailer who does not RFID-tag any item) in equilibrium. On the other hand, the dynamic of the relative price of the cheap item in the cases where the customer buys both cheap and expensive items and either the cheap item is RFID-tagged (28) or the both the items are RFID-tagged (4) vs. neither of the items are RFID-tagged (32) are not clear since the dominance of one over the other depends on p.Lemma 3.9When the customer buys both cheap and expensive items, the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged cannot charge more for the expensive item than that charged by the retailer with only the cheap item RFID-tagged.Comparing (23) and (27), we getαe+pR+2(1-p)PcR<(1-p)Pc+pPe+2αc+t+(1-p)Pc′+2(1-p)(1+β)(R-PcR)+(1-p)Pc′1+β, sinceR>PcRand Pe≫R. □Lemma 3.9 states that there is a negative interaction between the price at which the RFID-tagged expensive item can be sold when only the expensive item is RFID-tagged vs. the scenario where only the cheap item is RFID-tagged. The price of the expensive item is influenced positively by RFID-tag in just the cheap item than just the expensive item. The policy implication here is that, in a scenario where the customer buys both items and only one of the items can be RFID-tagged, when the retailer wants to sell the expensive item at a higher price, it is better to tag the cheap rather than the expensive item.The policy implications when the customer buys both the items are that (a) when both the items are RFID-tagged, the retailer can charge more for both the items compared to the case when only the expensive item is RFID-tagged. Although we did not explicitly consider the optimal profit values for these scenarios, clearly the profit is more in the case where both the items are tagged vs. the case where only the expensive item is RFID-tagged; (b) RFID-tagging any or both the items allows the retailer to charge more for the expensive item compared to the scenario where neither of the items are RFID-tagged; (c) when only the expensive item is RFID-tagged, the retailer can charge more for only the expensive item and not the cheap item compared to the case where neither of the items are RFID-tagged; and (d) surprisingly, when only one of the items is RFID-tagged, it is better to tag the cheap item (and not the expensive item) for the retailer to charge a higher price on the expensive item.Theorem 3.10When the customer buys only the expensive item, the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged can charge at least as much or more for the expensive item than any other retailer.Five different cases comprise this scenario. We now consider all these cases in turn:Case 1:When the customer buys only the expensive item, the price the retailer can charge for the expensive item is more when only the expensive item is RFID-tagged compared to the case when only the cheap item is RFID-tagged. This follows from (7) and (19) since αe>0.When the customer buys only the expensive item, the retailer with both the items RFID-tagged cannot charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged. This follows from the equality of (7) and (43).When the customer buys only the expensive item, the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged. This follows from (7) and (35) since αe+R>0.When the customer buys only the expensive item, the price the retailer can charge for the expensive item is more when both the items are RFID-tagged compared to the case when neither of the items are RFID-tagged. This follows from (35) and (43) since R+αe>0.When the customer buys only the expensive item, the retailer with both the items RFID-tagged can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with only the cheap item RFID-tagged. This follows from (19) and (43) since αe>0. □Theorem 3.10 states that, in equilibrium, when the customer buys only the expensive item, the retailer needs to RFID-tag only the expensive item to charge the most for that item. Placing RFID tag on the cheap item as well has no effect on the maximum price that could be charged for the expensive item.Theorem 3.11When the customer buys only the expensive item, the retailer with only the cheap item RFID-tagged cannot charge more for the expensive item than a retailer with at least any of the items RFID-tagged.We show this result using Theorem 3.10 and the following:When the customer buys only the expensive item, the retailer with only the cheap item RFID-tagged can charge more for the expensive item than the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged. This follows from (19) and (35) since R>0. □The implication of Theorem 3.11 is that when the customer buys only the expensive item, although it is better to tag only the cheap (vs. not tagging any) item, it is even better to tag either the expensive item or both the items. Since RFID-tagging costs about the same per unit item, when the customer buys the expensive item, to sell this item at the highest price, the retailer would be better off tagging the expensive item as per Theorems 3.10 and 3.11.We now evaluate the relative optimum profits for these scenarios.Theorem 3.12When the customer buys only the expensive item, the profit for the scenario where RFID-tagging only the cheap item results in the least profit while the scenario where none of the items are tagged is better than any other RFID-tagging scenario whenR>(Pe+t)1-11+β+αe.We consider three different cases:Case 1:When the customer buys only the expensive item, the profit is the same for the scenarios where the retailer tags both the items as well as when the retailer tags only the expensive item. This follows from (8) and (44).When the customer buys only the expensive item, the profit for the scenarios where only the expensive item is tagged, both the items are tagged, or none of the items are tagged is better than that for the scenario where the retailer tags only the cheap item. This follows from (8), (20), (36) and (44).When the customer buys only the expensive item, the profit for the scenarios where none of the items are tagged is better than that for the scenarios where the retailer tags both or just the expensive item whenR>(Pe+t)1-11+β+αe. This follows from (8), (36) and (44). □The policy implication of Theorem 3.12 is that when the customer buys the expensive item, it is better to not tag any item compared to tagging just the cheap item. The reverse is true of tagging only the expensive item - i.e., for the retailer’s profit, there is zero marginal benefit in tagging the cheap item when the expensive item is already tagged. The policy implications of Theorems 3.11 and 3.12 concur in that tagging the cheap item is the worst scenario when the customer buys the expensive item and the price of the expensive item is better with the same overall profit when only the expensive item (vs. both the items) is tagged.Theorem 3.13When the customer buys only the cheap item, the retailer with either the cheap or both the items RFID-tagged can charge more for the cheap item than the retailer who tags only the expensive item, and the lowest price goes to the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged.We consider five different cases:Case 1:When the customer buys only the cheap item, the price the retailer can charge for the cheap item is more when both the items are RFID-tagged compared to the case when neither of the items are RFID-tagged. This follows from (39) and (47) since R+αc> 0.When the customer buys only the cheap item, the price the retailer can charge is more when only the cheap item is RFID-tagged compared to the case when only the expensive item is RFID-tagged. This follows from (11) and (15) since αc>0.When the customer buys only the cheap item, the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged cannot charge more for the cheap item than that charged by the retailer with both the items RFID-tagged. The result follows from (15) and (47) since αc>0.When the customer buys only the cheap item, the retailer with both the items RFID-tagged cannot charge more for the cheap item than that charged by the retailer with only the cheap item RFID-tagged. This follows from the equality of (11) and (47).When the customer buys only the cheap item, the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged can charge more for the cheap item than that charged by the retailer with neither of the items RFID-tagged. This follows from (15) and (39) since R>0. □Theorem 3.13 states that when the customer buys only the cheap item, to charge the highest price for the cheap item, the retailer is better off just tagging the cheap item since the marginal benefit of tagging the expensive item as well is zero. Moreover, the next lower price can be charged by the retailer with only the expensive item RFID-tagged followed by the retailer who has none of the items RFID-tagged. The policy implication is clearly toward placing RFID-tags on only the cheap item when the customer buys only this item.We now evaluate the relative optimum profits for the scenarios.Theorem 3.14When the customer buys only the cheap item, the profit for the scenario where none of the items are tagged is better than any other RFID-tagging scenarios whenR>(Pc+t)1-11+β+αc.We consider the three possible cases in this scenario:Case 1:When the customer buys only the cheap item, the profit is the same for the scenarios where the retailer tags both the items as well as when the retailer tags only the cheap item. This follows from (12) and (48).When the customer buys only the cheap item, the profit for the scenarios where only the cheap item is tagged, both the items are tagged, or none of the items are tagged is better than that for the scenarios where the retailer tags only the expensive item. This follows from (12), (16), (40) and (48).When the customer buys only the cheap item, the profit for the scenarios where none of the items are tagged is better than that for the scenarios where the retailer tags both or just the cheap item whenR>(Pc+t)1-11+β+αc. This follows from (12), (40) and (48). □The policy implications of Theorems 3.13 and 3.14 are similar in that they both point to similar conditions that allow for the highest price on the cheap item as well as the highest overall profit. It is preferable to tag either the cheap item or both compared to tagging the expensive item when the customer buys the cheap item.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
