@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-objective approach to supply chain visibility and risk

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the effects of supply chain visibility and risk on SC performance.Our model incorporates three objectives under several functional constraints.Our results suggest that decision makers tend to mitigate SCR before enhance SCV.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Multiple objective programming,Supply chain visibility,Supply chain risk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigates the twin effects of supply chain visibility (SCV) and supply chain risk (SCR) on supply chain performance. Operationally, SCV has been linked to the capability of sharing timely and accurate information on exogenous demand, quantity and location of inventory, transport related cost, and other logistics activities throughout an entire supply chain. Similarly, SCR can be viewed as the likelihood that an adverse event has occurred during a certain epoch within a supply chain and the associated consequences of that event which affects supply chain performance. Given the multi-faceted attributes of the decision making process which involves many stages, objectives, and stakeholders, it beckons research into this aspect of the supply chain to utilize a fuzzy multi-objective decision making approach to model SCV and SCR from an operational perspective. Hence, our model incorporates the objectives of SCV maximization, SCR minimization, and cost minimization under the constraints of budget, customer demand, production capacity, and supply availability. A numerical example is used to demonstrate the applicability of the model. Our results suggest that decision makers tend to mitigate SCR first then enhance SCV.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Asia is a major contributor to many a global supply chain with many manufacturers, contractors and supply bases located throughout Asia, where more than 7000 parts suppliers service the automotive industry of the top ten vehicle manufacturers alone. According to Rajasekera (2011), Japan is a source of key electronic and automotive components and feeds the global supply chain to destinations such as the US, Mexico, and Canada. Nearly every firm making any of the most demanding consumer products needs Japanese components or raw materials because of its intrinsic product quality and technological edge. The disruption caused by the March 11 earthquake, tsunami and nuclear reactor crises in Japan has been felt in these industries, especially when the impact on the supply chain of these two industries is exacerbated by the subsequent major flooding in Thailand. The role of the parts supplies and the raw materials suppliers in Japan and Thailand is critical for the global supply chain of large vehicle manufacturers such as Toyota who for instance is served by a significant tier one supplier Denso (which supplies 50% of its production to Toyota), who in turn is served by Marcon Denso, a tier two single source supplier who for cost reasons draws its labor force from the cheaper rural areas in Japan near where the tsunami struck. Krebs (2011) has reported on the commercial impact of the risk of a delay of a Marcon Denso part to Toyota, who incidentally reported a decline of 77% in earnings in 2011. Indeed, most of the smaller suppliers to Japanese automotive and electronic suppliers are single source. The risk of their production being affected by natural disasters will lead to undesired shipment delays, and disrupting the production schedules of downstream companies in the chain (Jüttner, 2005).Zsidisin (2002) defines this form of supply risk as the potential occurrence of an incident associated with inbound supply from individual supplier failures or the supply market in which its outcomes result in the inability of the buying firm to meet demand. As mentioned, events affecting one supply chain entity or process will interrupt the operations of other supply chain members either directly or indirectly and in more ways than one. Supply chain disruptions have become a critical issue for many companies. In the literature, Zsidisin (2002) has studied the assessment of supply risk while Smeltzer and Siferd (1998) illustrated proactive supply management practices involving risk management. Sanders and Manfredo (2002) have proposed estimates of the downside risk on commodities by using a Value-at-Risk approach. Further, Zsidisin (2003) studied the supply characteristics that affect managerial perceptions of supply risk and created a classification of supply risk sources. A review of the research on the sources of potential supply risk is also provided by Zsidisin (2003), Goh, Lim and Meng (2007), and Zhang, Coronado Mondragon, and Lalwani (2010). From the literature, it becomes apparent that a main consideration in supply chain risk (SCR) management is the visibility of the risk. For instance, good visibility in the supply chain can yield benefits in operations efficiency (e.g. Smaros, Lehtonen, Appelqvist, & Holmstrom, 2003) and more effective supply chain planning (Petersen, Ragatz, & Monczka, 2005). While we acknowledge that SCR is wide ranging, we limit our scope of SCR in this paper to supply risk given the recent development of events in this area.Separately, Harland, Brenchley, and Walker (2003) report that in the supply chains examined, less than half of the risk was visible to the focal company. Thus, one key question arising from the two Asian disasters and the extant literature that begs an answer is: how to choose the parts supplier in order to minimize the supply risk / disruptions due to the supply chain and how to invoke as high a visibility as possible without exceeding the production or total budget.Indeed, the study of supply chain visibility (SCV) has drawn much recent interest from both researchers and practitioners in supply chain management (Barlett, Julien, & Baines, 2007). According to Enslow (2006), about 79% of the large companies surveyed globally cited the lack of SCV as their top concern. Further, an alarming 90% of the responding supply chains asserted that their existing supply chain technology is incapable of providing timely information to prepare budget and cash flow plans for the finance department. Delen, Hardgrave, and Sharda (2007) and Zhou (2009) claim that through the implementation of RFID, SCV can be enhanced to eliminate supply chain barriers by enabling and sharing information and eventually improve the performance of a supply chain. Ouyang (2007) further shows that SCV implementation can enhance supply chain stability and mitigate the bullwhip effect. Implementation is currently undertaken by sharing point-of-sales (POS) information across a supply chain. This concurs with Goh, De Souza, Zhang, Wei, and Tan (2009) who define SCV as the capability of a supply chain actor to have access to or to provide the required timely information/knowledge involved in the supply chain from/to relevant supply chain partners for better decision support. While some work on visibility has been undertaken, this area is still nascent (see e.g. Smaros et al., 2003). Zhang, Goh, and Meng (2010) have also reported that global logistics operators clearly seemed to benefit from the visibility of the end-to-end supply chain. Thus, there is a need to better understand the joint issues of risk and visibility particularly in the context of multiple objectives. As such, it warrants further in-depth study, especially when combined with other aspects of supply chain management such as risk, complexity, or disruptions.This paper makes the following contribution to the literature. We consider specifically the context of a selection of a parts supplier who has to strategically meet a triple objective of cost, risk and visibility for the downstream supply chain. This problem is new and novel to the field and is highly practical and timely in the light of the recent spate of events affecting the automotive and electronics supply chains globally.A mathematical model is developed incorporating SCV and SCR so that the appropriate suppliers can be identified. The proposed multiple objective integer programming model includes three objectives namely visibility maximization, risk minimization, and cost minimization. The formulation of the model is as follows.Notationsiindex of suppliersjindex of partsDecision variablesQijquantity of part i provided by supplier jYija binary variable determined by whether part j is supplied by supplier iYij=1if part i is supplied by supplierj0otherwiseParametersBibudget available to enhance SCV for part iCjproduction capacity of supplier jCRijcost of reducing supply risk for part i from supplier jCVijcost of enhancing SCV to current level for part i from supplier jDidemand for part imijminimum order quantity for part i required by supplier jPijpurchase price for part i supplied by supplier jIRijimpact (financial loss) caused by supply risk for part i from supplier jRijsupply risk for part i from supplier jRimaximum allowable supply risk for part iVijsupply chain visibility incurred if part i is supplied by supplier jViminimum amount of visibility needed for part iModel:(1)Maxvisibility=∑i∑jVijYij(2)Minrisk=∑i∑jRijYij(3)Mincost=∑i∑jVijCVijYij+∑i∑jRijCRijYij+∑i∑jIRijYij+∑i∑jPijQij(4)Subjectto:∑jVijCVijYij⩽Bifor eachi(5)∑jVijYij⩾Vifor eachi(6)∑jQij=Difor eachi(7)∑iQij⩽CjYijfor eachj(8)∑jRijYij⩽Rifor eachi(9)Qij⩾mijYijfor eachi,j(10)Qij⩽NYijfor eachi,(11)Qij⩾0for eachi,j(12)Yij∈{1,0}for eachi,jConstraint (4) restricts the spending of SCV under a planned budget for all suppliers. Constraint (5) implements the minimum amount of visibility for each part. Constraint set (6) enforces the fulfillment of the demand quantity for each part. Constraint set (7) serves as the capacity constraint for each supplier. Constraints in set (8) limit the maximum allowable supply risk for each part supplied by all suppliers. Constraint (9) specifies the minimum order quantity of each part for all suppliers. Set (10) prevents a conflict of the decision variables where N is a relatively large number. Constraint set (11), while redundant, preserves the non-negativity and set (12) maintains the integrality on the decision variables.Since the information regarding the vendor selection problem is fuzzy in nature, the original model is transformed to an FMOP model. The FMOP model, reformulated from the crisp model and modified from the fuzzy vendor selection model developed by Amid, Ghodsypour, and O’Brien (2006), is shown below. To avoid triviality, only those constraints with fuzziness are shown.(13)MaxvisibilityZ1(x)≅∑i∑jV∼ijYij(14)MinriskZ2(x)≅∑i∑jR∼ijYij(15)MincostZ3(x)≅∑i∑jV∼ijCVijYij+∑i∑jR∼ijCRijYij+∑i∑jIRijYij+∑i∑jPijQij(16)Subjectto:∑jV∼ijCVijYij⩽∼Bifor eachi(17)∑jV∼ijYij⩾∼Vifor eachi(18)∑jR∼ijYij⩽∼Rifor eachiTo solve for the modified FMOP model, the solution algorithm is described as follows:(1)Construct the model based on the available information on SCV and SCR. The demand and capacity constraints for different parts and suppliers are established.Solve the problem as a single objective problem for all objective functions. For each objective function, find the upper and lower bound solutions using Zimmermann (1978) max–min approach. Since SCV and SCR are modeled as triangular fuzzy numbers (L,M,U), the upper and lower bound solutions can be solved by implementing the following crisp models.(1)Find the respective membership functions for all objective functions.Eqs. (31) and (32) give the membership functions μi(xi) for the fuzzy maximization and minimization objective functions respectively where L1, L2, and L3 denote the lower bounds for the three fuzzy objective functions, and U1, U2, and U3 are the upper bounds.(31)μi(Zi(x))=1.ifZi(x)⩾UiZi(x)-LiU1-L1ifLi⩽Zi(x)⩽Ui0ifZi(x)⩽Li(32)μi(Zi(x))=1ifZi(x)⩽LiUi-Zi(x)Ui-LiifLi⩽Zi(x)⩽Ui0ifZi(x)⩾Ui(1)Defuzzicate the fuzzy constraints by a weighted average approach using a beta probability function.Reformulate and solve the FMOP model as a crisp single objective model by using the results obtained from Steps 2–4.A weighted crisp single objective model comprising K objectives as proposed by Amid, Ghodsypour, and O’Brien (2006) is implemented to solve the FMOP model, whereλkdenotes the achievement level of the kth objective.(33)Max∑k=1Kwkλk(34)Subjecttoλk⩽μk(Zk(x))k=1,2,…,K(35)∑j16VijpCVijYij+46VijmCVijYij+16VijoCVijYij⩽Bifor eachi(36)∑j16VijpYij+46VijmYij+16VijoYij⩾Vifor eachi(37)∑j16RijpYij+46RijmYij+16RijoYij⩽Rifor eachi(38)λk∈[0,1]k=1,2,…,K(39)∑k=1Kwk=1,wk⩾0(40)Yij∈[0,1]for eachiandjTo demonstrate the applicability of the proposed model, a numerical example of Toyota Motors is used. After Japan’s March 11 disaster, global vehicle production plunged to a mere 50% of capacity in May 2011. As Toyota’s profit tumbled 77% due to the loss of sales and production (Krebs, 2011), Toyota fell behind General Motors and Volkswagen in terms of global sales. Among the suppliers of Toyota, Denso provides major parts and sub-assemblies such as air-conditioning systems, engine-related components, and brake control and safety systems. Though Denso set up plants close to Toyota’s factories, it obtained parts from smaller suppliers who are located elsewhere in Japan where labor costs are lower (Rajasekera, 2011). Among Denso’s small suppliers, Marcon Denso is located in Yamagata Prefecture near the heavily damaged area due to the March 11 event. Marcon Denso produces auto parts such as small buzzers used in car door locks. Though these parts are inexpensive and considered trivial, a delay or even disruption in supply can lead to the closure of Toyota’s assembly lines due to its practice of just-in-time.In this example, the buyer (Toyota) will determine the quantity of three different car lock systems (namely, CLS1, CLS2, CLS3) to purchase from the supplier(s) so that multiple objectives (i.e., visibility maximization, risk minimization, and cost minimization) are achieved. The three different car lock systems are needed for the assembly lines of the compact, medium-priced, and luxury car models respectively. In a given planning period, the monthly demand quantities of the three car lock systems serving as critical parts for the three different car models are 60,000, 45,000 and 35,000 respectively. Three suppliers with various production capacities offer different prices for the three car lock systems. Table 1shows the pricing for the different parts. The monthly production capacity for the three suppliers is 70,000, 80,000, and 90,000 respectively. In addition, each of the three suppliers requires a minimum order quantity of 5000, 6000, and 7000 respectively.To enhance SCV, Toyota has set aside various budget amounts for the three suppliers based on their geographical locations and various information processing capabilities. The allocated amounts for suppliers 1, 2, 3 are $100,000, $120,000, and $150,000 respectively.For simplicity, fuzzy triangular numbers are used to model SCV and SCR. Letm̃=(l,m,r)be a triangular fuzzy number, where the membership functionμm̃(x)is given byμm̃=x-lm-l(l⩽x⩽)r-xr-m(m⩽x⩽r)Following Manuj and Mentzer (2008) who define supply risk (SCR) as the expected impact that a buyer may incur, the probabilistic form for SCR can be modeled on a scale of three different probability levels (low, medium, high). For each probability level, the incurred impact is modeled as its monetary value respectively. The impact for each supplier is estimated by taking into consideration the potential disaster that could occur and the possible financial operational damage due to the disaster. The risk profile is presented in Table 2.The selection of suppliers may incur various degrees of supply risk due to the suppliers’ capacity, capability, proximity, and natural environment. As each product part can endure a different risk since it is used for different car models that are sold to different markets and have different prices, the possible risks for a part supplied by different suppliers are represented by triangular fuzzy numbers (see Table 3) and we set their ranges to be between 0 and 4. Further, cost is incurred if supply risk is to be reduced through either an increase in production flexibility, or using alternate transport modes and routes, as well as through part substitution. In this example, $50,000 is assumed to reduce the risk to the next level. The maximum allowable risk for each of the three car lock systems is 6.5, 6.0, and 5.5 respectively.Visibility between Toyota and its suppliers for the car lock systems can be enhanced by the implementation of RFID and information systems. We assume that the higher the investment of the RFID system, the better the visibility. As the three suppliers are from different geographical regions with varying information processing capabilities, the cost needed to improve the visibility from the current level (i.e., CVij) is $20,000 for supplier 1, $22,000 for supplier 2, and $25,000 for supplier 3 respectively. The visibilities for each part purchased from the different suppliers are modeled on a scale (low, medium, high) with the corresponding triangular fuzzy numbers (Table 4). We set their ranges to be between 0 and 4. For the buying process to be more efficient, a minimum amount of visibility is needed for each car lock system. This minimum level of visibility is set by reviewing the importance of each car lock system for the supply chain based on the fact that the more critical the part is to the final product, the greater the visibility it must possess to ensure seamless parts movement across the chain. Thus, we set the threshold values as 1.5 for CLS1, 2 for CLS2, and 2.5 for CLS3 respectively.The solution of the model is processed as follows.Step 1: Establish the FMOP based on the information described above.Step 2: Solve as a single objective function model using Zimmermann (1978) max–min approach for each objective function, where {x,y} denotes {Uk,Lk}, yielding (Z1,Z2,Z3)=({35.9,6.6}, {21.3,7.6}, {7,519,400,6,101,000}).Step 3: Find the respective membership functions for the fuzzy objective functions. The membership functions are given by both the upper and lower bounds shown in Step 2 (see Table 5).Step 4: Defuzzicate the fuzzy constraints using a beta probability distribution. The weight of the most likely scenario is 4/6, and the weights of the optimistic and pessimistic cases are each 1/6. The defuzzicated risk and visibility triangular numbers are shown in Tables 6 and 7.Step 5: Reformulate and solve the modified FMOP model as a crisp single objective model by utilizing the results obtained from Steps 2–4. It is assumed that the decision preferences for the three objective functions are equally weighted (i.e., 1/3 for each objective). The results of the revised FMOP model are shown in Table 8.The results demonstrate that the degree of achievement of the cost-minimization objective (λ3) is greater than the achievement levels of the other two objectives. This result agrees with the decision preference for the majority of firms. In addition, the achievement level of the risk-minimization level (λ2) is relatively greater than that of the visibility-minimization objective. The reason may be due to fact that most decision makers are risk-averse and hence are prone to mitigating SCR rather than to enhancing SCV.Car lock system 3 (for the luxury model) has the least allowed risk since its associated products are sold for a higher price. Thus, supplier 1 is selected to provide car lock system 2 due to its high visibility and low risk. As for supplier 3, though it sells at a cheaper price, it is however exposed to a higher risk and incurs a greater impact, it is hence selected to provide car lock system 3. Supplier 2, on the other hand, offers a medium priced product while providing a medium level of SCV and is exposed to a medium level of SCR, is opted for supplying two parts. Thus, setting an appropriate supply chain risk strategy and enforcing a certain effort at supply chain visibility has worked to the advantage of Supplier 2.Sensitivity analysis is conducted to investigate the impact of SCV and SCR on supply chain performance through supplier selection. Based on the current levels of SCR and SVR, we examine the individual impact of SVR and SCV on the degree of achievement and objective function values. Tables 9 and 10show the results of the sensitivity analysis while Figs. 1–5highlight the relationship between SCR/SCV and the associated degrees of achievement.Fig. 1 shows that as SCR increases, the degree of achievement for the SCR minimization objective (λ2) is monotone increasing and the degree of achievement for the cost minimization objective (λ3) is monotone non-increasing. This is so as any increase in SCR will compel a company to focus more on risk control. On the other hand, the cost minimization objective is 100% achieved initially, but will decline as SCR increases to a certain level as companies will expend more financial resources to push for tighter risk control in the supply chain. Fig. 2 shows that the overall degree of achievement (L) plateaus after SCR increases to a certain level. This is probably due to the fact that as SCR increases initially, companies will respond with more risk controls albeit realizing a decreasing marginal utility. As a strategy, companies should determine the optimal amount of resources to be allocated to manage the risk.Fig. 3 shows a concave relationship between SCV and the degree of achievement for the SCV maximization objective (λ1). This is probable as any initial increase in visibility benefits the focal company through improved supply chain performance. However, total visibility in the supply chain requires significantly higher cost investment, which a small supplier may not always have. This then leads to a decreasing λ1. Figs. 4 and 5 show a convex relationship between SCV and the degrees of achievement for SCV and cost objectives (λ2,λ3) as well as L, suggesting that as SCV increases, companies become more confident of the performance of the supply chain, and hence pay less attention to risk and cost control, leading a declining L.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
