@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The disruptive anti-covering location problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposes a new construct: the Disruptive Anti-Covering Location Problem (DACLP).Solves for the “worst-case,” most disruptive, (lower bound) packing of facilities.Applies to a wide variety of problems from habitat analysis to franchise location.Introduces the concept of stable, proper levels of anti-cover.Provides computational experience for solving DACLP using a MIP model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Location modeling,Anti-cover,R-separation,Disruption,Packing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Dispersion is a desirable element inherent in many location problems. For example, dispersive strategies are used in the location of franchise stores, bank branches, defensive missile silo placement, halfway homes, and correctional facilities, or where there is need to be dispersed as much as possible in order to minimize impacts. Two classic models that capture the essence of dispersion between facilities involve: (1) locating exactly p-facilities while maximizing the smallest distance of separation between any two of them, and (2) maximizing the number of facilities that are being located subject to the condition that each facility is no closer than r-distance to its closest neighboring facility. The latter of these two problems is called the anti-covering problem, the subject of this paper. Virtually all past research has involved an attempt to solve for the “best or maximal packing” solution to a given anti-covering problem. This paper deals with what one may call the worst case solution of an anti-covering problem. That is, what is the smallest number of needed facilities and their placement such that their placement thwarts or prevents any further facility placement without violating the r-separation requirement? We call this the disruptive anti-covering location problem. It is disruptive in the sense that such a solution would efficiently prevent an optimal packing from occurring. We present an integer linear program model for this new location problem, provide example problems which indicate that very disruptive configurations exist, and discuss the generation of a range of stable levels to this problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The anti-covering (or r-separation) location problem (ACLP) involves maximizing the number of selected sites, such that no two selected sites are within a specified distance or time standard of each other. This problem can be defined on a bounded continuous region or a discrete set of sites (Carrizosa & Tóth, 2015). When defined on a bounded continuous domain it is generally assumed that all facilities must be located within the region and be at least r-distance from the boundary and at least r-distance from each other. Although both problem domains are of interest, this paper is concerned with the ACLP defined upon a discrete set of sites. The solution to the ACLP is sometimes referred to as a packed arrangement. There may be many configurations to a problem instance in which all located facilities are at least the prescribed r-distance apart from each other. Those arrangements which involve the maximum number of located facilities are optimal ACLP solutions. Those solutions that use fewer than the maximum possible number of located facilities fall into two classes: (1) at least one unused site exists where it is possible to locate an additional facility while still maintaining all r-separation constraints; and, (2) all remaining unused sites are too close to an existing facility or boundary so that no further facilities can be added to the solution without violating the r-separation constraints. This paper deals with this second class of solution.A logical question to ask is: what is the smallest number of facilities that can be deployed and placed such that no remaining sites can be used without violating one or more r-separation constraints? The basic idea is to find the smallest configuration that blocks to the greatest extent possible a maximal packing. We call this the Disruptive Anti-Covering Location Problem (DACLP). The objective of this paper is to develop a model to identify facility patterns that prohibit maximally packed configurations from being possible. This model can be useful in a number of possible applications. For example, the anti-cover location problem has been used by Grubesic and Murray (2008) to test possible policies on sex offender residential location. They used the ACLP to identify how many sex offenders could take up residence in a city when each offender had to live at least a given distance apart from all other sex offenders as well as from all public places where children are likely to be present (e.g. parks, day care facilities, and schools). A solution to the ACLP has been used to assess the impact of this proposed public policy for a given separation standard, but only under the assumption that a maximal packing will be possible and achievable. But, it is entirely possible that as sex offenders sequentially choose residential locations in some ad-hoc fashion, while ensuring that they keep away from other offenders and public spaces where children are present, the resulting pattern will be less than what could be maximally packed. In fact, some “choice” residential locations may effectively thwart a maximal packing and considerably reduce possible numbers of who could be accommodated in such a residential placement policy. Another example involves the use of the ACLP to test the impact of possible privatization of liquor sales associated with potential store placement under separation standards (Grubesic et al., 2012). Such an application helps to define the largest number of stores that could be placed. However, this approach ignores the fact that this situation may involve competitors, and each market entrant would most likely choose one or more location(s) which might preempt rivals from being able to locate in a close, packed-in arrangement when there are imposed separation requirements.Therefore, attention should be directed towards what configurations disrupt maximal packing the most? The importance of this problem is both theoretical and practical. From either perspective, optimal solutions to the DACLP define a lower bound on the number of facilities that can be placed without violating the r-separation constraints as well as pre-empt any additional facilities from being feasibly added. This is an important consideration, particularly in problems where a lower-bound arrangement might occur, like in habitat nest/den site modeling, feasible residence locations for sex-offenders, franchise store location choice, or any other application for which the ACLP has been used or proposed. The main objective of this paper is to present a model for the DACLP, discuss possible solution techniques, and present several example solutions. The next two sections provide a brief background of the ACLP and a description of past approaches in formulating the ACLP as a binary integer programming problem. This is followed by a formulation for the disruptive anti-covering location problem. We also develop a model which can be used to identify “stable” configurations for different levels of potential facility deployment. Computational examples for both models are presented along with a discussion on potential avenues for modeling disruption within this new construct.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper deals with a new form of the anti-covering location problem (ACLP). This classic problem involves maximizing the number of facilities being placed while keeping them at least r distance apart from each other. The ACLP has been used in a number of different application areas, including reserve design, defense, forest operations models, DNA sequencing, and analyzing policies impacting potential sex offender residence location as well as potential liquor store patterns, among others. This fundamental spatial optimization problem was originally proposed by Moon and Chaudhry (1984). We have defined that any feasible solution to the ACLP (i.e. feasible with respect to the separation constraints) where no further sites can be selected without violating one or more separation conditions to be a proper solution. Although there has been considerable interest in finding the maximum number of facilities that meet the separation requirements, virtually no attention has been directed to the existence of proper solutions which use less than what could be maximally placed. Such patterns are disruptive in the sense that they prevent an optimal anti-cover solution from occurring. Finding disruptive anti-cover patterns is the objective of this paper.The disruptive anti-cover problem (DACLP) involves finding a solution which minimizes the number of facilities being placed, ensuring that all facilities are separated from each other by a minimum separation distance, r, and where no further sites can be selected without violating a separation condition. We have formulated an integer-linear model for the disruptive anti-covering problem, provided example solutions, and discussed how this model can be used to identify stable levels of disruption. Because the DACLP is functionally related to the vertex packing problem and the location set covering problem, it falls within the class of NP hard. Future research should be directed towards identifying placement strategies to thwart possible location disruption to the greatest extent possible.The results of our analysis demonstrate the importance of the disruptive form of anti-covering. In fact, when policies are analyzed using the anti-cover location model (e.g. sex offender residences or carrying capacity of a population of Sandhill Cranes), it makes sense to solve the disruptive form of this problem as well in order to capture the range of possible outcomes. When the problem encompasses a number of independent decision making entities, sex offenders (or birds) in selecting housing (or nest sites), it is likely that an optimal pattern will not be generated. Thus, solutions to the DACLP are important and informative within the context of policy analysis and decision making.