@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The maximin HAZMAT routing problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new approach for treatment of HAZMAT transportation in urban areas.The approach maximises the distance between a HAZMAT route and its closest vulnerable population centre.An exact model is proposed, including a method of reduction of variables, and an optimal, polynomial heuristic.A real-like large instance is solved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Networks,Routing,HAZMAT,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The hazardous material routing problem from an origin to a destination in an urban area is addressed. We maximise the distance between the route and its closest vulnerable centre, weighted by the centre’s population. A vulnerable centre is a school, hospital, senior citizens’ residence or the like, concentrating a high population or one that is particularly vulnerable or difficult to evacuate in a short time. The potential consequences on the most exposed centre are thus minimized. Though previously studied in a continuous space, the problem is formulated here over a transport (road) network. We present an exact model for the problem, in which we manage to significantly reduce the required variables, as well as an optimal polynomial time heuristic. The integer programming formulation and the heuristic are tested in a real-world case study set in the transport network in the city of Santiago, Chile.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The hazardous material (HAZMAT) routing problem has been extensively studied in recent decades. For the most part it has been treated as a least cost routing problem between an origin and a destination, in which cost is a combination of transport costs and a risk function.Although there is no consensus on the best way to model risk, it is generally agreed that any formulation will include two elements: the probability of an accidental HAZMAT release, and its associated consequences. Very few of the risk measures take into account the distance between a population centre and the HAZMAT route except in order to define distance thresholds within which the consequence or risk is total and beyond which it is non-existent. In reality, however, the closer a HAZMAT vehicle passes to a population centre within such a threshold, the greater is the centre’s exposure to hazard (where hazard is understood as the potential for producing an undesired consequence without regard to the probability of its occurrence). This observation also fits with public perceptions, strongly suggesting that the distance between routes and populated centres warrants greater attention in HAZMAT route modelling, since it is a good proxy for hazard.Our contribution is oriented to propose an approach oriented to the protection of vulnerable centres, together with a new model and an optimal heuristic for HAZMAT transportation in urban areas. The approach assumes that population in residential or low-rise commercial areas is easier to evacuate, but there are vulnerable centres concentrating high populations of children, senior citizens or ill people, for which is difficult to evacuate or can slowly do so. These vulnerable centres are represented as points on a plane. We incorporate in a new model, the distance between a vulnerable centre and a HAZMAT transport route. A maximin objective is used here that, to the best of our knowledge, has not previously been used in the HAZMAT or routing literature in a network context. This objective maximises the minimum Euclidean distance between the route and the nearest vulnerable centre, the distance being weighted by the centre’s population. We remark that any other distance and hazard measure could be trivially used, as long as it is non-increasing with distance. Since we explicitly assume that hazard is an attribute of each vulnerable centre and depends on the centre’s distance from a HAZMAT route, by using this maximin approach we minimize the hazard facing the centre closest to the route (the most exposed centre). By using this approach, we obviate the need to set risk or risk difference thresholds, or to compute probabilities. Moreover, the formulation we develop designs a route instead of choosing one from a set.Maximal values of risk or hazard have seldom being minimized in the HAZMAT literature. In general, the average or total risk or hazard has been the objective to be minimized. Exceptions are some works that locate either straight or broken lines in a plane. However, HAZMAT transport in practice takes place over a network. Modelling the routing problem in a network context, with an integer programming formulation, requires the application of constraints that will relate each population centre to its closest link in the route (i.e., the link imposing the greatest hazard). This type of constraints is used in discrete location problems, e.g., assigning customers to the closest plant of a multi-plant firm.The new exact model we formulate here (our first solution method) potentially requires a large number of closest assignment constraints. Normally, this would also mean a large number of decision variables, significantly complicating the solution of the problem. Since the route is not known a priori, a variable associating each vulnerable centre with each network link has to be added, implying a total of O(mq) variables where m is the number of network links and q the number of vulnerable centres. In our exact model, however, each vulnerable centre needs only a subset of these variables identified by the sections of route within the centre’s danger area. The result is a major reduction in the required number of variables and constraints. Although the problem can be solved using an optimal heuristic also presented here, we offer both procedures, as the variable reducing technique could be applied to harder problems.Our second approach corresponds to an optimal heuristic, which solves the problem in polynomial time and can be used easily for large real instances.The remainder of this article is organised into four sections. In Section 2, we offer a Literature review. Section 3 formulates the maximin problem for hazardous materials routing as an exact formulation and includes an optimal heuristic; Section 4 describes a practical application of the proposed methodology and analyses the results; and finally, Section 5 presents our conclusions and some possibilities for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
