@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
New results on the relationship among risk aversion, prudence and temperance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Under non-satiation and bounded marginal utility, prudence implies risk aversion.Under non-satiation and bounded marginal utility, imprudence implies risk loving.Under non-satiation and bounded marginal utility, temperance implies prudence.Under non-satiation and bounded marginal utility, intemperance implies imprudence.Implications for increases in risk, in downside risk and in outer risk are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Utility theory,Decision analysis,Risk analysis,Risk aversion,Prudence,Temperance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This note studies the relationships between different aspects of agent’s preferences toward risk. We show that, under the assumptions of non-satiation and bounded marginal utility, prudence implies risk aversion (imprudence implies risk loving) and that temperance implies prudence (intemperance implies imprudence). The implications of these results for comparing risks in the cases of increase in risk, increase in downside risk and increase in outer risk are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A wide literature in the theory of decision making under uncertainty focuses on agents’ attitude towards risk by analyzing features of the utility function. Some of the different concepts identified have great relevance to economic problems. Three of the most important are risk aversion, prudence and temperance.Risk aversion was originally introduced by Pratt (1964), and describes the idea that agents dislike risks. Risk aversion is relevant in a wide range of economic issues, including insurance, portfolio problems and asset pricing (for a survey see, for instance, Gollier, 2001). When we assume that preference are represented by the utility function U(x) where x is the agent’s consumption, the agent’s attitude toward risk aversion is related to the second derivative of this function. In particular, an agent is risk averse ifd2U(x)dx2=U″(x)<0while she is risk lover ifd2U(x)dx2=U″(x)>0.Prudence was first introduced in the literature on precautionary saving (see Kimball, 1990; Leland, 1968; Sandmo, 1970) as the desire to increase saving in the presence of income risk. Beyond its relevance for saving decisions, prudence has also proved to be important in other fields, such as optimal prevention (Eeckhoudt & Gollier, 2005; Menegatti, 2009) and the agent’s preferences about skewness (Chiu, 2005; Menezes, Geiss, & Tressler, 1980). In utility theory, an agent is prudent ifd3U(x)dx3=U‴(x)>0while she is imprudent ifd3U(x)dx3=U‴(x)<0.Temperance, the third concept, was introduced by Kimball (1992) in the study of the effect of labor income risk on the fraction of saving devoted to risky investment, and is defined as “moderation in accepting [independent] risks” (Kimball, 1992, p. 160). This feature of preferences has been shown to be relevant for optimal decisions in the presence of background risk (Eeckhoudt, Gollier, & Schlesinger, 1996; Gollier & Pratt, 1996), in the study of the agent’s preferences when risks differ in kurtosis (Menezes & Wang, 2005) and for the analysis of the effects on saving of an increase in the downside risk of future labor income (Eeckhoudt & Schlesinger, 2008). In utility theory, an agent is temperate ifd4U(x)dx4=U″″(x)<0while she is intemperate ifd4U(x)dx4=U″″(x)>0.Risk aversion, prudence and temperance are concepts which concern different aspects of the agent’s attitude toward risk, and which are related to three derivatives of different orders of the utility function. However, since they are related to different features of the same preferences (i.e. different derivatives of the same function), it is important to understand if there are relationships between them. As will be shown in the literature overview below, few results have been derived on this issue.The aim of this work is to provide new insight into this field. We will show in particular that the different aspects of the agent’s attitude toward risk are not independent and that, under plausible assumptions on the utility function, prudence implies risk aversion (imprudence implies risk loving) and temperance implies prudence (intemperance implies imprudence). Moreover, since risk aversion, prudence and temperance are related to agents’ choices in many economic problems, the existence of these relationships is potentially relevant for many issues. This work analyses some of the most relevant of these issues, by studying comparison between different risks and by providing a simple application to a precautionary saving problem.The work proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a short literature overview. Section 3 introduces the assumptions and studies the relationships between temperance, prudence and risk aversion. Section 4 presents the implications of the results derived for increase in risk, increase in downside risk and increase in outer risk. Section 5 provides a simple application to precautionary saving. Section 6 concludes.There are two main strands of literature relevant for the present work.This work studies the relationships between different features of preferences toward risk, represented by the signs of derivatives of different order of the utility function. Despite its potentially important implications, this issue is not largely studied in utility theory.1For a very recent discussion on why it is important to study the signs of derivatives of the utility function of order larger than 2 (and in particular of orders 3 and 4) see the recent survey by Eeckhoudt (2012). Many papers (such as those cited in the introduction) study the interpretation of these signs. However they do not analyze the relationship between them.1To my knowledge the only explicit finding in this field was made by Menegatti (2001) who proved that if an agent is non-satiated and risk averse and if the third derivative of her utility function is assumed to be invariant in sign then this sign must be positive and the agent must be prudent.It is useful to emphasize that this result is different and is in fact complementary to results presented here. Menegatti (2001) showed sufficient conditions (non-satiation and invariant sign of the third derivative of the utility function) which ensure that risk aversion implies prudence. The present work shows sufficient conditions ensuring that prudence implies risk aversion (as well as conditions ensuring that temperance implies prudence). Note that the sufficient conditions in the two works are not the same.A further issue examined in the same strand of literature is the relationship between the index of absolute risk aversion (−U″(x)/U′(x)) and the index of absolute prudence (−U‴(x)/U″(x)). Some results have been published in this field. First Kimball (1992) proved that if preferences exhibit decreasing absolute prudence (i.e. −U‴(x)/U″(x) is decreasing in x) for every x>0 then they also exhibit decreasing absolute risk aversion (i.e. −U″(x)/U′(x) is decreasing in x) for every x>0. Maggi, Magnani, and Menegatti (2006) extended this result to two other cases: the relationship between increasing absolute prudence and increasing absolute risk aversion and the relationship between constant absolute prudence and constant absolute risk aversion. Furthermore they show that, in general, the number of local minima (maxima) of the index of absolute risk aversion is not larger than the number of local minima (maxima) of the index of absolute prudence. Finally, in a related field, Eeckhoudt and Schlesinger (1994) showed conditions ensuring that if one agent has a higher index of absolute prudence than another then she also has a higher index of absolute risk aversion and vice versa.As stated in the introduction, this work presents implications and potential applications of its findings on risk aversion, prudence and temperance for comparing risks. The literature studying comparison of risks is thus also relevant for the present paper. The first seminal contribution was by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970) who introduced the concept of increase in risk as a case where a risk can be obtained from another risk by a mean-preserving spread, which leaves the mean of the distribution unchanged and increases the variance.2Note that the opposite is not true: a larger variance does not imply a mean-preserving spread. See also Section 4.2In the same field, Menezes et al. (1980) define an increase in downside risk as a case where a risk can be obtained from another risk by a mean–variance–preserving contraction, which leaves mean and variance of the distribution unchanged and increases negative skewness.3The opposite is not true: larger negative skewness does not imply a mean–variance–preserving contraction. See Section 4.3Finally Menezes and Wang (2005) study an increase in outer risk as a case where a risk can be obtained from another risk by a sequence of outer transformations, which leaves mean, variance and skewness of the distribution unchanged and raises kurtosis.4Again the opposite is not true. See Section 4.4These comparisons are relevant to many areas, and in general to all problems where an agent chooses between different risky prospects. A standard case is when a firm compares different investment projects where each of them has different possible returns with different probabilities to occur. Similarly, risk is compared in finance whenever an agent compares different portfolios characterized by different random returns with different distributions. Such problems have been widely studied in the literature. For a summary of results, see Gollier (2001) and Levy (2006).Other applications of different kinds of risk changes have recently been presented in various fields. Eeckhoudt and Schlesinger (2008) studied conditions ensuring that different kinds of changes in risk increase precautionary saving. A simple application in this field is presented at the end of this work too. Eeckhoudt, Schlesinger, and Tsetlin (2009), Section 4.3 analyzed the effect of risk changes on production localization. Chiu and Eeckhoudt (2010) applied comparison of risks to the choice of agent’s labor supply. Finally Baiardi and Menegatti (2011) studied the effects of risk changes of different kinds on environmental policy.5Note that all these recent applications consider the general Nth-degree risk change as defined by Ekern (1980). The cases examined in the present paper are cases where N=2, 3, 4.5We assume that the agent’s preferences are described by the utility function U(x) defined over the domain [0,+∞) and continuous in the whole domain. The assumption on the unbounded domain of the utility function is particularly relevant for all results derived in this paper and thus requires a short comment. Obviously, this assumption does not mean that the agent has to deal with a case where consumption is infinite. It means instead that we want to describe the agent’s preferences for every possible level of consumption. In fact, although in a specific economic problem the agent’s consumption can vary within the closed interval[x¯,x̃], we usually want to study this problem for every possible value ofx¯andx̃, which requires that preferences are defined for the whole set R+.6It should also be emphasized that an alternative option could be to assume that U(x) is defined over R instead of R+. However, the domain is often limited to the positive real line excluding negative argument for U(x) in the analysis of consumption, because a negative level of consumption can be difficult to interpret. Note, on the other hand, that the results above hold if the domain of U(x) is R.6This is also the reason why utility functions which cannot be defined for this whole set are considered less appropriate for economic models studying risk.7This is the case for instance of the quadratic utility which exhibits the problem to be defined only on a bounded interval (see for example Gollier, 2001, p. 27).7Finally note that the assumption of a domain [0,+∞) is crucial in many papers studying desired or appropriate features of the utility function (e.g. Brockett & Golden, 1987; Caballé & Pomansky, 1996; Pratt & Zeckhauser, 1987),8The same assumption is also crucial for some conclusions by Kimball (1993) and for the results by Menegatti (2001).8it is standard in microeconomic theory (see, for instance, the well-known book by Mas-Colell, Winston, & Green (1995, p. 51)) and it is often introduced in works examining risk problems (recent examples are Çanakoğlu & Özekici, 2010; Choi & Ruszczyński, 2011; Hart, 2011; Roger, 2011).We assume that the utility function is differentiable four times and we letdU(x)dx=U′(x),d2U(x)dx2=U″(x),d3U(x)dx3=U‴(x)andd4U(x)dx4=U″″(x). Furthermore we introduce the usual assumption of non-satiation, meaning that marginal utility is strictly positive for every x in the domain (i.e. U′(x)>0 ∀x∈[0,+∞)). Finally we introduce a further assumption on the features of marginal utility for x→+∞, assuming that marginal utility function is bounded (i.e. that limx→+∞U′(x)≠+∞). Note that this assumption does not mean that marginal utility is decreasing (i.e. it does not imply concavity of the utility function) and is absolutely compatible with an increasing marginal utility. The assumption simply excludes that the function tends to +∞ for consumption tending to +∞. This assumption has two main justifications. First, it seems plausible that, when consumption becomes extremely high, an additional unit of it causes a small, or at least a bounded, increase in utility. Second, the assumption that marginal utility is bounded is standard in many economic models such as growth models and intertemporal models of consumption.9In the case of growth models we usually introduce the stronger assumption not only that limx→+∞U′(x)≠+∞ but also that limx→+∞U′(x)=0. See for instance the standard books by Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004, p. 87) and Blanchard and Fisher (1989, p. 38).9Note that these assumptions define a fairly general class of utility functions, which includes many of the most frequently used ones, such as exponential utility and constant relative risk aversion (CRRA). This set of assumptions is kept unchanged for all the propositions in the paper. Also note that, later on, we introduce for simplicity the following notation: limx→+∞f(x)≡f(+∞). This means that we have limx→+∞U′(x)≡U′(+∞), limx→+∞U″(x)≡U″(+∞) and so on.Finally, before examining the new results in this work, we recall a specific version of a well-known theorem (sometimes called “theorem of sign permanence”), used in some of the proofs below.Theorem 1Given a continuous function f(x), if f(+∞)=+∞ then ∃x0: f(x)>0∀x∈(x0,+∞) and if f(+∞)=−∞ then ∃x0: f(x)<0∀x∈(x0,+∞)Note that the interpretation of the theorem is straightforward: if the limit for x→+∞ of a function is +∞ then there exists a right-open interval where the function is positive, while if this limit is −∞ then there exists a right-open interval where the function is negative.Given the assumptions above, we can now state the first results of this work showing the relation between prudence and risk aversion. We obtain that:Proposition 1(a)Given non-satiation, if an agent is imprudent ∀x∈[x0,+∞) (where x0⩾0) then the agent is risk lover ∀ x∈[x0,+∞).Given non-satiation, if an agent is prudent ∀ x∈[x0,+∞) (where x0⩾0) then the agent is risk averse ∀x∈[x0,+∞).(a)The proof is by contradiction. Assume ∃x1∈[x0,+∞):U″(x1)⩽0. Now since U‴(x)<0 ∀x∈[x0,+∞), we have that U″(x) is strictly decreasing ∀x∈[x0,+∞), implying in turn,(1)U″(x)<U″(x1)⩽0∀x∈(x1,+∞)Imprudence and (1) implies that U′(x) is strictly decreasing and strictly concave ∀x∈(x1,+∞). This implies that U′(+∞)=−∞ contradicting non-satiation.Again by contradiction. Assume ∃x1∈[x0,+∞):U″(x1)⩾0. Now since U‴(x)>0 ∀x∈[x0,+∞), we have that U″(x) is strictly increasing ∀x∈[x0,+∞), implying in turn,(2)U″(x)>U″(x1)⩾0∀x∈(x1,+∞)Using a similar reasoning we can now study the relationship between temperance and prudence. For this we obtain:Proposition 2(a)Given non-satiation, if an agent is temperate ∀x∈[x0,+∞) (where x0⩾0) then the agent is prudent ∀x∈[x0,+∞).Given non-satiation, if an agent is intemperate ∀x∈[x0,+∞) (where x0⩾0) then the agent is imprudent ∀x∈[x0,+∞).(a)By contradiction. Assume ∃x1∈[x0,+∞): U‴(x1)⩽0. Now since U″″(x)<0∀x∈[x0,+∞) we have that U‴(x) is strictly decreasing ∀x∈[x0,+∞), implying in turn,(3)U‴(x)<U‴(x1)⩽0∀x∈(x1,+∞)Temperance and (3) imply that U″(x) is strictly decreasing and strictly concave ∀x∈(x1,+∞), implying in turn that U″(+∞)=−∞. By Theorem 1 this implies that ∃x2: U″(x)<0∀x∈(x2,+∞). Assuming x3=max(x1,x2), this result and (3) imply that the function U′(x) is strictly decreasing and strictly concave ∀x∈(x3,+∞). This implies in turn U′(+∞)=−∞ contradicting non-satiation.Again by contradiction. Assume ∃x1∈[x0,+∞): U‴(x1)⩾0. Now since U″″(x)>0 ∀x∈[x0,+∞), we have that U‴(x) is strictly increasing ∀x∈[x0,+∞), implying in turn,(4)U‴(x)>U‴(x1)⩾0∀x∈(x1,+∞)Finally we can easily identify the relationship between temperance and risk aversion from the above results. In fact Propositions 1 and 2 imply that:Proposition 3(a)Given non-satiation, if an agent is temperate ∀x∈[x0,+∞) (where x0⩾0) then the agent is risk averse ∀x∈[x0,+∞).Given non-satiation, if an agent is intemperate ∀ x∈[x0,+∞) (where x0⩾0) then the agent is risk lover ∀x∈[x0,+∞).The results in Propositions from 1–3 show that, under plausible conditions on the utility function, the different aspects of the agent’s attitude toward risk are not independent. In more detail, once the usual hypothesis of non-satiation is introduced, once preferences are defined for every level of consumption and once it is assumed that marginal utility is bounded (i.e. that it cannot explode), we obtain that temperance implies prudence, which implies in turn risk aversion, and that intemperance implies imprudence which implies in turn risk loving.The results in the previous section have significant implications for various problems. Some of the most important involve the analysis of different kinds of change in risk in an expected utility framework.In order to study this issue, we define the six risks y1, z1, y2, z2, y3 and z3 as six random variables taking values in R+ and described respectively by the cumulative distribution functionsFy1(x)=∫0xfy1(t)dt,Fz1(x)=∫0xfz1(t)dt,Fy2(x)=∫0xfy2(t)dt,Fz2(x)=∫0xfz2(t)dt,Fy3(x)=∫0xfy3(t)dtandFz3(x)=∫0xfz3(t)dtwhere fy1, fz1, fy2, fz2, fy3, fz3 are probability density functions.The seminal paper by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970) provided the following well-known definition and results about an increase in risk:Definition 1Given the two risks y1 and z1, z1 is said to be an increase in risk over y1 when z1 can be obtained from y1 by a sequence of mean-preserving spreads.10A mean-preserving spread is obtained by moving some probability mass of the distribution toward the tails, leaving the mean unchanged. For a formal definition see Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970).10When z1is an increase in risk over y1, E[U(y1)]⩾E[U(z1)] if and only if the agent is risk averse.Note that, given this definition, an increase in risk leaves the mean unchanged while it raises the variance of the risk. It should be emphasized that, while a mean-preserving spread implies a larger variance, the converse is not true since a larger variance does not imply that a mean-preaserving spread occurred.Menezes et al. (1980) provided the following definition and results for an increase in downside risk:Definition 2Given the two risks y2 and z2, z2 is said to be an increase in downside risk over y2 when z2 can be obtained from y2 by a sequence of mean–variance-preserving transformations.11A mean–variance preserving transformation is obtained by an appropriate pairing of mean-presearving spreads and mean-preserving contractions (which are defined as the converse of mean-preserving spreads). For a formal definition see Menezes et al. (1980).11When z2is an increase in downside risk over y2, E[U(y2)]⩾E[U(z2)] if and only if the agent is prudent.12Note that Menezes et al. (1980) just speak about downside risk aversion and show that it occurs if and only if U‴(x)>0. The term “prudence” is used to describe this feature of the agent’s preference only from Kimball (1990).12Note that an increase in downside risk leaves mean and variance of the distribution unchanged while it raises the negative skewness of the risk. Also in this case the converse is not true: an increase in negative skewness does not imply an increase in downside risk.Finally Menezes and Wang (2005) provided the following definition and results for an increase in outer risk:Definition 3Given the two risks y3 and z3, z3 is said to be an increase in outer risk over y3 when z3 can be obtained from y3 by a sequence of outer dispersion transformations.13An outer dispersion transformation is obtained by an appropriate pairing of different mean–variance–preserving spreads. For a formal definition see Menezes and Wang (2005).13When z3is an increase in outer risk over y3, E[U(y3)]⩾E[U(z3)] if and only if the agent is temperate.Note that an increase in outer risk leaves mean, variance and skewness of the distribution unchanged while it raises the kurtosis of the risk. Again the converse is not true: an increase in kurtosis does not imply an increase in outer risk.The results in Section 2 can be applied to the relationship between increases in outer risk, increases in downside risk and increases in risk. In particular, given the assumptions in Section 2, we get:Proposition 4If an agent weakly prefers y2to z2for every pair (y2, z2) where z2is an increase in downside risk over y2then the agent weakly prefers y1to z1for every possible pair (y1,z1) where z1is an increase in risk over y1.Lemma 2 proves that if the agent weakly prefers y2 to z2 for every pair (y2,z2) where z2 is a downside increase in risk over y2 then the agent is prudent ∀x∈[0,+∞). By Proposition 1(b) this implies that the agent is risk averse ∀x∈[0,+∞). By Lemma 1 this implies that she weakly prefers y1 to z1 for every possible pair (y1,z1) where z1 is an increase in risk over y1.□If an agent weakly prefers y3over z3for every pair (y3,z3) where z3is an increase in outer risk over y3then the agent weakly prefers y2over z2for every possible pair (y2,z2) where z2is an increase in downside risk over y2and the agent weakly prefers y1over z1for every possible pair (y1,z1) where z1is an increase in risk over y1.Lemma 3 proves that if the agent weakly prefers y3 to z3 for every pair (y3,z3) where z3 is an increase in outer risk over y3 then the agent must be temperate ∀x∈[0,+∞). By Proposition 2(a) this implies that the agent is prudent ∀x∈[0,+∞). By Lemma 2 this implies that she weakly prefers y2 to z2 for every possible pair (y2,z2) where z2 is an increase in downside risk over y2. Finally, by Proposition 4, this implies that the agent weakly prefers y1 to z1 for every possible pair (y1,z1) where z1 is an increase in risk over y1.□Propositions 4 and 5 show the relationships between agent’s preferences in cases of different kinds of changes in risks. Proposition 4 shows that if the agent dislikes every increase in downside risk then she also dislikes every increase in risk.14Note that the fact that the agent dislikes every increase in risk is related to the assumption that the agent is risk averse for every level of consumption, i.e. ∀ x∈[0,+∞). A similar observation applies to Propositions 5 and 6.14Proposition 5 shows that if an agent dislikes every increase in outer risk then she also dislikes every increase in downside risk and every increase in risk.As stated in Section 2, the results above can be applied to all kinds of economic models where an agent compares different risky prospects. What follows is a simple application to precautionary saving. Consider a typical two-period saving problem. An agent chooses her level of saving in order to maximize lifetime utility of consumption given byV(s)=U(y0-s)+11+δE[U(y1+s(1+r))]where s is saving, y0 and y1 are respectively first-period and second-period income, r is the interest rate paid for saving or borrowing and δ the subjective intertemporal discount rate. We also assume that first-period income y0 is certain and second-period income y1 is a random variable taking values in R+ and described by the cumulative distribution functionFy1(x)=∫0xfy1(t)dtwherefy1is a probability density function.Using results on risk changes, Eeckhoudt and Schlesinger (2008) showed that in this framework:Lemma 4(a)An increase in risk for y1determines a larger saving if and only if the agent is prudent.An increase in downside risk for y1determines a larger saving if and only if the agent is temperate.15It should be noticed that the word “larger” is used here in a weak sense to mean “⩾”. Also note that Lemma 4 directly comes from Corollary 1 by Eeckhoudt and Schlesinger (2008). That corollary refers to the concept Nth-degree risk change as defined by Ekern (1980). Ekern (1980) also states the equivalence of Nth-degree risk change to increase in risk and increase in downside risk respectively for the cases N=2 and N=3. Recalling this and substituting 2 and 3 in place of N in Corollary 1 by Eeckhoudt and Schlesinger (2008) we get Lemma 4(a) and (b).15Considering together Lemma 4 and Proposition 2 we obtain:Proposition 6If an agent increases saving in every case of increase in downside risk for y1then she will increase saving in every case of increase in risk for y1.By Lemma 4(b), if an agent increases saving in every case of increase in downside risk for y1 then she is temperate ∀x∈[0,+∞). By Proposition 2(a) this implies that the agent is prudent ∀x∈[0,+∞). This, together with Lemma 4(a), implies that the agent increases saving in every case of increase in risk.□The results in this work thus have clear implications for precautionary saving theory: the choice of the saving level in case of increase in downside risk and the choice of the saving level in case of increase in risk are related.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
