@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic pricing of primary products and ancillary services

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analyze multi-period dynamic pricing problem.Derive expression regarding expected total revenue.Analyze sales of primary and ancillary service to heterogeneous customers.Derive algorithm for deriving optimal prices of primary and ancillary service.Numerical analysis when dual pricing strategy outperforms single bundle price.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Revenue management,Ancillary services,Single-leg flight,Dynamic pricing,Customer choice,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Motivated by the growing prevalence for airlines to charge for checked baggage, this paper studies pricing of primary products and ancillary services. We consider a single seller with a fixed capacity or inventory of primary products that simultaneously makes an ancillary service available, e.g. a single-leg flight and checked baggage service. The seller seeks to maximize total expected revenue by dynamically setting prices on both the primary product and the ancillary service. In each period, a random number of customers arrive each of whom may belong to one of three groups: those that only want the primary products, those that would buy the ancillary service if the price is right, and those that only purchase a primary product together with the ancillary service. A multi-period dynamic pricing model is presented with computational complexity only of order equal to the number of periods. For certain distributions, close to analytical results can be obtained from which structural insights may be gleaned.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Consumers’ expectations of what should be included in a purchased service vary greatly. At sporting or entertainment events, nobody expects to be served complementary food or beverages. Similarly, for car-rentals, hotels, and cruises (including all-inclusive), consumers generally have little expectation of receiving ancillary services, such as car insurance, GPS, meals or wifi, for free. However, at the opposite spectrum, for air travel, consumers are, or rather were, generally accustomed to receive complementary ancillary services (such as food and beverages, inflight entertainment, and the most prominent bone of contention: checked baggage service). For example, KLM, Air France, Delta Air Lines, American Airlines, and Air Canada now all charge for checked baggage on their respective ‘domestic’  European and North American economy class flights; KLM and Air France charges Euro15 for each piece, while Delta Air Lines, American Airlines, and Air Canada charge $25 and $35 for the first and second checked bag, respectively.22On domestic Canadian routes, Air Canada charges $25 for the second.Even the US low-cost carrier Southwest Airlines, which markets flight service with two free checked bags charges for additional bags beyond two (Delta charges $125, American $150, Air Canada $100, and Southwest $50.) In sharp contrast to Southwest Airlines, the US ultra-low-cost carrier Spirit Airlines charges not only for checked baggage ($30) but also for carry-on baggage ($35).Revenue from ancillary services such as baggage fees is of growing importance to the airline industry. For example, the total baggage fee revenues for US airlines has over the past six years grown to a multi-billion dollar industry; $464M (2007), $1,149M (2008), $2,729M (2009), $3,395M (2010), $3,361M (2011), $3,487M (2012), $3,350M (2013), $3,529M (2014).33http://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/subject_areas/airline_information/baggage_fees/index.html; accessed 2015-08-27.Common arguments from airlines for charging for checked baggage are increasing fuel costs and to allow customers greater price flexibility. It is lesser known that many passenger airlines also transport cargo. Therefore low or zero baggage fees can represent an opportunity cost since fewer checked bags means more cargo space. The operational revenue from cargo transportation varies considerably among passenger airlines. For instance, for Delta and American, cargo represents only about 3% of the total operating revenue (AMR Corp, 2011; Delta Air, 2011), while reportedly for the top eight Asian airlines, cargo represents on average 30% of total revenue (Wong, Zhang, Hui, & Leung, 2009).In this paper, we present a model of a single seller with a fixed capacity or inventory of homogeneous products who also provides an ancillary service, e.g. an airline that offers checked baggage service or a hotel that provides wifi. We consider a finite, discretized time-horizon over which the seller for each period seeks to set the prices of the primary items and ancillary service in order to maximize expected total revenue. We assume in each period a random number of customers arrive and that customers randomly belong to one of three groups: those who only want a primary item and who would not consume the ancillary service even if it were free (Group 1), those who would potentially be willing to pay for both the primary item and ancillary service but who equally well would settle for just the primary item (Group 2), and those that only want a primary item as long as they also receive the ancillary service (Group 3). The objectives of the paper are: (1) to discuss how to derive optimal prices in order to maximize the expected total revenue, and (2) to analyze optimality conditions and the potential gain in charging separately for ancillary services versus a single charge for the bundle of the primary item and the ancillary service.Given the importance and growing trend to charge for ancillary services, the paper makes several contributions. First, we provide a dynamic pricing model for evaluating the expected total revenue and propose an easy to implement algorithm for deriving the optimal dynamic prices. For the special case with uniform distributions and no capacity constraint, we derive close to closed form solutions. Second, we show that the optimal prices for the unconstrained capacity problem can often serve as a good approximation for the capacity constrained problem. Third, through numerical analysis based on the uniform distribution we show that the incremental gain in charging separately for the ancillary service is higher when the proportion of Group 3 type customers is lower. In other words, the incremental gain for airlines/hotels to impose ancillary fees is smaller when the proportion of customers with demand for the ancillary checked baggage/wifi service is high. Instead the largest incremental gain for a dual pricing strategy is when the majority of customers do not demand the ancillary service.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Ancillary services have become an important revenue source in many industries using RM. A prime example is the growing trend in the airline industry to offer unbundled or add-on services such as preferred seating, early boarding, drinks, checked baggage service; see news articles McCartney (2013); White (2013). Consequently, the next generation of RM systems need to take into consideration pricing and demand of offered bundles and add-on services, and not be based solely on revenue optimization from the sale of primary products or services. Motivated by the growing prevalence in the airline industry to charge for checked baggage service, this paper has considered a seller with a fixed capacity or inventory of primary items that also makes an ancillary service available. The issue facing the seller, and main research question of the paper, is how to dynamically set prices of the primary items and the ancillary services in order to maximize expected profit.The model framework was based on three groups of heterogeneous customers: those that only want the primary product, those that could do with only the primary product but given a “right” price will also purchase the ancillary service, and those that only want the primary product provided they also receive the ancillary service. The seller’s problem is to dynamically set prices for both the primary product and ancillary service. Our formulation does not require specific distributional assumptions on the arrival process or the underlying customers’ willingness-to-pay. In this general capacity constrained setting with numerous customer combinations and allowing for lost sales, a first challenge is to formulate a useful expression for the expected total revenue. The problem was then transformed into a one dimensional optimization over the probability of a sale. Given specific distributional assumptions, this formulation allows for the exploration of structural properties. For example, for uniform distributions, we demonstrated the existence of unique optimal prices for the primary product and ancillary service. Indeed, for this example, the one dimensional formulation led to a close to closed form expression for the total expected revenue as a function of the probability of a sale.In our development we have assumed that both the distribution of the willingness-to-pay Fi(·) and the proportion of each group αiare time independent,i=1,2,3. This has purely been to keep the notational complexity to a minimum. Both stochastic components can be made functions of time with minor modification. Indeed the only real change would be to allow π(z) to be πt(z) and different for each periodt=1,…,T. In the MDP recursion the value of πt(z) (and corresponding maximizing prices(p1,tz,p2,tz)) would be called on in period t, rather than the current value π(z) (and corresponding maximizing prices(p1z,p2z)).Assuming uniform distributions is common in the extant literature and mainly done for reasons of mathematical tractability. Although this entails that the insights obtained are limited by the particular form of the uniform distributions, there are nevertheless interesting and valuable conclusions to draw. Consequently, we have included a number of analyses where the underlying distributions are assumed to be uniform. We demonstrated how our formulation can lead to close to closed form results in such cases. Based on a numerical analyses, we also investigated when pricing separately for the ancillary service is beneficial. The numerical analysis revealed some interesting and seemingly counterintuitive results. For instance, we found that the incremental gain from an optimal dual-price strategy versus an optimal single-price strategy is higher when the proportion of customers demanding the ancillary service is lower. This has important RM consequences. For instance, consider an airline with two flights: one primarily used by travelers who do not check baggage, and one primarily used by travelers who do check baggage. The incremental revenue gain in charging for the checked baggage is higher on the first flight. So, when most travelers check baggage, offering a single-price is almost equally good to charging separately for bags and the airline does not need to appear to ‘nickel-and-dime’ their customers.There are many areas to further enrich the proposed modeling framework and we hope the paper will motivate more research related to revenue management and ancillary services. Two immediate extensions include considering empirical distributions and the effect of competition. Although the presented model framework is very general and in particular imposes no distributional assumptions, the results were based on strictly increasing distribution functions for the willingness-to-pay. Extending the framework to a discrete probability space, including empirical distributions, is straight-forward and mainly entails keeping track of the point-mass at the critical thresholds. In fact, the problem becomes easier to numerically solve. The other extension regarding competition effects is a bit more challenging and would require further assumptions on the customer behavior and choice model. We leave this and other extensions for future consideration.