@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The partial adjustment valuation approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment to evaluating and measuring the business value of information technology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The new partial adjustment valuation (PAV) approach is developed.The new approach is more realistic and informative than the existing PAV approach.Broad applications of the new approach are discussed.The dynamic speeds of partial adjustment fluctuate through time.The built-in performance metrics are nonlinear.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Theory of partial adjustment,Constant speeds of adjustment,Dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment,IT productivity paradox,Non-linear least squares,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we develop the partial adjustment valuation approach in which the speeds of (partial) adjustment are assumed to be dynamic and variable, rather than fixed or constant, to assessing the value of information technology (IT). The speeds of adjustment are a function of a set of macroeconomic and/or microeconomic variables, observed and unobserved and, hence, become time-varying or dynamic and variable over time. The approach is illustrated by a practical application. The results imply that the constant speeds of adjustment may overestimate or underestimate the actual speeds of adjustment and, accordingly, may miscalculate the values of performance metrics. Thus, the partial adjustment valuation approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment is more realistic and, more importantly, captures the changing patterns and trends of the adjustment speeds and the performance measures as well. As such, the partial adjustment valuation approach with constant speeds of adjustment fails to adequately explain the dynamic production process of a decision making unit. The empirical evidence also conflicts with the lopsided view that the productivity paradox does not exist in developed countries.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The impacts of information technology (IT) investments upon firm or country performance have been emphasized these days and, hence, numerous studies have been conducted to investigate the relationship between IT investments and performance. A multitude of previous studies (e.g., Collier, Johnson, & Ruggier, 2011; Dewan & Kraemer, 2000; Grosskopf, 1993, chap. 4; Hitt & Brynjolfsson, 1996; Kao & Hwang, 2010) have applied the traditional regression analysis (TRA) approach to verify the impacts of IT investment on performance at the firm and country levels in order to assess the business value of IT. Some other studies (Chou, Shao, & Lin, 2012; Shao & Shu, 2004; Tohidi, Razaryan, & Tohidnia, 2012; among others) have applied the Malmquist index, incorporating data envelopment analysis (DEA, Bãdin, Daraio, & Simar, 2012; Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978; Cook & Seiford, 2009; Fethi & Pasiouras, 2010; Smirlis, Zeimpekis, & Kaimakamis, 2012), to measure the productivity of IT. On the other hand, Krüger (2012), Lee (2006, 2010), Lin and Shao (2000, 2006a,b), Lin (2009), and Shao and Lin (2001, 2002) have proposed applications of the time-varying stochastic production frontier (SPF) approach to evaluating the business value of IT measured by productive (technical) efficiency. Subsequently, the SPF approach has been applied in numerous studies (Chen & Lin, 2009; Lin 2009; Lin & Chiang, 2011; Lin & Chuang, 2013; Shu & Lee, 2003) for evaluating the value of IT.Recently, Lin, Chuang, and Choi (2010) have proposed a simple and useful valuation method, called a partial adjustment valuation (PAV) approach, to assess the business value of IT and offer new performance measures, with a country-level application. The authors, however, have assumed that the speed of adjustment for a decision making unit (DMU) is constant, rather than dynamic and variable; and the partial adjustment (PA) models with constant speeds of adjustment were estimated by the seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR) method proposed by Zellner (1962). The assumption of the constant speeds of adjustment (as originally presented by Nerlove, 1958) is considered as unrealistic, since it is conceivable that the adjustment speeds can be affected by macroeconomic variables, observed and unobserved, at the aggregate (country) level, such as the permanent income (Kmenta, 1997), unemployment benefits and duration of unemployment (Lin, Kao, Sharman, & Simpson, 2014), the inflation rate, the interest rate, and the discrepancy between the actual and the expected rate of interest in the same period (Lin, 1986); or by microeconomic variables, observed and unobserved, at the firm level, such as return on equity and sales growth (Lin, 1992). Furthermore, the PAV approach with constant speeds of adjustment does not offer an appropriate explanation of the dynamic behaviors of the adjustment speeds and the performance metrics over time.This study carries a step forward by proposing the PAV approach in which the speeds of adjustment are assumed to be a function of macroeconomic (at the country level) and/or microeconomic (at the firm level) variables, observed and/or unobserved. The new PAV approach is illustrated by a managerial application at the country level, since the country-level research is important but has been poorly accumulated (as argued by Lin, 2009; Melville, Kraemer, & Gurbaxani, 2004; Rosenzweig, 1974, among others) as compared to the volume of firm-level research. By permitting the speeds of adjustment to be variable and dynamic over time, the new PAV approach is considered to be more realistic and accurate to describe the real-world phenomena. In addition, by allowing the influence of unobserved variables upon the speeds of adjustment, the proposed PAV approach is capable of gauging the effect of the unobserved factors upon the production/operations process (Kmenta, 1997; Lin, 1986). Therefore, the present study represents an important and significant extension to the studies of Lin (1986) and Lin et al. (2010).The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 states the partial adjustment problem. Section 3 proposes the PAV approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment and the built-in performance metrics, based on the PA theory. Section 4 provides a discussion on the perspectives for broad applications possible of the new PAV approach. Section 5 presents a country-level application and analyzes the results. Finally, Section 6 covers a synthetic conclusion and concluding remarks.The theory of partial adjustment was initiated by Nerlove (1958) to account for the distributed lags in his study on the demand for agricultural and other commodities. He argued that the change in the actual value cannot be fully, but partially adjusted to the change in the desired value due to commonly cited reasons such as technological rigidities, habit inertia, resource constraints, and institutional controls and regulations (Lin, 1986). Written in symbol, the theory states:(1)Yjt-Yj,t-1=δjYjt∗-Yj,t-1,(j=1,2,…,mandt=1,2,…,n)where Yjtis the actual (observed) output of decision making unit (DMU) j (e.g., firm or country) at time t, Yj,t−1 is the observed output of the same DMU at time t−1,Yjt∗is the desired (ideal, true, expected, or maximum) output at time t, and δjis the constant speed of adjustment. In Eq. (1), the ratio of the change in the actual value to the change in the desired value is δj, known as the speed of adjustment, which must lie between 0 and 1 (0⩽δj⩽1). The one extreme case where the speed of adjustment is zero means that the actual output in time period t is equal to the actual output in the previous period (t−1). The other extreme case where the speed of adjustment is equal to one means that the actual output reaches the ideal level of output. Technological constraints, lack of market information, scarcity of inputs, institutional controls and regulations are often enumerated as the reasons explaining why the speed of adjustment lies between 0 and 1 (Lin, 1986; Lin et al., 2010). Adding a traditional random error (denoted by Wjt) to Eq. (1), we have(2)Yjt=δjYjt∗+(1-δj)Yj,t-1+Wjt,(j=1,2,…,mandt=1,2,…,n)where Wjtis assumed to be normally distributed according to N(0,σW2). ReplacingYjt∗by a production function in Eq. (2), just as practiced in the time-varying SPF approach, results in the PAV approach with constant speeds of adjustment, as proposed by Lin et al. (2010), in which two performance measures built in their approach have also been constructed.Both Nerlove (1958) and Lin et al. (2010) have assumed that the speeds of partial adjustment are constant rather than dynamic and variable over time. Such an assumption is far from realistic and, hence, reveals an important research problem to be resolved.As mentioned above, Nerlove proposed the theory of partial adjustment under the assumption that the speed of adjustment is constant (fixed) rather than dynamic and variable through time. The theory has been transformed into a regression analysis model (see Eq. (2)) known as the partial adjustment approach in applied research. Originally, Nerlove applied the approach to the demand for agricultural and other commodities.Since 1958, the partial adjustment approach has been applied to a wide range of disciplines ranging from microeconomics and macroeconomics (e.g., Coen-Pirani, 2004; Cook & Tang, 2010) to financial economics (e.g., Andres, Betzer, Goergen, & Renneboog, 2009; Flannery & Rangan, 2006); from lumber and pulpwood production (e.g., Lin, 1979, 1986) to production in the U.S. extractive industry (e.g., Lin, 1988); from the demand for money (e.g., Thornton, 1982) to forecasting foreign exchange rates (e.g., Lin, 2005; Lin & Chen, 1998); from finished goods inventories (e.g., Coen-Pirani, 2004; Maccini & Rossana, 1981) to capital structures (e.g., Cook & Tang, 2010; Flannery & Rangan, 2006) and to dividend policy (e.g., Andres et al., 2009); and from banking markets (Casu & Girardone, 2010) to the demand for natural gas, electricity and heating oil (e.g., Lin, Chen, & Chatov, 1987); and so on. A summary of the literature review is given in Table 1for an easy and convenient reference.The intensive review of the literature suggests that a vast majority of previous studies (Table 1) have maintained the constant speeds of adjustment assumption. There are only few studies that relax the original assumption by replacing it by the dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment assumption. Examples include Lin (1986, 1988, 2005) and Lin and Chen (1998).More importantly, the literature review suggests that all of the previous studies which assume constant speeds of adjustment provide no justifications of, and no comments on, the assumption. Lack of justifications and comments means to take the fixed speeds of adjustment assumption for granted. This leaves a gap in the literature needed to be bridged.Furthermore, the papers based on the partial adjustment approach have nothing to do with the assessment of the business value of information technology (IT), except Lin et al. (2010). In the only exception, it proposed the partial adjustment valuation (PAV) approach, still maintaining the assumption of constant speeds of adjustment, to assessing and measuring the business values of IT. We feel compelled to relax the fixed adjustment-speed assumption underling the original Nerlove’s (1958) and many others’ studies (Table 1). Thus, the purpose of the paper is to develop a new PAV approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment to assessing and measuring IT value, with an application. The new PAV approach is expected to have broad applications possible, as discussed in Section 4 below. In the high-tech era, IT has become increasingly important and, therefore, the new PAV approach will prove to be more realistic, informative, and useful than the existing one (Lin et al., 2010).The majority of previous studies based on the PA theory assume that the speed of adjustment is constant rather than dynamic and variable. In particular, as stated earlier, the PAV approach with constant speeds of adjustment as proposed by Lin et al. (2010) to assess and measure IT value cannot offer appropriate explanations of the dynamic and variable behaviors of the speeds of adjustment and, hence, the dynamic and variable patterns of the performance measures over time, since the rate at which a producer adjusts the level of actual production to reach the maximum level may be affected by public policies and/or the unexpected changes of those policies (Lin 1986; Lin & Lin, 2000). Therefore, this study relaxes the unrealistic assumption of fixed (or static) speeds of adjustment and assumes the speeds of adjustment to be a linear function of macroeconomic and/or microeconomic factors, observed and unobserved, thereby the speeds of adjustment become dynamic and variable.In order to make an important and significant extension to the one-equation PAV approach of Lin et al. (2010), the speed of adjustment (δj) in Eq. (2), which is constant rather than dynamic and variable, is now replaced by δjt=g(Zjt;αj), a dynamic and variable function. Consequently, the PAV approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment is now formulated by a two-equation system constituted by Eqs. (3) and (4) as follows:(3)Yjt=δjtf(Xjt;βj)+(1-δjt)Yj,t-1+Wjt,(j=1,…,mandt=1,…,n)(4)δjt=g(Zjt;αj),0<δjt<1,(j=1,…,mandt=1,…,n)where f(Xjt;βj) is a production function withXjtbeing a vector of production factors including the traditional capital (Kjt) and the traditional labor (Ljt) without the IT-capital (Ijt), andXjt=(Kjt,Ljt,Ijt) in the presence of Ijt. The speed of adjustment, δjt, is no longer fixed; instead, it is dynamic and variable over time and, hence, is a function ofZjt, a vector of macroeconomic (at the aggregate or country level) and/or microeconomic (at the firm, sector, or industry level) variables, observed and/or unobserved; andαjandβjare vectors of unknown coefficients. In applied research, assuming the g(⋅) function to be linear works well (Lin, 1986, 1988, 2005; Lin & Chen, 1998). In Eq. (4), if all the coefficients ofZjtwere statistically insignificant, that is, the elements ofαjwere insignificant exceptα0j, then δjt=α0jand, consequently, the two-equation PAV approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment would reduce to the one-equation PAV approach with constant speeds of adjustment (Lin et al., 2010). But it is conceivable that such an “if” is rare, provided that the elements ofZjtare properly and correctly chosen.The economic meaning of Eq. (3) is clearly that the actual output in the current period is equal to the weighted average of the true output in the current period and the actual output in the previous period, with weights equal to δjtand 1−δjt, respectively. Also, note that alternatively, Eq. (3) may be written as(3′)Yjt-Yj,t-1=δjtf(Xjt;βj)-δjtYj,t-1+Wjt.(j=1,…,mandt=1,…,nEq. (3′) indicates that the dynamic and variable speed of adjustment (δjt) is functioning as the weights of the desired and the past period’s output. In other words, the present period’s change in the actual output (i.e., ΔYjt=Yjt−Yj,t−1) is a weighted average of the desired and the past period’s output with weights equal to δjtand −δjt, respectively. Eq. (3′) also indicates that the change in the actual output is equal to the difference between the product of the dynamic and variable speed and the desired output (i.e., δjtf(Xjt;βj)) and the product of the dynamic and variable speed and the past period’s actual output (i.e., δjtYj,t−1).Concerning the forms of the production function f(Xjt;βj) required for applied research, there are such candidates as the Cobb–Douglas (CD) function, the Box–Cox (BC) transformation function, the Box–Tidwell (BT) transformation function, the translog (TL) function, and the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function. (See Arrow, Chenery, Minhas, and Solow (1961), Box and Cox (1964), Box and Tidwell (1962), Chen and Lin (2009), Kmenta (1997), Lin and Shao (2000, 2006a,b), Lin (2009), Lin et al. (2010), Lin and Chiang (2011), Lin and Chuang (2013), Usawa (1962), and so on.) Mathematically, if the two transformation parameters of BT tend to be identical (zero), BT would reduce to BC (CD); and if the only transformation parameter of BC tends to be zero, BC would collapse to CD (see Box & Cox, 1964; Box & Tidwell, 1962; Lin & Shao, 2006a; Lin, 2009). Thus, conceptually and in general, BT is the most generalized form, including BC and CD as special cases.As to the choice of the variables to be included inZjt, it depends largely on the research issues to be addressed or the research questions to be answered. In reviewing the literatures, we have found some potential candidates as listed in Table 2.As one can observe from Table 2, a number of macroeconomic factors have been cited in previous research as the potential variables that may affect the speed of adjustment. For example, Phelps (1969) has recommended the actual interest rate and the expected interest rate, and Lin (1986) has suggested that the actual government expenditure and the expected government expenditure as influential variables that make the speed of adjustment dynamic and variable over time. In other words, the discrepancies between the actual and the expected macroeconomic variables are the factors that may affect the dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment. Hackbarth, Miao, and Morellec (2004) have argued that the speed of adjustment depends on the stage of the business cycle and that the business cycle is dependent on the interest rate. Their argument implies that the speed of adjustment is eventually dependent on the interest rate, as Lin (1986, 2005) and Lin and Chen (1998) indicated. Trend or time-dummy variable is also frequently used as a variable to affect the speed of adjustment (Banjeree et al., 2000; etc.). In Lin, Kao, Sharman, & Simpson (2014), unemployment benefits (B) and unemployment duration (D) are selected to analyze the impacts of B and D upon IT value and vice versa (i.e., the impacts of IT upon B and D).Again, we can observe from Table 2 that there are several unobserved variables that have been adopted or suggested in previous studies. For instance, some authors (e.g., Phelps, 1969) have used the discrepancy between the actual and the expected rate of interest in the same period as an observed factor to estimate the speed of adjustment for their studies of highway investments. As a second example, Lin (1986) applied the difference between the actual and the expected government expenditure in the same period and the disparity between the actual and the expected rate of interest in the same period to explain the dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment in the lumber and pulpwood production. The dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment influenced by unobserved factors postulate that the actual output level of each country is affected by its unexpected changes in interest rates caused by shifts in monetary policy, or by unexpected changes due to alterations in fiscal policy.Moreover, Kmenta (1997) has recommended a number of unobserved variables as listed in Table 2. According to Kmenta, there are two types of unobserved factors: (i) variables that are contaminated by measurement errors which are related to the data used and (ii) variables that are intrinsically unobserved but can be quantified in practice by proxies or indicators. One example of the second type is the maximum (true, expected, or desired) output(Yjt∗)in Eqs. (1) and (2). Other examples of the second type include time, education, permanent income, intelligence, expected prices, expected interest rates, etc. (see Table 2).More specifically, as a result of the thorough review of previous studies, we find that the examples of useful macroeconomic variables (observed and unobserved) may include the actual interest rate (R(t)), the expected interest rate (R*(t)), the actual government expenditure (GE(t)), the expected government expenditure (GE*(t)), and the permanent income (PI*(t)). Then, the elements ofZjtin Eq. (4) may consist of UR(t)=the unexpected interest rate=R(t)−R*(t)=the discrepancy between the observed and the unobserved interest rate; UE(t)=the unexpected government expenditure=GE(t)−GE*(t)=the difference between the observed and the unobserved government expenditure; and UP(t)=the disparity between GDP(t) and PI*(t), where the unobserved variables R*(t), GE*(t), and PI*(t) are uttered by an autoregressive process of order 3 (Lin, 1986; Phelps, 1969). For example, PI*(t) is quantified by(5)PI∗(t)=12GDP(t-1)+13GDP(t-2)+16GDP(t-3).Thus, the issue of unobserved factors is important for the new PAV approach. Many unobserved variables should be introduced into the speed of adjustment function, since such variables can change the estimates of the coefficients including the estimates of the coefficients of the adjustment speed function and, hence, those of the desired output (the production function).Let the estimate ofαjbe denoted byαˆj. Then, by Eq. (4), the dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment are estimated by(6)δˆjt=g(Zjt;αˆj).0<δˆjt<1,(j=1,…,mandt=1,…,n)Eq. (6) depicts the dynamic and variable pattern of the adjustment speed over time for DMUjunder the impacts ofZjt(the observed and/or the unobserved factors) during the time period studied. Then, the estimate of the average speed of adjustment for DMUj, denoted by ASAj, can readily be computed via(7)ASAj=∑t=1ng(Zjt;αˆj)/n,(j=1,…,m)Like Eq. (6), the ASAjgiven by Eq. (7) is practically useful because it indicates how, on average, the elements ofZjtaffect the speed of adjustment of DMUjduring the time period considered. Especially, ASAjis a useful criterion to judge the performance of DMUjSimilar to the constant speed of partial adjustment case considered by Lin et al. (2010), we can construct the performance measures for the dynamic and variable speeds of partial adjustment case as given by PMjt=δjtf(Xjt;βj)=g(Zjt;αj)f(Xjt;βj), based on Eqs. (3) and (4). The measure is the product of the adjustment speed and the desired output which is quantified by a production function. Obviously, the performance measure is affected by (i) the estimate of the speed of adjustment (δjin the constant speeds of adjustment case and δjtin the dynamic speeds of adjustment case); (ii) the functional form of f(Xjt;βj), e.g., CD, BC, BT, or CES; (iii) the input components ofXjt; (iv) the estimates of unknown coefficientsβj; and (v) in the dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment case, the estimates of the unknown coefficientsαj.Hence, when the estimates of the coefficients of the production functionβjand the coefficients of the speed of adjustment functionαjhave been obtained (denoted byβˆjandαˆj, respectively), the value of the performance measure PMjtcan be defined as(8)PVjt=PM^jt=δˆjtf(Xjt;βˆj)=g(Zjt;αˆj)f(Xjt;βˆj).The average PVjt(APVj) for comparing the performance of DMUjor the value of IT is given by(9)APVj=∑tPVjt/n.(j=1,…,m).Since PVjtis considered as a monetary gain, the units of PVjtand APVjare dollars (e.g., millions of 2005 U.S. dollars used in this study).The monetary metric can be transformed into the performance ratio (index) which is equal to the performance value divided by the relevant observed output (denoted byYjtΔ). Consequently, the performance ratio (index) is given by(10)PRjt=PVjt/YjtΔ,(j=1,…,m).which must lie between 0 and 1, and whereYjtΔ=lnYjtfor CD and CES,=Yjtλ∗-1λ∗for BC, and=Yjtγ∗-1γ∗for BT withλ∗and γ∗ being the optimal values of the transformation parameters λ and γ in BC and BT, respectively. The average of PRjtis represented by(11)APRj=∑tPRjt/n.(j=1,2,…,m).It should be noted that since the speeds of partial adjustment are dynamic and variable, it follows that the built-in performance measures are also dynamic and variable (see Fig. 1).We have now completed the development of the new two-equation PAV approach with time-varying speeds of adjustment as an extension to the existing one-equation PAV approach with constant speed of adjustment (Lin et al., 2010).The new PAV approach (hereafter the new approach) is featured by several merits as compared with other methods such as DEA and SPF.First of all, DEA is a mathematical programming-oriented approach, lacks theoretical foundation, and is nonparametric; thus, unlike DEA, the new approach is parametric as SPF.Secondly, unlike SPF, the new approach involves no half-normally distributed random inefficiency variable and, therefore, is easier to apply than SPF.Thirdly, in practical applications, the new approach is particularly suitable for research topics engaged in partial adjustment towards a desired target (e.g., partial adjustment towards target capital structures or desired inventory of finished goods); and both DEA and SPF are not.Finally, the new approach is constituted by two equations (Eqs. (3) and (4)) to assess and measure the performance of the DMU: the performance is influenced by the desired (maximum) output through the first equation and is also impacted by the change in the actual (observed) output via the second equation; as such, the new approach is more appropriate for researches in a variety of disciplines than DEA and SPF, as stated in Section 4 below.In the front of applications, it is our belief that the newly proposed PAV approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment can be applied to a wide range of management and science disciplines, including Operations Research, Decision Sciences, Production Economics, Decision Support Systems (DSS), Production and Operations (PO), Information Systems (IS), Marketing, Strategy, Productivity Economics, etc. And the approach is applicable at various levels: firm, sector, industry, and country.Furthermore, though the approach is developed to evaluate the value of IT, it can be applied to assess the business values of e-commerce, communications technology, brand equity, etc., separately and jointly. For example, the importance of a brand in the discipline of Marketing at the firm or industry level cannot be overlooked. In Marketing, a brand at the industry or firm level is defined as a name, mark, symbol, or design that enhances the value of a product beyond its functional purpose (e.g., Farqubar, 1989). Since the brand name increases the value of products and, consequently, it has its own value measured by its impact on the firm’s performance via the two crucial components of the proposed PAV approach, namely, the dynamic and variable speed of adjustment and the production function. In other words, the brand name can be a very important adjustment speed-affecting variable and enters the second equation of the two-equation PAV approach to assess its value (independently of, or jointly with, IT) in a two- and a three-factor production function, as measured by the accompanied performance measure PRjtor APRjt.Specifically, the models of the PAV approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment applied to evaluate the business value of a brand can be described by:Model a, a two-factor model in the absence of IT-capital:Yjt=δjtf(Kjt,Ljt;βj)+(1-δjt)Yj,t-1+Wjtδjt=g(Bjt;αj),0<δjt<1andModel b, a three-factor model in the presence of IT-capital:Yjt=δjtf(Kjt,Ljt,Ijt;βj)+(1-δjt)Yj,t-1+ujtδjt=g(Bjt;αj),0<δjt<1where Bjtis the brand. If quantitative data on Bjtare not readily available, a proxy may have to use as its substitute. Model a is appropriate for assessing the business value of the brand independently of IT, while Model b is valid for evaluating the value of the brand jointly with IT. In the Marking literature, however, the brand name’s influence on customer, incremental cash flow, and brand replacement cost were used to evaluate the value of the brand. We have found no research that has ever applied the proposed PAV approach with dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment derived from the PA theory and its companions PRjtand APRjderived from the new PAV approach to evaluate the value of the brand!A second example to explain the perspectives of the applications of the PAV approach with variable and dynamic speeds of adjustment concerns the business values of IT and EC (electronic commerce). The new PAV approach can be applied to assess the business values of IT and EC separately and simultaneously. To do this, in the above Models a and b, Bjtis replaced by Ejt, where Ejtis EC (B2B and B2C) investments.To make theory meet application, this section is devoted to a country-level application of the proposed two-equation PAV approach with time-varying speeds of adjustment. It is both necessary and instructive to compare in details the different results obtained from both the new PAV approach developed in this study and the old PAV approach proposed by Lin et al. (2010).Among UR(t), UE(t), and UP(t) mentioned earlier, we choose only UP(t) to enter the g(⋅) function in Eq. (4) because of the problem of multicollinearity and the fact that an intensive experimentation reveals that UP(t) is the best choice among the three variables. The production function in Eq. (3) is specified to be BT, since the two transformation parameters of BT are neither identical nor equal to zero, a good justification for choosing BT to quantify the desired output.For purpose of comparison, we undertake the estimation of both constant (Case 1, Lin et al., 2010) and dynamic (Case 2, the present study) speeds of adjustment models. Each case is further pronged into two sub-cases: one sub-case considersXjt=(Kjt,Ljt) and the other one involvesXjt=(Kjt,Ljt,Ijt).Case 1The case of constant speed of adjustment (Lin et al., 2010)In this case, the speed of adjustment δjt=δjis constant rather than dynamic and variable through time. The two models (Models 1 and 2) related to Case 1 are described as follows:The first model incorporating BT is given byYjtγ-1γ-Yj,t-1γ-1γ=δjf(Xjt;βj)-δjYj,t-1γ-1γ+Wjt,where(12)f(Xjt;βj)=βj0+βj1Kjtθ-1θ+βj2Ljtθ-1θ.The optimal values (γ∗ and θ∗) of the BT transformation parameters (γ and θ) in Model 1 are obtained by maximizing(13)Lmax(γ,θ)=-nm2lnSSEnm+(γ-1)∑j,tln(Yjt)+(θ-1)∑j,tln(Yjt)where SSE is the sum of squares due to error (Box & Tidwell, 1962; Lin & Shao, 2000, 2006a; Lin, 2009). The estimated optimal values, γ∗ and θ∗, for Model 1 are −0.1177747991 and −0.1451526066, respectively, which are not equal to zero, justifying the deployment of BT. Then, they are used to transform the data for estimating the coefficients of Model 1.The second research model incorporating BT is described by(14)Yjtγ-1γ-Yj,t-1γ-1γ=δjf(Xjt;βj)-δjYj,t-1γ-1γ+Wjt,wheref(Xjt;βj)=βj0+βj1Kjtθ-1θ+βj2Ljtθ-1θ+βj3Ijtθ-1θ.Using Eq. (13), the optimal parameters (γ∗ and θ∗) are found to be −0.1640624389 and −0.1648592935, respectively, which again are not equal to zero, providing an empirical justification for the employment of BT.Models 1 and 2 are called structural models. They are not directly estimable. To estimate the structural (implicit or constrained) coefficients of Models 1 and 2, we need their counterparts called the non-structural (explicit or unconstrained) models, denoted by Model 1′ and Model 2′, respectively, given by:(15)Model1′:Yjtγ-1γ-Yj,t-1γ-1γ=γj0+γj1Kjtθ-1θ+γj2Ljtθ-1θ+γj3Yj,t-1θ-1θ+Wjt,where γj0=βj0δj, γj1=βj1δj, γj2=βj2δj, and γj3=−δj; then, the estimates of the constrained coefficients can be uniquely derived from the estimates of the unconstrained coefficients under the exact identification as follows:βj0=γj0/δj,βj1=γj1/δj,βj2=γj2/δj,andδj=-γj3.(16)Model2′:Yjtγ-1γ-Yj,t-1γ-1γ=γj0+γj1Kjtθ-1θ+γj2Ljtθ-1θ+γj3Ijtθ-1θ+γj4Yj,t-1θ-1θ+Wjt,Consequently, γj0=βj0δj, γj1=βj1δj, γj2=βj2δj, γj3=βj3δj, and γj4=−δj; then,βj0=γj0/δj,βj1=γj1/δj,βj2=γj2/δj,βj3=γj3/δj, and δj=−γj4.The unrestricted Models 1′ and 2′ in the constant speed of adjustment case were estimated by the seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR) method developed by Zellner (1962). SUR provides more efficient estimates than their OLS counterparts when a panel data set is used, as shown in Lin et al. (2010).Case 2The case of dynamic and variable speeds of adjustment (the present study)The two models (Models 3 and 4) in this second case under the BT specification are described as follows:Yjtγ-1γ-Yj,t-1γ-1γ=δjtf(Xjt;βj)-δjtYj,t-1γ-1γ+ujt=δjtf(Xjt;βj)-Yj,t-1γ-1γ+ujt,where(17)f(Xjt;βj)=βj0+βj1Kjtθ-1θ+βj2Ljtθ-1θ,andδjt=αjo+αj1UPjtwith0<δjt<1.Yjtγ-1γ-Yj,t-1γ-1γ=δjtf(Xjt;βj)-Yj,t-1γ-1γ+ujt,where(18)f(Xjt;βj)=βj0+βj1Kjtθ-1θ+βj2Ljtθ-1θ+βj3Ijtθ-1θ,andδjt=αjo+αj1UPjtwith0<δjt<1.It is necessary to note that since Models 3 and 4 are overparameterized and intrinsically nonlinear, neither OLS nor SUR is valid for estimating Models 3 and 4; hence, the task of estimation is carried out by the nonlinear least squares (NLS) method (Kmenta, 1997; Lin, 1986).In this practical application, we use a set of country-level panel data covering the period from 1993 to 2008. The data needed were collected from the reliable database of OECD (The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development). Thirteen countries are selected based on the consideration of data availability. These countries are Canada (CN), France (FR), the United Kingdom (UK), the United States (US), Japan (JP), Australia (AS), Austria (AT), Belgium (BG), Spain (SP), Sweden (SW), Denmark (DM), the Netherlands (NL), and New Zealand (NZ). Though the time period covers from 1993 to 2008, the two-year (1993–1994) data are needed to quantifyPIjt∗, resulting in 182 observations (the product of thirteen countries and fourteen years).The actual (observed) output (Yjt) is represented by a country’s gross domestic product (GDP), the traditional capital (Kjt) is defined as a country’s gross capital formation minus IT investmentjt, and the traditional labor (Ljt) is calculated as a country’s total labor cost minus IS (information systems) staffing costjt. The IT capital (Ijt) is defined as computer capitaljt+3×IS staffing expensesjt, as practiced in numerous studies (e.g., Brynjolfsson & Hitt, 1996; Dewan & Kraemer, 2000; Hitt & Brynjolfsson, 1996; Lin & Shao, 2000; Lin et al., 2010; Shao & Lin, 2002; Shu & Lee, 2003). Computer capital is the sum of IT hardware, IT software and other office equipment, while IS staffing expenses are the sum of the expenses of IT services and internal IT expenses.To maintain data consistency, all the data on GDP, total labor cost, government expenditure, interest rates, CPI, etc. for all the countries considered are acquired from one source which is the OECD Statistics Database. The data on computer capital and IS staffing expenses of all the countries considered were collected from Digital Planet 2002 – the Global Information Economy, Digital Planet 2006 – the Global Information Economy, and Digital Planet 2008 – the Global Information Economy, published by The World Information Technology and Services Alliance (WITSA).2The website of this organization is http://www.witsa.org/.2All the data on the relevant variables are measured in millions of 2005 U.S. dollars.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
