@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Critical infrastructure protection using secrecy – A discrete simultaneous game

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Present a simultaneous game model for critical infrastructure protection.Optimally allocate limited resources to protect critical infrastructures.Prove pure-strategy Nash equilibrium solution does not exist.Describe approach for identifying a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium solution.Used IEEE RTS 96 test system as illustration of approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Critical infrastructure protection,Simultaneous game,Intentional attack,Information,Secrecy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this research, critical infrastructure protection against intentional attacks is modeled as a discrete simultaneous game between the protector and the attacker, to model the situation that both players keep the information of their resource allocation secret. We prove that keeping the information regarding protection strategies secret can obtain a better effect of critical infrastructure protection than truthfully disclosing it. Solving a game theoretic problem, even in the case of two players, has been known to be intractable. To deal with this complexity, after proving that pure-strategy Nash equilibrium solutions do not exist for the proposed simultaneous game, a new approach is proposed to identify its mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium solution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The economic development and social wellbeing of modern societies are highly dependent on critical infrastructures, such as energy transmission and distribution, transportation and telecommunication (Ramirez-Marquez, Rocco, & Levitin, 2009; Simic, Lugaric, & Krajcar, 2009). Their continued effective performance creates a national sense of confidence, identity and purpose (The White House, 2003). Conversely, the destruction or degradation of such critical infrastructures could have a debilitating impact on the economy, the security, the public health or the safety of a nation (Chakravarty, 2011; Cheatle, 2006; Ojha, Salimath, & D'Souza, 2014). Thus, understanding intelligent and cost-effective approaches for their protection and upkeep has become and will continue to be paramount (Ramirez-Marquez et al., 2009; Zhang, Ramirez-Marquez, & Rocco, 2011).Intentional attackers have become one of the major threats contemplated against critical infrastructures. They are known to be inventive and resourceful and even have an advantage over the protector in terms of choosing the time, the targets, and the means of attacks (Bier, Cox, & Azaiez, 2009; Levitin & Hausken, 2010). Also, they have the ability to collect the information about an infrastructure (e.g. the configuration and protective measures) and analyze it to develop optimal attack strategies (Brown, Carlyle, Salmeron, & Wood, 2006). Most importantly, they can be adaptive so as to change their attack strategies in response to the change of protection strategies.Thus, the interaction between the attacker and the protector need to be addressed, in order to develop cost-effective strategies to protect critical infrastructures from intentional attacks. Game theoretic approaches have been proven useful to fulfill this purpose (Bier et al., 2009; Hausken & Zhuang, 2011; Zhang & Ramirez-Marquez, 2013; Zhuang, Bier, & Alagoz, 2010). The reader is referred to Hausken and Levitin (2012) for a review of infrastructures defense and attack models.One of the most important issues encountered by the protector when implementing game theoretic approaches is the information disclosure policy. One policy, referred to as truthful disclosure in this research, is that the protector truthfully discloses all the information regarding the protection measures adopted, so that the attacker can obtain these information before making decisions. This policy is usually modeled as a two-stage game in the literature (Azaiez & Bier, 2007; Bier, Nagaraj, & Abhichandani, 2005; Hausken & Levitin, 2009; Hausken & Zhuang, 2011; Korzhyk, Yin, Kiekintveld, Conitzer, & Tambe, 2011; Levitin, 2009; Zhang & Ramirez-Marquez, 2013), within which the protector allocates resources to protect the infrastructure in the first stage. Then, in the second stage, after being aware of how the defensive resources are allocated without any uncertainty, the attacker determines the optimal attack strategy.Another policy of information disclosure, referred to as secrecy in this research, is that the protector keeps the whole or partial information of protection strategies secret so that the attacker has no or only limited information about the allocation of protection resources when determining attack strategies. Zhuang and Bier (2010) described several applications, without quantitative analysis, where secrecy would be preferred to truthful disclosure, such as a theft game, Lojack, and onboard air marshals. In the case of onboard air marshals, if the information about which specific planes have air marshals is kept secret, attack deterrence can be obtained by having air marshals aboard only a limited number of planes.However, the comparisons between the two aforementioned information disclosure policies conducted by a series of studies, such as Bier (2007), Zhuang and Bier (2007), Hausken (2011b) and Hausken and Bier (2011), indicate that the protector should truthfully disclose the information about protection strategies, instead of keeping it secret. It has been suspected that the possible reasons for this conclusion lie in the assumptions adopted by these studies: 1) the protector has no private information; 2) the success probability of an attack is a convex function of the amount of protection resources allocated; 3) decision variables (i.e., the amount of resources allocated to each component) are continuous (Dighe, Zhuang, & Bier, 2009; Zhuang & Bier, 2010). Moreover, they did not consider mixed strategies.Another drawback of existing studies considering secrecy is that they are usually restricted to systems with trivial structures (e.g., isolated components, series, parallel, series–parallel, etc.). In the proposed zero-sum game, Major (2002) considered a system as the combination of isolated components. Levitin and Hausken (2010) considered only parallel systems with identical components to study the influence of the attacker's unprotected component detection capacity on the development of protection strategies.Based on the rent-seeking model, Hausken and Bier (2011) described a simultaneous game between one protector and multiple attackers, viewing the studied system as an isolated component. Hausken (2011a) studied interlinked components, but modeled the total damage under attack as a weighted-sum of damages to certain series and parallel systems. The structure studied by Hausken (2010) is more realistic. However, he transferred the game theoretic problem into a reliability analysis problem, which has been known to be NP-hard (Agrawal & Barlow, 1984).Although Zhuang et al. (2010) and Zhuang and Bier (2011) identified secrecy at equilibrium, these studies are also focused on an isolated component. They also assume that the protector has private information, such as target valuations and expense effectiveness. Assuming that the success probability of an attack is a non-convex function of the amount of protection resources allocated and strategies are discrete, Dighe et al. (2009) also indicates that secrecy should be preferred to truthful disclosure by the protector. However, they only considered two isolated components.In all, the benefits of secrecy over truthful disclosure have not yet been properly studied in the context of real-world infrastructures, which usually have more general structures than those studied by existing studies. Also, how to efficiently allocate defensive resources among potential components of an infrastructure to make use of secrecy when possible is still an open question.Secrecy can be studied in a simultaneous game, within which each player has to make their decisions before knowing their opponents’ strategies (Zhuang & Bier, 2007, 2011). Therefore, to address current research gaps, this research proposes a simultaneous game between the protector and the attacker, to model the problem of critical infrastructure protection against intentional attacks using secrecy. Comparatively, when truthful disclosure of information is employed by the protector, the game is modeled as a two-stage game with the protector moving first, as in the literature.A flow network is employed to represent a critical infrastructure. In the proposed games, the protector seeks to find the optimal protection strategy, which is to protect a subset of the network links within his/her resources, while the attacker seeks to inflict the highest level of damage to the network by attacking a subset of the network links, also within his/her resources. The maximal network flow between the source and sink nodes of the network is employed in this research as a figure of merit. Destruction of network links leads to the decrease of the maximal network flow and the amount of this decrease is understood as the total damage to the whole infrastructure. Thus, the objective of the protector and the attacker is to respectively maximize and minimize the maximal network flow, assuming that they are both rational players.Given the protection and attack strategies described above, the two information disclosure policies can be further clarified as follows. If the attacker knows exactly which specific links have been protected at the time of making decisions, we say that the protector is truthfully disclosing information about his/her strategies. Comparatively, as long as the attacker cannot be sure about which specific links have been protected before making decisions, it is viewed that the secrecy policy has been adopted by the protector.Secrecy can be achieved, for example, by randomly choosing links to protect, as in a mixed strategy, which is known as a probability distribution over the player's actions (Osborne, 2004). Under a mixed strategy, the protector randomly chooses links to protect in each time period, according to the specific probability distribution. This way, although the attacker may be able to infer the probabilities that each link is protected, he/she is uncertain about which specific links have been protected when making decisions. We believe that this uncertainty provides the protector more cost-effective utilization of scarce protection resources.As a building block to solving more realistic problems, we assume that, once a link is protected, it cannot be destroyed by the attacker. Thus, the attack success probability is considered as a non-convex function of the amount of protection resources devoted. We also assume that except for the exact allocation of attack and defensive resources are kept secret by the attacker and the protector respectively when the policy of secrecy is adopted, there is no other private information held by the two players. Specifically, each player knows his/her opponent's resource constraints, valuation of the infrastructure, the infrastructure's topology and so forth.Note that in the proposed simultaneous game, the two players do not have to move at exactly the same time. The game can be viewed as a simultaneous game as long as no players have information of their opponents’ strategies (i.e., the subset of links protected/attacked). Under the described assumptions, we prove that pure-strategy Nash equilibrium solution does not exist for the proposed simultaneous game and, it is preferred keeping information of protection resource allocation secret, as in the simultaneous game, rather than truthfully disclosing it, as in the sequential game.The number of protection/attack strategies increases exponentially as the number of network links increases, which leads to a computational challenge considering that real-world infrastructures usually have thousands of or even millions of components (consider national power grids, public telecommunication systems, and the world wide web). Approaches based on complete set of strategies of each player (e.g., Lemke–Howson algorithm (Lemke & Howson, 1964)) would be too time consuming to identify Nash equilibrium solution of the proposed game.To deal with this challenge, this research tailored the algorithm described by Godinho and Dias (2010, 2013) to solve the proposed simultaneous game. One of the most important steps for implementing this algorithm is to identify the best response of each player to his/her adversary's strategy. This problem is modeled as a Network Interdiction Problem (NIP).The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the problem is described and the simultaneous game is proposed. Section 3 describes the algorithm of identifying the equilibrium solution to the game described in Section 2. In Section 4, experimentation is presented to illustrate the proposed approach. Finally, Section 5 discusses the proposed approach and concludes the article.In this research a critical infrastructure is modeled as a two-terminal network with known source node s and sink node t, represented by G (N, A), where N represents the set of nodes, and A = {(i, j)|i, j ∈ N, i ≠ j}, represents the set of links. Without loss of generality, it is assumed that each link in set A can be indexed by k= 1, 2,…, |A|. A capacity is associated to each link. Also, let the network state vector x = (x1, x2,…, xk,…, x|A|) denote states of all the links in the network, where xk=0 if link k is destroyed and xk= 1 if link k is working properly. The structure function F(x): B(|A|) → Z+ maps a state vector x into the corresponding maximal network flow between s and t, where, B={0, 1}.It is important to mention that although the proposed approach considers maximal network flow, it can be adapted to consider other figures of merit (FOMs) such as reliability, distance, time delay, etc. Also, although the proposed approach is described based on a two-terminal network structure, it can be adapted to consider networks with multiple source nodes and sink nodes, given that the maximal network flow from source nodes to sink nodes can be determined via certain approaches, such as DC optimal power flow (DCOPF) for electricity systems (Hedman, Oren, & O'Neill, 2011).In this research, the interaction between the protector and the attacker is modeled as a simultaneous game, when the information about the allocation of protection resources is kept secret by the protector. It is assumed that when making decisions, the protector (attacker) can obtain information about the total amount of attack (protection) resources, but do not know exactly which links are to be attacked (protected) by his/her opponent. It is also assumed that both the protector and the attacker have complete information about the network configuration. One should note that the two players do not have to move at exactly the same time. The game can be viewed as a simultaneous game as long as no players know their adversaries’ strategies before making decisions.It is assumed that both the protector and the attacker are rational players. Thus, the protector seeks to maximize the maximal network flow between s and t by allocating limited resources to protect a subset of network links. Conversely, the attacker seeks to minimize the maximal network flow between s and t by allocating limited resources to attack a subset of network links. We also assume that when an unprotected link, say k, is attacked, it is destroyed (xk= 0). Protected or not attacked links are considered as functional (xk= 1).We also assume that both the attack and protection costs are equal to 1 unit for each link, based on which resources constraint can be understood as the number of links that can be attacked or protected. Let d = (d1, d2…, dk…, d|A|) represent a protection strategy, where dk= 1 if link k is protected and dk= 0 otherwise. Let Cdrepresent the total number of links that can be protected, and Carepresent the total number of links that would be attacked under resources constraint. Let D represent the set containing all possible protection strategies (i.e., d ∈ D). Let y = (y1, y2…, yk…, y|A|) represent an attack strategy, where yk= 1 if link k is attacked and yk= 0 otherwise. Let Y represent the set containing all possible attack strategies (i.e., y ∈ Y). Let F(x|y, d) represent the maximal network flow between nodes s and t of G(N, A) under protection strategy d and attack strategy y.To summarize, the following assumptions and notations are utilized in this paper.Assumptions1.The protector and the attacker are rational players in the proposed game.An unprotected component is destroyed whenever it is attacked, and a protected component cannot be destroyed by the attacker.The protector and the attacker are aware of their adversaries’ amount of resources.Protection and attack resources are limited and for an arbitrary set of link failures with cardinality less than Ca(the amount allowed by attack resources), there exists at least one set of unprotected links with cardinality less than or equal to Cathat, once destroyed, can cause higher damage to the network.NotationsNSet of nodesSet of linksTwo-terminal networkSource nodeSink nodeIndex of links k = 1,…, |A|Network state vector, x = (x1, x2,…, xk,…, x|A|)Probability of taking protection strategy i in the gameProbability of taking attack strategy i in the gameProtection strategy vector, d = (d1, d2…, dk…, d|A|)Set containing all possible protection strategies, d ∈ DAttack strategy vector, y = (y1, y2…, yk…, y|A|)Set containing all possible attack strategies, y ∈ YMaximal network flow under protection strategy, d, and attack strategy, yThe total number of links that can be protected under resources constraintThe total number of links that would be attacked under resources constraintSet containing identified attack strategiesSet containing identified protection strategiesThe network protection using secrecy can then be modeled as a simultaneous game described by Model I and Model II. The protector seeks to identify the protection strategy that maximizes the maximal network flow between nodes s and t of G(N, A), while the attacker tries to identify the optimal attack strategy to minimize the maximal flow between nodes s and t of the network.Model I(1)Maxd∈DF(x|y,d)s.t.(2)∑k=1|A|dk≤CdModel II(3)Miny∈YF(x|y,d)s.t.(4)∑k=1|A|yk≤CaComparatively, when information of protection resource allocation is truthfully disclosed, the game between the protector and the attacker can be modeled as Model III.Model III(5)Maxd∈DMiny∈YF(x|y,d)s.t.(6)∑k=1|A|dk≤Cd(7)∑k=1|A|yk≤CaThere does not exist any pure strategy Nash equilibrium solution for the proposed simultaneous game, considering that whenever the protector tries to protect a set of links, the attacker would avoid attacking any links within the set in order to inflict the highest damage, and whenever the attacker tries to attack a set of links, to minimize the potential damage, the protector would intend to protect as many links within the same set as available protection resources allow. This leads to a cycle, like the rock-paper-scissor game and the game of matching pennies.Proposition 1Pure-strategy Nash equilibrium solution for the simultaneous game described inEqs. (1)–(4)does not exist.For the proof, see Appendix A.Better effect of critical infrastructure protection can be obtained by keeping information regarding protection resource allocation secret rather than truthfully disclosing it.For the proof, see Appendix B.Solving a game theoretic problem, even in the case of two players, has been known to be intractable (Papadimitriou, 2007). To deal with this complexity, we adopted the algorithm described by Godinho and Dias (2010, 2013) and made necessary adaptions in order to obtain the Nash equilibrium solution of the proposed simultaneous game. Although may not be able to identify all Nash equilibrium solutions that may exist, the algorithm is guaranteed to reach one equilibrium solution. Let u represent the number of pure strategies identified by the algorithm, before getting into a cycle. Initially, u = 1. The algorithm can then be tailored to solve the proposed game as follows:Step 1.InitializationLet u = 1, identify the attack strategy, yu, that can minimize the maximal network flow of the network without any protection, under the constraint of the attacker's resources. Then, identify the protector's best response, represented by du, to the attack strategy, yu.Best responses identificationStep 2.1.Let u = u + 1, identify the attacker's pure strategy best response, represented by yu, to protection strategy, du−1.Identify the protector's pure strategy best response, represented by du, to attack strategy, yu.If du= du−1, (yu, du) represents a pure strategy Nash equilibrium solution of the proposed game, stop.If du= dl, for any l = u − e, (e is an integer number, and 1 < e < u), a cycle is reached. Let set Sa = {yk|l < k ≤ u} and let set Sd = {dk|l < k ≤ u}.Otherwise, go to Step 2.1.Nash equilibrium computation based upon restricted sets of strategiesStep 3.1.Compute a Nash equilibrium (p, q) – note that p and q here represent respectively mixed protection and attack strategy – for the game defined by the attacker's action set Sa, and the protector's action set Sd. As the proposed game can be considered as a zero-sum game, this can be done by transferring to a linear programming, as described by Tardos and Vazirani (2007). The resulted linear programming is solved by a commercial solver, CPLEX, in this research.Identify the attacker's pure strategy best response, y, to the protector's mixed strategy, p, and the protector's pure strategy best response, d, to the attacker's mixed strategy, q. If F(x|d, q) ≤ F(x|p, q) and F(x|p, y) ≥ F(x|p, q), (p, q) represents a Nash equilibrium solution, stop.Otherwise, Sa = Sa∪{y}  and Sd = Sd∪{d}Go to Step 3.1.In the original description by Godinho and Dias (Godinho & Dias, 2010, 2013), the algorithm starts by randomly selecting an action for an arbitrary player. Alternatively, in this research, we start the algorithm from the attacker's pure strategy that can minimize the network's maximal network flow without any links protected. This is plausible considering the unique characteristic of the proposed game – the attacker tries to inflict the highest damage on the network, and the protector only has incentives to protect links that may be attacked, at least with some probability. Protecting links that will never be attacked (e.g., because of low importance) only leads to a waste of valuable defensive resources.During this process of search, especially at the beginning when the number of links that can be protected (Cd) and the number of links that can be attacked (Ca) are not equal, there may be a tie between two strategies. That is, two strategies may result in the same value of damage to the network. This tie is broken by considering the opponent's second best responses. That is, the strategy with the highest maximal network flow under the attacker's second best response is chosen for the protector, and the strategy with the lowest maximal network flow under the protector's second best response is chosen for the attacker. If the strategies have the same level of maximal network flow under the opponent's second best response, we break the tie by randomly selecting one.In the algorithm described in the previous section, one of the most important steps is to compute the two players’ best responses to their adversaries’ given strategies. To clearly describe the approach to fulfill this purpose, assume that at the beginning of step u, Nash equilibrium solution has been determined as the sets of strategiesSd*for the protector andSa*for the attacker, with the probability distributions represented byp,p=(p1,p2,…,p|Sd*|), andq,q=(q1,q2,…q|Sa*|), respectively.To identify the protector's best response to q, note that the protector has only incentives to protect links that appear in some attack strategies inSa*to efficiently utilize defensive resources to maximize the maximal network flow. Let Dr represent the set of potential protection strategies that protect only links that would be attacked by at least one attack strategy, i.e.,Dr={dk|ifdmk=1,dmk∈AL,forallm=1,2,…,|A|}, where AL represents the set of all links that appear in at least one attack strategy y,y∈Sa*. The search for the protector's best response can then be restricted to set Dr, which can highly decrease computation time. The problem can then be described by Model I-R, and solved by a commercial solver, CPLEX.Model I-R(8)Maxd∈Dr∑i=1|Sa*|qi×F(x|yi,d)s.t.(9)∑m=1|A|dm≤CdThe identification of the attacker's best response to a given protector's strategy is modeled as a Network Interdiction Problem (NIP), as described by Model II-R. NIP is generally employed to minimize a network's maximal flow by interdicting a subset of its links within interdicting resource constraints (Zhang & Ramirez-Marquez, 2013). It has been widely implemented into areas such as drug interdiction (Wood, 1993), military planning (Whiteman, 1999), hospital infection control (Assimakopoulos, 1987) and so forth. Model II-R, is utilized to identify the attack strategy that can minimize the expected network flow under the given protection strategy, represented by the set of protection strategiesSd*, and probability distributionp=(p1,p2,…,p|Sd*|). In this research, for small scale networks, Model II-R is solved by a commercial solver, CPLEX. For large scale networks, the evolutionary algorithm PSDA, as described by Ramirez-Marquez (2008), isemployed.Model II-R(10)Miny∈Y∑i=1|Sd*|pi×F(x|y,di)s.t.(11)∑m=1|A|ym≤CaThe proposed approach can be used to identify a Nash equilibrium solution for the proposed simultaneous game efficiently. For the example described in Section 4.2, which has 117 links, when the quantity of protection and attack resources are equal to 2 and 3 units respectively, only 10 pure strategies of each player are found to constitute the support of the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium solution. Comparatively, the protector and the attacker have respectively 6786 and 160,130 possible pure strategies.This section employs two networks, a two-terminal network and an IEEE RTS 96 test system, to illustrate that the proposed approach can be used to analyze networks with general topologies, instead of only simple topologies, such as series, parallel, or series–parallel as in the literature. Effects of the two information disclosing policies, namely truthful disclosure and secrecy, have also been compared. The approach presented in Section 3 was coded in C++ and the two examples were solved with a Core™ Quad desktop computer at 3.20 gigahertzand 8 gigabytes of RAM.In this section, the two-terminal flow network shown in Fig. 1 originally presented by Dai and Poh (2002) is analyzed. The numbers above each link represent respectively, link index number and link capacity. For this network, the maximum flow between source node (node s) and sink node (node t) equals 44 units when all links work properly.We firstly consider the condition that the protector has 3 units of resources and the attacker has 2 units of resources. It has been assumed that protecting and attacking each link incurs in a unitary cost, respectively. Thus, only 3 links can be protected and 2 links can be attacked. After running the algorithm, the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium solution can be found as shown in Tables 1 and 2. In Table 1, the rows and columns represent all pure strategies contained in respectively the mixed protection strategy and the mixed attack strategy. Damages to the network, i.e., the decrease of the maximal network flow, under each pair of pure protection strategy and attack strategy are also shown in Table 1. Table 2 represents the probability distributions over the pure strategies.Thecombination of mixed protection and attack strategies described by Tables 1 and 2 represents a Nash equilibrium solution to the proposed simultaneous game, which means no player can be better off by adopting any other strategies given that his/her adversary retains the strategy described by Tables 1 and 2. Under the identified combination of protection and attack strategies, the expected damage to the network would be 11.3769 units.The identified equilibrium can be employed to guide the protector to efficiently allocate limited available resources to ensure expected capacity of critical infrastructures under intentional attacks. Resources can be allocated according to the identified probability distribution over pure protection strategies. For example, if protection resources are time of patrolling links (such as border patrol problem considered by Brown et al. (2006)), the time can be determined as: assigning 30.51, 25.86, 18.78, 10.69, 7.08, 4.04, and 3.04 percent of time to respectively patrol links contained in set, {1, 3, 28}, {4, 29, 30}, {2, 28, 30}, {1, 3, 30}, {2, 3, 29}, {1, 28, 30}, and {1, 2, 4}.To understandthe effect of secrecy, we also identified the mixed Nash equilibrium solutions of the proposed simultaneous game under different combinations of the amount of attack and protection resources as shown in Table 3 and Fig. 2, and compared them with the solutions under truthful disclosure of the information of protection strategies, as described by Model III solved by a commercial solver, CPLEX. The last column of Table 3 represents the improvement on the protection effect, i.e., decrease of damage to the network when attack happens, when adopting secrecy compared to truthful disclosure.According to Table 3 and Fig. 2, it can be found that using secrecy can highly decrease (by 7.6231, 7.6698, 7.6524 and 8.5555 units under respectively conditions 1, 2, 3 and 4) the damage to the network when intentional attack happens compared to the policy of truthful disclosure of the information regarding the allocation of protection resources. It can be realized that one of the most important reasons for this improvement is that when the policy of secrecy is adopted, it has certain probability that an attack strategy happens to attack protected links and thus cannot inflict the level of damage as expected by the attacker.For example, as shown in Table 2, when the attacker decides to implement attack strategy, {3, 30}, the probability that it cannot inflict any damage is 0.1069, which equals the probability that protection strategy {1, 3, 30} is implemented. Moreover, the probability that this attack strategy can only partially succeed equals 0.8625, which equals the sum of probabilities that the protector implements protection strategy {1, 3, 28}, {2, 3, 29}, {4, 29, 30}, {2, 28, 30}, and {1, 28, 30}.Comparatively, when truthful disclosure is adopted, the attacker can obtain complete information regarding which links are protected, and thus can determine optimal attack strategies that would succeed without uncertainty. For example, under the condition that the amount of protection resources and attack resources are respectively 3 and 2 units, the optimal protection and attack strategy are respectively to protect links 1, 28, and 30, and to attack link 3 and link 4, as the solution to Model III. The attack strategy would succeed and inflict a damage of 19 units, which is much higher than the expected damage (11.3769 units) when secrecy policy is adopted.It can be found that truthfully disclosing the information regarding protection resource allocation (i.e., the set of protected components) can “guide” the attack from the protected components to components with less potential damage to the whole network. For example, in the previous example, knowing that links 1, 28, and 30 have been protected leads to attacking link 3 and link 4, whose failure cause less damage (19 units) to the network than the failure of link 1 and link 30 (25 units), or link 28 and link 30 (26 units). However, the damage using truthful disclosure is still much higher than the expected damage (11.3769 units) using secrecy. To some extent, this is similar with rock-paper-scissor game and the game of matching pennies. In these two games, truthful disclosure of strategy information leads to a loss of the games, while using secrecy makes it possible to win the games.To illustrate a different network behavior and consider a more realistic networked infrastructure, this section considers an IEEE RTS 96 test system. As an electrical power transmission network, the RTS 96 test system consists of 73 buses, 117 branches, 111 generators distributed over 30 buses (which are considered as source nodes), and 8550 units of loads (i.e., demand for the electricity) distributed over 51 buses (which are considered as sink nodes). Buses here are considered as nodes and branches are considered as links of the network.In this research, we assume that the buses cannot be destroyed and only the branches can be destroyed. The minimal generating cost for meeting all the loads without any failures of branches can be obtained via the classical DCOPF (Zhang & Wang, 2014) model, which equals 26128.6 units. Then, this cost is viewed as a constraint. That is, when an intentional attack happens and some branches are destroyed, we compute the minimal Loss of Load without violating this generating cost based on the DCOPF approach. This minimal Loss of Load is then considered as the damage the attack inflicts on the system.We also assume that a unitary cost is required for protecting and attacking each link, respectively. The condition that the protector has 2 units and the attacker has 3 units of resources is firstly analyzed. Thus, at most 2 branches can be protected, while at most 3 branches can be attacked. After running the proposed approach, the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium solution was found, as shown in Tables 4and 5. Table 4 describes branches protected and attacked by respectively each pure protection and attack strategy, together with the probabilities that each pure strategy is taken, which constitute the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium solution. Under this equilibrium solution, the expected damage to the IEEE RTS 96 test system equals 1412.13 units. Table 5 provides the damage to the system under each combination of pure protection and attack strategies.It can be found that the protector tends to allocate more resources to protect the combination of components that will cause higher damage to the system when fail. For example, the combination of components that can cause the highest damage to the system when fail is {8, 17, 74}, and the combination that can cause the second highest damage when fail is {20, 59, 96}, which can cause respectively 1958.98 units and 1824.73 units of damage. Thus, the combination of branches that the protector tends to allocate the highest amount of resources (i.e., the highest probability of taking the strategy, 0.2713) to protect is {17, 20}, which makes the two attack strategies, namely {8, 17, 74} and {20, 59, 96}, not preferable to the attacker (i.e., their probability of being taken equal zero). This observation is consistent with our intuition in that the protector seeks to make the attack strategy that can cause the highest damage not successful.As described in Section 4.1, the identified Nash equilibrium solution can be employed to guide the allocation of protection resources. For example, when the amount of protection resources, such as patrol teams, scanning machines, sensors, etc., is limited, the period of time that they are allocated to protect the combinations of branches can be determined according to the corresponding probabilities. To clarify, let us assume that only two sensors are available to detect the signs of intentional attacks. Then, the ratio of time period that they are allocated to protect branch combinations, {17, 20}, {20, 59}, {6, 23}, {27, 98}, {7, 21}, {8, 17}, {6, 15}, {1, 27}, {22, 27}, and {1, 22}, can be determined as respectively 27.13, 14.20, 13.72, 13.51, 10.07, 8.08, 6.77, 4.34, 1.62, and 0.56 percent.In order to compare the policies of secrecy and truthfully disclosure of the information of resource allocation, the proposed approach and the game described by Model III, solved by a commercial solver, CPLEX, have also been implemented to this example considering different combinations of the amount of protection and attack resources. Equilibrium solutions have been identified as shown in Table 6and Fig. 3.Similar with the example described in Section 4.1, significant improvement on the efficiency of using protection resources has been found when secrecy is employed, compared with the policy of truthful disclosure. Specifically, under different combinations of the amount of available protection and attack resources, 331.86, 316.89, 361.73, 295.01 units of Loss of Load can respectively be reduced using secrecy compared with truthful disclosure.One of the most important reasons for this improvement is that when the policy of secrecy is taken, attacker has no information regarding which branch has been protected when making decisions. Thus, with certain probability, the attack strategy would be to attack some branches that have already been protected, which would lead to a failure or partial success of the attack. For example, in the case described in Table 4, when protection strategy number 2, i.e., protecting branch 20 and 59, is implemented by the protector, if the attacker decides to attack branches 20, 59, and 96 (attack strategy number 5), only branch 96 could be destroyed.It can also be found that under the same amount of attack resources, the effect of improving the amount of protection resources is higher using the policy of secrecy than truthful disclosure. To clarify, consider the amount of attack resources to be 2 units. When the policy of truthful disclosure is used, improving the amount of protection resources from 2 to 3 units causes no reduction on the damage on the system (they both equal to 1286.08 units). On the other hand, when secrecy is used, the improvement of protected branches from 2 to 3 can reduce the damage by 14.98 units (from 969.20 units to 954.22 units) when the attack is restricted to 2 branches. The same effect can be found for the condition that 3 branches could be attacked, where improving protected branches from 2 to 3 causes 20.85 units and 87.57 units reduction on the damage under truthful disclosure and secrecy policy, respectively.This research proposed a simultaneous game to model the problem of optimally allocating limited resources to protect critical infrastructures from intentional attacks, while keeping information regarding the exact allocation of protection resources secret. After proving that pure-strategy Nash equilibrium solution does not exist for the proposed simultaneous game, we described an approach for identifying its mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium solution.We also proved that keeping the information regarding protection resource allocation secret is preferred rather than truthfully disclosing it. Finally, the proposed approach was illustrated by a two-terminal network and an IEEE RTS 96 test system, from which it is also found that, compared to truthful disclosure of the information about protection strategies, using secrecy can help obtain a better effect of allocating limited available resources to protect critical infrastructures against intentional attacks.As a first step towards studying more realistic conditions, this research has assumed that once a link is protected, attacker cannot destroy it. This assumption is used to simplify the condition that the protector is able to ensure that the protection of each component is successful. The condition that protected links can still be damaged when the amount of devoted attack resources is large enough, will be studied in the future in order to make the approach more realistic. This research did not consider the cost of implementing a mixed protection strategy, which may be caused by measures needed to hide the resource allocation, or encountered when changing the strategies (e.g., when relocating some inspecting machines). Taking these costs into account can make the problem more realistic and will be studied in the future.This research has assumed that the attacker is rational and thus, his/her objective is to inflict the highest damage to the infrastructure. An interesting topic for future research is how to efficiently allocate defensive resources given that the attacker's rationality is bounded. In future, we will also conduct research on how other approaches, such as deception, can help to obtain better utilization of defensive resources in the context of a large-scale infrastructure with non-trivial topologies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
