@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An implicit enumeration algorithm for the passenger service planning problem: Application to the Taiwan Railways Administration line

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigated the passenger service planning problem of a railway company.An implicit enumeration algorithm was developed to solve this problem.Intelligent branching and effective bounding strategies were explored and incorporated.Results show that we can obtain service plans that are at least as good as real-world plans.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in service industries,Passenger railway,Service planning,Implicit enumeration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In a passenger railroad system, the service planning problem determines the train stopping strategy, taking into consideration multiple train classes and customer origin–destination (OD) demand, to maximize the short-term operational profit of a rail company or the satisfaction levels of the passengers. The service plan is traditionally decided by rule of thumb, an approach that leaves much room for improvement. To systematically analyze this problem, we propose an integer program approach to determine the optimal service plan for a rail company. The formulated problem has a complex solution space, and commonly used commercial optimization packages are currently incapable of solving this problem efficiently, especially when problems of realistic sizes are considered. Therefore, we develop an implicit enumeration algorithm that incorporates intelligent branching and effective bounding strategies so that the solution space of this integer program can be explored efficiently. The numerical results show that the proposed implicit enumeration algorithm can solve real-world problems and can obtain service plans that are at least as good as those developed by the rail company.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Railway transport plays an important role in passenger service for long-distance transportation in various metropolitan areas, especially in many Asian countries (e.g., Japan and China). With the growing importance of energy conservation and carbon emissions reduction, improving the quality of railway system service and encouraging its use have become significant issues because public railway transport produces less pollution than private transport. For a passenger railroad system, the rail company must address the service planning problem, which determines the train stopping strategy; to do so, the company must take into consideration both the multiple train classes in use and the customer origin–destination (OD) demand to maximize its profit. Note that train class is related to its service level. For instance, the express train can provide the highest service level by skipping certain stations with fewer passengers and only stop at major stations while local train stops at every station to service the short-distance commuters. If a train skips more stations, the travel times to reach different OD pairs can be shorter.According to an interview with the staff from Taiwan Railways Administration (TRA), which is one of the major railway companies in Taiwan, service plans are primarily determined manually based on experience. To the best of our knowledge, most rail companies do not have a systematic procedure for solving this service planning problem. In this work, we propose a mathematical programming model for the service planning problem and develop an implicit enumeration algorithm, which explores problem features to accelerate the solution process. Specifically, we devise effective bounding techniques and propose a series of enhanced branching rules so that the enumeration tree can be explored effectively in the implicit enumeration algorithm. The proposed solution framework is empirically applied to real-world networks of various sizes. To demonstrate their efficacy and efficiency, the solutions from the procedure are compared with the optimal solutions from a commercial optimization package. The promising results show that the implicit enumeration algorithm can solve real-world problems within a reasonable timeframe and can determine service plans that are at least as satisfactory as the practical plans already in use by the studied railway company.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 critically overviews the related work in the literature, and Section 3 presents a mathematical model for the passenger service planning problem. The implicit enumeration algorithm used for solving the problem is detailed in Section 4, and the empirical studies are summarized in Section 5. The final section (Section 6) offers conclusions and suggestions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
