@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Capacity market design options: A dynamic capacity investment model and a GB case study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assess three capacity market design options under feed-in from renewable energy sources.We develop a dynamic capacity investment model to assess the market effect.We compare along three dimensions: affordability, reliability, and sustainability.In a Great Britain case study, we find that a capacity market increases generation adequacy.Furthermore, we show that a capacity market can lower the total bill of generation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Capacity mechanism,Capacity market,Dynamic capacity investment model,Generation adequacy,Conventional electricity generation investment,Renewable energy sources,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rising feed-in from renewable energy sources decreases margins, load factors, and thereby profitability of conventional generation in several electricity markets around the world. At the same time, conventional generation is still needed to ensure security of electricity supply. Therefore, capacity markets are currently being widely discussed as a measure to ensure generation adequacy in markets such as France, Germany, and the United States (e.g., Texas), or even implemented for example in Great Britain.We develop a dynamic capacity investment model to assess the effect of different capacity market design options in three scenarios: (1) no capacity market, (2) a capacity market for new capacity only, and (3) a capacity market for new and existing capacity. We compare the results along the three key dimensions of electricity policy—affordability, reliability, and sustainability. In a Great Britain case study we find that a capacity market increases generation adequacy. Furthermore, our results show that a capacity market can lower the total bill of generation because it can reduce lost load and the potential to exercise market power. Additionally, we find that a capacity market for new capacity only is cheaper than a capacity market for new and existing capacity because it remunerates fewer generators in the first years after its introduction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Conventional electricity generation is increasingly unprofitable in several European markets. The major reason is that increasing feed-in from renewable energy sources (RES) decreases revenues of conventional generation through decreasing electricity prices and load factors—often referred to as the merit order effect of renewable energy (Sensfuß, Ragwitz, & Genoese, 2008). At the same time, conventional generation is still needed to ensure security of supply due to the intermittency of RES. This challenge currently leads to a resurgence of the discussion around capacity mechanisms11A capacity mechanism is a regulatory instrument to ensure the availability of a certain amount of electricity generation capacity in a market.as a suitable measure to ensure generation adequacy22Generation or supply adequacy describe an amount of electricity generation capacity that is sufficiently large to meet electricity demand even at peak hours.,33Additionally, there are other factors creating fear of capacity shortage and therefore reinforcing the discussion: 1. Several large power plants that were built during the 1970s and 1980s have reached the end of their economic lifetime and are scheduled to be retired; 2. Coal fired power plants are soon to be forced out of the market due to the EU large combustion plant directive (EU, 2001) 3. In Germany, all nuclear power plants are scheduled to be decommissioned by 2022 at the latest (German Federal Government, 2011)..Renewable energy is growing in major markets worldwide. It has reached a share of total electricity generation of 11 percent in Great Britain, 13 percent in the U.S., and 22 percent in Germany in 2012. Most important in terms of renewable capacity growth are intermittent sources, namely wind (onshore and offshore) and solar photovoltaic (PV). An essential characteristic of these sources is that the total cost is almost entirely driven by capital costs and that marginal costs are close to zero. As a consequence, in an energy-only market, RES push conventional generation out of the money, if they are available. Hence, the load factors of conventional generators decrease, along with average wholesale electricity prices44(short- and medium-term), and generators become unprofitable. In 2012 for example, gas-fired generation was unprofitable in Germany, France, and the Netherlands, while it was only barely profitable in Great Britain (Bloomberg, 2013a; Platts, 2013; Reuters, 2013).Due to the intermittency of RES however, these sources are not able to fully replace conventional generation55As long as there is no cost-efficient grid scale storage for electricity available.. Moreover, studies of VDE (2012) show that the need for conventional generation capacity stays almost unchanged with rising levels of feed-in from RES. They find that the required conventional peak capacity stays the same with increasing renewable feed-in, only the need for energy from conventional generation decreases (in terms of power generated).The contradiction between lower profitability of conventional generation, which causes investors to stay away from new investment, and continuously high demand for reliable capacity puts generation adequacy at risk. Different capacity mechanisms have been discussed to ensure supply adequacy. The three most important ones are strategic reserves, capacity payments, and capacity markets. What distinguishes the three schemes most clearly is the question of who sets the price of capacity and who sets the quantity that is being supplied: a strategic reserve is realized through the regulator determining system critical power stations and paying these specific plants the fixed costs necessary to keep them available for times of capacity shortage. In contrast to that, a capacity payment is a market-wide fixed price set by the regulator, while the quantity is subsequently determined by the market (the market will determine how much capacity is profitable to be supplied at the given price). A capacity market reverses the logic of a capacity payment as the regulator sets the quantity necessary for generation adequacy and auctions that quantity in the market. Hence, the market sets the price that is required to provide the quantity needed to fulfill generation adequacy needs. Additionally, the schemes differ in terms of market clearing: with strategic reserves, the regulator pays for capacity of selected generators only66Selection is mostly done by location, i.e., if a plant is located in a region of shortage, or by profitability, i.e., if a plant would be unprofitable without a strategic reserve payment.. In a capacity payment scheme, all generators receive a fixed payment per megawatt installed. Whereas in a capacity market, the regulator auctions the capacity needed for generation adequacy annually. From their design, some benefits and downsides of each mechanism can easily be detected: strategic reserves are a very flexible measure that can be adjusted quickly by the regulator, but the existence of strategic reserves distorts price signals in periods of shortage—i.e., hindering investment in new capacity. A capacity payment allows for the option of different payments per technology but bears the risk that setting the price too low or too high leads to a lack of capacity or to overcapacity. The capacity market is most focused towards fulfillment of the regulator’s goal to ensure the required capacity at the lowest possible price. On the downside, it significantly increases market complexity because it introduces an additional market that is interdependent with the electricity market. Our brief qualitative discussion shows that there are differences between these policy schemes and that all of the schemes exhibit individual strengths and weaknesses. Hence, it is not obvious what the effects of the introduction of such a mechanism are in a specific case. Therefore, we enrich the qualitative discussion by a model to quantify the expected effects in the specific market where the mechanism might be introduced.All schemes are in use in some markets77Strategic reserves exist in Finland, Germany, and Sweden; Capacity payments in Ireland, Portugal, and Spain; Capacity markets in several markets in the U.S.—e.g., in the PJM (Pennsylvania-Jersey-Maryland Interconnection) and in New England., but the current regulatory discussion is mostly focused on capacity markets: examples are the U.K. where a capacity market is currently in the process of legislation and implementation and the discussions in France, Germany, and Texas. Therefore, we focus on the capacity market scheme to facilitate this discussion through a quantification of effects of different capacity market design options on market prices and generation mixes. To the best of our knowledge, the paper is the first to quantify the difference between three scenarios: (1) an energy-only market, (2) a capacity market for new capacity only and (3) a capacity market for new and existing capacity through a dynamic capacity investment model. We apply this model in a GB case study to show its practicality in a case where exactly these policy decisions are currently discussed. At the same time, we set up the model in a way that it could easily be transferred to any other market as well. The findings are of value to three groups. First, regulators discussing the introduction and the possible effects of a capacity market scheme in their market. Second, investors planning to invest in markets with such a scheme88Either already implemented or in regulatory discussion.. Third, all other market participants such as grid operators, equipment manufacturers, and utilities evaluating possible future regulatory impact.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief overview of the literature regarding capacity mechanisms in liberalized electricity markets in general, of qualitative discussions of capacity markets, and of quantitative simulation and capacity expansion models. Section 3 describes our capacity investment model. In Section 4, we present the assumptions and results of our GB case study. Section 5 provides general policy recommendations that can be derived from our findings, while Section 6 concludes and provides suggestions for further research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
