@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Issues Mapping: A problem structuring method for addressing science and technology conflicts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Issues Mapping and other problem structuring methods (PSMs) can help address science and technology risk conflicts.PSMs have advantages over traditional risk communication approaches.Issues Mapping is applied to the genetic engineering controversy in New Zealand.Participant and researcher evaluations of Issues Mapping are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Problem structuring methods,Issues mapping,Science and technology conflicts,Risk communication,Dialogue,Genetic engineering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There are new opportunities for the application of problem structuring methods to address science and technology risk conflicts through stakeholder dialogue. Most previous approaches to addressing risk conflicts have been developed from a traditional risk communication perspective, which tends to construct engagement between stakeholders based on the assumption that scientists evaluate technologies using facts, and lay participants do so based on their values. ‘Understanding the facts’ is generally privileged, so the value framings of experts often remain unexposed, and the perspectives of lay participants are marginalized. When this happens, risk communication methodologies fail to achieve authentic dialogue and can exacerbate conflict. This paper introduces ‘Issues Mapping’, a problem structuring method that enables dialogue by using visual modelling techniques to clarify issues and develop mutual understanding between stakeholders. A case study of the first application of Issues Mapping is presented, which engaged science and community protagonists in the genetic engineering debate in New Zealand. Participant and researcher evaluations suggest that Issues Mapping helped to break down stereotypes of both scientists and environmental activists; increased mutual understanding; reduced conflict; identified common ground; started building trust; and supported the emergence of policy options that all stakeholders in the room could live with. The paper ends with some reflections and priorities for further research.Problem structuring methods (PSMs) involve participants in a discussion where they engage around models. These models help people who might initially have different perspectives on an issue to clarify and develop their understandings, and identify what actions can or should be taken.Problem structuring methods can be contrasted with problem solving methods (Rosenhead & Mingers, 2001). The latter assume that, even if the problem is complicated, analysis can allow it to be understood objectively, and there is a correct or optimal solution to it. In contrast, PSMs start from the assumption that there may be multiple perspectives on what the problem is (Jackson, 2006). Likewise, what counts as an effective solution or an improvement depends on the framing used in an analysis and the values that inform that framing (Churchman, 1970; Midgley, 2000; Ulrich, 1983). With PSMs, it is therefore not possible to talk about ‘optimal solutions’ in the manner that is common in the OR problem solving literature (Checkland, 1985).PSMs can also be differentiated from other approaches to enabling discussion, such as meetings with agendas and focus groups. A distinguishing feature of PSMs is the use of models as ‘transitional objects’ (temporary foci) to structure engagement (Eden & Ackermann, 2006; Eden & Sims, 1979). These models may use words, pictures and/or numbers to represent, for example, people’s understandings of a problematic situation; the assumptions underpinning a particular stakeholder perspective; and/or the activities that might be needed to improve the situation. Typically, models are qualitative and are constructed collectively in a workshop, but sometimes they are brought in by a facilitator based on previous inputs from participants and are used to orientate engagement: “the model… plays a key role in driving the process of negotiation towards agreement through discussion and the development of a common understanding” (Eden & Ackermann, 2006, p. 766). However, a ‘common understanding’ does not necessarily imply consensus or agreement across the board: it may be an agreed understanding of the differences between people’s perspectives and what accommodations are possible in the circumstances (Checkland & Scholes, 1990).Rosenhead and Mingers (2004), Rosenhead (2006) and Mingers (2011) argue that PSMs are particularly useful when it is necessary to address complex issues characterised by “multiple actors, differing perspectives, partially conflicting interests, significant intangibles, [and] perplexing uncertainties” (Rosenhead, 2006, p. 759). In the policy literature, these are sometimes called “wicked problems” (Rittel & Webber, 1973). PSMs are useful for addressing wicked problems because they support participants’ learning about their own and other perspectives, as well as the broader problematic situation people find themselves in.Importantly, the quality of the engagement between participants matters to the success of problem structuring. Franco (2006) contrasts different forms of conversation, such as persuasion and debate, with dialogue (also see Anderson, Baxter, & Cissna, 2004; Bohm, 1996; Buber, 1958; Gergen, McNamee, & Barrett, 2001; Tannen, 1998, for some earlier, seminal writings on this concept). Persuasion is when one party tries to unilaterally change the viewpoint of another, and debate happens when two parties enter a conversation with a view to defeating the arguments of the other. In contrast,“…participants in a dialogue do not attempt to validate particular propositions or find weaknesses in them. Rather, participants listen to find strength and value in another’s position and work together towards a mutual understanding… Dialogue involves the suspension of judgment or pre-conceptions, an equal participation in the conversation by the parties, empathetic listening, and the mutual probing of assumptions… The goal of dialogue is to jointly create meaning and shared understanding between participants…” (Franco, 2006, p. 814).Franco makes the important point that problem structuring works best in the context of dialogue, rather than persuasion, debate or other lower-quality forms of engagement where listening to others is restricted. This echoes earlier research in systems/OR suggesting that problem structuring is most effective when open communication between participants with different perspectives is possible. In the context of coercion or manipulation (the pretence of open communication by some participants without the intention to really listen or act), it is difficult to improve mutual understanding with existing PSMs (Jackson, 1987a; Midgley, 1997).Having stressed the value of dialogue to problem structuring, it is nevertheless important not to embrace a naïve understanding of dialogue. We have three concerns relating to this. First, while some writers (e.g., Bohm, 1996) stress the suspension of preconceptions, it is actually only possible for an individual to interpret a communication from someone else by employing concepts with existing meanings (Gregory, 1992; Maturana, 1988; Maturana & Varela, 1992; Von Foerster, 1979; Von Glasersfeld, 1985; Weimer, 1979). Therefore, preconceptions are inevitable. In our view, it is not the absence of preconceptions that characterises dialogue; rather, it is openness to the questioning and revision of preconceptions, whether they are ones own or another’s.A second, related issue with some understandings of dialogue is the assumption that dialogue communication is completely free from the effects of power relations. Bohm (1996), Habermas (1976, 1984) and others talk about eliminating the effects of power. This is problematic because power relations do not only take the form of one participant coercing another. Power can also be present in the form of the preconceptions discussed above, and these can be reinforced or challenged through the selection of the participants and dialogue setting, and the construction of the process used. Foucault (1980) explains how today’s preconceptions may be established through historical power relations, and they may constrain what it is considered legitimate to say or do (also see Flood, 1990; Brocklesby and Cummings, 1996, for discussions of the relevance of this to systems/OR). One commonly cited example is the privileged status accorded to scientific knowledge, which ‘trumps’ other forms of knowledge such as those that have been developed and used over multiple generations by indigenous people (McPhail, 2004; Smith, 1999). Often participants may not even be aware of the preconceptions, or assumptions, that they are taking for granted in a dialogue. Therefore, the critical point is that dialogue consists of open communication, free from the effects of coercion (rather than power in general), where all preconceptions are in principle available for scrutiny. In practice, however, it is not possible to scrutinise all preconceptions, and therefore eliminate the effects of power relations, because dialogue would have to be extended infinitely: every probing of preconceptions would involve the deployment of concepts based on further preconceptions, which would in turn need to be scrutinised, ad infinitum (Ulrich, 1983). Arguably, a more reasonable indicator of dialogue is that it enables explorations of boundaries: who should participate in discussions; what issues and forms of knowledge should be included, excluded or marginalised; and what values should drive processes of inclusion, exclusion and marginalization (Midgley, 2000; Ulrich, 1983). In other words, a dialogue involves openness to reflection on the conditions that constitute it, even if that reflection can never be comprehensive.Our third concern arises around the need for facilitation. Bohm’s (1996) dialogue method assembles a group of 20–40 people in a circle, normally without a facilitator or a topic, and allows the conversation to simply emerge. He assumes that an “impersonal fellowship”, involving authentic trust and openness, can develop in a group, even without the participants having a shared history (Bohm, 1996: x). In contrast, more recent writers on dialogue (e.g., Franco, 2006) do not make such an assumption. Rather, they rely substantially on expert facilitation to overcome problems of dominance by some participants, and to maintain an etiquette of dialogue (Cronin, 2007): i.e. to foster mutual respect and affirmation, and to focus the discussion on questions of inquiry rather than assertions or ‘win-lose’ dynamics (Gergen et al., 2001).We suggest that an approach to dialogue which allows for the facilitated questioning of taken-for-granted framings without assuming that this will entirely eliminate power relations fits well with the use of PSMs. The latter are often deployed in ‘real world’ situations that impose constraints on the extent and duration of stakeholder and citizen participation. High quality problem structuring in the context of dialogue therefore involves critical reflection on these constraints alongside the mutual exploration of assumptions, leading to the identification of new ways forward for action.PSMs have been used in dialogue to address a wide range of complex issues (Rosenhead & Mingers, 2004). However, they appear to have been underutilized in the context of science and technology conflicts: only a few case studies can be found in the literature (Kartowisastro & Kijima, 1994; Nakagawa, Shiroyama, Kuroda, & Suzuki, 2010). This is arguably because the field of science and technology conflict has historically been dominated by the discourse of risk communication, and until recently there has been little exchange between the risk communication and problem structuring research communities.Below, we argue that a traditional risk communication approach often limits the potential for dialogue between scientists and other stakeholders, including wider communities of concerned citizens. We suggest that approaches based on problem structuring principles offer more promise for conflict resolution and improved decision outcomes. In this light we introduce Issues Mapping, a PSM specifically designed for addressing science and technology conflicts. We outline its application in the context of a stakeholder engagement programme focused on dialogue around the development of genetically engineered (GE) organisms. We argue that Issues Mapping helps construct engagement differently, making it more dialogical than most forms of risk communication, and hence it is more likely to produce fruitful outcomes in resolving science and technology conflicts. Therefore, it is not only the case that problem structuring is most effective in the context of dialogue (as argued by Franco, 2006), but also a good PSM can enhance dialogue and improve the prospects for deliberation on complex problems.Risk communication is now regarded as integral to risk management; see, for example, the new standard ISO 31000 (Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand, 2009). Risk communication first emerged over forty years ago in response to what was seen as the gap between scientific knowledge and social perceptions of risk, and has traditionally been aimed at realigning ‘lay’ public responses to fit ‘expert’ technical assessments (Fischoff, 1998; Leiss, 1996; Morgan, Fischoff, Bostrom, & Atman, 2002). Initially, the problem of social resistance to science and technology was constructed as a lack of knowledge on the part of the public. Communication responses were designed to overcome the ‘deficit’ in the public understanding of science, and thereby reduce risk aversion (Irwin & Wynne, 1996).However, in the case of many new technologies (such as nuclear power, pest control and food irradiation), public aversion still remained. Promoting science and communicating technical information were found to be insufficient to change risk perceptions and enable acceptance (Slovic, 2000). New methods were called for to engage the public with scientific expertise. Two-way communication between ‘risk proponents’ and ‘risk respondents’ was then advocated as a more effective way of increasing public understanding and improving the information base available to decision-makers (National Research Council, 1989). A significant trend was the development of so-called ‘dialogue methods’, which involved the provision of scientific information and listening to public concerns (Renn, 1998). These methods, which do not usually involve modelling (and are therefore not PSMs), were introduced to improve public trust in science and to reduce the level of conflict around key technology applications (Covello, Sandman, & Slovic, 1988; Chess, Hance, & Sandman, 1989). ‘Dialogue’ is now being widely promoted in the field of risk communication to resolve conflicts between ‘experts’ and ‘the public’ around controversial health and environmental risks, notably in relation to biotechnologies and nanotechnologies (see, for example, Klinke & Renn, 2002; Renn, 2004; Stebbing, 2009; Wardman, 2008).Exchanges involving two or more parties are commonly referred to as ‘dialogue communication’, but arguably this usage does not capture the full meaning and potential of dialogue as described by Buber (1958), Bohm (1996), Franco (2006) and others. Instrumental forms of engagement, which are primarily designed to support the smooth implementation of technology proposals, risk policies and/or regulatory decision making, are not truly dialogic. Authentic dialogue enhances mutual respect and understanding of the self and others, and can be transformative when it supports participants in their efforts to open up new insights and uncover deeper layers of meaning. It offers prospects for personal and even institutional change. This form of dialogue facilitates the identification of a wider set of potential actions than were apparent prior to the dialogue commencing. Instrumental dialogue may offer the promise of meaningful engagement, but it prevents any questioning of the dominant framing of the risk being considered, and therefore reduces the scope for reflection and reflexivity. Instrumental approaches may also obstruct the consideration of alternative frames being employed by different stakeholders; inhibit the identification of the full range of issues and impacts relevant to a proposal; and limit the exploration of alternative strategies and technical options.A key means by which risk communication approaches prevent the questioning of dominant frames is by assuming that scientists evaluate technologies using facts, while lay participants employ values and perceptions (Cook, Pieri, & Robbins, 2004). This problematic assumption remains dominant in risk communication, despite the move towards ‘dialogue’: see, for example, a recent report for the International Risk Governance Council (Renn, 2005). ‘Understanding the facts’ is considered the central activity in traditional risk communication, and this has two limiting effects. First, the perspectives of lay participants (assumed to be values alone) are effectively marginalized. Second, the values of scientists and policy experts (which inevitably exist) remain unexposed to scrutiny. Under these circumstances, it becomes virtually impossible to question the value-laden framing of issues that makes a particular fact relevant or not, and genuine dialogue orientated to mutual understanding is frustrated (Irwin & Wynne, 1996; Wynne, 2000).We argue that PSMs, particularly those that are applied with recognition of the value of authentic dialogue (Franco, 2006), may open up more opportunities for addressing science and technology conflicts than have been developed to date in traditional risk communication. As long as stakeholders are willing to engage meaningfully, dialogue has the potential to generate ‘break through’ experiences for participants in a risk dispute, even in the case of deeply controversial technologies such as genetic engineering (GE). Establishing a dialogic setting that ensures equal participation and voice for stakeholders (and hence the validation of multiple perspectives) can lead to mutual respect and improved understanding. Under these conditions, fresh insights into the issue may surface, including the emergence of new ways forward for its management. Below we introduce Issues Mapping, a problem structuring method that we argue can support and enhance dialogue.By the early 2000s, the public debate around GE in New Zealand was widely seen as problematic and irreconcilable. In response to increasing social and political tension arising from both the GE debate and other science controversies, the New Zealand Ministry of Research, Science and Technology (MoRST) funded a trial of dialogue methods in 2002–2005. The Dialogue Programme (MoRST, 2005) was aimed at improving ‘science and society’ engagement and sought to move beyond traditional approaches to science communication predicated on promoting science and increasing scientific literacy amongst the public. It supported a series of dialogue interventions involving scientists and non-scientists in four regions of New Zealand.In an applied social research project funded under this programme in 2003–2004, Cronin and Jackson (2004) proposed that, even though the discussion between scientists and wider society around GE was difficult, and full agreement between stakeholders might not be possible, there were nevertheless opportunities to improve communication. Their research set out to engage scientists and community stakeholders who had an active interest in the development and use of GE biotechnologies. The aim was to involve participants with strongly divergent views to explore if new communication methods based on dialogue could reduce conflict and create improved understanding. Cronin and Jackson’s (2004) report, Hands Across the Water, discussed their trial of adaptations of two established dialogue methods: Appreciative Inquiry (Cooperrider, Whitney, & Stavros, 2003) and the Civil Conversation, developed by Rhonda Pritchard based on the US Public Conversation project (Chasin et al., 1996; Herzig, 2001; Pritchard, 2004). They also trialled a PSM called Issues Mapping, which is the focus of this paper (also see Cronin, 2007). Issues Mapping structures dialogue around visual representations (models) of the GE risk issue.The Hands Across the Water dialogue project sought to contribute new insights into the way science and technology controversies could be managed. Cronin and Jackson’s (2004) research was informed by the literature on public participation, environmental conflict resolution and risk communication, noting inter alia the work of Creighton (1992), Fisher and Ury (1983), Hammond and Royal (1988), Jackson (2001), Lofstedt and Frewer (1998), Morgan et al. (2002), Wynne (1992) and Wynne (2000). The project assumed that science and society stakeholders in the New Zealand GE debate would be open to new forms of communication, and would be willing to move beyond risk conflict. This was premised on previous New Zealand research, including Cronin and Marchant (2002) and Hunt (2002), which had indicated significant potential for scientists to respond to public expectations of biotechnology, and for members of the public to articulate scientific concepts and questions. The intention was to create a meaningful space for dialogue.It should also be noted that both the Hands Across the Water project in general and Issues Mapping in particular were developed in direct response to the ‘mental models’ approach in risk communication advocated by Morgan et al. (2002). The latter approach starts with experts defining the ‘actual’ risks of a technological proposal, and then these are contrasted with the ‘perceived’ risks of the lay public. The framings of the public are then modelled to identify where they deviate from the ‘actual’ risk data held by the experts. Finally, risk communication initiatives are used to overcome the gap between lay and expert assessments: i.e. to bring the lay assessments into line. In contrast, Issues Mapping assumes that both ‘lay’ and ‘expert’ stakeholders use mental models; both have social perceptions of risk, and develop assessments through a process of framing; and all views are relevant, although based on different premises (see Wynne, 2000, for further thinking on why these assumptions are more appropriate than the ones implicit in Morgan et al’s approach).Participant recruitment to the Hands Across the Water dialogue project (Cronin & Jackson, 2004) was targeted at key protagonists in the GE debate: i.e. GE scientists and members of community interest groups. It was decided to work with these key stakeholders rather than others (business, farming or ‘the general public’) because the conflict between ‘scientist’ and ‘community’ groups was widely perceived as central to the discourse in New Zealand society. Nevertheless, it was acknowledged that these were simplified labels: scientists were also members of the community, and many in the interest groups were also trained scientists. Several participants challenged these labels to avoid being given a narrow ‘pro’ or ‘anti’ association. It was explained that the terms were ‘shorthand’, and a diverse range of opinions was being recruited within each group.Following discussion with key organisations in the science, government, industry and community sectors, and using the professional networks of the researchers, a total of 93 people were initially recruited into the project: 46 scientists and 47 community participants. The ‘scientists’ included those working on GE in the laboratory, or as programme leaders or managers in a range of universities, government research institutes and private companies. Their fields of interest included theoretical biology, food, medicine and agricultural applications of biotechnology. ‘Community’ participants included members of community interest groups with concerns about the environment, Māori issues (Māori are the indigenous people of New Zealand), trade and development, safe food, health, sustainable agriculture and spiritual (including Christian) values.Respondents were invited to take part as individuals rather than as representatives of their groups, under strict conditions of confidentiality, and to present their personal opinions rather than the official policies of their organisations. This was important to ensuring that participants could contribute without direct reference to the formal roles and scripts that they had adopted in the public risk debate about GE.Within the wider Hands Across the Water project, the Issues Mapping method was implemented in 5 stages, as outlined below (note that these are generic steps that can also be utilised in other contexts):(1)Gathering baseline information. Telephone interviews were completed with a group of 66 respondents (29 community and 37 scientists) to generate preliminary information on their general views about biotechnology and the public debate about GE. Taken from the initial 93 recruits, this telephone sample comprised a representative mix of science/community participants, including Māori and non-Māori and men and women in public/private sector and community organisations, across New Zealand.Interviews. In depth, individual, face-to-face interviews were held with 24 participants (12 scientists and 12 community) on their perceptions of GE generally; their views on the motivations of and their trust in other stakeholders; their views on the way the GE debate had been conducted in society; and their expectations for future engagement. Participants were asked to rank the acceptability of a range of GE applications, including 9 transgenic/non-transgenic applications; 10 possible end uses, such as agricultural and medical; and 8 containment-related applications, from strict laboratory containment to full scale field release. Respondents were also presented with 8 value statements related to the GE debate and asked which of these issues were personally at ‘the heart of the matter’ for them. The carefully worded ‘heart of the matter’ question was based on the approach originally used in the Public Conversations project (Chasin et al., 1996) and the Civil Conversation (Pritchard, 2004). Note that the rankings of acceptability and ‘heart of the matter’ prioritisations of value statements were not done in a spirit of reductionism, except in the sense that all models involve reduction. A reductionist (or calculative) use of rankings determines decision making using a formulaic principle (such as ‘majority rule’). The purpose of rankings in Issues Mapping is not calculative; it is to inform participants in dialogue about their initial differences, and we make the assumption that the perspectives of participants may change through that dialogue.Production of risk acceptance models. A series of graphic representations was then created to illustrate the responses from the interviews (see Fig. 1). The individual risk acceptance rankings were collected in Microsoft Excel and presented as bar graphs to show ranges of acceptance for the different GE applications on a three point scale: least acceptable, neutral and most acceptable. Responses were collated for the full group of participants (n=24) along with contrasting models showing separate science and community rankings (Fig. 2). Responses to the ‘heart of the matter’ question were collected in a concentric circle diagram, showing those matters which were most central and most peripheral to respondents’ concerns (Fig. 3). Again, rankings were shown for the full group and for scientists and community respondents separately. This enabled participants to locate themselves in the discursive landscape alongside and in contrast to others. A strength of employing bar charts and concentric circles is that these are widely used forms of representation that most participants will be able to easily understand.Issues Mapping Workshop. A mixed group of 10 participants (5 scientists and 5 community stakeholders) took part in a half day workshop, led by an expert facilitator. Participants took part on a first name basis, and were not identified as ‘scientist’ or ‘community’ unless they chose to indicate their backgrounds during the discussion. Following the approach used in the Public Conversation method (Chasin et al., 1996; Herzig, 2001; Pritchard, 2004), participants were invited to focus on personal narratives relevant to the issue of GE, and were also introduced to some general ideas about dialogue. The focus of the workshop was to present the risk acceptance and the ‘heart of the matter’ models, and invite respondents to engage with each other about the results. The models illustrated areas of overlap/agreement and disagreement between the two groups of respondents. Seeing the total picture of the discourse created significant discussion about how the GE debate itself had been constructed and experienced by participants. Science and community participants were then invited to work in matched pairs to ask inquiring questions of each other (avoiding assertions and rebuttals) about their responses to the models and the issues that had been raised. An important component of the process was a shared sit down meal, half way through the workshop. This served to engage protagonists in closer proximity than they had experienced previously in the GE debate, and created a ‘civil setting’ for discussion which added to the atmosphere of respectful listening. Participants were lastly invited to consider what they agreed or disagreed on concerning the GE issue; the issues that were a priority for everyone, even if people took different positions on them; where there was common ground; and where they would like to see the GE debate going in the future.Evaluation. Participants took part in a short evaluation discussion at the end of the workshop, and were invited to complete a final written evaluation form two weeks later. The researchers and workshop facilitator also did a team evaluation after the workshop. The evaluation results are discussed in more detail below.The risk acceptance and ‘heart of the matter’ models were not intended as a quantitative measure of risk perceptions. Instead, the aim was to highlight the narratives that emerged from the interviews and to re-present the issues back to participants in pictorial form. The purpose of the Issues Mapping process was, therefore, to use the images as a heuristic device to help participants ‘see’ where they were situated in the wider debate and to support their engagement with others in the dialogue workshop that came next. Some details about how the Issues Mapping method was used are presented below, with selected models as illustrations.Respondents were asked in the interviews to rank a series of real world GE technology examples on a continuum from the least to most acceptable. The following ten GM applications were presented to illustrate a range of end-uses for the technology (note that the letters a-j below correspond with the letters a-j on the y axes of Figs. 1 and 2):(a)Human gene therapy to treat a disorder that causes an illness, such as cystic fibrosis.Putting a synthetic human gene into the gene of a dairy cow so that it is reproduced and can be extracted in quantities from the cow’s milk.Using a green fluorescent protein (say from a jelly fish) as a marker to make a mouse glow so you can tell that it has been genetically modified.Changing part of a sheep gene to increase the muscle growth in the sheep.Changing the genes in a white clover plant to reduce its vulnerability to viral disease.Putting another plant gene in broccoli or asparagus to increase its shelf life.Putting a fish antifreeze gene in strawberries to increase their shelf life.Putting another fish gene in the gene of a salmon to make it grow faster.Altering the genes of a microbe for pollution control (e.g. to take up heavy metals).Putting a microbe called Bt in corn to work as a pesticide.The ranking results are presented in Fig. 1. Taken together, respondents indicated that the most acceptable examples were:(a)Human gene therapy to treat a disorder that causes an illness, such as cystic fibrosis.Altering the genes of a microbe for pollution control (e.g. to take up heavy metals).Changing the genes in a white clover plant to reduce its vulnerability to viral disease.The least acceptable end uses were:(g)Putting a fish antifreeze gene in strawberries to increase their shelf life.Putting another fish gene in the gene of a salmon to make it grow faster.These rankings supported findings from the baseline interviews that human and environmental health uses are seen more favourably than purely commercial applications of GE.The scientists generally found all uses of GE more acceptable than the community respondents, as shown in Fig. 2. Importantly, the models showed where scientists’ risk acceptance was higher or lower, and the contrasting rankings served to break the stereotyped view that all scientists were pro GE technology, and all community members were anti GE.The models served as an illustration to show the acceptance rankings among scientists and the community, where they disagreed and where they overlapped. These zones of commonality were significant: they demonstrated that the GM debate was not simply a division between ‘science and society’, but there were important areas where scientists and community respondents agreed. The areas of disparity were also significant. They showed where the conflict was most pronounced and provided a platform for discussing the issues face-to-face with others, in the context of a facilitated discussion.In addition to ranking GE technology applications, respondents were asked to consider what issues were ‘at the heart of the matter’ for them personally in the GE debate. This question was deliberately worded to surface the normative elements in the discourse, and to provide a basis for sharing values with other participants. Drawing on the results from the baseline survey of respondents, eight key issues were listed that appeared to be common in the discourse about GE. These were:1.The environment.Māori culture and values.Food safety.Methods of agricultural production.Ethical and spiritual issues.Foreign investment in New Zealand.Public input to decisions on science and technology.Medicine and human health.Each of these statements was put on a small card, and respondents were asked to locate them on a concentric circle diagram. Fig. 3 shows the combined results for scientists and community respondents, and then some separate results can be found in Figs. 4 and 5.Across all 24 respondents, including both science and community, the environment was the most central issue. The environment card was placed at the centre of the diagram 18 times. Looking at the next circle out, the issue most commonly located here was Māori culture and values. In the third circle out, public input to decisions on science and technology was the top issue.There were significant similarities and differences between the science and community respondents on the relative importance of each of the 8 issues. The environment was equally central for both groups. As illustrated in Fig. 4, this emerged as a significant new insight for both the scientists and community members (as well as the researchers).While the environment issue was the highest topic of common concern between scientists and the community, the issue that showed the most disparity between the two groups was ethical and spiritual values, as illustrated in Fig. 5.Only 2 scientists regarded this issue as most central to them, whereas 10 of the community participants put it in the innermost circles. Scientists located this issue in every part of the circle diagram, showing considerable diversity within their group over the centrality (or otherwise) of ethical and spiritual concerns. This finding reinforced the comments in the baseline survey, indicating the differential framings of scientists and community participants around the GM issue. It also connects with the wider risk communication literature that discusses the importance of ethical values, and the limited opportunity for these to be considered in technocratic science and technology risk management procedures.The project findings indicated an unexpected consensus between science and community participants around the importance of protecting environmental values and promoting sustainability. Across both groups there was reasonably strong support for medical applications of biotechnology, with less support for agricultural applications. In the dialogue workshop, it became clear that one of the shared values influencing risk acceptance or rejection was public benefit: medical applications were perceived to generate new possibilities for health gains, making the risks more acceptable. In contrast, agricultural applications were perceived as providing little added value other than increasing private profit. In the latter scenario, the risks were more likely to be perceived as outweighing the benefits. The science and community groups both showed greater risk acceptance for contained research than for field tests or full release of genetically modified organisms. Community respondents, however, tended to regard ethical and social issues as more central to the GE issue than did scientists. Regarding their experience of the GE debate in New Zealand society, both groups had concerns about a conflict-based approach to communication, which they saw as being exacerbated by news media reporting and adversarial discussion formats. Most were able to identify positive motivations behind the involvement of others in the issue. There was common recognition of the increasing commercial pressures on scientists in the modern knowledge economy.Overall, the two stakeholder groups were able to achieve common ground while recognising some areas of disagreement. This not only provided a welcome shift from the kind of discussion they had experienced previously, but also suggested areas for future policy consensus and socially acceptable technology innovation: for example, focusing on GE technologies in containment and for medical applications, rather than on full scale field releases of GE crop applications (also see ESRC Global Environmental Change Programme, 1999). Participants found that a dialogue setting allowed them to move out of the entrenched positions they normally occupied in the public domain. They also indicated a strong preference for using these forms of communication in the future, and for scientists to be more responsive to the social context of their work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
