@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the cooperation of recycling operations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider two issues in the recycling industry, many small-scaled inefficient firms, and multiple recycled products in output.We use cooperative game theory to design mechanism encouraging cooperation among all firms.We show the existence and non-existence of the core of the cooperative game under different conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Waste management,Recycling operations,Cooperative game,Core,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses two important issues that may affect the operations efficiency in the recycling industry. First, the industry contains many small-scale and inefficient recycling firms, especially in developing countries. Second, the output from recycling a waste product often yields multiple recycled products that cannot all be sold efficiently by a single firm. To address these two issues, this paper examines how different firms can cooperate in their recycling and pricing decisions using cooperative game theory. Recycling operations under both joint and individual productions with different cost structures are considered. Decisions include the quantity of waste product to recycle and the price at which to sell each recycled product on each firm’s market. These decisions can be made jointly by multiple cooperating firms to maximize total profit. We design allocation schemes for maximized total profit to encourage cooperation among all firms. Managerial insights are provided from both environmental and economic perspectives.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With soaring prices for natural resources and advances in technology, recycling not only plays an important role in waste management, but also has become a lucrative business. For example, the United Nations Environment Programme reports that 23% of the weight of cellular phones is metals, a percentage far richer than any natural mine, and a mobile phone can contain over 40 different metal elements. There are billions of cellular phones sold each year and will become obsolete in a few years, providing a huge source of recyclable waste [43]. While one hurdle confronting recycling is its high cost, the rising prices of raw materials for electronics and automobile parts increase incentives to recycle (moneycontrol.com [36]). Srivastava [44] points out that sustainable development can be achieved together with higher profits. Recycling is the key component to achieving this goal through generating profit from waste. Further, legislation mandates higher requirements for recycling. Kanari et al. [29] report that in the European Union, about 75% of the content of end-of-life vehicles is recycled and the remainder is regarded as waste to be sent to landfills. However, environmental legislation requires that waste be reduced to no more than 5% by 2015.Recycling has difficulty achieving both environmental friendliness and commercial success, especially for complex waste products such as electrical and electronic equipment (Cui and Forssberg [11]). Recycling such waste products, through disassembly, chemical and physical processing, and further processing, generates multiple recycled products, which creates complex operations management problems, because the recycled products are produced roughly along a fixed output ratio for each product, which is often inconsistent with demand for the products. A similar situation exists in the mining industry. For example, multiple types of precious metals are conglomerated together in rare-earths, and a separation process is needed to isolate them (Areddy [3]).The above described difficulty in recycling is more serious when recycling is conducted on a small scale. The city of Guiyu, home to more than 5500 electronics waste recycling firms, many operating in a family-workshop style, has become the most polluted area in China due to the wastes generated from recycling (crunchgear.com [10]). Cooperation among multiple parties is important for efficient and profitable recycling (Roy and Whelan [42]). Recently, the Chinese government has issued policies to accelerate integration in the recycling industry, in the pursuit of an economies of scale effect (greenbiz.com [18], Hicks et al. [28]). Also, Alcoa, a leading integrated aluminum company, bought partial ownership of Electronics Recyclers International to collaboratively make aluminum electronics more sustainable (Dignan [14]). We note that in practice it is challenging for thousands of small-scale recycling firms to cooperate. Our work is not necessarily exploring the current issue in recycling industry. We view the cooperation among recycling firms as important emerging practice and opportunities that should be encouraged, and hence use cooperative game to help the decisions in recycling quantity, pricing, and fair allocation of total profit. Meanwhile, to pursue social welfare, the government has certain responsibility to improve the efficiency of the recycling industry as a whole. To this end, cooperative game models will provide useful insights to the government with respect to the best achievable, as well as a benchmark for other scenarios.This paper studies how different firms can cooperate in their recycling and pricing decisions using cooperative game theory. Specifically, we consider a common waste product that can be recycled and reproduced into different recycled products with a fixed output ratio for each product. We consider two types of recycling operations. First, in joint production, the firms use a common facility for recycling. Second, in individual production, each firm uses its own facility for recycling. Both recycling types can be capacitated or not. Further, for each type of recycling operations, we consider three types of nondecreasing cost functions: linear, convex, and with economies of scale. The recycling operations considered represent different scenarios with respect to the transportation of the waste product, the sharing the recycle facility, and the limited supply of the waste product. After recycling, the firms sell the reproduced products into individual markets. Decisions include the quantity of the common waste product to recycle and the price at which to sell each recycled product on each firm’s market. These decisions can be jointly made by multiple cooperating firms to maximize total profit. We formulate the recycling problem as a cooperative game which studies whether the maximum total profit can be fairly allocated to the participating firms. Depending on the type of recycling operations and cost functions, there are 12 different games. We show that none of these games is convex. For each of the games, we either provide a fair allocation of the maximized total profit of all the firms to encourage cooperation, or show the none existence of such an allocation.For an extensive literature review on recycling and its role in a supply chain, please refer to Gungor and Gupta [25], Srivastava [44], and Akçali [1]. Since our focus is on economically driven recycling, the types of waste product that best fit our model are automobiles (Bellmann and Khare [5], Qu and Williams [41]) and electrical and electronic equipment (de Fazio et al. [13], Krikke et al. [32]). Cui and Forssberg [11] review the mechanical recycling process for waste electrical and electronic equipment. Hicks et al. [28] study legislative and market responses to the recycling and disposal of electrical and electronic waste.Our work is in the broad area of the planning and control of recycling and remanufacturing from an operational perspective. Guide et al. [21] and Guide et al. [22] examine capacity planning, structure complexity, and scheduling in remanufacturing. A review over product, process, and organizational design in remanufacturing is set forth in Bras and McIntosh [6]. Guide [20] describes industry practice in planning and control of remanufacturing. However, recycling with the output of multiple reproduced products has received limited attention in the literature.Recycling operations can be modeled as a disassembly process, as by Gupta and McLean [26], Lee and Xirouchakis [33], and Kim et al. [30,31]. It is also similar to certain production process with multiple types of output, e.g., Lu and Qi [34]. Our work differs from the above literature in that we consider the recycling and pricing decisions of multiple firms, with the focus on cooperation among these firms.Cooperative game theory has been extensively applied to encourage cooperation at operational levels, such as in scheduling (Curiel et al. [12], Aydinliyim and Vairaktarakis [4]), queueing (García-Sanz et al. [16], Yu et al. [46], Anily and Haviv [2]), and ordering and inventory management (Chen [8], Chen and Zhang [9], Zhang [47], Hall and Liu [27]). A common feature of these studies is that there is an optimization problem underlying the game, which often can be formulated as mathematical programs, such as linear or nonlinear program. Duality theory plays an important role in fairly allocating total cost or profit to different parties.Cooperative games modeling production systems can be traced back to the seminal work by Owen [39], who examines the linear production game. The underlying optimization problem is to maximize the output value of multiple products subject to linear resource constraints. All players act as an exchange economy by pooling resources together. Important extensions of the linear production game include the multicommodity flow game [35] and the inventory centralization game ([19,8,9], among others [40]. Our model can be regarded as a nonlinear production game with extendable resources, but differs from existing work in two aspects. First, we model and provide managerial insight for cooperative decisions that specifically arise from the recycling industry, and consider firms that make recycling and pricing decisions jointly, as motivated by the finding that in price-sensitive markets, such as for cellular phones, recycling firms can exercise control over the prices of recycled products [24,23]. Second, we consider different types of recycling operations with different cost structures, and develop results that significantly enrich the literature.Game theoretic analysis has been used to evaluate recycling operations to a limited extent. Nagurney and Toyasaki [38] model the reverse supply chain management of electronic waste. They consider decision makers in four tiers: sources of electronic waste, recycling firms, processors, and consumers. The corresponding decisions in a multi-tiered recycling network are modeled using a noncooperative game. Apparently, the present work is among the first to study recycling operations using cooperative games.In summary, this paper uses cooperative game models to address two unique features in some recycling industry: the existence of many small-scale recycling firms and the yield of multiple recycled products. Meanwhile, there are also other important issues in different scenarios of the recycling industry, such as different quality grade of the waste product, and different efficiency in the waste collection process. We aim to extend our model to incorporate these issues in the future.The remainder of this work is organized as follows. Section 2 formally defines the cooperative games that model the cooperative recycling and pricing decisions among different firms, and summarizes our main findings. Sections 3 and 4 discuss the existence of core allocation for the games under joint and individual production, respectively, with different forms of recycling cost functions. Section 3 provides a special case in which a core allocation can be found efficiently. Concluding remarks are provided in Section 5. All proofs appear in Appendix S1.There are n firms engaged in a recycling business, transforming a common waste product into m recycled products, along a fixed output ratio for each product. Without loss of generality, we scale the unit of each recycled product such that one unit of the common waste product can be transformed into one unit of each recycled product.Let N={1,2,…,n} denote the recycling firms and M={1,2,…,m} denote the recycled products. We consider two types of recycling operations. First, in joint production, the firms use a common facility for recycling, and have cost function C(q), where q⩾0 is the quantity of the waste product recycled. In case of capacitated production, we have q⩽Q, where Q⩾0 is a constant. Joint production models a centralized recycling facility. Second, in individual production, each firm uses its own facility for recycling, and has cost function Ci(qi), where qi⩾0 is the quantity of the waste product recycled by firm i. In case of capacitated production, we require qi⩽Qi, where Qi⩾0 is a constant. The capacity Qican be the recycle processing capability or the limited supply of the waste product to firm i. The individual production model is applicable to cases without sharing the waste product among the firms, due to reasons such as transporting the waste is restricted by laws or costly.We consider three types of nondecreasing cost functions for recycling: linear, convex, and with economies of scale. Linear cost is a special case of the other two, and is included for more specific results. A convex cost function represents the practice where marginal cost is increasing, due, for example, to the extra cost of after-hours production. For a function, C(q) or Ci(qi), that admits economies of scale, we have that C(q)/q nonincreasing in q when q>0 or Ci(qi)/qinonincreasing in qiwhen qi>0. Note that such a function is more general than a concave function, since a concavely nondecreasing function is always with economies of scale, as can be easily verified. Mass processing with economies of scale is widely recognized as a key factor in successful recycling (Stevels et al. [45], greenbiz.com [18], Hicks et al. [28]). Such a cost function also captures the common occurrence of setup costs in recycling (Dobos and Richter [15]).Each firm owns a portfolio of sales channels for different recycled products, each of which is independent of the others. For firm i, the demand for product j, dij=dij(pij)⩾0 is a continuous and decreasing function of price pij⩾0. Let Dij=dij(0) be the market potential for product j faced by firm i. As there is a one-to-one correspondence between price pijand demand dij, the revenue from each recycled product fij(pij)=pijdij(pij) can be regarded as a function of either pijor dij. We note that pricing decisions are important in terms of business meanings. But throughout the paper, we use selling quantities dij’s as decision variables instead of prices, mainly for the ease of exposition. Specifically, the constraints in our model will be operational constraints, such as capacity constraints and availability constraints for recycled products, and thus it is more convenient to model them as linear constraints in terms of selling quantities. Moreover, notational wise, using demand as decision variables makes it much easier for us to analyze the problem. We assume that fij(dij) is concave in dij, which is quite common in operations management literature (Ziya et al. [48]). If recycled product j is not in the sales channels of firm i, we simply let fij(·)=0.We formulate the recycling problem as a cooperative game, via a case of uncapacitated joint production for simplicity. Other cases for capacitated and individual production can be formulated similarly. For a firm operating alone, the decision problem is to decide the recycling quantity for the waste product and the price for each recycled product that maximizes profit, i.e., sales revenue less recycling cost. Firm i’s profit is given as follows:(1)maxdij,q∑j∈Mfij(dij)-C(q)(2)s.t.q-dij⩾0,∀j∈M,(3)dij⩾0,∀j∈M.In the formulation, constraints (2) link the output of each recycled product to the quantity of the common waste product recycled. Recall that we have assumed by appropriate scaling that when one unit of waste product is recycled, each recycled product is produced by one unit.The concave revenue function fij(dij) can absorb other terms, such as reproduction cost, transportation cost, delivery lateness cost, etc., as long as they do not change the concavity of the function. Also, note that a product j may have leftover q−dijwith particular salvage value. In the formulation, such salvage value is ignored for analytical simplicity. Including the salvage value would not substantially change the results, as long as the salvage value is a linear function of q−dij. This routine follows in the sequel.We now consider the case where firms cooperate by making recycling and pricing decisions jointly. For a subset S, S⊆N, of firms, let V(S) denote the maximum total profit achieved through cooperation of firms in S. Then V(S) can be determined as(4)V(S)≔maxdij,q∑i∈S∑j∈Mfij(dij)-C(q)(5)s.t.q-∑i∈Sdij⩾0,∀j∈M,(6)dij⩾0,∀i∈S,j∈M.In this formulation, constraints (5) enforce that the total demand∑i∈Sdijfor any product j should not exceed the recycling quantity q. Note that the program (4)–(6) is similar to that defining the multicommodity flow game with a nonlinear utility function considered by Markakis and Saberi [35]. The difference is that in the multicommodity flow game, the constraints corresponding to (5) specify that the total outflow from a source node is no more than the capacity of the node, which is a standard capacity constraint in network flow models; but in our model, constraints (5) require that the maximum, rather than the total, amount of recycled product is no more than the recycled amount of the common waste product, which is actually a side constraint added to the standard network flow constraints. Therefore, our model is beyond the framework of multicommodity flow games.The recycling problem can be modeled as a cooperative game defined by a tuple (N,V), where N is the set of players, i.e., all recycling firms, andV:2N↦Ris a characteristic function defined by (4)–(6). We name this game a recycling centralization game with uncapacitated joint production. Subset S is called a coalition and N the grand coalition. To provide incentive for all firms to cooperate in the grand coalition, value v(N) must be allocated to all players in a fair way. Specifically, an allocation scheme {xi}i∈Nis called a core allocation iff∑i∈Nxi=V(N),and∑i∈Sxi⩾V(S),∀S⊂N.The core of a game is the set of all core allocations. A game is balanced iff it has a nonempty core. The focus of this work is to investigate the existence of core allocation and how to find it if one exists for the recycling centralization game. Further, we provide managerial insights on how a core allocation encourages cooperation among firms.An important class of cooperative game (N,V) is called convex, if its characteristic function satisfies V(S⋃{i})−V(S)⩽V(T⋃{i})−V(T), ∀ S⊂T⊆N and i∉S,T. Convexity means that one player’s marginal contribution to a coalition increases with the coalition that he joins. It is well known that convexity guarantees the existence of a core allocation. Unfortunately, as shown in the following example, the recycling centralization game with uncapacitated joint production is not convex, even when the recycling cost function is linear.Example 1There are three recycling firms with a linear recycling cost function C(q)=5q. Two recycled products can be produced from the waste product recycled. The firms’ demand function for all products is summarized in Table 1.The following results can be easily verified. Let S={2}, T={1,2}. Then for S, we have the optimal q=2.5 and V(S)=6.25; for T, we have the optimal q=3.75 and V(T)=28.125; for S∪{3}, we have the optimal q=3.75 and V(S∪{3})=28.125; and for T∪{3}, we have the optimal q=3.75 and V(T∪{3})=37.5. Hence,V(S∪{3})-V(S)=21.875>9.375=V(T∪{3})-V(T),and the game is not convex.Similar to uncapacitated joint production, cooperative games can be formulated for the other recycling environments under different types of recycling cost. The 12 different games are listed in Table 2. Note that Example 1 indicates that none of the other five games with joint production is convex. Further, if we replace C(q) with Ci(qi)=5qifor i=1, 2, 3 in Example 1, then clearly the corresponding game with uncapacitated individual production under a linear recycling cost is still not convex, which further indicates that none of the other five games with individual production is convex.The balancedness of all 12 games considered is summarized in Table 2, for each of which a reference is provided for validation, where Th and Ex refer to Theorem and Example, respectively. These results shows the possibility or difficulty of cooperation under different scenarios. We will provide more detailed discussion for each case in the following sections.In this section, we consider the recycling centralization game with joint production, either capacitated or not.When the recycling facility is uncapacitated and recycling cost C(q) is linear in q, i.e., C(q)=cq, where c⩾0 is the unit recycling cost, a core allocation scheme can be achieved via a duality approach. The Lagrangian dual function associated with V(S), ∀S⊆N, is given byLS(μ,λ,d,q)=∑i∈S∑j∈Mfij(dij)-cq+∑j∈Mμjq-∑i∈Sdij+∑i∈S∑j∈Mλijdij,where dual variablesμ={μj}j∈Mare associated with constraints (5), and dual variablesλ={λij}i∈S,j∈Mare associated with constraints (6). Letd={dij}i∈S,j∈M. LetgS(μ,λ)=maxd,qLS(μ,λ,d,q).Thus, the Lagrangian dual problem of V(S) is given byminμ⩾0,λ⩾0maxd,qLS(μ,λ,d,q),orminμ⩾0,λ⩾0gS(μ,λ).Because the objective function (4) is concave when C(q)=cq, we know that there is no duality gap between the primal problem V(S) and its associated Lagrangian dual problem. Letμ∗(S)=μj∗(S)j∈M,λ∗(S)=λij∗(S)i∈S,j∈M,d∗(S)=dij∗(S)i∈S,j∈Mand q∗(S) denote the optimal solution of the Lagrangian dual problem of V(S), ∀S⊆N. Then, we define an allocation scheme {xi}i∈Nas(7)xi=∑j∈Mfijdij∗(N)-∑j∈Mμj∗(N)dij∗(N),∀i∈N.Theorem 1When C(q)=cq, the allocation scheme defined in(7)lies in the core of game (N,V).Note that defining a core allocation using duality analysis is common in the literature, e.g., Markakis and Saberi [35]. However, the specific form of the allocation scheme (7) is carefully derived to provide important managerial implications for recycling and pricing decisions. The allocation distributes revenuefijdij∗(N)of each market channel (i,j) to the channel owner i, which means that revenues are not shared across firms. On the contrary, recycling cost C(q)=cq is shared among firms, proportional to demand. Specifically, the valueμj∗(N)can be interpreted as the unit price that a firm must pay to acquire one unit of recycled product j.In (7),μj∗(N)is positive only when total demand for the recycled product j coincides with the recycling quantity q∗(N), i.e., constraint (5) is binding for product j; otherwise, product j is “free of charge” as defined in the core allocation, and thus can be regarded as a by-product of recycling. This is a fairly strong result in that even when some firms acquire certain recycled products for free, the grand coalition is still stable. Other firms without the need of those free products cannot be better off by departing from the grand coalition and acting on their own.We study a special case in which V(S), ∀S⊆N, can be determined in polynomial time, and thus the core allocation can also be determined in polynomial time. In the special case, we assume the demand function dij(pij) is linear in pij, i.e., dij=Dij−kijpij, where kij>0 is a constant representing the price sensitivity of consumers of firm i for product j. Thus the revenue function fij(dij) is written byfij(dij)=-1kijdij2+Dijkijdij.We rewrite the optimization problem for grand coalition as follows.(8)V(N)≔max∑i∈N∑j∈M-1kijdij2+Dijkijdij-cq(9)s.t.q-∑i∈Ndij⩾0,∀j∈M,(10)dij⩾0,∀i∈N,j∈M.The objective function is quadratic, and all constraints are linear, hence the problem is a maximization over a concave quadratic function, which is known to be polynomially solvable (Goldfarb and Liu [17]). In the sequel, we develop a more efficient algorithm to solve the problem. We first set forth the following lemma to characterize the structure of the optimal solution.Lemma 1In an optimal solution to(4)–(6), the product set M can be partitioned into two subsets, M1and M2, such thatM1=j∈M∑i∈Ndij∗(N)<q∗(N),M2=j∈M∑i∈Ndij∗(N)=q∗(N).Further, for any j∈M1, the optimal demanddij∗(N)=argmax{fij(dij)}=Dij2,∀i∈N.In a feasible solution, sets M1 and M2 can be easily determined for a given q, as follows. Without loss of generality, we assume that all products are indexed in an increasing order of∑i∈NDij. If0⩽q⩽12∑i∈NDi1, then M1=∅ and M2=M; if there exists a k∗ such that12∑i∈NDik∗<q⩽12∑i∈NDi,k∗+1, then M1={j∣j⩽k∗,j∈M} and M2={j∣j>k∗,j∈M}. Note that the caseq>12∑i∈NDimwill not occur in an optimal solution.Now we focus on the KKT conditions of the (4)–(6) that characterize an optimal solution:(11)-2kijdij+Dijkij-μj+λij=0,∀i∈N,j∈M,(12)-c+∑j∈Mμj=0,(13)μjq-∑i∈Ndij=0,∀j∈M,(14)λijdij=0,∀i∈N,j∈M,(15)q-∑i∈Ndij⩾0,∀j∈M,(16)dij⩾0,∀i∈N,j∈M,(17)μj⩾0,λij⩾0,∀i∈N,j∈M.Condition (13) implies that μj>0 is possible only for j∈M2. Therefore, condition (12) can be rewritten as(18)-c+∑j∈M2μj=0.Also, from (11), we have(19)dij=Dij2-kij2(μj-λij),∀i∈N,j∈M2.Together with (14), (19) further becomes(20)dij=maxDij2-kij2μj,0,∀i∈N,j∈M2.Recall that, for any j∈M2,(21)q=∑i∈Ndij=∑i∈NmaxDij2-kij2μj,0.Based on the above analysis, the KKT conditions can be rewritten as follows, once M2 is fixed:(22)∑i∈NmaxDij2-kij2μj,0=q,∀j∈M2,(23)-c+∑j∈M2μj=0,(24)μj⩾0,∀j∈M2.Denote the left hand side of (22) by hj(μj), which is characterized by the following lemma:Lemma 2hj(μj) is a piecewise linear nonincreasing function in μj,∀j∈M2.It is easy to determine the breakpoints of hj(μj), which are defined byDijkiji∈N. For (22) to hold, Lemma 2 indicates that μjis nonincreasing in q. Also note that M2 shrinks as q increases, therefore∑j∈M2μjis nonincreasing in q. In view of this, the solution approach begins with a large value of q, then gradually lowers the value of q until∑j∈M2μjincreases to c, such that all the KKT conditions are satisfied.We introduce some further notations. Denoted by Bj, the set of values of hj(μj) at the breakpoints are:Bj=hjDijkiji∈N. DefineB=⋃jBj⋃12∑i∈NDijj∈M⋃{0}, i.e., B contains all the breakpoints of hj(μj), j∈M, and the values specifying different M2’s, and 0.Now we describe Algorithm RG, which solves the problem defined by (22)–(24) optimally. The basic approach is to restrict q to a specified range, within which hj(μj) becomes a linear function; finally, a system of linear equations is solved.Algorithm RG 1•Step 1. Sequence all values in B from highest to lowest, such that B={b1,b2,…,b∣B∣}, and b1⩾b2⩾⋯⩾b∣B∣, where b∣B∣=0.Step 2. For l=1, 2,…, ∣B∣, let q=bl; find the corresponding M2, denoted by M2(bl), and calculate{μj}j∈M2according to (22), denoted by{μj(bl)}j∈M2(bl). Then find the unique l∗ such that∑j∈M2bl∗μjbl∗<c⩽∑j∈M2bl∗+1μjbl∗+1.Step 3. Forμj∈μjbl∗,μjbl∗+1,hj(μj)becomes a linear function, and thus (22) and (23) become a system of linear equations, whose solution is an optimal solution of (8)–(10).There are two points worth mentioning with respect to Algorithm RG. First, the uniqueness of l∗ in Step 2 follows from the monotonicity of∑j∈M2μj. Second, in Step 3, within the specific range of μj, each term in the summation of hj(μj) becomes either a linear function or 0, and thus hj(μj) is a linear function, and the solution for (22) and (23) is unique and automatically fulfills (24).Theorem 2Algorithm RG solves the problem defined by(22)–(24), and hence finds a core allocation for the game (N,V) with linear demand functions and a linear recycling cost function, in O(max{m2n2,m3}) time.Note that the complexity of Algorithm RG is lower than all existing algorithms for the maximization of a concave quadratic function with linear constraints.The centralized recycling game with uncapacitated joint production and a convex recycling cost C(q) is unbalanced, as shown by the following example.Example 2There are three recycling firms having a convex recycling cost function C(q)=q2. A single recycled product can be produced from the waste product recycled. Firm i’s demand function for the product is di=2−pi, for i=1, 2, 3.It is easy to see that any two firms can achieve a profit of 2/3, which requires a profit of at least 1 from the grand coalition for the existence of a core allocation. However, the grand coalition can achieve a maximum profit of only 0.75, and thus the core is empty.Convex recycling cost fails to incentivize cooperation because the benefit from demand pooling is offset by the increasing marginal cost. Instead of joining the grand coalition, firms are more inclined to form small coalition to avoid excessive recycling cost, and the size of coalition largely depends on how sharply the marginal recycling cost function increases.Consider the recycling cost function with economies of scale, where C(q)/q is nonincreasing in q when q>0. To guarantee the existence of an optimal solution to the nonlinear program defined by (4)–(6), we require that C(q) is lower semicontinuous, i.e., lim infx→qC(x)⩾C(q) for any q, and that limq→∞C(q)=∞.The recycling centralization game with economies of scale in recycling is closely related to the inventory centralization game studied by Chen [8]. The optimization problem underlying the inventory centralization game is not necessarily convex in the presence of a quantity discount ordering cost. Therefore, strong duality does not hold, and the duality approach does not directly constitute a core allocation. Alternatively, Chen [8] constructs a new game with a linear ordering cost, which is shown to have a nonempty core; the core allocation of the inventory centralization game can be derived from a core allocation of the new game. The applicability of this constructive approach depends heavily on the solution property of the underlying nonlinear optimization problem. Specifically, it is required that a monotonicity relationship holds. That is, the optimal total order quantity, which corresponds to the recycling quantity in our problem, should be nondecreasing as more players join a coalition. However, this property is not obvious in our problem. Technically, this is because, in the inventory centralization game, the quantity discount applies to order sizes that are additive; whereas in our game, the economies of scale derive from the recycling quantity of the common waste product, which is an upper bound, instead of a summation, of all the recycled products to produce. Note that if there is only one recycled product, then our model is a special case of the model considered by Chen [8].Now we show that, for the recycling centralization game, the recycling quantity of the common waste product in an optimal solution for a coalition S, denoted by q∗(S), is nondecreasing with coalition.Lemma 3If A⊆B⊆N, then q∗(A)⩽q∗(B).The managerial implication of Lemma 3 is that with more firms cooperating, more waste product can be recycled. From the environmental friendliness perspective, this property encourages more firms to participate in coordinated recycling and pricing decisions. Technically, Lemma 3 plays a key role in the construction of a core allocation for the recycling centralization game with a general cost function, as used in the proof of Lemma 4 below. Note that the proof of Lemma 3 uses the concavity of fij(·), but does not impose any specific requirement on the recycling cost function C(q). The condition that C(q)/q is nonincreasing in q is not required in proving Lemma 3, but is needed in the following Lemma 4:Let (N,V′) denote the uncapacitated recycling centralization game under joint production with economies of scale. Let (N,Vc) denote the uncapacitated recycling centralization game with linear recycling cost function C(q)=cq. We have the following result.Lemma 4For any instance of game (N,V′), there exists a valuecˆ∗such that we can construct an instance of gameN,Vcˆ∗satisfyingVcˆ∗(S)⩾V′(S),∀S⊂NandVcˆ∗(N)=V′(N).Now, we are ready to show the balancedness of the uncapacitated recycling centralization game under joint production with economies of scale.Theorem 3The game (N,V′) has a nonempty core. Moreover, for game (N,V′), letN,Vcˆ∗be the related game as specified inLemma 4, and thus any core allocation of gameN,Vcˆ∗is also a core allocation of game (N,V′).Observe that in the core allocation constructed, the payoff to each coalition S is at leastVcˆ∗(S), which is no less than V′(S) by Lemma 4. Therefore, the economies of scale in recycling will benefit every coalition under such a core allocation.When the recycling facility is capacitated, all the three recycling centralization games with joint production are unbalanced, as shown by the following example.Example 3The instance is the same as that in Example 2 except that the recycling cost function is changed to C(q)=q with capacity limit q⩽1.It is easy to verify, any two firms can achieve a profit of 0.5, which requires a profit of at least 0.75 from the grand coalition for the existence of a core allocation. However, the grand coalition can achieve a maximum profit of only 2/3, and thus the game instance has an empty core.The unbalancedness indicated by Example 3 is not surprising because the game assumes every coalition can access the same amount of the production capacity and thus when capacity becomes restricted, adding more players may not help in generating more value. However, firms may compete for the production capacity if they do not cooperate, and as a result a coalition may not be able to obtain the whole production capacity. Such an issue naturally occurs when modeling cooperation in competitive markets (Cachon and Netessine [7], Nagarajan and Sošić [37]). Since our focus is cooperative game, we leave this competition issue on recycling facility to future research.In this section, we consider the recycling centralization game with individual production, either capacitated or not. Specifically, we study the situation where each firm has its own recycling facility, and facilities at different firms may have different cost efficiencies.For firm i∈N, the recycling cost function is Ci(qi), qi⩽Qi, where Qiis the production capacity of firm i. Hence, we obtain a new game, denoted as (N,V″), where the characteristic function V″ is defined as follows.(25)V″(S)≔maxdij,qi∑i∈S∑j∈Mfij(dij)-∑i∈SCi(qi)(26)s.t.∑i∈Sqi-∑i∈Sdij⩾0,∀j∈M,(27)-qi+Qi⩾0,∀i∈S,(28)dij⩾0,∀i∈S,j∈M,(29)qi⩾0,∀i∈S.When each Ci(qi) is a convex function, compared with the game (N,V) with joint production, game (N,V″) has additional concave terms in the objective function and additional linear constraints. However, we can still use a similar approach as in Section 3.1 to characterize a core allocation of the game.Letμ={μj}j∈M,ν={νi}i∈S,λ={λij}i∈S, j∈Mandξ={ξi}i∈Sbe the dual variables associated with constraints (26)–(29), respectively, and letq={qi}i∈S. The dual function associated with V″(S), ∀S⊆N is given byLS(μ,ν,λ,ξ,d,q)=∑i∈S∑j∈Mfij(dij)-∑i∈SCi(qi)+∑j∈Mμj∑i∈Sqi-∑i∈Sdij+∑i∈Sνi(Qi-qi)+∑i∈S∑j∈Mλijdij+∑i∈Sξiqi.LetgS(μ,ν,λ,ξ)=maxd,qLS(μ,ν,λ,ξ,d,q).Thus, the Lagrangian dual problem of V″(S) isminμ⩾0,ν⩾0,λ⩾0,ξ⩾0maxd,qLS(μ,ν,λ,ξ,d,q),i.e.,minμ⩾0,ν⩾0,λ⩾0,ξ⩾0gS(μ,ν,λ,ξ).Since recycling cost is convex in qi, and all newly introduced constraints are linear, the program (25)–(29) remains as a maximization over a concave function. Therefore, there is no duality gap between the primal problem, (25)–(29), and its associated Lagrangian dual problem, for any S⊆N. Letμ∗(S)=μj∗(S)j∈M,ν∗(S)=νi∗(S)i∈S,λ∗(S)=λij∗(S)i∈S,j∈M,ξ∗(S)=ξi∗(S)i∈S,d∗(S)=dij∗(S)i∈S,j∈Mandq∗(S)=qi∗(S)i∈Sdenote the optimal solution of the Lagrangian dual problem of (25)–(29), ∀S⊆N. We define an allocation scheme {yi}i∈Nas(30)yi=∑j∈Mfijdij∗(N)-∑j∈Mμj∗(N)dij∗(N)+νi∗(N)Qi,∀i∈N.Theorem 4When the recycling cost functions Ci(qi) are convex, the allocation scheme defined in(30)lies in the core of game (N,V″).Compared with the core allocation defined in (7), the allocation yiin (30) has one extra term,νi∗(N)Qi, which can be interpreted as the compensation firm i receives for the use of its recycling facility. Accordingly, valueνi∗(N)is compensation per unit of recycling capacity of firm i. We have the following further insight on this compensation rate.Consider the problemmaxd,qLN(μ∗(N),ν∗(N),λ∗(N),ξ∗(N),d,q),whose optimum is attained at (d∗(N),q∗(N)). Therefore, we have∂LN(μ∗(N),ν∗(N),λ∗(N),ξ∗(N),d,q)∂qid=d∗(N),q=q∗(N)=-Ci′qi∗(N)+∑j∈Mμj∗(N)-νi∗(N)+ξi∗(N)=0,∀i∈N,which implies that(31)νi∗(N)=∑j∈Mμj∗(N)-Ci′qi∗(N)+ξi∗(N),∀i∈N.From the complementary slackness condition in the optimal solution, we haveνi∗(N)Qi-qi∗(N)=0,∀i∈N.Therefore, the unit compensation is zero for firms whose capacities are not fully utilized.Further, note that∑j∈Mμj∗(N)is constant across all firms. Hence, for those firms whose production capacity is fully utilized (qi∗(N)>0, equivalentlyξi∗(N)=0), the firm with the lowest recycling cost will receive the largest unit compensationνi∗(N). In other words, the allocation scheme encourages firms to improve their recycling efficiencies.We first consider the uncapacitated recycling centralization game (N,V″) under individual production with economies of scale, which means Ci(qi)/qiis nonincreasing in qi. Define a new cost functionCminS(q)=mini∈S{Ci(q)}, for q⩾0 and S⊆N. Obviously, functionCminS(q)admits economies of scale, and satisfiesCminS(q)⩾CminN(q)for any S⊂N. Thus, by Theorem 3, the recycling centralization game defined under joint production with recycling cost functionCminN(q), denoted byN,Vmin′, is balanced.Theorem 5The uncapacitated recycling centralization game (N,V″) under individual production with economies of scale is balanced, and any core allocation of the corresponding gameN,Vmin′is a core allocation of the game (N,V″).Next we consider the capacitated recycling centralization game under individual production with economies of scale. The game is unbalanced, as indicated by the unbalancedness of a special case of the inventory centralization game studied by Chen and Zhang [9]. For completeness, we provide the following example with constant setup cost in recycling.Example 4The instance is the same as that in Example 2 except that the recycling cost function is changed to Ci(0)=0 and Ci(qi)=1 when qi>0 with capacity limit qi⩽2, for i=1, 2, 3.It is easy to verify, any two firms can achieve a profit of 1, which requires a profit of at least 1.5 from the grand coalition for the existence of a core allocation. However, the grand coalition can achieve a maximum profit of only 1, and thus the game instance has an empty core.The unbalancedness caused by the capacity limits, as shown in Example 4, can be explained by a comparison with two similar but different cases studied in Theorems 4 and 5. In Theorem 4 for the case with capacitated convex costs, the cooperation is stable because the centralized optimal solution will tend to “balance” the recycling production load among the firms, due to the cost convexity, so the capacity constraint does not have a significant impact on that core existence for that case. In Theorem 5 for the case with uncapacitated cost with economies of scale, the cooperation is stable because the optimal centralized solution essentially uses a single “equivalent” firm with decreasing marginal cost. However, the capacity limits for individual firms rule out the existence of such an equivalent firm.This work examines the cooperation of recycling operations where multiple firms recycle a common waste product into multiple recycled products, and then individually sell the recycled products in their own markets. Firm pricing decisions are also considered. We examine joint and individual productions with recycling cost that is either linear, convex, or with economies of scale. We model the problems as cooperative recycling centralization games. For each game, we either provide a scheme that defines a core allocation, or show that the game is unbalanced. For a special case where the recycling cost function and the demand function are both linear, we provide an efficient algorithm to find a core allocation.Since a closed-form core allocation is found for each of the balanced games, we are able to draw managerial insights toward firms in their recycling and pricing decisions. First, under many production settings, cooperation in recycling operations is achievable via rational decisions by firms, credited to the existence of core allocation in the corresponding recycling centralization games. Second, more waste product would be recycled with more firms cooperating; hence, cooperation should be encouraged by central authorities with environmental concerns. Third, with the proposed core allocation schemes, the revenue generated by each firm will not be shared with others, which generates incentive for firms to increase the efficiency of their individual market channels. Fourth, the proposed allocation schemes provide incentive to firms to reduce the recycling cost incurred by their individual recycling facilities, and they encourage firms to increase efficiency via economies of scale in their recycling operations. Finally, there are several factors that may discourage cooperation among recycling firms: joint production with convex recycling cost or capacity limits, and capacitated individual production with economies of scale in recycling (Table 2).This work can be extended in multiple ways. First, note that in the characteristic function of the recycling centralization game, we adopt a general concave revenue function. Technically, this concave function can absorb other costs, such as reproduction cost, transportation cost, delivery lateness cost, etc., given that such costs do not change the concavity of the function. Second, the setup cost in the recycling cost function should be studied further. When the setup cost is incurred coalition-wide, our consideration of economies of scale in recycling is able to model the cost. However, there might be an extra setup cost incurred when a new firm joins a coalition. For a discussion of the role that submodular setup cost plays in the core of cooperative game, see Zhang [47]. Third, firms may be in competition such that when a coalition deviates from the grand coalition, it competes with the other players. In such case, the characteristic function needs to be carefully redefined; see Nagarajan and Sošić [37] for a related discussion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
