@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Complex investment decisions using rough set and fuzzy c-means: An example of investment in green supply chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Green supplier development programs require significant organizational resources and investments to succeed.Green supplier development programs have many dimensions and big data sets to consider.Novel integration of rough set theory and fuzzy clustering means (FCM) provides a methodology for decision modeling.Application of the methodology to green supplier development investment shows practical and theoretical usefulness.Directions for future research on green supplier development investment are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Investment management,Green supplier development,Large data sets,Rough set theory,Fuzzy clustering means,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Green supplier development focuses on helping organizations integrate activities to improve the natural environmental performance of their supply chains. These green-supplier-development programs require substantial resources and investments by a buyer company. Investigation into investment management in this context has only begun. This paper introduces a methodology to help manage investment in green-supplier-development and business-supplier-development practices. Managing these practices and their outcomes requires managing of a large sets of data. We propose a combination of rough set theoretic and fuzzy clustering means (FCM) approaches; first to simplify, and then sharpen the focus on the complex environment of evaluation of the investment decisions. The combined methodology, based on performance measures of supplier practices and agreed-upon investment objectives, identifies a set of guidelines that can help make decisions about sound investments in the supplier practices more effectively and judiciously. Various steps involved in the methodology are illustrated through using an example developed to highlight the salient steps and issues of the methodology. We show how the results may be interpreted to obtain many insights useful from both practical and research perspectives. Although the impetus to developing this methodology came from sustainability considerations, the methodology is general enough to be applicable in other areas where management and evaluation of investments is based on large data sets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Organizations can make a broad variety of investments for greening their operations as they seek to competitively make themselves sustainable. An effective way for organizations to improve their overall sustainability is by greening their supply chains (Humphreys, Wong, & Chan, 2003). The process of developing and implementing sustainable supply chains is a complex task because it involves many interrelated supply chain activities and functions within and between organizations (Kiron et al., 2015). Suppliers may find it difficult to achieve sustainability and greening goals in a timely fashion without the help, support and cooperation of buyers (Seuring & Mueller, 2008b; Simpson & Power, 2005). It has come to light that supplier development and green supplier development programs may be the most effective way to improve supply chain sustainability (Bai & Sarkis, 2010b; Blome, Hollos, & Paulraj, 2014; Govindan, Sarkis, Jabbour, Zhu, & Geng, 2014; Vachon & Klassen, 2006). It has been noted that the most effective way to improve the sustainability and greening of the entire supply chain is to develop shared objectives and procedures for stakeholders throughout the supply chain (Grimm, Hofstetter, & Sarkis, 2014). Not only is the greening important and needed for developed countries, but for developing countries as well (Jabbour & Jabbour, 2009; Kannan, Jabbour, & Jabbour, 2014). The green supplier development not only involves the acquisition of capital expenditure items but also investments in technology, training, research and development, knowledge transfer, etc.The complexity of such shared programs, involvement of multiple stakeholders, and the potentially large capital costs makes the investment decision – selection of the programs to invest – a multi-faceted and intricate task (Bai & Sarkis, 2014; Varsei et al., 2014). A method or technique that can identify effective green and sustainable supplier development programs and also indicate the level of effective investment is a valuable tool for organizations seeking to justify and/or prioritize such programs.In order to help managers make decisions in this multifaceted environment, this paper introduces a novel technique, which reduces the complexity of the decision setting and simultaneously finds guidelines that identify the most effective programs given the level of investment in these programs. The method introduced here eschews a “meta-analysis” approach lest we miss some relationships helpful in identifying the investments and their influence on overall performance. Managers find it useful to have such data available in considering many conflicting issues and impacts that can result from these investment decisions.In this paper, fuzzy cluster means (Başkır & Türkşen, 2013; Bezdek, 1981; Tan & Isa, 2011) and rough set theory (Pawlak, 1982) are introduced as complementary components in a novel methodology. First, this methodology reduces the set of all available programs to a set of potentially beneficial programs that are worthy of investment; next, it clusters these programs based on their general characteristics and then identifies how well they relate to greening performance. The model developed in this paper succeeds in reducing the complexity of the decision scenarios to make them more amenable for analysis and understanding, while minimizing information loss.The research in this paper contributes to the literature by furthering investigation into investments for sustainability with a supply chain focus, and especially the under-explored topic of green supplier development (Bai & Sarkis, 2010b). The technique utilizes two methodologies that are rarely applied to engineering economy or investment decisions. Thus, we seek to expand the scope of the two methodologies and offer a synthesized practical example of their application.The remainder of the paper provides some general background on the green supplier development environment and tools for investment and appraisal evaluation of green supplier development practices. Then, the two analytical approaches used for investment appraisal modeling are introduced. An illustrative, hypothetical, example is provided to build comprehension of the multi-methodology technique. Insights from the results and conclusions are presented with directions for future investigation on this topic.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
