@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cost efficiency in data envelopment analysis under the law of one price

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A pair of models are developed to calculate the upper and lower bounds of CE.A base-enumerating algorithm is proposed to solve the lower CE models.A numerical example is used to illustrate the proposed approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Law of one price,Cost efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To impose the law of one price (LoOP) restrictions, which state that all firms face the same input prices, Kuosmanen, Cherchye, and Sipiläinen (2006) developed the top-down and bottom-up approaches to maximizing the industry-level cost efficiency. However, the optimal input shadow prices generated by the above approaches need not be unique, which influences the distribution of the efficiency indices at the individual firm level. To solve this problem, in this paper, we developed a pair of two-level mathematical programming models to calculate the upper and lower bounds of cost efficiency for each firm in the case of non-unique LoOP prices while keeping the industry cost efficiency optimal. Furthermore, a base-enumerating algorithm is proposed to solve the lower bound models of the cost efficiency measure, which are bi-level linear programs and NP-hard problems. Lastly, a numerical example is used to demonstrate the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The concept of cost efficiency (CE), which evaluates the ability of a DMU to produce the current outputs at a minimal cost given the input price at each DMU, originates from Farrell (1957). Based on this concept, the cost efficiency is conventionally defined as the ratio of the minimum cost to the actual observed cost (see Thompson, Brinkmann, Dharmapala, Gonzalez-Lima, and Thrall (1997), Schaffnit et al. (1997), Taylor, Thompson, Thrall, and Dharmapala (1997), Camanho and Dyson (2005), Cherchye and Vanden Abeele (2005), and Jahanshahloo, Soleimani-damaneh, and Mostafaee (2008)). CE models require that all of the input prices be fixed and known exactly at each DMU. However, in their actual application, exact knowledge of the prices is difficult, and prices may be subject to variations in the short term, as noted by Cooper, Thompson, and Thrall (1996). To address the uncertain price data, some researchers have developed models to obtain the upper and lower bounds of the CE (Camanho & Dyson, 2005; Fang & Li, 2012, 2013; Mostafaee & Saljooghi, 2010).Note that the input prices in the above papers are allowed to differ across firms. However, much of the price variation across firms is at odds with the common perception of price information in competitive markets (Kuosmanen, Cherchye, & Sipiläinen, 2006). In a recent study, Kuosmanen et al. (2006) explored the productive efficiency analysis under the law of one price (LoOP), which refers to the same prices of the inputs for all of the firms under market equilibrium. Utilizing the relationship between industry-level and firm cost efficiency measures, they developed the top-down and the bottom-up approaches to maximize the industry-level cost efficiency with respect to the LoOP condition under incomplete price information. However, the optimal shadow prices generated by the above approaches need not be unique, which may affect the distribution of the efficiency indices at the firm level (Fang, 2013; Kuosmanen, Kortelainen, Sipiläinen, & Cherchye, 2010). These researchers noted that an interesting avenue for follow-up research is to develop an efficient algorithm to calculate the upper and lower bounds of cost efficiency for each firm in the case of non-unique LoOP prices. However, calculating these bounds is extremely complicated because changing the input prices influences not only the actual cost but also the minimum cost for producing the given output (Kuosmanen et al., 2006).To solve the above problems, in this paper, we developed a pair of two-level mathematical programming models to calculate the upper and lower bounds of cost efficiency for each firm in the case of non-unique LoOP prices while keeping the industry cost efficiency at its optimal value.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a pair of DEA models to calculate the upper and lower CE measures for each firm under the framework of the top-down approach in the case of non-unique LoOP prices. A base-enumerating algorithm based on the optimality conditions of linear programming is proposed to solve the lower CE models in Section 3. Section 4 illustrates the proposed approaches with a numerical example. Section 5 concludes the paper.Suppose an industry consists of n decision-making units. Each DMU j (j=1,…,n) utilizes the inputs xj=(xj1,…,xjR) to produce the outputs yj=(yj1,…,yjS).Assume that the technology exhibits constant returns-to-scale and that all DMUs operate under the same technology. According to the relationship between firm-level efficiency indices and industry-level efficiency reported by Li and Ng (1995), Ylvinger (2000) and Fare and Zelenyuk (2003), the industry technology equals the individual firm technology. Kuosmanen et al. (2006) developed the following top-down approach to estimate the industry cost efficiency:(1)ITCEFDH(χ,η,W)=maxcs.t.c⩽∑s=1Sηspjsj=1,…,n∑s=1Syjspjs-∑r=1Rxjrwr⩽0j=1,…,n∑r=1Rχrwr=1w∈Wwhere(χ,η)=∑j=1nxj,∑j=1nyjis the aggregated industry input–output combination. pjsrepresents the shadow price of output s for DMU j;W≡w∈R+R|Aw′⩾b|represents the polyhedral convex set for the input price domain; A is an l×R matrix and b an l-dimensional column vector. The third constraint guarantees the input prices are consistent with LoOP. Let c∗ be the optimal value to the model (1).Assumingwr∗(r=1,…,R) are the optimal input shadow prices that maximize the industry cost efficiency of model (1), we can use the optimal input shadow prices, which are assumed to be unique, to estimate the firm-level efficiency analysis. Unfortunately, the optimal input shadow prices are not always unique, making the cost efficiency levels of individual firms uncertain (Mostafaee & Saljooghi, 2010).In the following, we shall develop optimistic and pessimistic DEA models to obtain the upper and lower bounds of cost efficiency, respectively, for each firm in the case of non-unique LoOP prices in model (1).To obtain the upper bound of cost efficiency for DMU j,we can propose the optimistic CE model in the following mathematical formulation:(2)UTCEFDH(xj,yj,W)=maxcj(2.1)s.t.c∗∑r=1Rχrwr⩽∑s=1Sηspmsm=1,…,n(2.2)cj⩽∑s=1Syjspmsm=1,…,n(2.3)∑s=1Symspms-∑r=1Rxmrwr⩽0m=1,…,n(2.4)∑r=1Rxjrwr=1pm∈R+Sm=1,…,nw∈Wwhere pmrepresents the output shadow price vector for DMU m. The above optimistic model takes the most optimistic strategy, which selects the most favorable input prices among the multiple input shadow prices of model (1) to evaluate DMU j. We can thus refer to it as an upper bound for the cost efficiency of the evaluated DMU j.Letwr∗(r=1,…,R) andpms∗(m=1,…,n,s=1,…,S) be the optimal solution to model (2).The following theorem shows that the above optimal shadow prices keep the industry cost efficiency at the optimal value c∗ of model (1).Theorem 1Ifwr∗(r=1,…,R) andpms∗(m=1,…,n, s=1,…,S) solve model(2), then the industry cost efficiency corresponding to the optimal shadow prices equals c∗.Letwr∗(r=1,…,R) andpms∗(m=1,…,n,s=1,…,S) be the optimal solution to model (2). Assume that∑r=1Rχrwr∗=ρ. According to constraints (2.1) and (2.3), we have(2.5)c∗ρ⩽∑s=1Sηspms∗m=1,…,n(2.6)∑s=1Symspms∗-∑r=1Rxmrwr∗⩽0m=1,…,nNow, we definewr∗∗=1ρwr∗andpms∗∗=1ρpms∗. Thus, we have∑r=1Rχrwr∗∗=1. In addition, dividing both sides of the constraints of (2.4) and (2.5) by ρ, we havec∗⩽∑s=1Sηspms∗∗m=1,…,n∑s=1Symspms∗∗-∑r=1Rxmrwr∗∗⩽0m=1,…,nThus,wr∗∗,r=1,…,R;pms∗∗,m=1,…,n,s=1,…,Sis a feasible solution to model (1). Moreover, the objective function of model (1) corresponding to this solution equals c∗.This completes the proof.□If we take the least favorable strategy in choosing the input prices among the multiple input shadow prices of model (1), then a Pessimistic CE model is generated. In this problem, once wr(r=1,…,R) and pms(m=1,…,n,s=1,…,S) are fixed, one can obtain a maximum cj; when wrand pmsare fixed to other values satisfying the constraints, another maximal cjis obtained. Our purpose is to find the minimal maximal value of cj. Thus, the pessimistic CE model is a min–max problem, which is in essence a bi-level programming problem. To obtain the lower bound of the cost efficiency for DMU j, the following bi-level programming model is presented:(3)LTCEFDH(xj,yj,W)=mincjs.t.c∗∑r=1Rχrwr⩽∑s=1Sηspmsm=1,…,nmaxcjs.t.cj⩽∑s=1Syjspmsm=1,…,n∑s=1Symspms-∑r=1Rxmrwr⩽0m=1,…,n∑r=1Rxjrwr=1pm∈R+Sm=1,…,nw∈WTheorem 2Ifwr∗(r=1,…,R) andpms∗(m=1,…,n,s=1,…,S) solve model(3), then the industry cost efficiency corresponding to the optimal shadow prices equals c∗.Similar to the proof of Theorem 1.□The above pessimistic model takes a least favorable strategy in choosing the input prices to evaluate DMU j.We can thus refer to it as a lower bound for the efficiency that the evaluated DMU j can have. Combined with the upper bound, the lower bound can be used to generate an interval efficiency approximation for the cost efficiency measure of DMU j in the case of non-unique LoOP prices.The above top-down approach only applies if the technology exhibits constant returns-to-scale. Under variable returns-to-scale, the industry technology is defined as the sum of the individual firm technologies. In this case, industry cost efficiency can be expressed as the cost-share weighted average of the firm cost efficiencies. Accordingly, the bottom-up approach is proposed to obtain the industry cost efficiency (Kuosmanen et al., 2006). Similarly, we can develop a pair of two-level mathematical programming models to calculate the upper and lower bounds of cost efficiency under the bottom-up approach in the case of non-unique LoOP prices (see Appendix). Note that the bottom-up approach is equivalent to the top-down approach and under constant returns-to-scale (Kuosmanen et al., 2006).The above bi-level programming model (3) has been proven to be an NP-hard problem (Ben-Ayed and Blair, 1990). To solve the above linear bi-level model efficiently, a base-enumerating algorithm is proposed in the next section based on the optimality conditions of linear programming.In the following, we develop an algorithm for model (3). As explained as above, model (3) is a linear bi-level programming problem. Several classical approaches can address this problem, such as the “k-th best”, branch-and-bound and penalty techniques (Audet et al., 2007; Calvete et al., 2008). However, considering that two objective functions are the same and that the follower level only involves one variable cj, which makes model (3) different from the general linear bi-level programming problem, we presented a base-enumerating scheme based on the optimality conditions of linear programming. For simplicity, the leader-level variables (wr,pms) are represented as vector x, and the follower-level variable cjis traditionally replaced by y. Model (3) can then be re-written as follows:(4)minx,yys.t.A1x⩽0,maxyyey⩽A2xx⩾0;y⩾0In model (4), Ai(i=1,2) corresponds to the known coefficient matrices, i.e., the nonzero elements of A1 are taken from c∗χr,ηs,yms,xmr,yjrand the nonzero elements of A2 are taken from yjs. In model (3), the constraints have the same left-hand side; hence, the follower-level constraints are uniformly represented asey⩽A2x, in which e=(1,…,1)T. Furthermore, we standardize the follower’s problem by adding a slack vector y0 as follows:(5)minx,yys.t.A1x⩽0,maxyyey+Iny0=A2xx⩾0,y,y0⩾0in which Inis a unit matrix with n rows. Set Y=(y,y0) and A=(e,In).In the follower’s problem of model (5), A is an n×(n+1) matrix, which means that the follower’s linear programming has at most n+1 bases. According to the optimality conditions of linear programming, we consider each base and find x for which this base is optimal and feasible for the follower’s problem. It follows that one can obtain the optimal solution to the model (5) as soon as all bases are checked. This process can be completed in the following several steps:Set c=(1,0,…,0), which is the coefficient vector of the follower’s problem. First, we take all potential bases Biconsisting of n different columns in A, i=1,2,…,n+1.If Biis nonsingular and(6)c-cBiBi-1A⩾0wherecBiis the components of c corresponding to Bi, then base Bisatisfies the optimality conditions of the follower’s problem. Next, the following linear programming is solved.(7)minx,yyis.t.A1x⩽0Bi-1A2x⩾0x⩾0,yi⩾0In model (7), the second constraint makes Bifeasible. If model (7) has at least one optimal solution, then the solution and the corresponding objective value yiare recorded as a threshold. The next potential base Bi+1 is considered as above. If the objective value of (7) is smaller than the threshold, and the threshold is then updated.If Biis singular, or the inequality (6) fails or the model (7) has no solution, then the corresponding objective value yiis taken as a sufficiently large positive number. When a total of n+1 potential bases are checked, the algorithm is stopped. The detailed steps of the algorithm see the Appendix.In this section, we provide a numerical example with multiple inputs and outputs to illustrate the proposed approaches. We assume that the industry consists of 20 firms, each consuming two inputs to generate two outputs. Table 1shows the input and output dataset for 20 firms.If we solve the industry cost efficiency using the top-down approach (1) under constant returns-to-scale, its optimal value is 0.8333. However, the shadow price vector w is not unique, in which w1∈[0.000257,0.000471] and w2∈[0.0000265,0.000141] are the optimal shadow prices for input 1 and input 2, respectively. As a result, the cost efficiency levels of individual firms vary considerably depending on the particular shadow price vector we choose. In the case of non-unique LoOP prices, we use model (2) and model (3) to calculate the upper and lower bounds of cost efficiency, respectively, for each firm, which are shown in Table 2. Similarly, If we applied the bottom-up approach to solve the industry cost efficiency under variable returns-to-scale, its optimal value is also 0.8333. Note that in this application, the industry efficiency by the top-down approach under constant returns-to-scale is the same to that by bottom-up approach under variable returns-to-scale, which is not a general property. However, the multiple optimal shadow prices for input 1 and input 2 are w1∈[0.000176,0.000521] and w2∈[0,0.000184], respectively. The upper and lower bounds of cost efficiency for each firm are shown in the last two columns of Table 2.Some insights can be gained from Table 2:(1)The efficiency interval tends to be larger under variable returns-to-scale than under constant returns-to-scale when comparing the results of the top-down approach and the bottom-up approach. For some DMUs (e.g., DMU 10 and DMU 20), the results of the two different approaches are quite different. This further confirms the findings by Kuosmanen et al. (2006) that the assumption of the production technology has a strong impact on the efficiency measures at the firm level, which calls for a careful inspection of the production assumptions prior to the actual efficiency analysis.Efficiency intervals contain more information than the point efficiency of upper bounds alone, which helps the decision-maker to further discriminate among the efficient units. For example, based on the above efficiency score intervals obtained by the top-down approach, the firms can be classified in the following three subsets:Moreover, the interval measures show the robustness of the efficiencies. Thus, the range of possible efficiency scores can be used to further rank the units in the set CE+. For instance, the efficiency bounds of DMU 5 and DMU 6 are given by [0.7427,1] and [0.9362,1], respectively. The former is characterized by a greater efficiency variation than the latter, which indicates that DMU 6 is better than DMU 5 in terms of sturdiness of efficiency.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
