@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-objective integrated facility location-hardening model: Analyzing the pre- and post-disruption tradeoff

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a new model for integrating facility location and hardening decisions.We convert a natural three-level formulation to a single-level formulation.We present algorithms for the single- and bi-objective versions of the problem.We report the runtime of the single- and bi-objective algorithms.Risk was sizably improved without a comparable degradation to normal performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Location,Interdiction,Multiple objective programming,Catastrophe planning and management,Discrete optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Two methods of reducing the risk of disruptions to distribution systems are (1) strategically locating facilities to mitigate against disruptions and (2) hardening facilities. These two activities have been treated separately in most of the academic literature. This article integrates facility location and facility hardening decisions by studying the minimax facility location and hardening problem (MFLHP), which seeks to minimize the maximum distance from a demand point to its closest located facility after facility disruptions. The formulation assumes that the decision maker is risk averse and thus interested in mitigating against the facility disruption scenario with the largest consequence, an objective that is appropriate for modeling facility interdiction. By taking advantage of the MFLHP’s structure, a natural three-stage formulation is reformulated as a single-stage mixed-integer program (MIP). Rather than solving the MIP directly, the MFLHP can be decomposed into sub-problems and solved using a binary search algorithm. This binary search algorithm is the basis for a multi-objective algorithm, which computes the Pareto-efficient set for the pre- and post-disruption maximum distance. The multi-objective algorithm is illustrated in a numerical example, and experimental results are presented that analyze the tradeoff between objectives.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This article addresses the problem of finding a set of facilities to locate and a set to protect in order to optimally mitigate against facility disruptions. In particular, the objective of the problem is to minimize the worst-case consequence incurred due to the disruption of facilities. Thus, this objective is appropriate for a situation in which facilities are subject to interdiction, i.e., attacks by an intelligent adversary. After a disruption occurs, a set of demand points are each assigned to their closest non-disrupted facility. Thus, the consequence of a disruption is measured as the maximum travel distance, i.e., the maximum distance from any demand point to its closest located and operating facility. We call this problem the minimax facility location-hardening problem (MFLHP). Further, this article also analyzes a bi-objective version of the MFLHP, simultaneously considering the maximum travel distance both with and without disruptions.Distribution networks, such as power networks and supply chains, are ubiquitous throughout the world. These networks consist of a set of facilities (power sub-stations, ports, distribution centers, etc.) and set of customers that rely on the facilities. Because these facilities form the backbone of distribution networks, facility disruptions often result in severe consequences. One recent example is the 2011 Tohoku earthquake in Japan, which disrupted manufacturing facilities and caused several Japanese automakers to halt car production for up to six months (Kim, 2012). These severe consequences have forced decision-makers to consider the possibility of facility disruptions when they design their network of facilities. In addition, decision-makers also may choose to harden facilities to protect them from disruptions. Facility hardening, a special case of facility protection, involves allocating resources to a facility (e.g., additional security, retrofitting, etc.) to make it immune to failure (Scaparra & Church, 2008a, 2008b; Smith, 2011). This paper serves to help decision-makers make better facility location and hardening decisions by providing a mathematical model of these decisions and using this model to generate insights about these decisions.This research focuses on the maximum distance objective, which is also used in the classic p-center problem (Hakimi, 1965). Since this objective is concerned with minimizing the worst service experienced by a demand point, it is appropriate for the public sector (Daskin, 2000). Researchers have cited numerous potential applications for the maximum distance objective such as locating emergency vehicles and facilities (Hochbaum & Pathria, 1997; Mladenovic, Labbe, & Hansen, 2003; Scaparra, Pallottino, & Scutella, 2004) and locating warning sirens (Suzuki & Drezner, 1996). This article also seeks to minimize the worst-case disruption, i.e., the worst-case risk measure. The worst-case risk measure is well-suited for risk-averse decision-makers, especially in critical infrastructure protection (Church & Scaparra, 2007; Salmeron, Wood, & Baldick, 2009; Scaparra & Church, 2008b).A growing amount of research exists on locating facilities subject to disruptions and hardening facilities subject to disruptions. Several authors (Cui, Ouyang, & Shen, 2011; Drezner, 1987; O’Hanley, Paola Scaparra, & Garcia, 2013; Snyder & Daskin, 2005) have developed models for locating facilities subject to random disruptions. Other works have considered that located facilities are subject to interdiction, i.e., intentional and calculated attacks. O’Hanley and Church (2011) developed a bi-level model for the problem of locating facilities to minimize the post-interdiction total weighted covered demand. Drezner (1987) developed a method to minimize the post-interdiction maximum distance from a demand point to its closest located and operating facility. O’Hanley and Church (2011) optimized a weighted combination of the system performance before and after interdiction for a facility location problem.Rather than locating facilities, others have examined the problem of hardening a set of existing facilities. O’Hanley, Church, and Gilless (2007b) and Li, Zeng, and Savachkin (2013) have presented models for hardening facilities subject to random failures. Church and Scaparra (2007) and Scaparra and Church (2008a, 2008b) have studied the problem of how to harden facilities in order to minimize the post-interdiction total weighted distance. O’Hanley, Church, and Gilless (2007a) presented a bi-level model to optimally harden facilities in order to minimize the post-interdiction total weighted covered demand.Some researchers have developed models that include both facility location and facility hardening. Snyder and Daskin (2005) present extensions of the p-median and warehouse location models and include perfectly reliable, i.e., hardened, and unreliable facility locations in their model. Specifically, a facility is perfectly reliable if and only if it is located at a perfectly reliable location. Although their study focuses on location, it would be possible to integrate location and hardening decisions in their model if every geographical site had both a reliable and an unreliable location. However, it is unclear whether using their model in this way, which would double its size, would be computationally tractable. Lim, Daskin, Chopra, and Bassamboo (2010) were the first to explicitly include both location and hardening decisions in a single model. They present an extension of the warehouse location problem in which the decision maker chooses between locating unreliable facilities and locating perfectly reliable, i.e., hardened, backup facilities at a higher cost. The authors assume one layer of supplier backup. Thus, if a demand point’s primary facility fails, the demand point is then immediately assigned to its hardened backup without checking if there is a closer operating facility. This assumption simplifies the model and allows the authors to provide several useful analytical results. Li et al. (2013) extend the work of Lim et al. (2010) but still assume one layer of supplier backup. The research presented in this paper considers multiple layers of backup, allowing a demand point to be assigned to its closest operating facility after a disruption. Aksen, Aras, and Piyade (2013) study an extension of the p-median problem in which facilities are susceptible to interdiction. They present a tri-level version of the budget-constrained median location model in which a defender locates and hardens facilities and then an attacker destroys a number of unhardened facilities. Their works extends the work of Lim et al. (2010) by modeling multiple layers of backup. Aksen et al. (2013) study several methods for solving their problem including a tabu search algorithm and a two-phase heuristic. The research in this paper builds on the work of Aksen et al. (2013) by providing an exact procedure for solving the integrated location-hardening problem, rather than a heuristic procedure.This article builds upon the facility location and facility hardening literatures by making the following main contributions. (1) A new model for integrating facility location and hardening decisions; in particular, a natural three-level formulation is converted to a single-level mixed-integer program (MIP) by taking advantage of the structure of the MFLHP. This model is accompanied by a binary search solution procedure along with a method for obtaining a lower bound. (2) This integrated model and solution method forms the basis of an algorithm that computes the complete Pareto-efficient set for the pre- and post-disruption maximum distances. This algorithm is based on a method from Medal, Rainwater, Pohl, and Rossetti (2013) that optimizes facility location decisions but does not model facility hardening. (3) A set of computational experiments provide results that should help decision-makers better understand the tradeoff between the pre- and post-disruption maximum distances when making the decision to locate and harden facilities subject to disruptions. Toward this end we present the following analyses: (i) an analysis of the Pareto-efficient set between the pre- and post-disruption maximum distances; (ii) an analysis of the penalty incurred for optimizing either the pre- or post-disruption radius in isolation; and (iii) an analysis of the benefit of considering facility hardening when locating facilities subject to disruptions.The remainder of this article is as follows. In Section 2 the MFLHP is described and a three-level model of the problem is converted to a single-level MIP. In Section 3, two algorithms are presented for single- and bi-objective versions of the MFLHP. An example that demonstrates the bi-objective MFLHP is given in Section 4. Section 5 reports the results of computational experiments on the single- and bi-objective MFLHP. Section 5 concludes the article with a summary and a discussion of future work.The purpose of the MFLHP model is tolocate a set of facilities and harden a subset of the located facilities in order to minimize the worst system performance over all possible disruption scenarios consisting of the disruption of r facilities. The system performance for a disruption scenario is the maximum distance from a demand point to its closest located and operating facility.The MFLHP model is appropriate for two situations: (1) facilities are vulnerable to naturally-caused disruptions and the decision-maker wishes to mitigate against the worst-case consequence due to the loss of r facilities and (2) facilities are subject to a strategic attacker who seeks to attack up to r facilities in order to generate the largest consequence possible and the decision-maker wishes to mitigate against these attacks.To understand the model, it may help to divide it into three stages: (1) the mitigation, (2) the disruption, and (3) the response. We use the generic term facility to refer to a physical entity that we are locating and hardening. The mitigation stage, which happens before the disruption occurs, involves actions taken to mitigate against the disruption. The mitigation decisions in our model concern where to locate facilities and which facilities to harden, and these decisions are made simultaneously. If a facility is hardened in our model, it is always available to serve demand points. In the disruption stage, the disruption causes exactly r facilities to fail. Thus, if p facilities are located, there areprcombinations of facility disruptions. (Later, we show that we do not have to consider all combinations.) In the response stage, demand points are served by their closest located facility. Since the decision in this stage is so simple – find the closest facility to each demand point – this stage will be implicit in the model.To understand the three-stage model, it is helpful to think of it as consisting of three players acting in sequence: a defender, an attacker, and an operator. In the first stage, the defender mitigates against the actions of the attacker by strategically locating and hardening facilities. The defender’s objective is to minimize the attacker’s objective. The attacker, knowing the location and hardening actions taken by the defender, then destroys r facilities. The objective of the attacker is to maximize the operator’s objective, i.e., maximize the post-disruption radius. The operator, observing the actions of the attacker, pairs each demand point with its closest available facility in order to minimize the post-disruption radius.The following notation will be used to describe the problem. LetIbe a set of potential facility locations,Lbe a set of located facilities, andHbe a set of hardened facilities. Since only located facilities can be hardened,H⊆L. Denote byχ(L,H)the cost of all location and hardening activities, which is subject to a budget b. (Note that b must be large enough to ensure that there exists a feasible solution(L,H)such that|L|⩾r+1or|H|⩾1.) The setOis the set of located facilities that fail in a disruption; at most r facilities can fail in a disruption. A set of demand points is represented by the setJ. We measure how effectively a facility located at i can serve the demand point located at j using a measure ϕij. The measure ϕijcould be the distance between i and j or a function of the distance between i and j. It could also represent the distance multiplied by the demand weight wj. Let Φ be a map that holds the assignments of demand points to facilities; thus, Φ(j) is the facility assigned to demand point j.Thus, the defender’s optimal objective value, U(r)∗, is equal to the optimal value of the following three-level optimization problem:(1a)minH⊆L⊆IH(L,H)(1b)s.t.χ(L,H)⩽b,H(L,H)=maxO⊆L⧹HS(L,O),(1c)s.t.|O|⩽r,S(L,O)=minΦmaxjϕΦ(j),j,s.t.Φ(j)∈L⧹O∀j∈J.This is the integrated MFLHP model. The defender’s problem (1a) is to locate a set of facilitiesLfrom a set of candidate locationsIand harden a subset,H, of the located facilities to minimize the post-disruption radiusH(L,H). The cost of location and hardening must be within a budget, b. The interdictor’s problem (1b) is to destroy a subset,O, of the located, unhardened facilities in order to maximize the post-disruption radius,S(L,O). The interdictor can only destroy r facilities. The operator’s problem (1c) is to assign demand points to facilities. Since the operator’s problem is uncapacitated, it is optimal to assign every demand point to its closest facility. Thus, the operator’s problem can be represented by taking the maximum distance from any demand point to its closest non-disrupted facility.Rather than trying to solve the three-stage formulation, the MFLHP’s structure can be exploited to formulate a single-stage model. In particular, because of the minimax distance objective of the integrated MFLHP model, the interdictor’s optimal solution can be described as a simple expression.Because of the structure of the interdictor’s problem, we can determine exactly which facilities the interdictor would want to destroy to optimize his objective without having to solve an optimization problem. After the setsLandHhave been chosen, the interdictor’s problem is(2)U(r)∗=maxO⊆L⧹HS(L,O),such thatOconsists of no more than r facilities. LetLjibe the set of facilities closer to demand point j than facility i is. LetO∗(L,H)be the set of facilities that optimizes the interdictor’s problem (maximize the post-disruption maximum radius) given a location-hardening solution(L,H).Definition 1Let U(r)∗ be the optimal post-disruption radius. Demand point j′ and facility i′ are a post-disruption bottleneck pair ifU(r)∗=ϕi′j′. In this case, j′ is called a post-disruption bottleneck demand point and i′ is called a post-disruption bottleneck facility.LetDj(L)=mini∈Lϕij, letD‾j(L)=maxi∈Lϕij, and letLjk⊆Lbe the set of the k closest located facilities to j. The interdictor’s optimal strategy is the following. First, choose the bottleneck demand point asj′=argmaxj∈JminD‾jLjr+1,Dj(H).Next, depending on which facilities are located and hardened, take one of the following actions. (i) If the r facilities closest to j′ are unhardened, then interdict the r closest facilities to j′. (ii) If the kth (k⩽r) closest facility to j′ is hardened, then interdict the (k−1) closest facilities to j′.ProofThe interdictor is able to force the post-disruption assignment distance (PDAD) for a demand pointj′∈Jto equalminD‾j′Lj′r+1,Dj′(H)by choosing actions (i) or (ii) depending on which facilities are located and hardened. Action (i) causes j′s PDAD to equalD‾j′Lj′r+1and Action (ii) causes it to equalDj′(H). Since the interdictor can only destroy r facilities and a demand point is always assigned to its closest operating facility after a disruption, the quantityminD‾jLjr+1,Dj(H)is an upper bound for the PDAD for any demand pointj∈J. Since the interdictor is a maximizer and the problem has the bottleneck property (i.e., the interdictor’s objective value depends on only one demand point), he or she will focus on the demand point with the largest PDAD upper bound. □The following corollary, following directly from Theorem 1, provides a simple expression of the interdictor’s optimal objective value, which will help simplify the three-level model.Corollary 1The interdictor’s optimal objective value is equal to(3)maxj∈JminD‾jLjr+1,Dj(H).By Corollary 1, the interdictor’s maximization problem (given a location-hardening solution(L,H)) can be reformulated as the problem of simply choosing a demand point, j′, with the largest post-disruption assignment distance to be the post-disruption bottleneck demand point, i.e.:(4)H(L,H)=maxj∈JminD‾jLjr+1,Dj(H).Substituting (4) for (1b), the three-level problem (1) converts to the following minimax problem:(5)U(r)∗=min(L,H)⊆Kmaxj∈JminD‾jLjr+1,Dj(H),whereK={(L,H):L⊆I,H⊆L,χ(L,H)⩽b}is the set of feasible location-hardening solutions.Model (5) has the minimax structure of a bottleneck problem (Hochbaum & Shmoys, 1986) and can thus be reformulated as a single-level MIP. Let Wijbe a variable that is 1 if ϕijis an upper bound on the post-disruption assignment distance (PDAD) for demand point j and 0 otherwise. Let Xibe a binary variable that is 1 if a facility is located at i and 0 otherwise and Yibe a variable that is 1 if a facility at i is hardened and 0 otherwise. The cost of locating a facility at i is fi, and the cost of hardening a facility at i is gi.A MIP formulation of the integrated MFLHP model is:(6a)minU(r)(6b)s.t.U(r)⩾ϕijWij∀i∈I,j∈J,(6c)(r+1)Wij⩽(r+1)Yi+∑i′∈I:ϕi′j⩽ϕijXi′∀i∈I,j∈J,(6d)∑i∈IWij=1∀j∈J,(6e)Wij⩽Xi∀i∈I,j∈J,(6f)Yi⩽Xi∀i∈I,(6g)∑i∈IfiXi+∑i∈IgiYi⩽b,(6h)Xi,Yi∈{0,1}∀i∈I,(6i)Wij∈{0,1}∀i∈I,j∈J.The objective (6a) is to minimize the post-disruption radius, which is the defender’s objective. Constraints (6b) require that the interdictor’s objective is equal to the maximum of all of the PDAD upper bounds, obeying Proposition 1. Constraints (6c) ensure that the PDAD upper bound for a demand point j is equal tominD‾jLjr+1,Dj(H). If a facility i is hardened, i.e., Yi=1, thenϕij=Dj(H)in an optimal solution. If r facilities closer to j than i are located and i is located, i.e.,∑i′∈I:ϕi′j⩽ϕijXi′=r+1, thenϕij=D‾jLjr+1in an optimal solution. Constraints (6d) require every demand point to have an upper bound. Constraints (6e), although not necessary because of the presence of Constraints (6c), tighten the LP relaxation. Constraints (6f) prevent non-located facilities from becoming hardened. Constraint (6g) is a budget on the location and hardening costs. Constraints (6h) and (6i) require that the variables be binary.Theorem 2The single-level MIP formulation(6)is equivalent to the three-level model(1).LetL={i:Xi=1}andH={i:Yi=1}be the set of located and hardened facilities corresponding to a solution to (6).(i) A feasible solution to (6) obeys the requirementH⊆L⊆Iin (1) because Constraints (6h) enforceL⊆I, and the coefficients (fi+gi) for each Yiin (6g) ensure that every hardened facility is also located, enforcingH⊆L.(ii) In addition, Constraint (6g) is simply a concrete instance of the abstract constraintχ(L,H)⩽bin (1).(iii) Finally, we will demonstrate that minimizing U(r) in (6) subject to Constraints (6b)–(6i) is equivalent to minimizingH(L,H)in (1). Because of Constraints (6b) and (6d),U(r)=maxj∈JϕΦ(j),j, where Φ(j) is the facility i for which Wij=1. Because of the bottleneck structure inherent in (6a) and (6b), there exists a demand point j′ such thatU(r)=ϕΦ(j′),j′; i.e., j′ is a bottleneck demand point. Because of Constraints (6c), the feasible values for Φ(j′) include all i for which Yi=1 and all i for which∑i′∈I:ϕi′j′⩽ϕij′Xi′=r+1. Because of the minimization in (6a), Φ(j′) will be chosen in a way that minimizesϕΦ(j′),j′. Thus,U(r)=ϕΦ(j′),j′=minmini:∑i′∈I:ϕi′j′⩽ϕij′Xi′=r+1ϕi,j′,mini:Yi=1ϕi,j′=minD‾j′Lj′r+1,Dj′(H)=maxj∈JminD‾jLjr+1,Dj(H),which by Corollary 1 is equal toH(L,H). Therefore, since the single-level MIP formulation (6) is equivalent to minimizingH(L,H)subject to the ConstraintsH⊆L⊆Iandχ(L,H)⩽b, the theorem holds. □We also tested an alternate formulation of Model (6) which involves redefining the X and Y variables. Let Xibe a binary variable that is 1 if a facility is located but not hardened at i and 0 otherwise and Yibe a variable that is 1 if a facility at i is located and hardened and 0 otherwise. The alternate formulation is as follows:(7a)(MIP-Alt)minU(r)(7b)s.t.(6b)–(6d),(7c)Wij⩽Xi+Yi∀i∈I,j∈J,(7d)∑i∈IfiXi+∑i∈I(fi+gi)Yi⩽b,(7e)(6h) and (6i).Constraints (7c) and (7d) are revised versions of Constraints (6e) and (6g), respectively. Preliminary tests showed that the alternate Model (7) solved faster than Model (6).Model (6) can be solved using an off-the-shelf MIP optimizer such as CPLEX. However, preliminary experiments indicated that this approach would be computationally prohibitive. Because of the bottleneck structure of the integrated MFLHP model, we chose to use a binary search (BS) algorithm instead. Hochbaum and Shmoys (1986) showed that all bottleneck problems can be solved by solving a series of auxiliary problems within a binary search algorithm that searches over values in the set of all possible radii. These auxiliary problems can be thought of as inverses of their corresponding bottleneck problem. Specifically, this auxiliary problem takes a radius value as an input and outputs the cost of covering all objects within that radius.Empirical evidence has shown that a binary search algorithm works well for the p-center problem, which is also a bottleneck problem (Elloumi, Labbé, & Pochet, 2004). The p-center problem is to find a set of p located facilities that minimize the radius. The auxiliary problem for the p-center problem is the set-cover problem with unitary costs, which is still an NP-hard problem (Johnson, 1974). If some radius δ is given as an input to the set-cover problem, the set-cover problem outputs how many facilities must be located, i.e., the cost, so that all demand points are covered within δ. Let U(0)∗ be the optimal radius and p∗(δ) be the optimal number of facilities needed to cover all demand points within δ. If p∗(δ) is greater than or equal to p, then U(0)∗ is at least δ and δ is a new lower bound. If p∗(δ) is less than p, then U(0)∗ is at most δ and δ is a new upper bound. Thus, a binary search can be performed over all values of δ to find the optimal radius, U(0)∗. Binary search has been shown to be an effective solution method for the p-center problem because the set-cover problem with unitary costs is easier to solve than the p-center problem itself.Similar to the solution approach for the p-center problem, in this article we solve the integrated MFLHP using a binary search algorithm. However, we use an auxiliary problem that is tailored for the MFLHP along with new upper and lower bounds and a new heuristic.To use a binary search algorithm for the integrated MFLHP, the auxiliary problem must first be described. Define U(r) as the radius for the auxiliary problem. (Note that U(r) is now a parameter and not a variable, as it was in Model (6).) To evaluate whether a particular U(r) is above or below the optimal post-disruption radius, the set-cover problem with location and hardening (SCP-LH) is used:(8a)SCP-LH(U(r),r)min∑i∈IfiXi+∑i∈IYi(8b)s.t.(r+1)∑i:ϕij⩽U(r)Yi+∑i:ϕij⩽U(r)Xi⩾r+1∀j∈J,(8c)Yi⩽Xi∀i∈I,(8d)Xi,Yi∈{0,1}∀i∈I.The SCP-LH minimizes the cost required for every demand point to have a post-disruption assignment distance less than or equal to U(r). The objective (8a) is to minimize the total cost of location and hardening. Constraints (8b) require that for each demand point j, either r+1 facilities within U(r) of j must be located or at least one facility within U(r) of j must be hardened. Since the set-cover problem is a special case of SCP-LH(U(r), r) (set r=0 and set fi=1, Yi=0 for all i), SCP-LH(U(r), r) is also NP-hard.Note that an alternate version of SCP-LH can be constructed by redefining the X and Y variables as in Section 2.4. In this alternate model the objective (8a) changes to∑i∈IfiXi+∑i∈I(fi+gi)Yi, but Constraints (8b) remain unchanged. We refer to this alternate model as SCP-LH-Alt. Because SCP-LH-Alt outperformed SCP-LH in preliminary testing, we use SCP-LH-Alt throughout the rest of this paper.The binary search algorithm for the integrated MFLHP is similar to the binary search algorithm for the p-center problem. In addition to the modified auxiliary problem, we also add a heuristic for the auxiliary problem and use a polynomial algorithm to obtain bounds for the integrated MFLHP. The binary search algorithm is described in Medal (2012).Before starting the binary search, we attempt to find good upper and lower bounds for the integrated MFLHP to reduce the search space of the algorithm. In particular, we apply the binary search algorithm to the linear-programming relaxation of the auxiliary problem (8). Let the binary search algorithm that uses the linear-programming relaxation of the auxiliary problem be called the relaxed binary search algorithm. This idea was first employed by Elloumi et al. (2004) for the p-center problem.We compute a binary search (BS) lower bound for the MFHLP by applying the relaxed binary search algorithm. The optimal radius returned by the relaxed binary search algorithm is a lower bound to the integrated MFHLP. We add the following step to the relaxed binary search algorithm so that it also returns an upper bound. Each iteration of the relaxed binary search algorithm produces a new midpoint index; let Dindexbe the distance corresponding to this index. To obtain a heuristic upper bound, solve SCP-LH-Alt (Dindex) using a greedy algorithm (see Medal, 2012). This greedy algorithm extends an algorithm by Balas and Ho (1980) for the set cover problem and sequentially adds facilities to be located and hardened based on their costs of location and hardening and how many additional demand points they can cover. If the total cost of this heuristic solution to SCP-LH-Alt (Dindex) is less than the budget (b), then Dindexis a new incumbent lowest upper bound.There are other ways to obtain bounds for the integrated MFLHP. A linear-programming lower bound (LP) can be obtained by solving the linear-programming relaxation of the MIP Model (6). A partial relaxation (PR) lower bound can be obtained by solving the MIP Model (6) with only Xiand Yirelaxed for all i. In our experimentation, we found that the BS lower bound required much less run time than the PR lower bound and yet the BS lower bounds were reasonably close (16% relative error, on average) to the PR lower bounds.Although the MFLHP optimizes the post-disruption radius (PostDR), decision-makers may also be concerned about the pre-disruption radius (PreDR), especially if disruptions are rare. Because these two objectives conflict, an effective solution approach is to generate a set of Pareto-efficient solutions, allowing a decision-maker to choose from among them based on his or her preferences.Because the binary search algorithm presented in Section 3.2 efficiently computes the optimal solution to the MFLHP, it can also be used to efficiently compute the Pareto-efficient set for multiple objectives. To describe how to compute the Pareto-efficient set for the pre-disruption and post-disruption radii, let us introduce two new optimization problems. Let MFLHP(·, U(r)) denote the problem “minimize the pre-disruption radius such that the post-disruption radius is no greater than U(r), and MFLHP(U(0), ·) denote the problem “minimize the post-disruption radius such that the pre-disruption radius is no greater than U(0). Both of these problems can be solved using a modification of the binary search algorithm from Section 3.2. Specifically, a single-cover constraint is added to the SCP-LH(U(r), r) auxiliary problem, resulting in the distance-constrained set-cover problem with location and hardening (DC-SCP-LH):(9a)DC-SCP-LH(U(0),U(r),r)min∑i∈IfiXi+∑i∈IgiYi(9b)s.t.∑i:ϕij⩽U(0)Xi⩾1∀j∈J,(9c)Yi⩽Xi∀i∈I,(9d)(r+1)∑i:ϕij⩽U(r)Yi+∑i:ϕij⩽U(r)Xi⩾r+1∀j∈J,which minimizes the cost of location and hardening (9a) subject to the requirements that (i) the pre-disruption radius be at most U(0)(9b) and (ii) the post-disruption radius be at most U(r)(9d).The DC-SCP-LH(U(0), U(r), r) can be used to solve MFLHP(·, U(r)) and MFLHP(U(0), ·) via binary search:•To solve MFLHP(·, U(r)), fix U(r) in Constraints (9b) and vary U(0) in Constraints (9d) via binary search (see Section 3.2) in order to find the optimal pre-disruption radius, U(0)∗.To solve MFLHP(U(0), ·), fix U(0) in Constraints (9b) and vary U(r) in Constraints (9d) within a binary search algorithm (see Section 3.2).Given the problems MFLHP(·, U(r)) and MFLHP(U(0), ·), we can use the ∊-constraint method of multi-objective optimization (Cohon, 2004) to generate the Pareto-efficient set. The ∊-constraint method was used for the p-center problem with facility disruptions in Medal et al. (2013) and is modified in this article to include facility hardening. Specifically, the auxiliary problem DC-SCP-LH(U(0), U(r), r) is used in place of the auxiliary problem employed in Medal et al. (2013). Algorithm 1 describes this ∊-constraint method. On line 4, an upper bound is obtained by taking the maximum distance from a demand point j to its (r+1)st closest facility site, denoted asijr+1. On line 6, MFLHPUk(0),·is solved, returning the post-disruption radius for the kth member of the Pareto set, and on line 8, MFLHP·,Uk(r)-∊is solved, returning the pre-disruption radius. The value ∊ is subtracted fromUk(r)to ensure that the pre-disruption radius corresponding to Pareto point (k+1) is greater than the pre-disruption radius corresponding to Pareto point k.Algorithm 1Constructing the Pareto-efficient set for pre- and post-disruption radius objectives1 function GenerateParetoEfficientSet2k←0; ∊← a small number3 Set of Pareto-efficient pointsS←∅4 Solve MFLHP·,maxijϕijr+1j, returning minimum PreDRUk(0).5loop6Solve MFLHPUk(0),·, returningUk(r). ▷Min. PostDR s.t. PreDR constraint.7S←S∪Uk(r),Uk(0)8Solve MFLHP·,Uk(r)-∊, returningUk+1(0). ▷Min. PreDR s.t. PostDR constraint.9if MFLHP·,Uk(r)-∊is infeasible, break.10k←k+111returnSWe will first demonstrate our research on a simplified example, using a dataset from Daskin (1995) that consists of 150 nodes representing the most populous cities in the United States. This example attempts to locate seven facilities to service each of the 150 demand points. To make solutions easier to visualize, each of the demand points are given a unit weight. Without considering facility disruptions, the design objective is to minimize the maximum distance from a demand point to its closest facility. Thus, this is the classic p-center problem (Hakimi, 1965). Because the p-center problem is known to produce many optimal solutions, we utilize the total distance as a secondary objective in all of the results presented in this section and the next. See Appendix A for a model that optimizes the total distance subject to constraints on the pre-disruption and post-disruption radii.Fig. 1(a) shows the optimal solution to this 7-center problem. Seven facilities are located in the optimal solution, and the (pre-disruption) radius for this solution is 420 miles. One limitation of the p-center model is that it may produce solutions that are vulnerable to facility disruptions. Fig. 1(b) shows how the solution is impacted by the worst-case facility disruption scenario consisting of the disruption of r=3 facilities. Specifically, the demand points assigned to the facilities at Albequerque, NM; Boise City, ID; and Glendale, CA must be reassigned, causing the radius to increase. The new radius, the post-disruption radius, is 1624 miles which is a 286% increase over the pre-disruption radius.A decision-maker is likely to be concerned about this 286% increase in the radius. To reduce the potential increase in the radius the MFLHP model can be used to locate and harden facilities. However, it is likely that the decision-maker is interested in both the pre-disruption and post-disruption radii. In many cases a decision-maker may not know his or her preferred tradeoff between the pre-disruption and post-disruption radii. Thus, it would be helpful if the decision-maker had a set of Pareto-efficient solutions to choose from. Fortunately, Algorithm 1 can be used to compute the Pareto-efficient set for the pre-disruption and post-disruption radii.Fig. 2shows the Pareto-efficient set for the pre-disruption and post-disruption radii. (For this example, we assume that the cost of hardening a facility is the same as the cost of locating a facility (e.g., gi=fi).) The left and right endpoints of the Pareto set are obtained by optimizing the post-disruption and pre-disruption radii, respectively, in isolation. The Pareto set is relatively flat when the post-disruption radius is between 902 and 1381. This means the post-disruption radius can be decreased from 1381 to 902 (35% reduction) while only increasing the pre-disruption radius from 543 to 612 (13% increase). Overall, the slope of the curve is gradual, indicating that a large reduction in the post-disruption radius can be obtained with a modest increase in the pre-disruption radius. More analysis on the tradeoff between the pre-disruption and post-disruption radii is given in Section 5.1.Fig. 3shows three of the solutions corresponding to Pareto-efficient points in Fig. 2. Fig. 3a, c, and e shows the solutions and assignments without disruptions for solutions 6, 9, and 11 of the Pareto set in Fig. 2. Fig. 3b, d and f shows the post-disruption assignments. (Solution 1 is shown in Fig. 1.) As the Figures show, as the post-disruption radius receives more emphasis, less of the budget is spent on location and more is spent on hardening. A description of each of the solutions in Fig. 3(a)–(f) is given in the Supplemental material.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
