@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measuring the bullwhip effect for supply chains with seasonal demand components

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A two-stage supply chain with an order-up-to inventory policy is considered.A bullwhip measure for a general SARMA (p, q) × (P, Q)sdemand process is derived.Can exploit link between lead-time and seasonal lag to reduce bullwhipe effect.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chains,Bullwhip,Time series,Seasonal demand,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A bullwhip measure for a two-stage supply chain with an order-up-to inventory policy is derived for a general, stationary SARMA(p, q) × (P, Q)sdemand process. Explicit expressions for several SARMA models are obtained to illustrate the key relationship between lead-time and seasonal lag. It is found that the bullwhip effect can be reduced considerably by shortening the lead-time in relation to the seasonal lag value.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When retailers submit orders to their suppliers in response to demand, they must carefully balance inventory levels and expected future demand. Ensuring that the inventory can meet consumer demand often results in higher fluctuations in the ordering process than the variability of demand would initially suggest. This phenomenon is called the bullwhip effect and can depend on many factors such as the ordering policy, the lead-time for an order to arrive, and even the demand process itself. Lee et al. (1997a); 1997b) have illustrated the existence of this effect at firms such as Proctor & Gamble Co. and Hewlett-Packard Company. The distortion of information as orders go upstream in a supply chain has been studied from a mathematical perspective by examining the magnitude of the bullwhip effect under various settings. In this paper, we consider a single-item, two-stage supply chain with an order-up-to inventory policy and derive a bullwhip effect measure for a general class of demand models: seasonal autoregressive and moving average processes (i.e., SARMA(p, q) × (P, Q)s). We use this theory to show the crucial links among the magnitude of the bullwhip effect, the lead-time, and seasonal lag.There is a large body of work showing that demand has seasonal components. Wray (1958, pp. 4) writes, for example, that toy purchases are seasonal with demand rising around the Christmas holidays. Baltas (2005) and Heien (1983) examine the seasonal behavior of the demand for nondurable goods such as laundry detergent, food, and energy. Board (2008) and Heien (1983) also examine housing and Board (2008) continues his analysis for other durable goods. Finally, for a more general discussion examining cyclical demand across industries and countries, see Beaulieu et al. (1992).Furthermore, seasonal demand has been previously considered within the operations and supply chains context – just not, as far as we know, in the bullwhip literature. For example Crowston et al. (1973) and McClain and Thomas (1977) focus on production planning for goods which are in demand on a seasonal basis. Sethi and Cheng (1997) and Aviv and Federgruen (2001) study inventory systems for products with seasonal demand as well. Finally, Bradley and Arntzen (1999) combine production planning and inventory policy along with capacity in the presence of seasonal demand. Given this large body of literature and that the demand process is a key driver of the bullwhip effect, we feel it is critical to incorporate demand seasonality in our measurements.This paper is organized as follows. We begin with a review of the existing bullwhip effect literature in Section 2. In Section 3, we outline the supply chain framework for one supplier and one retailer where the latter employs an order-up-to inventory policy and mathematically define the bullwhip measure. In Section 4, we describe the SARMA(p, q) × (P, Q)smodel. Sections 3 and 4 provide the foundation for the main result. Next, in Section 5, we derive the bullwhip measure for the general SARMA demand case. We apply our theorem to the AR(1), MA(q), and ARMA(1,1) settings to connect our new results to previous work. In Section 6, we consider the SARMA(1, 0)s, SARMA(0, 1) × (1, 0)s, and SARMA(1, 0) × (0, 1)scases, deriving formulas analytically from the main theorem. We examine the conditions under which the bullwhip effect exist focusing specifically on the key relationship between the seasonal lag and the lead-time between placing and receiving an order. Moreover, we show how to reduce the bullwhip effect by exploiting this relationship. Finally, we provide some concluding remarks in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
