@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modelling generator maintenance scheduling costs in deregulated power markets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Modelling costs that affect generator maintenance schedule in deregulated power market.Models for reputational cost and selection of loyalties using Analytic Hierarchy Process.Demonstration of cost modelling activities for a case study.Assessment of impact of market related costs in maintenance schedules.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance,Opportunity cost,Deregulated market,Reputation,AHP,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Generating companies use the maintenance cost function as the sole or main objective for creating the maintenance schedule of power generators. Usually only maintenance activities related costs are considered to derive the cost function. However, in deregulated markets, maintenance related costs alone do not represent the full costs of generators. This paper models various cost components that affect the maintenance activities in deregulated power markets. The costs that we model include direct and indirect maintenance, failures, interruptions, contractual compensation, rescheduling, and market opportunity. The loss of firm’s reputation and selection of loyalty model are also considered using the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) within an opportunity cost model. A case study is used to illustrate the modelling activities. The enhanced model is utilised in generator maintenance scheduling cases. The experimental results demonstrate the importance and impact of market related costs in maintenance schedules.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The electricity sector in many countries has moved from a centralised structure to deregulated markets separating the integrated power system into various competitive entities. This has created an open electricity market pool by allowing competition with respect to the supply of power and allowing consumers to choose their preferred supplier of electric energy (Cai, Deilami, & Train, 1998; Galloway, Dahal, Burt, & McDonald, 2004; Shahidehpour & Marwali, 2000). In power systems, generators must be maintained in order to supply electricity with high reliability. Power generating companies (GENCOs) apply different maintenance strategies, such as reliability centre maintenance (Bertling, Allan, & Eriksson, 2005; Park & Yoon, 2011), corrective maintenance (Bertling et al., 2005), preventive maintenance (Cai et al., 1998; Canto, 2008), and age-based maintenance (Huynh, Castro, Barros, & Bérenguer, 2012), to achieve their objectives in terms of quality and cost. Regardless of the type of maintenance carried out, the generator units must be taken out of service for a period of time ranging from several hours to several weeks (Dahal & Chakpitak, 2007; Shahidehpour & Marwali, 2000). In the deregulated environment, the decision when to take the generator out of service depends on various factors such as the effect of maintenance outages on the overall system, reliability, loss of services, loss of firm’s reputation and loss of revenue (Chen, Huang, & Huang, 2008; Conejo, García-Bertrand, & Díaz-Salazar, 2005). The coordination of this is usually done by the Independent System Operator (ISO).This paper concentrates on the maintenance cost modelling of power generators for GENCOs in a deregulated environment. There are different costs associated with generator maintenance activities in deregulated power markets that influence maintenance scheduling and other planning activities. Reducing the maintenance cost is one of the main objectives in scheduling power system maintenance but this can be problematic. As the major factor for scheduling maintenance, formulating the problem requires the maintenance cost to be carefully modelled to reflect the real-world scenarios. It must be accurately quantified to ensure the optimal solution found represents a realistic optimised schedule (Canto, 2008).In Al-Arfaj, Dahal, and Azaiez (2007) preliminary modelling concepts and opportunity costs of planning generator maintenance have been introduced. We extend these ideas by developing two complete maintenance cost models under “no-failure” and “failure” cases. The developed models also include “reputational costs”, “interruption” and “contractual compensation”1In case of failure to generate power, GENCOs are obliged to supply the contractual volume by buying in the spot market. Hence the compensation cost will be equal to the difference between spot price and contracted price (see expression 6 for further details).1(hereafter “compensation”) costs. The reputational cost is quantified with the selection of the best loyalty model to minimise the loss using the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP). The paper also shows the data gathering process for the proposed cost models. The developed cost model has been utilised in two generator maintenance scheduling cases to demonstrate the impact of the “reputational costs” with the AHP loyalty models on the maintenance schedule.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The maintenance cost has been modelled in the literature with several representations for centralised power systems (Dopazo & Merrill, 1975; Kralj & Petrović, 1988; Shahidehpour & Marwali, 2000). With deregulation of power industries in many countries, the costs representation to be used within the maintenance model in the decentralised power systems has become an important research question. In this paper we have analysed maintenance cost representations considering the direct, indirect and opportunity costs to include in a maintenance scheduling model. We demonstrated the data gathering process for different maintenance cost components. Two models are developed in this paper reflecting the failure and no-failure status of a generator. The paper shows that other costs that affect the decisions with respect to the timing of generator maintenance should be taken into account. Also, the models account for any sudden failure which may happen before or after any planned maintenance event. The opportunity costs which reflect GENCOs’ reputation from the viewpoint of their customers in case of a failure are also considered.In the case of maintenance or failure, the GENCOs must minimise their reputational cost and that is equal to keeping customer loyalty in either case. The cost of maintaining customer loyalty should be added to the total maintenance cost of GENCOs. The paper presented an application of the AHP to identify the best loyalty model for GENCOs to select in order to price out “reputational cost” in deregulated power systems which will help in minimising total maintenance cost. This model reflects the current situation in the deregulated environment. The experimental results with maintenance scheduling case studies demonstrate the effect of the new cost model in the maintenance cost and optimal schedule.