@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling, forecasting and trading the EUR exchange rates with hybrid rolling genetic algorithms—Support vector regression forecast combinations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a hybrid Rolling Genetic Algorithm-Support Vector Regression (RG-SVR) model.In the RG-SVR, a GA is applied for optimal parameter selection and feature subset combination.We introduce a GA fitness function for financial forecasting purposes.The RG-SVR model is benchmarked against GA-SVR and simple SVR algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Genetic algorithms,Support vector regression,Feature subset,Forecast combinations,Exchange rates,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The motivation of this paper is to introduce a hybrid Rolling Genetic Algorithm-Support Vector Regression (RG-SVR) model for optimal parameter selection and feature subset combination. The algorithm is applied to the task of forecasting and trading the EUR/USD, EUR/GBP and EUR/JPY exchange rates. The proposed methodology genetically searches over a feature space (pool of individual forecasts) and then combines the optimal feature subsets (SVR forecast combinations) for each exchange rate. This is achieved by applying a fitness function specialized for financial purposes and adopting a sliding window approach. The individual forecasts are derived from several linear and non-linear models. RG-SVR is benchmarked against genetically and non-genetically optimized SVRs and SVMs models that are dominating the relevant literature, along with the robust ARBF-PSO neural network. The statistical and trading performance of all models is investigated during the period of 1999–2012. As it turns out, RG-SVR presents the best performance in terms of statistical accuracy and trading efficiency for all the exchange rates under study. This superiority confirms the success of the implemented fitness function and training procedure, while it validates the benefits of the proposed algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Forecasting financial time series appears to be a challenging task for the scientific community because of its non-linear and non-stationary structural nature. On one hand, traditional statistical methods fail to capture this complexity, while on the other hand non-linear techniques present promising empirical evidence. However, their practical limitations and the expertise required to optimize their parameters are creating skepticism on their utility.This study introduces a hybrid Rolling Genetic Algorithm-Support Vector Regression (RG-SVR) algorithm for optimal parameter selection and features subset combination when applied to the task of forecasting and trading the EUR/USD, EUR/GBP and EUR/JPY exchange rates. The proposed model genetically searches over a feature space (pool of individual forecasts) and then combines the optimal feature subsets for each exchange rate. A novel fitness function specialized for financial purposes is used to simultaneously minimize the error of the obtained forecasts, increase the profitability of the final forecast combination and reduce the complexity of the algorithm. This is crucial in financial applications, where statistical accuracy is not always synonymous with the financial profitability of the deriving forecasts. The reduced complexity of the algorithm decreases the computational cost of the proposed methodology and makes it ideal for trading applications, where time efficiency is important. At the same time, it acts as a protection against overfitting and impeded generalization abilities. The model employs a sliding window training approach and is capable of capturing the time-varying relationship that dominates the financial trading series.RG-SVR is benchmarked against seven models. Their statistical and trading performance is compared during the period of 1999–2012. The rationale behind the selection of the benchmarks is twofold. Firstly, Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Support Vector Regression (SVR) architectures with genetically and non-genetically optimized parameters are dominant in the relevant literature. The six most popular and promising variants are identified and included in the study (see Section 4.3). Secondly, it would be unfair to compare the hybrid RG-SVR only with hybrids of the same methodology class, especially when other proposed methodologies have shown statistical and trading superiority in a similar task. One such example is the hybrid Neural Network (NN) that combines Adaptive Radial Basis Functions with Particle Swarm Optimization (ARBF-PSO), as introduced recently by Sermpinis, Theofilatos, Karathanasopoulos, Georgopoulos, and Dunis (2013). The authors apply ARBF-PSO to the task of forecasting and trading the same exchange rates that the present study is investigating. Their results show that ARBF-PSO is outperforming several linear and non-linear models, while its structural complexity is not high. Consequently, ARBF-PSO's selection as a benchmark to this application is required and justified.To the best of our knowledge, the proposed RG-SVR methodology has not been presented in the literature. Similar hybrid applications exist but they are either limited in classification problems (Dunis, Likothanassis, Karathanasopoulos, Sermpinis & Theofilatos, 2013; Huang & Wang, 2006; Min, Lee, & Han, 2006; Wu, Tzeng, Goo, & Fang, 2007) or the Genetic Algorithm (GA) does not extend to optimal feature subset selection (Chen & Wang, 2007; Pai, Lin, Hong, & Chen, 2006; Yuan, 2012). In addition to this fact, the RG-SVR hybrid is the first GA hybrid SVR algorithm that deploys v-SVR models, minimizes the number of support vectors and applies a specialized loss function and a sliding window training approach. A detail comparison of the algorithm and the previous two algorithms is presented in the next section. The genetically optimized SVM model (GA-SVM) proposed by Huang and Wang (2006), Min et al. (2006), Wu et al. (2007) and Dunis et al. (2013) and the genetically optimized ε-SVR model (GA-ε-SVR) proposed by Chen and Wang (2007) , Pai et al. (2006) and Yuan (2012) will act as benchmarks to the RG-SVR algorithm. Compared to non-adaptive algorithms presented in the literature, the proposed model does not require from the practitioner to follow any time-consuming optimization approach (such as cross validation or grid search) and is free from the data snooping bias (all parameters of RG-SVR are optimized in a single optimization procedure).From the results of this analysis, it emerges that RG-SVR presents the best performance in terms of statistical accuracy and trading efficiency for all exchange rates under study. RG-SVR's trading performance and forecasting superiority not only confirms the success of the implemented fitness function, but also validates that applying GAs in this hybrid model to optimize the SVR parameters is more efficient compared to the optimization approaches (cross validation and grid search algorithms), that dominate the relevant literature.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is a literature review of previous relevant research on SVMs and SVRs in forecasting. A detailed description of the study's dataset, the EUR/USD, EUR/GBP and EUR/JPY European Central Bank (ECB) fixing series, is presented in Section 3. Section 4 includes the complete description of the hybrid RG-SVR model, while the statistical and trading performance of the implemented models is presented in Sections 5 and 6 respectively. The concluding remarks are provided in Section 7. The essential theoretical background for the complete understanding of the proposed methodology is given in Appendices A–D, along with the technical characteristics of the models used in this study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
