@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance measurement with multiple interrelated variables and threshold target levels: Evidence from retail firms in the US

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a performance measurement methodology with interrelated variables.Our methodology draws on generalized expressions of the directional distance function.Our methodology takes into account trade-offs among the dimensions of performance.The identified benchmarks satisfy threshold values for every dimension of performance.Our methodology provides scientific underpinning to the Balanced Scorecard.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in service industries,Performance management,Data envelopment analysis,Balanced Scorecard,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we developed a DEA–based performance measurement methodology that is consistent with performance assessment frameworks such as the Balanced Scorecard. The methodology developed in this paper takes into account the direct or inverse relationships that may exist among the dimensions of performance to construct appropriate production frontiers. The production frontiers we obtained are deemed appropriate as they consist solely of firms with desirable levels for all dimensions of performance. These levels should be at least equal to the critical values set by decision makers. The properties and advantages of our methodology against competing methodologies are presented through an application to a real-world case study from retail firms operating in the US. A comparative analysis between the new methodology and existing methodologies explains the failure of the existing approaches to define appropriate production frontiers when directly or inversely related dimensions of performance are present and to express the interrelationships between the dimensions of performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The performance of modern organizations that operate in competitive marketplaces is based on multiple interrelated dimensions, which are both endogenous (controllable by the organizations) and exogenous (either non-controllable or partially controllable by the organizations). An important study in the area of performance management is the Balanced Scorecard (BSC) (Kaplan & Norton, 1992). The BSC goes beyond the traditional financial measures for assessing the performance of organizations as it also incorporates customers, internal processes, and learning and growth perspectives (Kaplan & Norton, 1996).The fundamental drawback of the BSC is the ambiguity of putting the theory into practice by modeling the conceptual framework so as to yield specific and measurable results (Amado, Santos, & Marques, 2012). In addition, the link among the dimensions of performance is vague, and the impact on the performance of trade-offs that may exist among these dimensions is not explicit (Otley, 1998).Several studies, most of which are performed within the area of Operational Research, have been published providing scientific underpinning to performance assessment frameworks. Many of these studies use Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) for evaluating performance. DEA is a nonparametric methodology for assessing the production process of operational units. DEA provides a robust quantitative framework that enables the identification of the strengths and weaknesses of each unit under evaluation and yields measurable results that lead to the optimization of each unit's performance. Since the publication of the seminal paper by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), a significant number of extensions of DEA have been developed (Emrouznejad, Parker, & Tavares, 2008). A selected list of DEA-based studies related to performance assessment in a multi-dimensional setting is provided in Table 1.The studies presented in Table 1 either do not deal with the mixed relationships between the dimensions of performance or omit a discussion of whether the targets decision makers set for a number of dimensions of performance are satisfied. As a result, the benchmarking either does not express reality or is not flawless. Drawing on the results presented in the studies listed in Table 1, it is questionable if the units located in the frontier are appropriate benchmarks for the remaining units of the sample as it is unknown whether these units are qualified in all dimensions of performance incorporated in the evaluation.In this paper, we address the issues raised in existing studies. We modify and extend the methodology developed by Zervopoulos and Palaskas (2011) to measure performance considering both the direct and inverse relationships among the dimensions of performance. The modified methodology relaxes the major assumption of the work of the said authors, which is that of fixed weights between the original and the adjusted variable levels. The adjustment of variables that fail to meet certain user-defined criteria is crucial for the construction of appropriate production frontiers. These frontiers consist of units that are not only assigned performance scores equal to unity, but also report scores at least equal to threshold values for all dimensions of performance. Our methodology guarantees that all units deviating from the frontier will become qualified in all dimensions of performance when they are projected to the frontier. The methodology developed in this study is not a straightforward extension of the work of Zervopoulos and Palaskas (2011). This conclusion draws on the outputs of the comparative analysis between our methodology and the methodology of the two authors, which is presented in Sections 2 and 3 of this paper.This study unfolds as follows. Section 2 analyzes the performance assessment methodology and compares it with the methodology of Zervopoulos and Palaskas (2011). Section 3 justifies the selection of variables, clarifies the underlying relationships among them, and provides a real-world numerical example to present the properties and advantages of our methodology relative to competing approaches. Conclusions, limitations, and future research are presented in the final section of this study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
