@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling special-day effects for forecasting intraday electricity demand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model special-day effects to predict hourly electricity demand in Korea.The regression model with hourly special day effect and the double SARMA error is suggested.The hourly special-day effects are more important than the daily ones.The suggested model is effective during both the special-day prediction and the non-special-day prediction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forecasting,Double SARMA model,Intraday electricity demand,Special-day effect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose and apply a novel approach for modeling special-day effects to predict electricity demand in Korea. Notably, we model special-day effects on an hourly rather than a daily basis. Hourly specified predictor variables are implemented in the regression model with a seasonal autoregressive moving average (SARMA) type error structure in order to efficiently reflect the special-day effects. The interaction terms between the hour-of-day effects and the hourly based special-day effects are also included to capture the unique intraday patterns of special days more accurately. The multiplicative SARMA mechanism is employed in order to identify the double seasonal cycles, namely, the intraday effect and the intraweek effect. The forecast results of the suggested model are evaluated by comparing them with those of various benchmark models for the following year. The empirical results indicate that the suggested model outperforms the benchmark models for both special- and non-special day predictions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Consumers typically demand electricity throughout the year, including special days/holidays. However, electricity demand patterns on holidays are often idiosyncratic and cause significant forecasting errors. Such effects are known as special-day effects and are recognized as an important issue in determining electricity demand data.Typically, while observations related to special-day effects have been included in prediction models, they have been eliminated from the testing periods (Nowicka-Zagrajek and Weron, 2002). Darbellay and Slam (2000) suggested splitting the data into working days and holidays, so that researchers could predict the two data series separately. Smith (2000) treated holidays as Sundays. Hippert et al. (2005) simply switched the holiday data with similar values from a day of the preceding week. Taylor et al. (2006) tried to smooth out the special days by averaging the corresponding periods from two adjacent weeks prior to fitting and evaluation.Special-day effects have been explicitly included in forecasting models using dummy variables. In particular, many researchers have applied regression models with regression coefficients and an autoregressive-moving-average (ARMA) type error, because it is convenient to include important deterministic components, such as the trend, seasonality, and special-day effects. For example, Ramanathan et al. (1997) suggested employing a dummy variable to reflect the effect of the day after a holiday. Pardo et al. (2002) used dummy variables to indicate holidays and working days before holidays. Cottet and Smith (2003) applied 5day-type dummy variables to the days of the week and also coded public holidays as Sundays. Gould et al. (2008) suggested a state space model approach with multiple seasonal patterns. They coded holidays using the same indicator as the one for the Saturday or Sunday sub-cycle. Soares and Medeiros (2008) employed 15 different codes for the days of the week, common holidays, special holidays, working days before and after a holiday, etc. Cancelo et al. (2008) implemented various dummy variables to define different classes of special days. Religious and national holidays were modeled using dummy variables by De Livera et al. (2011). More recently, more complicated nonlinear type models using fuzzy neural network techniques have been proposed and applied by some authors (Srinivasan et al., 1995; Kim et al., 2000). These models use dummy variables or segmentation rules and apply to special days with abnormally low demand.Each of the abovementioned forecasting models for special-day effects have been applied to intraday high frequency electricity data. Numerous studies have suggested employing the intraday high frequency data forecasting approach in order to determine the electricity demand or load, since it is best suited given the availability of relevant data and the increasing interest in short-term prediction. In fact, the intraday modeling scheme is known to be more effective than its inter-day counterpart in the presence of significant intraday dependence. On the contrary, the special-day effects in most of the above mentioned models have been coded on a daily basis, instead of an intraday basis, via dummy variables. Therefore, the intraday patterns of special days are treated as being similar to those of ordinary days, with the exception of the relatively reduced amounts. However, the intraday patterns of special days tend to differ significantly from those of average days.We propose a novel approach that efficiently captures special-day effects. Unlike previous models, using two variables, this study considers the special-day effects on an intraday basis in order to reflect their unique intraday patterns. The first variable distinguishes the abnormal intraday pattern of a special day from that of an ordinary intraday. The second variable reflects the level of abnormality of the specific intraday period on a special day. On most special days, there are few observations; thus, it is difficult to capture the exact abnormal intraday period as well as its strength. In this study, we seek to record more detailed intraday special-day patterns; thus, we also explore the interaction between the intraday period and special-day effects. We program the stochastic term of the regression model using a double seasonal ARMA (SARMA) mechanism, which allows me to capture various seasonal components, such as the intraday and intraweek effects. We also apply hourly electricity demands to evaluate the suggested model. This data set contains multiple seasonal cycles and various special-day effects. Finally, the suggested model is compared with various benchmark models, and its superiority is proved empirically.The remainder of this article is organized in the following manner. Section 2 describes the patterns of hourly electricity demand in Korea and explains the motivation for this study. In Section 3, we describe the suggested model, introduce the benchmark models, and discuss the model evaluation criteria. Section 4 reviews the empirical comparison results among the models. Some concluding remarks are provided in Section 5.In Korea, the hourly amount of electricity demand is measured in megawatts. For the purposes of this study, a daily sample was composed of 24 observations taken between 01:00 and 24:00hours. The time period under study ranged from January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2008. Hence, the total number of observations is 26,304. The data set was obtained from the Korean Power Exchange (KPX). The time series are illustrated in Fig. 1.According to Fig. 1, the electricity demand series denotes significant holiday effects. Occasional drops in dynamics are documented and point to reduced electricity consumption on holidays. One possible reason could be that many businesses do not function on holidays, and the overall electricity demand in Korea is significantly lower on these days. In particular, on traditional Korean holidays, such as Seollal and the Mid-Autumn festival (which are composed of three consecutive days), drops in electricity demand can be explicitly detected, the more significant of them marked by the six circles in Fig. 1.Fig. 2illustrates the average hourly demand on several kinds of special days and compares them with the average hourly demand on ordinary days. Due to the lower number of holidays between January 1, 2002 and July 31, 2007, we employ the hourly electricity demand data for more than five and a half years. Using this plot, we can easily observe that the intraday patterns of special days differ from those of ordinary days. On holidays, the hourly electricity demand tends to be explicitly lower than that of an ordinary day during business hours. Here, the term “holiday” refers to ordinary holidays, including New Year’s Day, Independence Movement Day, Labor Day, Buddha’s Day, Children’s Day, Memorial Day, Constitution Day (2006 and 2007 only), Liberation Day, National Foundation Day, and Christmas Day. The intraday patterns of most ordinary holidays tend to be similar to each other in the pilot analysis; therefore, we treat each of the ordinary holidays identically. In contrast, the pattern of the hourly demand curves for traditional holidays, such as the Mid-Autumn festival and Seollal, appear to be significantly different from those of ordinary holidays. Meanwhile, the patterns on the days before the Mid-Autumn festival and after Seollal seem to be similar to those of the ordinary holidays. Electricity demand on the day before Seollal tends to decrease after around 15:00hours; on the other hand, electricity demand on the day after the Mid-Autumn festival tends to remain low throughout the day. This graph proves that special days contain unique intraday or hourly patterns. The modeling of intraday-based special-day effects seems to represent the effects of special days more precisely.Fig. 1 also seems to include multiple seasonal cycles in its dynamics; however, it does not reflect the detailed patterns of the cycles. Due to these limitations, we create Fig. 3a, which uses the entire data set to depict the average hourly demand dynamics over seven days of the week. The implemented data are the initial in-sample data set (from January 1, 2006 to July 31, 2007). According to Fig. 3a, the demand for electricity appears to decrease from 13:00 to 16:00hours for all days of the week. The minimum demand is recorded at 04:00hours from Mondays to Saturdays. After 05:00hours, electricity demand increases until 12:00hours from Mondays to Saturdays. In particular, we observe the maximum electricity demand at 12:00hours on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays. A sharp fall is documented during lunch time. After lunch, the demand increases and remains high until 20:00 or 21:00hours on weekdays. When comparing the demand over the days of the week, we note that the patterns observed from Mondays to Fridays are very similar, with one exception: significantly lower values are noted from 01:00 to 10:00hours on Mondays. On the other hand, the demand pattern on Sundays is completely different from that of the other days of the week.In summary, Fig. 3a depicts the different intraday patterns over the seven days of the week. These effects are summarized into two seasonal cycles: the hour-of-day (intraday) effect and the day-of-week (intraweek) effect. Evidence of these effects appears in numerous studies analyzing short-term electricity data (Darbellay and Slam, 2000; Soares and Medeiros, 2008; Taylor, 2003, 2010). To provide rigorous statistical evidence of the existence of these two effects, Fig. 3b presents the periodogram plot for the electricity demand. The frequency on the x-axis indicates the angular frequency, which is equal to 2π/period. For example, an angular frequency of 0.2618 corresponds to the period 24. This period translates to a day since we consider hourly data in this study. According to this figure, the dominant peak of the periodogram almost corresponds to the period of a day. The second-largest peak is observed at the period of a week. These results provide evidence of the existence of intraday and intraweek cycles.Besides the intraday and intraweek effects, Taylor (2010) suggested the consideration of the intrayear effect, consisting of data over six complete years, for modeling and forecasting intraday electricity demand. While this effect seems plausible, we do not consider it, since we do not find conclusive evidence of this periodicity in the data set.Recently, two types of methods have been primarily applied to high frequency electricity data prediction: multi-equation modeling for each intraday period (Ramanathan et al., 1997; Cottet and Smith, 2003; Cancelo et al., 2008; Soares and Medeiros, 2008) and univariate time series modeling (Darbellay and Slam, 2000; Smith, 2000; Taylor, 2003, 2010, 2012). The first method treats each intraday period as a different series, while the second treats the entire time series as one series. According to Cancelo et al. (2008), most authors prefer the first method. However, there is some debate as to which method is better. In particular, the multi-equation approach involves too many parameters for estimation. Moreover, some studies that used the multi-equation approach disregarded intraday dependence characteristics (Cancelo et al., 2008; Soares and Medeiros, 2008). As mentioned before, if the intraday dependence pattern is significant, it is important to include it in the model. In this paper, we apply the univariate modeling approach as it has been widely employed in forecasting other high frequency data, including call arrivals (Shen and Huang, 2008; Taylor, 2008).To reduce the heteroscedasticity problem, a variety of transformation schemes have been suggested in the literature. Logarithmic and square root transforms have been extensively implemented. Recently, the traditional Box–Cox transformation was employed as a component of a seasonal exponential smoothing model, and its parameter was estimated along with other parameters (De Livera et al., 2011). We apply a square root transformation in this study. A transformed variableyt=Ntis utilized for prediction, where Ntis the electricity demand in hour t. According to Makridakis et al. (1998) and Taylor (2008), a square root transformation is useful to reduce the heteroscedasticity when it is proportional to the level of the original series. In the previous section, we observed that the levels of electricity demand differ between ordinary and special days. Indeed, these patterns may lead us to assume that the variance of the distribution on ordinary days is different than that on special days, which indicates the existence of heteroscedasticity. Furthermore, if there is strong heteroscedasticity, forecasting electricity demand on working days and special days would be problematic using the proposed model. Therefore, the square root transformation will help to alleviate the problem. Particularly, predictions with this transformation have typically provided superior forecasting results than predictions without it in several pilot studies.If ytdepends on an exogeneous variable xtin some way, then we can write a regression model asyt=c+f(xt)+et,where c is a constant. f(·) is a function of the predictor variables, while etis an autocorrelated stochastic error term, which is independent of xt. For example, etis assumed to be(1)et=θq(B)ΘQ1(BS1)ΘQ2(BS2)ϕp(B)Φp1(BS1)Φp2(BS2)εt,where εtis white noise. If we assume that εtfollows a normal distribution, then the maximum likelihood (ML) method for parameter estimation is applicable. Eq. (1) indicates that the error term etis modeled via a double SARMA mechanism.B is the backshift operator with Blyt=yt−l. ϕp(B) and θq(B) designate the autoregressive (AR) and moving average (MA) parts, respectively. These are usually polynomial functions of orders p and q, respectively.Φp1(BS1)andΦp2(BS2)indicate two seasonal factors related to the AR part.ΘQ1(BS1)andΘQ2(BS2)indicate two seasonal factors related to the MA part. P1, P2, Q1, and Q2 indicate the order of the corresponding polynomial functions, and s1 and s2 indicate the length of the two seasonal cycles. In this study, intraday and intraweek effects are modeled via this double SARMA mechanism. This stochastic disturbance is often represented asARMA(p,q)×(P1,Q1)s1×(P2,Q2)s2. Regression models with SARMA errors and few regression coefficients are often referred to as “SARMA with the exogeneous variable” (SARMAX) model.In this study, the suggested model includes the following predictor variables: IntAh,t, IntBh,t, and Bt. IntAh,trepresents the interaction effect between the hour-of-the-day effect and the hour-of-special-day effect At. The hour-of-day effects are coded using k-dummy variables. The corresponding current hour of day at t is coded as 1 if it is the same as the kth hour of the day (where k=1,2,…,23) and 0 otherwise. Atindicates whether a specific hour of a special day deviates from the normal pattern. In particular, At=1 if t corresponds to some specific time on some special days with their patterns differing from the ordinary. Otherwise, At=0. On the other hand, IntBh,trepresents the interaction effect between the hour of the day and Bt. We implement Btso as to discern the difference between the strength of the idiosyncrasy of the intraday pattern on a special day. Bt=2 indicates a pattern that is even more extraordinary than the regular abnormality, which is coded as Bt=1. For a normal case, Bt=0.We suggest the following SARMAX model:(2)yt=c+β0Bt+∑h=123αhIntAh,t+∑h=123βhIntBh,t+θq(B)ΘQ1(BS1)ΘQ2(BS2)ϕp(B)Φp1(BS1)Φp2(BS2)εt.Henceforth, we refer to this model as the SARMAX (AB) model. Initially, we consider including the variable Atin the model; however, we decide against this since it turned out to be insignificant with the existence of Bt. Furthermore, models with Bttend to provide better fits than ones with At.Detailed values of Atand Btcorresponding to some specific hours of some special days are summarized in Table 1. Atand Btare coded as 0 during all the other times of the year not included in Table 1. The implemented rules are as follows: If the average hourly electricity demand on special days is lower than that on normal days by amounts bigger than or equal to 10% of the demand on normal days, then At=1. Otherwise, At=0. On the other hand, if the average hourly electricity demand on special days is lower than that on normal days by amounts equal to or exceeding 10% and less than 20% of the demand on normal days, then Bt=1. Bt=2 if the average hourly electricity demand on special days is lower than that on normal days by amounts equal to or exceeding 20% of the demand on normal days. Otherwise, Bt=0.As mentioned earlier, we employ hourly electricity demand data for more than five and a half years (from January 1, 2002 to July 31, 2007) to construct the coding system in Table 1. Note that the forecasting period starts from August 1, 2007. Since the number of observations on special days is quite limited, it is not easy to build explicit distributions of the variables specifying intraday special-day effects. Thus, this coding system is constructed with the help of the graphical comparison seen in Fig. 2. While this approach is ad hoc and may appear to be subjective, when taken together, the two variables (Atand Bt) effectively help improve the forecasting accuracy with the interaction effects.A discussion of the weather variables is also pertinent. Researchers have included weather variables in models predicting short-term electricity demand in various ways (Srinivasan et al., 1995; Ramanathan et al., 1997; Cottet and Smith, 2003; Cancelo et al., 2008). While forecast models with weather variables appear to be competitive, it is typically difficult to obtain accurate intraday weather forecasts. There are about 570 weather stations in Korea. Constructing weather variables reflecting each of these 570 climatic regions is certainly very difficult and time consuming. Note that the electricity demand data reflects the electricity demand of South Korea as a whole. Predicting the variables on an hourly basis is likely to be even more difficult. Additionally, according to Cottet and Smith (2003), general meteorological conditions vary by a higher degree during the summer, leading to weather forecast failures. Recent trends show that the summer season in Korea is getting longer, spanning more than three months per year. Furthermore, the weather-based methods were empirically shown to be inferior to many types of univariate models for very short-term predictions (less than six hours in advance) (Taylor, 2012). Due to these concerns, we exclude weather variables from the proposed model.Hahn et al. (2009) conducted a comprehensive literature review to summarize various types of electric load forecasting models. Major forecasting models include SARMA type models, seasonal exponential smoothing, artificial neural networks (ANN), support vector machines, and hybrids of several models. Among these, the SARMA type models have been prevalently implemented as benchmark models in numerous studies. Empirical evidence shows that these models outperform many rival models. In particular, the double SARMA models surpassed the ANN type models for relatively short-term forecasting (Taylor et al., 2006; Taylor, 2010; Taylor, 2012). A triple SARMA model with intraday, intraweek, and intrayear effects was superior to an extension of standard Holt–Winters exponential smoothing with triple seasonal components (Taylor, 2010). To evaluate the prediction performance of the SARMAX (AB) model, we conduct comparisons with the following SARMA or SARMAX type benchmark models. For a comparison with other classes of models, we additionally consider an exponential smoothing method.The double SARMA model can be written asϕp(B)Φp1(BS1)Φp2(BS2)(1-B)d(1-BS1)D1(1-BS2)D2(yt-c)=θq(B)ΘQ1(BS1)ΘQ2(BS2)εt,where d, D1, and D2 are orders of differencing, and(1-B),(1-BS1), and(1-BS2)are difference operators. This model is written asARIMA(p,d,q)×(P1,D1,Q1)s1×(P2,D2,Q2)s2. Note that the ARIMA model is reduced to the ARMA model if d=0 (i.e., if there is no differencing). A model fitted with differencing (d=1) is useful if there is any evidence of existence of significant unit roots. In this study, we consider a model fitted with no differencing since we did not detect any significant existence of unit roots via several unit root tests.Soares and Medeiros (2008) considered the SARMA model with special-day effects as a benchmark model. However, they employed dummy variables in order to identify special days. They also applied the special-day effects on a daily basis. In this study, we implement a similar approach. We apply daily-based special-day effects to the regression model with the SARMA error term. Thus,yt=c+γ0dt+θq(B)ΘQ1(BS1)ΘQ2(BS2)ϕp(B)Φp1(BS1)Φp2(BS2)εt,where dtis an exogeneous variable that represents the special-day effects on a daily basis in the SARMAX model. dt=1 if time t belongs to a special day; in this case, special days include all holidays and the working days before/after Seollal and the Mid-Autumn festival. Here, all hours of special days are coded as 1, because the special-day effects are coded on a daily basis. During all other times, dtis coded as 0. Additionally, we attempt to include a linear time trend term in the function of predictor variables in order to check the existence of a significant time trend pattern. However, it was not detected.For comparison purposes, we consider the restricted SARMAX (AB) models with only one type of special-day effect. Therefore, we delete either the Type A or the Type B related variable from Eq. (2). The SARMAX model with a Type A special-day effect only is written asyt=c+α0At+∑h=123αhIntAh,t+θq(B)ΘQ1(BS1)ΘQ2(BS2)ϕp(B)Φp1(BS1)Φp2(BS2)εt.The SARMAX model with a Type B special-day effect only is expressed asyt=c+β0Bt+∑h=123βhIntBh,t+θq(B)ΘQ1(BS1)ΘQ2(BS2)ϕp(B)Φp1(BS1)Φp2(BS2)εt.As shown in the next section, under certain evaluation criteria, a SARMAX model with both types of special-day effects is superior to a SARMAX model with only one type of special-day effect.In their regression model for daily electricity spot price forecasting, Koopman et al. (2007) suggested the idea of plugging lagged dependent variables in the function of the predictor variable. This allowed them to capture seasonal cycles, such as day-of-week effects. Regarding the stochastic term, they applied the generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) process, which allowed them to reflect the volatility clustering characteristics of spot prices. In the main model (SARMAX (AB)), the seasonal periodicities are already captured through the stochastic disturbance part in the SARMA mechanism; nevertheless, we also consider including the lagged dependent variables. If there is any significance in the newly added variables, then we might expect an additional periodic pattern that was not detected through the SARMA mechanism in the stochastic term of the SARMAX (AB) model. Including these variables in the model might allow for better forecasting results. We call this benchmark model the SARMAX model with lagged dependent variables and express it asyt=c+∑i=1kγiyt-i+β0Bt+∑h=123αhIntAh,t+∑h=123βhIntBh,t+θq(B)ΘQ1(BS1)ΘQ2(BS2)ϕp(B)Φp1(BS1)Φp2(BS2)εt.This model adds the lagged dependent variables∑i=1kγiyt-ito Eq. (2). Assuming the normality of εt, we obtain the ML estimators for the parameters.As stated earlier, we also implement a seasonal exponential smoothing method. This approach is appropriate when the time series does not include a trend but does include seasonality. Intraday and intraweek cycles corresponding to 24 and 168hours respectively, are attempted. The smoothing equations are built in an additive way.In this study, we implement a total of seven models. The notations of each model are summarized in the following manner:SARMA: This is a double SARMA model without differencing, where the SARMA mechanism is employed to catch multiple seasonal cycles, namely the intraday effect and the intraweek effect.SARMAX (d): This is a double SARMAX model with daily special-day effects.SARMAX (A): This is a double SARMAX model with only Type A special-day effects in its function of predictor variables. Stochastic disturbance is built using the double SARMA mechanism. The Type A variable identifies the abnormality of specific hours of some special days from the other hours of those days.SARMAX (B): This is a double SARMAX model with only Type B special-day effects in its function of predictor variables. The stochastic term is constructed via the double SARMA mechanism. The Type B variable measures the strength of the abnormality of specific hours of some special days.SARMAX (AB): This is a double SARMAX model with special-day effects of both types A and B in its function of predictor variables. The stochastic term is built using the double SARMA mechanism. This is the main model in this study. The other six models serve as benchmark models.SARMAX-Lag: This is a double SARMAX model with lagged dependent variables in the function of predictor variables as well as special-day effects for both Types A and B. The stochastic term is constructed using the double SARMA mechanism. Lagged dependent variables are provided to catch additional seasonal cycles.SES: This is a seasonal exponential smoothing technique with no trend. However, seasonal cycles, namely the intraday effect and the intraweek effect, are included.The prediction accuracies between models are evaluated using the forecasting results of the following day. For example, forecasting for the next day (i.e., “tomorrow”/day i) is undertaken hourly, up to 24hours in advance, using the information available at the end of “today/day i−1”. By using the 24-hourly prediction outcomes of the following day, we compute the root mean square errors (RMSEs) and the mean absolute percentage errors (MAPEs). Thus, we obtain the daily RMSEs and MAPEs. The averages are computed using the distributions of the daily RMSEs and MAPEs over the prediction period, which are then applied to the prediction evaluation. These model evaluation criteria have also been employed in forecasts using short-term time series data (Weinberg et al., 2007; Shen and Huang, 2008).On a daily basis, the formulae for the RMSE and the MAPE are written asRMSEi=1J∑j=1J(Nij-N^ij)21/2andMAPEi=100J∑j=1J|Nij-N^ij|Nij,N^ijis the forecasted value of Nijusing the information available at the end of day i−1, where Nijindicates the electricity demanded on day i and hour j, where j=1,2,…,24. Nijcorresponds to Nt, where t=j+24× (i−1). One might useN^t+j|tto represent the demand prediction in period t+j from period t.In this study, the initial in-sample data set ranges from 01:00hour on January 1, 2006 to 24:00hours on July 31, 2007. The total forecasting period covers the following year, from August 1, 2007 to December 31, 2008. Using the initial in-sample data, we obtain the 24-hourly predictions (from 01:00 to 24:00hours) for August 1, 2007. We calculate the RMSEs and MAPEs on August 1, 2007, using the 24-hourly forecasts. For the forecasts of August 2, 2007, we switch the window of the in-sample data, which ranged from January 2, 2006 to August 1, 2007. These steps are repeated until the end of the forecasting period on July 31, 2008. This procedure provides a total of 366 observations for the daily RMSEs and the same number of observations for the daily MAPEs. These observations were used to report the averages of the RMSEs and MAPEs.In this section, we present the empirical results for forecasting hourly electricity demand in Korea. The parameter estimation results and the prediction performances of the main proposed model are reported in comparison with the six benchmark models.The ML method is applied to the parameter estimation of the six SARMA or SARMAX type models assuming the normality of the error term. All ML estimates are requested to be significant at the 1% level. Insignificant variables are deleted from the model. Furthermore, the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and Schwarz’s Bayesian criterion (SBC) are implemented for model selection. Table 2summarizes the parameter estimation results over all six models for the data from January 1, 2006 to July 31, 2007. To provide the overall model comparisons, the AIC and SBC are summarized at the bottom of the table. The SARMAX-Lag model provides the smallest values among the six competing models. The SARMAX (AB) model is followed by the SARMAX (B) model, the SARMAX (A) model follows the SARMAX (B) model, and the SARMAX (d) and the SARMA models provide larger AIC and SBC values compared to the other models.The SARMA model is composed of only lag orders of the AR and MA parts, where no exogeneous variable is involved. The sets of significant lags of the AR and MA parts are p=(1,2,5,12), q=(1,5), P1=(12,24,72,96,144), Q1=(48,144), P2=(168,672), and Q2=(168,672). The lengths of the intraday and intraweek cycles are denoted by s1 and s2, which correspond to 24 and 168, respectively (see Taylor (2010) p. 141) for more details).In SARMAX-type models, significant lag orders in the SARMA error play roles similar to those of the lags in the SARMA model. Unlike the SARMA model, however, SARMAX-type models hold exogeneous variables, which explain the special-day effects. SARMAX-type models have a significant negative special-day effect, which reflects the fact that a designated period of special-days has relatively lower demand than the rest of the period. In particular, we use “d” in Table 2 in order to denote the coefficient of the daily-based special-day effect for SARMAX (d). In this study, we detect the significant interaction effects between the hour-of-special-day effect and the hour-of-day effect. These results imply that the interaction effect may improve the models’ prediction accuracies. The notation “int k” indicates the existence of an interaction term corresponding to the kth hour of a day in Table 2.The SARMAX-Lag model additionally includes the dependent lag variables in its function of predictor variables. For example, “lag24” indicates yt−24, which represents significant autocorrelation for a day. We find periodic autocorrelations on 1day, 3days, 4days, and 28days.Regarding the SES, various combinations of smoothing weights are attempted and selected in order to obtain the minimum RMSE for the total period. The SES with a single intraweek seasonal cycle provided better forecasting fits than that with an intraday seasonal cycle or that with both cycles combined. Therefore, the SES with an intraweek cycle is applied and reported. We use the software SAS 9.1 to obtain the forecasting outcomes.The averages of the RMSEs and MAPEs are calculated to compare the prediction performances between the main model and the six benchmark models. Table 3summarizes the results of the RMSEs and MAPEs on a monthly basis as well as over the entire period. The results show that the SARMAX (AB) model tends to outperform the other models over several months; it also records lower RMSEs and MAPEs. For a more detailed comparison, we report the relative percentages (RPs) of the averages of the models’ RMSEs and MAPEs over the total period. This value is obtained by dividing the averages of the RMSEs and MAPEs of each model by those of the SARMAX (AB) model. The RPs of all the other models exceed 1; thus, the SARMAX (AB) model is superior to its competitors over the entire time horizon. In Table 2, the SARMAX-Lag model reports the best AIC and SBC values among the candidate models; however, its prediction accuracy is not very good (see Table 3). We suspect overfitting in the SARMAX-Lag model.Prediction performances over the total period, in terms of lower RMSEs and MAPEs, are ranked in the following order: SARMAX (AB), SARMAX (B), SARMAX (A), SARMAX-Lag, SARMAX (d), SARMA models, and SES. The SARMAX (AB) model with both types of special-day effects performs the best, followed by the SARMAX (B) model, as evidenced by the slight difference in both the RMSE and MAPE. The SARMAX (A) and the SARMAX-Lag models follow the SARMAX (B) model. The traditional seasonal time series models, SARMA and SARMAX (d), perform relatively poorly, while the SES ranks last. With respect to the SARMAX (AB) model, the RPs of the averages of the RMSEs and MAPEs are around 104% in the SARMA and SARMA (d) models. In the case of SES, the RPs are around 145–153%.Additionally, we consider comparing model performances on special and non-special days (summarized at the bottom of Table 3). Reviewing the case over the total period, we find that the SARMAX (AB) model performs the best for both special and non-special days. The order of model performances is almost the same as that during the total period, except that the SARMAX-Lag model provides poor performance on non-special days. The RPs of the RMSEs and MAPEs in the SARMA, SARMA (d), and SES models are around 108–116% on special days; this implies that the suggested method significantly helps reduce forecasting errors on special days. On the other hand, the RPs in the SARMA, SARMA (d), and SES models on non-special days are around 101–164%. In summary, the analysis results indicate that the proposed approach allows us to capture the special-days effect more effectively and also help improve the prediction accuracy over the non-special day period.In order to obtain a more detailed and informative comparison of the forecasting results among models, additional RMSEs and MAPEs are calculated for different lead times. The RMSEs and MAPEs for each model for a given lead time are reported across different hours of a day during the total period, special days, and non-special days in Tables 4 and 5, respectively. The overall model ranks for the considered periods appear unchanged for the daily RMSEs and MAPEs.Fig. 4shows a graphical comparison that provides conclusive evidence of the superiority of the proposed main model; the MAPEs for each model are illustrated for special and non-special days in Fig. 4a and b, respectively. We omit depicting the RMSEs graphically as their presentation is similar to that of the MAPEs. Most MAPEs increase rapidly from around 07:00hours and maintain a high value between 10:00 and 19:00hours. Thereafter, they begin to decrease. This pattern is similar to that of the intraday electricity demand. The prediction error might get magnified as the level of volume increases. According to Fig. 4, the SARMAX (AB) model outperformed the other models across many forecasting time horizons. These additional results lend strength to our belief in the superiority of the suggested approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
