@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Graphical exploration of the weight space in three-objective mixed integer linear programs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explore the weight space in multiobjective mixed-integer linear programming.Subsets of indifference regions in the weight space are computed for MOMILP problems.Adjacent extreme nondominated solutions are explored for two and three-objective problems.All extreme nondominated solutions can be computed.We present a graphics-based computer implementation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple objective programming,Mixed integer linear programming,Weighted-sum scalarization,Weight space,Extreme supported nondominated solutions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we address the computation of indifference regions in the weight space for multiobjective integer and mixed-integer linear programming problems and the graphical exploration of this type of information for three-objective problems. We present a procedure to compute a subset of the indifference region associated with a supported nondominated solution obtained by the weighted-sum scalarization. Based on the properties of these regions and their graphical representation for problems with up to three objective functions, we propose an algorithm to compute all extreme supported nondominated solutions adjacent to a given solution and another one to compute all extreme supported nondominated solutions to a three-objective problem. The latter is suitable to characterize solutions in delimited nondominated areas or to be used as a final exploration phase. A computer implementation is also presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A multiobjective integer or mixed-integer linear programming (MOMILP) problem with p ≥ 2 objective functions can be written as:maxz1=f1(x)=c1x...maxzp=fp(x)=cpx}Maxz=f(x)=Cxs.t.x∈X={x∈Rn:Ax=b,x≥0,xj∈N0,j∈I}where A is the m × n technological coefficients matrix, being all constraints transformed into equations by introducing appropriate slack or surplus variables, and b ∈ ℝmis the right-hand-side vector. I ⊆ {1,…,n}, I ≠ ∅ is the set of indices of the integer variables, with n the total number of variables (decision variables plus slack/surplus variables). It is assumed that X is bounded and non-empty. C is the p × n objective matrix whose rows are the vectors ck∈ ℝn,k=1,…,p.If all decision variables are integer, then the multiobjective problem is pure integer (MOILP), which is a special case of the multiobjective mixed-integer case. In what follows we will denote by MOMILP the general case, in which integrality constraints are imposed on all or a subset of the decision variables.A feasible solution x′ ∈ X is efficient if and only if there is no other solution x ∈ X such that fk(x) ≥ fk(x′) for allk=1,…,pand fk(x) > fk(x′) for at least one k. Let XEdenote the set of all efficient solutions.Let Z ⊂ ℝpbe the image of the feasible region X in the objective space such that Z = {z ∈ℝp: z = Cx, x ∈ X}. If x′ ∈ X is efficient,z′=f(x′)=Cx′is a nondominated criterion point. Let ZNDbe the set of all nondominated points,ZND={z′∈Z:z′=Cx′,x′∈XE}.An important concept in MOMILP is the distinction between supported and unsupported nondominated/efficient solutions.A nondominated point z′ ∈ ZNDis supported if it is located on the boundary of the convex hull of Z (conv Z). An unsupported nondominated point is located in the interior of conv Z (it is dominated by some convex combination of supported nondominated points). A supported (unsupported) nondominated point corresponds to a supported (unsupported) efficient solution.We can further distinguish two types of supported nondominated points:(a)extreme supported nondominated points z ∈ ZND, which are vertices of conv Z; we will denote these nondominated points/efficient solutions as ESND solutions;non-extreme supported nondominated points, which are located in the relative interior of a face of conv Z.Let ZESNDdenote the set of all ESND points/solutions in the objective space and XESNDthe corresponding set in the decision space.Supported nondominated solutions are optimal solutions to the weighted-sum scalarization program (Pλ) for some weight vectorλ∈Λ={λ∈Rp:λk>0,k=1,…,p,∑k=1pλk=1}:(Pλ)maxzλ=∑k=1pλkfk(x)=λCx(Pλ)s.t.x∈XΛ is usually called the weight space and the set of weight vectors that lead to the same nondominated solution is referred to as an indifference region in the weight space. The weights of the objective functions are the parameters in the (Pλ) scalarization program and the variation of parameters enables to attain different supported nondominated solutions. However, there are multiple parameter values that lead to the same solution, i.e. an indifference set on the parameter's space (weight space) can be defined for each supported nondominated solution.The set Λ can be decomposed into subsets Λ(z′), ∀z′ ∈ ZNDsuch that z′ is supported, where Λ(z′) denotes the indifference region of z′ in the weight space. It represents the set of weight vectors λ that lead to z′ through the optimization of (Pλ), i.e., Λ(z′) = {λ ∈ Λ: λz′ ≥ λz, ∀z ∈ ZND}. Indifference regions in the weight space are convex polytopes (Przybylski, Gandibleux, & Ehrgott, 2010).The optimization of (Pλ) using the branch-and-bound method yields (at least) an ESND solution. If there are alternative optima, a further exploration of the branch-and-bound tree allows for computing non-extreme supported nondominated solutions. However, unsupported nondominated solutions are never obtained through (Pλ) even if a complete parameterization is attempted and all alternative solutions for a given λ ∈ Λ are analysed. The ESND points allow for the whole decomposition of the weight space into subsets Λ(z′), z′ ∈ ZESND, because these, and only these points z′ ∈ ZESND, correspond to indifference regions Λ(z′) of dimension p − 1 (the dimension of Λ) of a MOMILP problem. Therefore,Λ=⋃z′∈ZESNDΛ(z′). Non-extreme supported nondominated points are associated with indifference regions of lower dimension resulting from the intersection of the regions of ESND points (these properties can be found in Przybylski et al. (2010)).Although the supported nondominated solutions (or even only the ESND solutions) constitute a subset of all nondominated solutions of the problem, they can provide important insights about the whole nondominated set because they are on the boundary (and the ESND are the vertices) of the convex hull of all nondominated points (Özpeynirci & Köksalan, 2010). Indifference regions in the weight space also constitute useful information for the decision maker. He/she may be indifferent to all weight combinations inside one region because they give rise to the same nondominated point.An interactive graphical exploration of the weight space in multiobjective linear programming (MOLP) problems with three objective functions has been proposed in the TRIMAP method by Clímaco and Antunes (1987). The use of the weight space as a valuable means to gather information obtained from different interactive methods, and its graphical representation to present the information to the decision maker, has likewise been considered in other interactive MOLP computational tools (Alves, Antunes, & Clímaco, 2015; Antunes, Alves, Silva, & Clímaco, 1992). Also considering MOLP problems, Benson and Sun (2002) proposed a weight set decomposition algorithm to generate all extreme nondominated points.The computation of indifference regions in other parameter spaces has also been addressed. Costa and Clímaco (1999) related reference points (using achievement scalarizing functions) and weights in MOLP and defined indifference regions on the reference point space. Alves and Clímaco (2001) analysed the shape of indifference regions in the reference point space (in general, non-convex regions) for all-integer MOILP problems and proposed an approach to define indifference sets of reference points as long as a directional search procedure (Alves & Clímaco, 2000) is performed.Concerning MOMILP problems, Przybylski et al. (2010) and Özpeynirci and Köksalan (2010) have exploited the weight space to design algorithms intended to generate all ESND points. These two approaches are reviewed in the next section.In the present work we focus on ESND solutions of MOMILP problems and the exploration of their indifference regions in the weight space. We propose an approach that is able to compute a subset of an indifference region using the branch-and-bound tree that solved the weighted-sum scalarizing program (Pλ) for a given weight vector λ ∈ Λ. Acting alone, this approach rarely calculates the entire indifference region for the corresponding ESND solution, and the obtained sub-region may be much smaller than the full region. However, indifference regions can be iteratively enlarged using some properties, namely convexity. Accordingly, we have developed a procedure that merges and expands sub-regions by building the convex hull of joined or disjoined sub-regions of the same solution. An indifference region can be enlarged not only from a merging process but also as a result of properties that relate adjacent regions of different solutions. We explore these properties for three objective problems, proposing an algorithm to compute all ESND solutions adjacent (in the weight space sense) to a known ESND solution or even to compute all ESND solutions of a three-objective problem. These features can naturally be applied to problems with two objective functions, but we will omit this case herein as it is straightforward. We also present a computer implementation in which the indifference regions are graphically depicted.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the related work is reviewed. Section 3 introduces the technique to compute an indifference sub-region for an ESND solution and an illustrative example is shown. Section 4 gives the main principles to explore the weight space in MOMILP problems with three objective functions and describes the algorithms to compute the ESND solutions adjacent to a given solution and to compute all ESND solutions. Section 5 presents an overview of the computational implementation, illustrating the previous features using two examples, and presents computational experiments. The paper ends with some concluding remarks and future work in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have proposed a procedure to compute subsets of indifference regions in the weight space for MOMILP problems. We have also proposed algorithms to compute all extreme supported nondominated solutions (ESND) adjacent to a given solution or even all ESND solutions to problems with up to three objective functions. These algorithms are based on a graphical exploration of the weight space. A computational implementation has been developed to take the most of these procedures. Two examples have been shown to illustrate the proposed features. Computational experiments have also been presented.Indifference regions give useful information to the decision maker allowing him/her to be indifferent to all weight combinations inside one region as those combinations give rise to the same nondominated solution. The graphical visualization of these regions supports the decision maker in the interactive exploration of the weight space, in particular for the exploration of neighbourhoods of solutions. Although the main aim is not to generate all solutions to the problem, an algorithm to compute all ESND solutions is also available, which is still based on the graphical exploration of the weight space. It is suitable to characterize solutions in delimited nondominated areas or to be used as a final exploration phase in problems with a moderate number of extreme nondominated solutions.As future work, we intend to study other approaches with the purpose of defining larger subsets of the indifference regions within the weighted-sum optimization step. We also aim to address the exploration of unsupported efficient solutions in the “neighbourhood” of supported efficient solutions.