@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Frontier projection and efficiency decomposition in two-stage processes with slacks-based measures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose the variable intermediate measures SBM model (VSBM) to evaluate the system efficiency of two-stage processes.We derive the efficient DEA frontier projection based on the VSBM model.We address the VSBM model on potential conflicts with respect to the intermediate measures.The system inefficiency is equivalent to the sum of inefficiencies of the two stages.We obtain efficiency decomposition of two-stage processes based on dual of the VSBM model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Two-stage,Slacks-based measure,Efficiency frontier,Efficiency decomposition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the prior literature on measuring the efficiency of two-stage processes, there are both radial and non-radial methods of efficiency measurement. In some cases, non-radial methods which allow all inputs, intermediate measures and outputs to change non-proportionally are more appropriate than radial methods, but they do not ensure stage efficiency or allow for the efficiency decomposition of two-stage processes. Based on slacks-based measure (SBM), this paper develops both envelopment-based and multiplier-based models to obtain simultaneously both the frontier projection and the efficiency decomposition. Specifically, we propose the variable intermediate measures SBM (VSBM) model to evaluate the system efficiency of two-stage processes and consider the following three properties of the VSBM model: 1) we derive the efficient DEA frontier projection based on the VSBM model; 2) we address potential conflicts in this model with respect to the intermediate measures; 3) we prove that the system inefficiency is equivalent to the sum of inefficiencies of the two stages. Furthermore, we derive the efficiency decomposition of two-stage processes based on the dual of the VSBM model. Finally, we apply our proposed approach to real data of US commercial banks, and extend our approach to settings in which the assumption of variable returns to scale (VRS) holds or there are more general network structures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Based on the fundamental contributions by Debreu (1951), Shephard (1953), and Farrell (1957), Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978) proposed the well-known performance evaluation method entitled data envelopment analysis (DEA) to measure the relative efficiency of peer decision making units (DMUs). In traditional DEA models, most notably the CCR model (Charnes et al., 1978) and its later reformulations, DMUs are treated as black boxes whose internal structure is ignored. A major drawback of this is that inefficiencies arising from the organization of activities within this internal structure cannot be addressed, which limits the amount information that can be gained to improve the system efficiency.In recent years, DEA has been extended to investigate the performance of two-stage processes or network structures. Unlike traditional DEA studies which treat production as a one-stage process, the analysis of these two-stage processes or network structures makes it possible to examine the internal structure of DMUs by explicitly modelling the two stages. In the simplest two-stage structure, all outputs from the first stage are viewed as intermediate measures (and/or products) which constitute the inputs to the second stage (see Fig. 1below). Many real-world examples of such two-stage processes have been reported. For example, Wang, Gopal, and Zionts (1997) examined the impact of information technology (IT) on firm performance within the two-stage DEA framework. They focused on IT-related value-added activity and identified the effects of IT on intermediate output variables, which in turn affected the performance of 22 banks whose value-added activities consisted of the processes of (i) collecting and (ii) investing funds. Based on Chen and Zhu (2004), Wang et al. (1997) and Rho and An (2007) measured the indirect impact of IT on firm performance by identifying the efficient frontier of two principal value-added stages and by extending two-stage DEA models to consider input and output slacks. Seiford and Zhu (1999) used DEA to examine the performance of US commercial banks by employing a basic two-stage process of which the first stage was profitability and the second was marketability. For more details, we refer to Cook, Liang, and Zhu (2010) and Kao (2014a).Based on the special structure of two-stage processes, several models have been proposed based on radial efficiency measures. Typically, these models are developed based on the arithmetic or geometric mean efficiency decomposition which makes it possible to determine the efficiency of each stage, also known as divisional efficiency (Chen, Cook, Kao, & Zhu, 2013). For example, Chen, Du, Sherman, and Zhu (2010), Du, Liang, Chen, Cook, and Zhu (2011), Kao and Hwang (2008), Liang, Cook, and Zhu (2008), Zha and Liang (2010) and Li, Chen, Liang, and Xie (2012) defined the overall efficiency of two-stage processes as the product of efficiencies of each stage. Chen and Zhu (2004), Chen, Cook, Li, and Zhu (2009) and Cook, Zhu, Bi, and Yang (2010), on the other hand, defined the overall efficiency as the weighted sum of divisional efficiencies. In this paper, we call the divisional efficiency as stage efficiency when we refer to the two-stage process in Fig. 1. This term is clearer because the production with respect to the two-stage process proceeds stage by stage.Tone and Tsutsui (2009) argued that one should be careful when using radial DEA models to measure the efficiency of two-stage processes, because radial efficiency measures assume that all inputs or outputs change proportionally. As a partial remedy, they introduced a slacks-based measure (SBM) to develop a network DEA approach to evaluate both divisional and overall efficiencies of DMUs. Other extensions have been proposed by Fukuyama and Weber (2010), Tone and Tsutsui (2010, 2014) and Kao (2014b). In particular, Tone and Tsutsui (2010, 2014) extended the SBM-based network DEA to the dynamic DEA. Based on Fukuyama and Weber (2010), Tone and Tsutsui (2009) measured the eco-efficiencies of two-stage processes which generated some harmful (undesirable) outputs. Kao (2014b) studied the efficiency decomposition in network DEA based on SBM.However, Chen et al. (2013) showed that Tone and Tsutsui's (2009) approach may not fulfil the property of stage efficiency, suggesting that the rationale for the (stage) efficiency for two-stage processes must be reconsidered. Moreover, the establishment of the DEA frontier or DEA projection is a key issue for determining the reference set for inefficient DMUs and for improving their performance. Even though Tone and Tsutsui's (2009) approach can produce efficient projected DMUs, the problem of frontier projection also needs to be studied to ensure stage efficiency. Recently, Chen et al. (2013) claimed that the multiplier-based network DEA model should be used for determining the stage efficiency while the envelopment-based network DEA model should be used for determining the frontier projection for inefficient DMUs. Lim and Zhu (2016) showed that the duality in the standard radial DEA migrated to the two-stage network DEA well.This paper develops both envelopment-based and multiplier-based models to derive the frontier projection for inefficient DMUs and to measure simultaneously both stage and system efficiencies of two-stage processes. In particular, we propose a SBM-based DEA model, called the variable intermediate measures SBM model (VSBM), to measure system efficiency. We prove that the proposed model gives an efficient frontier projection. We also show that the proposed model helps address potential conflicts between the two stages. Specifically, we find that the same weights are associated with the intermediate measures in the two stages when the VSBM model is transformed into its multiplier (dual) model. We also find that the system inefficiency is equivalent to the sum of inefficiencies of the two stages. Finally, we propose several multiplier-based models to establish an efficiency decomposition (the stage efficiency in two-stage processes) based on the dual of the VSBM model.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the SBM model. We then propose a SBM-based model for two-stage processes to calculate the system efficiency in Section 3. In Section 4, we present key properties of the VSBM model and discuss the efficiency decomposition of two-stage processes. In Section 5, we apply the proposed approach to a data set of US commercial banks. Section 6 extends our approach to the assumption of variable returns to scale (VRS) and general network structures. Conclusions and directions for future research are given in Section 7.Traditional CCR model uses radial measure of technical efficiency which assumes that all inputs and outputs can change proportionally. Tone (2001) extended this model to non-radial measures by proposing the slacks-based measure (SBM) model. This model employs slacks to model the excessive use of inputs and the insufficient production of outputs relative to efficient DMUs. It is a non-oriented DEA model which differs from traditional (input-oriented or output-oriented) DEA models.Assume that there are n DMUs with inputsxij,i=1,2,…,mand outputsyrj,r=1,2,…,s. Then, the SBM efficiency of DMU0 is given by:(1)minρ0=1−1m∑i=1msi−xi01+1s∑r=1ssr+yr0s.t.∑j=1nλjxij=xi0−si−,i=1,2,…,m,∑j=1nλjyrj=yr0+sr+,r=1,2,…,s,λj≥0,j=1,2,…,n,si−,sr+≥0,i=1,2,…,m;r=1,2,…,s.where λjis the intensity variable, andsi−andsr+are input and output slacks, respectively. The variable λjindicates the importance of the j-th DMUs in constructing the efficient frontier for DMU0 under evaluation. The slackssi−andsr+may be different for different inputs and outputs so that inputs and outputs can change non-proportionally in the computation of efficiencies. The last constraint in model (1) ensures that inputs can only decrease and outputs can only increase.Note that model (1) can be regarded as a general case of the CCR model. Specifically, ifsi−=s−,sr+=0,∀i,rorsi−=0,sr+=s+,∀i,r, then the model (1) can be transformed into the input-oriented or output-oriented CCR models, respectively. Denote the optimal value of model (1) as ρ0*. According to Tone (2001), we have the following definition:Definition 1(SBM-efficient).DMU0 is SBM-efficient if and only ifρ0*=1.Consider the two-stage production process in Fig. 1. The first stage uses m inputsxij,i=1,2,…,mto produce D intermediate measures (regarded as outputs)zdj,d=1,2,…,D. The second stage treats these intermediate measures as inputs to generate s (final) outputsyrj,r=1,2,…,s.Based on models in Tone (2001), Tone and Tsutsui (2009) and Chen, Cook, and Zhu (2010), we propose the following model to obtain the system efficiency of DMU0:(2)mine0=1−1m∑i=1msi−xi01+1s∑r=1ssr+yr0s.t.∑j=1nλj1xij=xi0−si−,i=1,2,…,m,∑j=1nλj1zdj=z˜d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nλj2zdj=z˜d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nλj2yrj=yr0+sr+,r=1,2,…,s,si−,sr+≥0,i=1,2,…,m;r=1,2,…,s,λj1,λj2≥0,j=1,2,…,n.whereλj1andλj2are the intensity variables of each stage, andsi−andsr+denote input and output slacks, respectively. It is worth noting thatz˜d0is a variable in model (2), meaning that the intermediate measures can increase or decrease freely. Therefore, we call model (2) as thevariable intermediate measures SBM model(hereinafter referred to as the VSBM model). Usinge0*to denote the optimal efficiency of DMU0, we have:Definition 2(VSBM-efficient). DMU0 is VSBM-efficient if and only ife0*=1.Remark 1Of intermediate measures, Tone and Tsutsui (2009) considered two possible cases. One is the free-link value case and the other is the fixed-link value case. The former assumes that the intermediate measures can be freely chosen (variable) while in the latter case they stay the same (constant). Thus, the only difference between these two cases lies in the handing of intermediate measures. Becausez˜d0is a variable in model (2), it can be regarded as the free-link value case of Tone and Tsutsui (2009). The reason why we choose the free-link case but not the fixed-link case is that models based on the free-link value case can yield efficient frontier projections and address potential conflicts between the two stages. In contrast, models developed for the fixed-link case cannot ensure that the DEA frontier will be efficient. Nor can they solve potential conflicts (see Appendix B).The only difference between model (2) and the approach in Tone and Tsutsui (2009) is the definition of system efficiency. In Tone and Tsutsui (2009), the system efficiency was defined as the weighted sum of its divisional efficiencies. In this paper, our model (2) defines the system efficiency directly at the level of the entire system. In fact, the system efficiency of model (2) is exactly the SBM efficiency if we ignore the internal structure of two-stage processes. By using the SBM efficiency definition, we obtain the stage efficiency. Moreover, in the SBM model we need not assign weights to divisions in advance, which is not the case in the efficiency definition of Tone and Tsutsui (2009). In this sense, our model (2) combines the SBM model with Tone and Tsutsui's (2009) free-link DEA model.Remark 2By changing the equality constraints of the intermediate measures into inequalities in model (2), we arrive at the following model:(3)min1m∑i=1mθi/1s∑r=1sϕrs.t.∑j=1nλj1xij≤θixi0,i=1,2,…,m,∑j=1nλj1zdj≥z˜d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nλj2zdj≤z˜d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nλj2yrj≥ϕryd0,r=1,2,…,s,θi≤1,i=1,2,…,m,ϕr≥1,r=1,2,…,s,λj1,λj2≥0,j=1,2,…,n.If we examine model (3), we can find that model (3) can be regarded as a non-radial and non-oriented version of the projected model in Chen, Cook, et al. (2010) and Chen et al. (2013). We next prove that model (2) is equivalent to model (3), as stated in the following theorem:Theorem 1Model (2) is equivalent to model (3).ProofSee Appendix A.Theorem 1 is important in that it links the VSBM model proposed in this paper with the projected model in Chen, Cook, et al. (2010) and Chen et al. (2013).Although model (2) is nonlinear, it can be transformed into a linear program through the Charnes–Cooper transformation (Charnes & Cooper, 1962). That is, let(4)t=11+1s∑r=1ssr+/yr0,Si−=tsi−,Sr+=tsr+,αj1=tλj1,αj2=tλj2,zd0′=tz˜d0.Then, model (2) can be rewritten as:(5)mint−1m∑i=1mSi−xi0s.t.t+1s∑r=1sSr+yr0=1,∑j=1nαj1xij=txi0−Si−,i=1,2,…,m,∑j=1nαj1zdj=z′d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nαj2zdj=z′d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nαj2yrj=tyr0+Sr+,r=1,2,…,s,Si−,Sr+≥0,i=1,2,…,m;r=1,2,…,s,αj1,αj2≥0,j=1,2,…,n.Strictly speaking, we should state if variable t is free, nonnegative or positive. The reason for not adding this constraint is that the sign of variable t can be restricted by the constraints of model (5). We also note that because the model (5) is linear, the system efficiency can be readily calculated for all DMUs.This section presents key properties of the VSBM model in Section 3. We derive the DEA frontier and prove that it is efficient. We also address potential conflicts between the two stages, show that the system inefficiency is equal to the sum of inefficiencies of the two stages, and discuss the efficiency decomposition of two-stage process.DEA helps identify which best-practice production activities of other DMUs can serve as useful benchmarks for improving the activities of any given (inefficient) DMU. For two-stage processes, adjusting the inputs, intermediate measures and outputs based on efficiency scores does not necessarily yield an efficient frontier projection (Chen et al., 2010). In other words, the projections of two-stage processes may still be inefficient because the improvement of one stage can inadvertently affect the efficiency of the other stage (Chen & Zhu, 2004).To obtain an efficient frontier projection, Chen, Cook, et al. (2010) revised the original two-stage radial model by introducing a series of steps and new variables. Let the optimal solution of model (2) be (si−*,sr+*,λj1,λj2,z˜d0*). We next derive an efficient frontier projection for each DMU using the VSBM model:Theorem 2For any DMU0, the projection (xi0−si−*,z˜d0*,yr0+sr+*) based on the VSBM model is VSBM-efficient.ProofSee Appendix A.By Theorem 2, an efficient frontier projection (xi0−si−*,z˜d0*,yr0+sr+*) can be obtained using the VSBM model (2). Moreover, this projection is also efficient based on the CCR model and the input-oriented projected model of Chen, Cook, et al. (2010). In fact, if we treatz˜d0as a constant in model (2) which corresponds to the fixed-link case in Tone and Tsutsui (2009), the corresponding projection may be inefficient based on the CCR model and the input-oriented projected model of Chen, Cook, et al. (2010).This section investigates the VSBM model on potential conflicts that may arise from the intermediate measures between the two stages. As shown in Fig. 1, the first stage may have to increase its outputs to improve its efficiency, but such an action would increase the inputs of the second stage, which would then reduce the efficiency of the second stage (Liang et al., 2008). To address this conflict, Chen, Cook, et al. (2010), Kao and Hwang (2008), Liang et al. (2008) and Kao and Hwang (2010) claimed that the weight associated with any intermediate measure should be the same regardless of whether it was regarded as the output of one stage or the input of the other.The VSBM model (2) or (5) is in an envelopment form and thus it is not suitable for investigating potential conflicts. We therefore first transform model (5) into the multiplier form.The dual of the model (5) is(6)maxαs.t.vixi0≥1m,i=1,2,…,m,uryr0≥αs,r=1,2,…,s,α+∑i=1mvixi0−∑r=1suryr0=1,∑d=1Dwd1zdj−∑i=1mvixij≤0,j=1,2,…,n,∑r=1suryrj−∑d=1Dwd2zdj≤0,j=1,2,…,n,−wd1+wd2=0,d=1,2,…,D,α,vi,ur,wd1,wd2free,∀i,r,d.By imposing the constraint−wd1+wd2=0,d=1,2,…,D, we require that the aggregated value of the intermediate products∑d=1Dwd1zdjand∑d=1Dwd2zdj(or, equivalently, the “worth” of the intermediate productswd1andwd2) is the same regardless of whether this value is associated with the outputs of the first stage or with the inputs to the second stage (Kao & Hwang, 2008; Liang et al., 2008). This requirement is important from the viewpoint of applications. For example, in evaluating IT impact on bank performance, the value-added activities of a bank include the two processes of collecting funds and making investments (Wang et al., 1997). The value of deposits can be chosen as the intermediate products. Its weight provides a measure of the relative contribution or importance of the deposits to the virtual products of each stage for a DMU. Here, it is implausible that the same deposits would have two different degrees of relative importance, and consequently the weight for the same deposits should be the same. In model (6), the constraints−wd1+wd2=0,∀dimply that the two weights are the same for intermediate measures, which in turn implies that the VSBM model is capable of handling potential conflicts. Note thatwd1andwd2are non-negative due to the constraints in model (6) even though they are free variables in the last constraint of model (6). Similarly, ifz˜d0is constant in model (2), we obtain the corresponding multiplier model. Thus, we find that the two weights may not be the same when evaluating the system efficiency (see Appendix B).Based on model (6), the system efficiency of DMU0 can be written ase0=α=1−(∑i=1mvixi0−∑r=1suryr0). Definings0=∑i=1mvixi0−∑r=1suryr0givese0=1−s0so that s0 can be regarded as the system inefficiency. Similarly, based on the dual to model (1), the first and second stage efficiencies can be represented ase0Dec1=1−s01ande0Dec2=1−s02, respectively, wheres01=∑i=1mvixi0−∑d=1Dwd1zd0ands02=∑d=1Dwd2zd0−∑r=1suryr0(for details see Appendix C). In addition, the two sets of constraints (∑d=1Dwd1zd0−∑i=1mvixi0≤0and∑r=1suryr0−∑d=1Dwd2zd0≤0) in model (6) ensures01≥0,s02≥0. Therefore,s01ands02represent inefficiencies of the first and second stages, respectively.In model (6), the equalitywd1=wd2gives(7)s0=s01+s02,s0,s01,s02≥0.Thus, the system inefficiency equals the sum of inefficiencies of its two stages; moreover, the system inefficiency can be attributed to these two stages. This important result – which establishes the relationship between the system efficiency and the efficiencies of its divisions – strengthens the finding of Kao and Hwang (2010) who note that the inefficiency of a system can be represented as a linear combination of the inefficiencies of its processes.It is important to understand what stage inefficiency means in practice. To our best knowledge, a similar concept of process inefficiency was first proposed by Kao and Hwang (2010). They assumed that a general network system consisted of different processes. The efficiency (inefficiency) for a process is called process efficiency (inefficiency). Because inefficiency is effectively the complement of efficiency, it is very broadly applicable and can be applied to real case studies as well as numerical examples on two-stage processes (for an example of a two-stage bank system, see Seiford & Zhu, 1999). In particular, the decision maker can use our results on stage inefficiency (i) to identify which part of two-stage processes is inefficient and (ii) to improve the system efficiency by reducing these stage inefficiencies. In this way, the measurement of stage inefficiency gives the decision maker an operational tool for pinpointing the causes of inefficiency and for improving the system.Next, we “look inside” the internal structure of each DMU and determine stage efficiencies for the two stages. The results help decision-makers improve the efficiency of inefficient DMUs because they can identify the inefficiency of each stage of each DMU. This identification procedure is called efficiency decomposition. As shown in Chen et al. (2013), the multiplier-based DEA model should be used for determining the stage efficiency. We therefore employ the model (6) to obtain the efficiency decomposition.Based on (7), the relationship between the efficiencies of the system and its divisions becomes(8)e0=e0Dec1+e0Dec2−1,e0,e0Dec1,e0Dec2≤1.This is the arithmetic mean decomposition or, equivalently, the additive efficiency decomposition (Chen et al., 2009).However, the efficiency decomposition in (8) is not necessarily unique, in the sense that the same system efficiency may be associated with different stage efficiencies. Following Liang et al. (2008), we next show how to calculate the maximal and minimal efficiencies for both stages. Starting with the first stage, the maximal decomposed efficiencye0Dec1+of the first stage can be calculated as:(9)e0Dec1+=max1−(∑i=1mvixi0−∑d=1Dwd1zd0)s.t.vixi0≥−1m,i=1,2,…,m,uryr0≥αs,r=1,2,…,s,1−(∑i=1mvixi0−∑r=1suryr0)=e0*,∑d=1Dwd1zdj−∑i=1mvixij≤0,j=1,2,…,n,∑r=1suryrj−∑d=1Dwd2zdj≤0,j=1,2,…,n,−wd1+wd2=0,d=1,2,…,D,α,vi,ur,wd1,wd2free,∀i,r,d.wheree0*is the optimal system efficiency of DMU0, and the constraint1−(∑i=1mvixi0−∑r=1suryr0)=e0*ensures that the system efficiency stays constant and optimal when optimizing the efficiency of the first stage. Because the maximal decomposed efficiency of the first stage ise0Dec1+, the minimal one of the second stage ise0Dec2−=e0*+1−e0Dec1+based on (8). Similarly, by replacing the maximization objective function in model (9) by minimization, we obtain the minimal decomposed efficiency of the first stage. By denoting this minimume0Dec1bye0Dec1−, the maximal decomposed efficiency of the second stage ise0Dec2+=e0*+1−e0Dec1−.Therefore, each stage has an efficiency interval such that(10)e0Dec1∈[e0Dec1−,e0Dec1+]ande0Dec2∈[e0Dec2−,e0Dec2+].In particular,e0Dec1+=e0Dec1−if and only ife0Dec2+=e0Dec2−. In this case,e0Dec1ande0Dec2are uniquely determined.This section applies the proposed approach to a real data set of top US commercial banks from Liang et al. (2008) and compares it with Tone and Tsutsui's (2009) approach. Considering the correlation (variables are correlated with each other) and inclusion (a variable is part of another variable) among the input/output metrics, we re-compile them in this paper. The data in Table 1 consists of 30 banks with two inputs (“Employees” and “Equality”), two intermediate measures (“Revenues” and “Profits”) and one output (“Returns”). All our optimization models have been solved in MATLAB, using the software version R2011b (7.13.0.564) 64-bit.Based on model (2), the system efficiency of all DMUs is in the second column of Table 2. This table also shows the efficiency decomposition of two-stage processes based on Section 4.The results in Table 2 are useful for efficiency improvement of inefficient DMUs, because they help identify inefficiencies arising from the internal system structure of each DMU. The third pair of columns shows the efficiency decomposition which is unique in this example. Namely, all DMUs have the same maximal and minimal efficiencies for both stages when their system efficiency is kept constant. It should be noted that, theoretically, the efficiency decomposition need not be unique. For example, if we calculate the efficiency decomposition based on the data set of banks from Liang et al. (2008), we can obtain different maximal and minimal efficiencies for both stages for certain DMUs.In some cases, the system inefficiency of a DMU can be attributed to one stage only. DMU 27, for example, its system inefficiency is caused by the first stage. The system efficiency of DMU 27 is 0.5864. Its first stage efficiency is 0.5864 and its second stage one is VSBM-efficient so that DMU 27 should improve the efficiency of its first stage. This analysis can be repeated similarly for DMUs 5 and 16. In addition, Table 2 shows that each DMU is VSBM-efficient if and only if its two stages are VSBM-efficient.Table 3 further illustrates the relationship between the system and its two stages by reporting their respective efficiencies and inefficiencies. First, this table shows that the system inefficiency is equal to the sum of its stage inefficiencies, as implied by (7). For instance, the inefficiency of the first stage of DMU 4 is 0.1783 and that of its second stage is 0.6607 so that the system inefficiency is 0.1783 + 0.6607 = 0.8390. Second, the relationship between efficiencies of the system and its two stages satisfies (8). The efficiency of DMU 4 is 0.1610, and the efficiencies of its two stages are 0.8217 and 0.3393, and consequently its system efficiency is 0.1610 = 0.8217 + 0.3393 - 1. Similar analyses can be carried out for other DMUs.Chen, Cook, et al. (2010) found that adjusting the inputs, intermediate measures and outputs by their efficiency scores did not necessarily yield a frontier projection for two-stage processes. The following results, however, show that the VSBM model will give an efficient frontier projection. For the sake of comparison, we consider six models and two cases. The six models are the VSBM model, two models proposed in Chen, Cook, et al. (2010) (they call them models (4) and (8) in their paper) and three CCR models: (1) the black box only considering inputs X and outputs Y, but omitting intermediate measures Z; (2) the first stage only considering inputs X and intermediate measures Z; (3) the second stage only considering intermediate measures Z and outputs Y. The two cases are:Case I: All DMUs are replaced by their projections.Case II: Only the DMU under evaluation is replaced by its projection.We therefore have twelve scenarios.First, we calculate frontier projection for each DMU based on the VSBM model and obtain the results in Table 4 which show that the projections of all DMUs differ from their original data in Table 1 except for one efficient DMU 30. We then calculate efficiencies of each projected DMU in Table 4 based on the above twelve scenarios. Now, all projected DMUs are VSBM-efficient based on the twelve scenarios, because the VSBM model does give an efficient frontier projection for two-stage processes. In fact, the VSBM model can also give an efficient frontier projection for each stage because the system is efficient if and only if its stages are efficient. These results follow from Theorem 2.For the sake of comparison, we evaluate efficiency by employing Tone and Tsutsui's (2009) input-oriented SBM network DEA model (both fixed and free link cases) under the constant returns to scale (CRS) assumption. This model will not have the stage efficiency for stage 2 because the intermediate measures are the only outputs from stage 1 and the only inputs to stage 2 (Chen et al., 2013). In fact, as the inputs are in the denominator of the efficiency definition of stage 2, it makes no sense if there are no inputs. In this case, the stage efficiency for stage 2 is not meaningfully defined. Chen et al. (2013) regarded the stage efficiency for stage 1 as the overall efficiency. We then calculate the input-oriented model based on the data in Table 1 and the results are shown in Table 5.Table 5 reports the system efficiency and stage efficiency of 30 DMUs. For each DMU, its system efficiency for the fixed link case is no less than that for the free link case. There are six efficient DMUs for the fixed link case. Only one DMU (DMU 30) is efficient for the free link case, which is the same with our results in Table 2. There is no stage efficiency for stage 2 and the system efficiency is the stage efficiency of stage 1 in both fixed and free link cases. However, as shown in Table 2, our approach yields stage efficiencies for both stages. Moreover, we may obtain a stage efficiency interval for each stage (though the efficiency decomposition is unique in this specific example), which is informative in its own right.In previous sections, we have developed models for deriving the frontier projection and efficiency decomposition under CRS. In this section, we first extend our approach to settings in which the variable returns to scale (VRS) assumption holds, and then extend our approach to general network structures.The traditional CRS envelopment-based model can be extended to its VRS version by adding the constraint∑j=1nλj=1on intensity variables. In the DEA literature (e.g. Chen & Zhu, 2004; Moreno & Lozano, 2014), the VRS envelopment network DEA model has been obtained by adding∑j=1nλj1=∑j=1nλj2=1to the corresponding CRS model. Chen et al. (2013) argued that this choice needed to be re-examined for network DEA, because the network DEA model behaved differently from the standard DEA model. Still, based on careful consideration of our problem and the argument of Chen et al. (2013), we believe it is appropriate to state the VRS model by adding∑j=1nλj1=∑j=1nλj2=1. Before explaining our reasons, we present our VRS model from which the VSBM VRS system efficiency of DMU0 can be determined as follows:(11)mine0=1−1m∑i=1msi−xi01+1s∑r=1ssr+yr0s.t.∑j=1nλj1xij=xi0−si−,i=1,2,…,m,∑j=1nλj1zdj=z˜d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nλj2zdj=z˜d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nλj2yrj=yr0+sr+,r=1,2,…,s,∑j=1nλj1=∑j=1nλj2=1,si−,sr+≥0,i=1,2,…,m;r=1,2,…,s,λj1,λj2≥0,j=1,2,…,n.which has been obtained by adding∑j=1nλj1=∑j=1nλj2=1to the VSBM (CRS) model.The rationale for this proposed VRS model is motivated by two reasons: 1) our proposed model is based on a slacks-based measure (SBM) which is non-radial and non-oriented. Because the original SBM measure or model is developed by using production possibility sets (i.e. envelopment-type linear program), this should be the case for other extensions, too. Thus, we should develop our VRS model based on the analysis of production possibility sets (our proposed CRS model is envelopment-based and based on the production possibility sets). 2) Though Chen et al. (2013) pointed out that the multiplier-based and envelopment-based network DEA models were two different approaches and they may be no longer equivalent to each other, their example/model was based on the “fixed link” case and radial measure, which was different from ours. Moreover, as shown in Chen et al. (2013), the radial multiplier-based model (3) in their paper for two-stage processes was equivalent to the envelopment-based model (7) of their paper under the “free link” case. Thus, it is logical to develop our VRS model from envelopment-based format by adding∑j=1nλj1=∑j=1nλj2=1, because our VSBM model is based on the “free link” case.Note that model (11) can be easily transformed into its equivalent linear program to obtain the dual formulation. Specifically, model (11) can be transformed into the following linear programming via (4):(12)mint−1m∑i=1mSi−xi0s.t.t+1s∑r=1sSr+yr0=1,∑j=1nαj1xij=txi0−Si−,i=1,2,…,m,∑j=1nαj1zdj=z′d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nαj2zdj=z′d0,d=1,2,…,D,∑j=1nαj2yrj=tyr0+Sr+,r=1,2,…,s,Si−,Sr+≥0,i=1,2,…,m;r=1,2,…,s,αj1,αj2≥0,j=1,2,…,n.The dual to model (12) is:(13)maxαs.t.vixi0≥1m,i=1,2,…,m,uryr0≥αs,r=1,2,…,s,α+∑i=1mvixi0−∑r=1suryr0−A−B=1,∑d=1Dwd1zdj−∑i=1mvixij+A≤0,j=1,2,…,n,∑r=1suryrj−∑d=1Dwd2zdj+B≤0,j=1,2,…,n,−wd1+wd2=0,d=1,2,…,D,α,vi,ur,wd1,wd2free,∀i,r,d.We can conduct the same analysis and establish results (frontier projection, potential conflicts, relationship between the system inefficiency and stage inefficiencies, and efficiency decomposition) similar to in Section 4.In this paper, we have assumed that all inputs to the second stage are outputs from the first stage as shown in Fig. 1. Our models fit well in those production processes which have this two-stage structure. Still, there are processes whose structure does not fulfil the conditions in Fig. 1, which limits the direct applicability of our results to the analysis of real production processes. For instance, Li et al. (2012) introduced a regional R&D process that was an extended two-stage network structure by containing two sub-stages, i.e. technology development stage and economic application stage, and the economic application stage had a separate input, i.e. the contract value (CV) in technology market. This section extends our proposed approach to general network structures.Like Tone and Tsutsui (2009), we assume that there are n DMUs (j=1,…,n) consisting of K divisions (k=1,…,K). The numbers of inputs and outputs to Division k are denoted by mkand rk, respectively. The link (intermediate measures) from Division k to Division h is denoted by (k, h) with respect to a set L (i.e. (k, h) ∈ L). The number of items in Link (k, h) is denoted by d(k, h). The inputs, outputs and intermediate measures arexijk(∀j,k;i=1,…,mk),yrjk(∀j,k;r=1,…,rk)andzdj(k,h)(∀j,(k,h);d=1,…,d(k,h)), respectively. Based on Tone and Tsutsui (2009) and the model (2), we propose the followingvariable intermediate measures network SBM model (VNSBM):(14)mine0=1−1∑k=1Kmk∑k=1K∑i=1mksik−/xi0k1+1∑k=1Krk∑k=1K∑r=1rksrk+/yr0ks.t.∑j=1nλjkxijk=xi0k−sik−(∀i,k),∑j=1nλjkyrjk=yr0k+srk+(∀r,k),∑j=1nλjkzdj(k,h)=zd0(k,h)(∀d,(k,h))(asoutputsfromk),∑j=1nλjhzdj(k,h)=zd0(k,h)(∀d,(k,h))(asinputstoh),sik−,srk+≥0(∀i,r,k),λjk≥0(∀j,k).Using model (14), we can measure the system efficiency of general network structures. Similarly, model (14) can be transformed into corresponding linear program, and we can also derive the dual to the linear program. Again, results similar to those presented in Section 4 can be obtained.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a SBM-based approach to extend the work of Tone and Tsutsui (2009). Unlike radial measure approaches, our VSBM model allows inputs or outputs to change non-proportionally, and optimizes efficiencies of two-stage processes by simultaneously reducing inputs and increasing outputs. Unlike Tone and Tsutsui's (2009) approach, the proposed model does not require exogenous weights for the purpose of relating the efficiencies of the system and its divisions.This VSBM model can be employed to measure the system efficiency. It also gives an efficient frontier projection for two-stage processes. Furthermore, the dual of the VSBM model ensures that the weights of the intermediate measures are the same for two stages, thus eliminating potential conflicts in the treatment of intermediate measures between the two stages.We have also considered the internal structure of two-stage processes and examined the efficiency decomposition. We find that the efficiency decomposition provided by the dual of the VSBM model is not necessarily unique. For these situations, we have presented several models to obtain the decomposed efficiency interval for each stage. We have also illustrated the proposed approach by applying it to 30 US commercial banks and compared our results with Tone and Tsutsui's (2009). Extensions of the proposed approach to VRS and general network structures are also conducted.There are several related topics for future research. To begin with, our approach can be employed to assess the efficiency of production or services processes in different industries, for instance in view of environmental efficiency (Lee, Yeo, & Thai, 2014), banking efficiency (Wang, Huang, Wu, & Liu, 2014), airline or airport efficiency (Tavassoli, Faramarzi, & Farzipoor Saen, 2014; Xu, Chen, & Zhu, 2014), or efficiency evaluation of innovation activities in industrial sectors (Song, 2011).Note that the two-stage processes in this paper are different from a two-stage analysis of DEA applications in which the second stage regressions (to reveal determinants of inefficiency) require a bootstrapping approach to correct DEA efficiency scores in the first stage (e.g. Merkert & Hensher, 2011; Tsai, Mulley, & Merkert, 2015). The two-stage analysis results in inconsistent/biased parameter estimates unless the DEA efficiency scores are corrected by the bootstrapping approach (Merkert & Hensher, 2011; Simar & Wilson, 2007). However, because two-stage network structures are different from traditional DEA, it is worth studying whether the two-stage analysis will result in biased parameter estimates based on the DEA efficiency scores in this paper. If it does, we believe the bootstrapping approach can be used as a potentially useful technique in future research.In this paper, we develop models to obtain the frontier projection and efficiency decomposition. Future research can further consider the decomposition of technical efficiency and scale elasticity in two-stage network DEA (Sahooa, Zhu, Tone, & Klemen, 2014) and measurement of returns to scale (Krivonozhko, Førsund, & Lychev, 2014). Moreover, data properties such as discrete and bounded data and fixed-sum outputs can be incorporated and further examined (Chen, Cook, Du, Hu, & Zhu, 2015; Yang, Li, Chen, & Liang, 2014; Yang, Li, & Liang, 2015).In this paper, we have developed our approach based on the SBM. However, it may be challenging to interpret the original SBM which finds the minimum (the worst) score and gives reference points on the efficient frontier that may not be adequate (Andreu, Sarto, & Vicente, 2014; Tone, 2010). Based on this consideration, Tone (2010) extended Tone's (2001) SBM and provided four variants of the SBM model. From this perspective, it appears that our approach could be extended based on the variants in Tone (2010). It would be instructive to explore the relationship between the extended approach based on the variants in Tone (2010) and our approach, and to investigate how the results may vary and what limitations the different models would have. In addition, previously it has been (partly unrealistically) assumed that in two-stage processes the stages can selfishly choose their input and output weights when optimizing their respective efficiencies. Future research can also be carried out to combine aspects of our approach with the ratio-based efficiency analysis (Salo & Punkka, 2011) which considers all possible weights to give more robust results.