@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal distribution (re)planning in a centralized multi-stage supply network under conditions of the ripple effect and structure dynamics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integration of structure dynamics and operational distribution planning.Consideration of the service level at strategic inventory holding point.Transition from optimal control to LP-based maximal flow model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Logistics,Distribution planning,Structure dynamics,Ripple effect,Service level,Linear programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, an original approach to formulate and solve a multi-period and multi-commodity distribution (re)planning problem for a multi-stage centralized upstream network with structure dynamics considerations is proposed. First original idea of this study is description of the supply chain as a non-stationary dynamic system along with a linear programming (LP) model. This allows distribute design and control variables between dynamic and static models. Second original idea is to transit from the classical LP model to maximal flow problem by excluding demand constraint from the LP model. The first contribution of this study is multi-objective problem formulation that opens additional perspectives for decision-making beyond cost-oriented optimization. Second, the maximal flow LP model allows the finding of a feasible solution even for unbalanced supply and demand cases without relaxing hard capacity constraints. Third, this allows improve service level at the strategic inventory holding point. Fourth, structure dynamics and ripple effect can be taken into account. Structure dynamics allows considering different execution scenarios and developing suggestions on replanning in the case of disturbances. The graph of structural reliability allows identify the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios. These scenarios are used for computational experiments with the developed model and the industrial models. With the developed model, the practical issues of scenario-based risk identification strategy and operational distribution planning can be interlinked.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Distribution planning (DP) in supply chains (SC) is a referenced research problem in the domain of distribution networks (DN) to successfully meet customer needs while improving operations performance efficiency. DP decides on directing commodity flows in the DN to balance supply and demand at the aggregate level in the middle-range period of time (Amiri, 2006; Chopra & Meindl, 2012; Hinojosa, Kalcsics, Nickel, Puerto, & Velten, 2008; Mula, Peidro, Díaz-Madroñero, & Vicens, 2010; Tayur, Ganeshan, & Magazine, 1999). For DP, the following data are typically needed: a facility location structure and warehouse capacities from DN design; customer demand from forecasting; inventory control policies and order quantities from inventory management and procurement planning; and transportation channel capacities from transportation network design. The DP problem is typically constrained by limited capacity of nodes and arcs in the network, given service level, reverse flows, product quality, etc. (Akkermann, Farahani, & Grunow, 2010; Chen, 2010; Costantino, Dotoli, Falagario, Fanti, & Mangini, 2012; Liang, 2008; Mula et al., 2010). The constraints may be formulated as soft (i.e., allowing capacity overrun at over cost) or hard (without allowing an overrun) conditions.Objectives of optimization are typically oriented at costs minimization (Manzini & Bindi, 2009). In some cases, service-oriented objectives are included (Chen, 2010; Das, 2011). Episodically, multi-objective formulations can be encountered (Chen & Lee, 2004). Most of the cost-oriented contributions have been based on demand and capacity-constrained (integer) linear programming (LP), mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) or heuristics (Mula et al., 2010). Multi-objective formulations also include fuzzy-based solutions (Costantino et al., 2011; Liang, 2008; Selim, Am, & Ozkarahan, 2008).Application of optimization models for DP is a practical need in at least two cases. First, through optimization, a significant increase in revenue and market shares can be achieved. Second, in the case of unsatisfied demand (i.e., no feasible LP solution), the bottlenecks can be identified and strengthened by investment in new facilities or capacity expansion. Similarly, such models can be applied by analysing the planning of future investments in new facilities/capacities. The basis of this analysis is balancing demand and capacities at aggregate level.The optimization object may be the whole DN (upstream the strategic inventory holding point and downstream to the customers) or only the up- or downstream DN part. In this paper we will restrict ourselves to the upstream part consideration. Finally, considerable advancements have been achieved in the integrated formulations for distribution and transportation planning. Such models take into account different planning horizons and transfer aggregate product flows into determination of daily vehicle requirements, assignments, and routing (Bilgen & Günther, 2010; Chen, 2010; Zanoni & Zavanella, 2007). However, for real data complexity, it is frequently very difficult to implement the models where data and decision-variables of different time horizons and detailing level are considered within only one large-scale model. This frequently leads to heuristic solution procedures (Bevilacqua et al., 2012; Manzini & Bindi, 2009). Another possibility is to formulate dynamic programmes and solve them by decomposition according to some practical reality considerations (Kunnumkal & Topaloglu, 2011).Structural and functional complexity of modern DNs, the multi-stage, multi-period, and multi-commodity DP is one challenge of decision-making on optimal DP. Another challenge is the uncertainty of inventory and demand. In this case, integration of DN design and planning typically involves robust (Baghalian, Rezapour, & Farahani, 2013), stochastic (Santoso, Ahmed, Goetschalckx, & Shapiro, 2005), and fuzzy (Costantino et al., 2011; Liang, 2008) optimization models (see also the state-of-the art review in Mula et al., 2010). However, practical application of these approaches frequently leads either to too complex and weakly implementable models or to scenario-based deterministic models without a clear articulation of how to create these scenarios.Along with “traditional” uncertainty of inventory and demand, (i.e., random uncertainty), severe disruptions (i.e., deep uncertainty and structure dynamics subject to unavailability of some nodes or arcs in the network) have attracted much attention both in the theory and practice in recent years (Hishamuddin, Sarker, & Essam, 2013; Hu, Gurnani, & Wang, 2013; Klibi, Martel, & Guitouni, 2010; Lim, Bassamboo, Chopra, & Daskin, 2013; Peng, Snyder, Lim, & Liu, 2011; Qi, 2013; Snyder & Daskin, 2005). These studies consider how changes to some variables are rippling through the rest of the SC and impacting on performance. The scope of the rippling and its impact on economic performance depends both on robustness reserves (such as inventory and capacity buffers) and speed and scale of recovery measures. Although the term “ripple effect” has been episodically used in the supply chain management (SCM) domain (Deloitte Consulting, 2013), it has not so far received proper attention in the scientific community so far, although many of its elements have been considered implicitly in numerous empirical and quantitative studies. We suggest introducing the ripple-effect in the SCM as a scientific topic in the area of supply chain disruption management, in an analogy to computer science where ripple effect determines the disruption-based scope of changes in the system (Black, 2006). In the supply chain setting, ripple effect describes the impact of a disruption on supply chain performance and disruption-based scope of changes in the supply structures and flows.If no stochastic or simulation models are applied, existing LP-based software for supply chain optimization in the presence of the ripple effect does not provide sufficient support for such uncertainties and companies merely to empirically build up ‘rational excessiveness’ in the form of inventories and reserve transportation capacities, or to use additional distribution centers as alternative distribution channels. In reality, companies need simple methods and decision making techniques in assisting them to make a fast decision without having difficulty in understanding complex mathematical models.Although industrial solvers extensively use LP models solved by the simplex method, their usage can also create some problems. First, if no feasible solution can be calculated (e.g., due to uncovered demand because of insufficient capacity in the case of hard constraints), the programme merely informs the user about this problem but does not calculate a possible solution for such a situation. Second, the software indicates problematic nodes or arcs, but without calculating a proposal of how to redesign the DN structure or its parameters to meet demand. Third, no recommendations are calculated on how, in the multi-period mode, to replan product flows in the case of non-stationary capacity fluctuations or partial/full unavailability of some nodes and arcs. That is why it is important, along with the optimization approaches to DP, to be able to analyse distribution plans subject to (1) the impact of different disturbances on distribution execution; and (2) actual usage of the created structural robustness. Such an analysis has great practical importance, since companies are very interested in the results of such studies. These would help them to estimate the investment needed in different redundancies to mitigate or reduce uncertainty and the impact of these investments/reductions on the changes in operations performance.In putting these questions into a research focus, the aim of this paper is to take into account practical issues of decision-making on optimal DP and to develop a model for multi-objective, multi-period, and multi-commodity DP for a multi-stage centralized network with structure dynamics considerations. The proposed method has been developed in a practical project on the basis of an existing industrial solver for optimal DP in a production–distribution network. The company was interested in extending the existing cost-oriented LP-based model into two directions: (i) creating flexibility for planner by including the service level objective (trade-off “service level vs. costs”) and (ii) including supply chain disruptions into the model (trade-off “efficiency vs. robustness”). The requirement on the new model was that it should be LP-based, easy understandable, and trigger minimal changes in the existing software.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 analyses recent literature. Section 3 presents case-study, proposed methodology and mathematical model. Section 4 is devoted to the experimental calculation of optimal distribution plans. The paper concludes in Section 5 by summarizing the most important findings and outlining future research needs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Multi-stage, multi-period, and multi-commodity problem settings challenge multi-objective decision-making on optimal DP. An original approach to optimal DP for an upstream centralized network with uncertainty and structure dynamics considerations has been developed in this paper. Optimal distribution plans have been calculated for optimistic and pessimistic scenarios. Subsequently, these plans have been analysed subject to different disturbances and regarding DN design and sourcing planning decisions.The developed DP model on the basis of LP has two particular features. First, this study uses the real logic of decision-making in companies and excludes demand constraint from the LP model. This allows transit from the classical LP problem to maximal flow problem, formulated as an LP model, in order to improve service level at strategic inventory holding points. Second, an original idea is the use of intervals of structural constancy.The first contribution offered by this paper is a multi-objective problem formulation that opens additional perspectives for decision-making beyond cost-oriented optimization. Second, by taking into account the reality of decision-making in companies, the proposed model is represented as a maximal flow problem. This developed approach allows the finding of a feasible solution even for unbalanced supply and demand cases without relaxing hard capacity constraints. More importantly, this model makes it possible to formulate the inverse problem to perform analysis regarding interconnected decisions on DN design, transportation design, and procurement planning. Another contribution is the consideration of different execution scenarios and the development of suggestions on replanning in the case of structure dynamics. Finally, some extensions of this model in future can be considered. First, it is possible to extend the developed model to operative detailed decisions on transportation planning. The possibility of addressing decision components of different time horizons and levels of detail arises from a combination of a static LP and dynamic OPC models. This combination can result in a hybrid multi-period distribution–transportation model that can be investigated in detail in future research.Second, in comparing the presented approach with the literature, dimensions of agility and flexibility as well as environmental performance can be integrated subject to the trade-off “efficiency-flexibility-resilience”. Different data, e.g., fuzzy representation, can be considered. Additional restrictions, e.g., total budget with time value or other optimization objectives, e.g., minimizing delivery times, can be included in future analysis. On-line adaptation can be the next possible future research direction. Here different adaptation options (e.g., flow re-direction, capacity adjustment, and structure adjustment) and their costs can be compared. In addition, a comparison between investments in robustness vs. costs of adaptation can be made.Some limitations of the proposed approach belong to its centralized planning focus and limitation on the upstream part of a DN. However, for the considered case-study the proposed model has been successfully validated and practically tested on different examples and been compared with existing industrial solutions. In future, an extrapolation of other case-studies with different numbers of intervals of structural constancy and other DN structures may reveal some additional insights in the application of the proposed model and the approach in general. Additional research into dynamic and inverse models is needed. The disturbances can be considered as unpredicted and handled in a reactive mode. Also the strategies of information sharing in the DN (as suggested in this study by the deterministic demand) and partially unknown demand information (e.g., stochastic demand or adaptive planning) can be compared in future.