@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-criteria decision analysis for supporting the selection of medical devices under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New perspective in decision-making on medical device.Experts’ competences were assessed based on subjective and objective data.AHP method is used as the basis for problem solution.Presenting a new MCDM model for medical devices selection.Selecting the best MRI system for hospitals with foresight perspective.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Health technology assessment (HTA),Magnetic resonance imager (MRI),Purchasing,Forecasting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Innovative approaches to the assessment and management of medical technologies use a combination of health technology assessment (HTA) and operations research methods, specifically multiple-criteria decision analysis (MCDA). The purpose of this article is to develop methodological support and provide a theoretical justification for decision support in the selection of medical devices under conditions of uncertainty, using MRI systems as an example. The goal of the method application has been formulated as follows: determine a ranked list of MRI systems for contributory health organisations administered by regional authorities (regional hospitals) in the Czech Republic. An analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and the Delphi method were used to identify experts’ preferences and for consensus building. The expert group was selected based on eight complex-valued criteria, and each expert was given a weighting factor. A set of 13 MRI systems and the 14 key default specifications that play the most important roles when hospitals select MRIs for purchase were defined. Strong conformity (W ≥ 0.6, p < 0.05) within the experts' judgments was revealed. A prediction regarding alternatives, weights and changes in priority vectors over the following 8 years has been provided. The developed approach is useful in decision support when selecting medical devices under conditions of uncertainty by hospitals.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical technologies (MTs) play one of the largest roles in growth of health expenditures (Ivlev, Kneppo, & Bartak, 2014) and, more than many other factors, influence processes in the healthcare system (Willemé & Dumont, 2014). MTs are the main element causing increases in financial expenses in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries (World Health Organization, 2010). The global market for medical device (MD) technologies reached US $411.8 billion in 2013 and is expected to climb to $538.7 billion by 2018 (BCC Research LLC, 2014) as a result of many factors (Sastri, 2014).To provide access to new or expensive technologies under resource-limited conditions, health technology assessment (HTA) methods are most commonly utilised (Barron, Klinger, Shah, & Wright, 2015; Goeree & Diaby, 2013). Innovative approaches for the assessment and management of MTs use a combination of HTA and operations research methods, specifically multiple-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) (Diaby, Campbell, & Goeree, 2013; Endrei, Molics, & Agoston, 2014; Padilla-Garrido, Aguado-Correa, Cortijo-Gallego, & López-Camacho, 2014; Reddy, Kelly, Thokala, Walters, & Duenas, 2014).Complexity in healthcare decision-making is associated with a high degree of responsibility on the part of decision-makers (DMs) in regard to outcomes, which may affect the quality of life of the individual patients and/or the community as a whole (Diaby et al., 2013). Decision-making processes related to the management and assessment of MDs are fraught with uncertainty (Barberá-Tomás & Consoli, 2012; Retèl, Grutters, van Harten, & Joore, 2013) due to the presence of (1) various stakeholders aims (Marsh, Lanitis, Neasham, Orfanos, & Caro, 2014; Schuwirth, Reichert, & Lienert, 2012) and the aims of other participants, such as governments, hospitals (Sorenson & Kanavos, 2011), insurance companies, physicians (Ulucanlar, Faulkner, Peirce, & Elwyn, 2013), patients, etc. (Scholten, Schuwirth, Reichert, & Lienert, 2015); (2) various supplier policies (Sorenson & Kanavos, 2011) (differences in purchase prices or the heterogeneous presentation of information about the units); (3) requirements of the DMs to understand the economic environment, the technical and organisational requirements and the social consequences of the decisions made (Goetghebeur et al., 2012), and (4) the various objectives of the clinical application. Uncertainty in this work is understood as explained in the paper (Scholten et al., 2015). The points described above, along with other ‘internal’ and ‘external’ uncertainties (Durbach & Stewart, 2012), cause difficulty in decision-making during the selection of MDs and often make it impossible to predict the future effect of any given decision. Thus, the process of selection and the events that follow purchasing take place in a multidimensional space in which most criteria are parameters of a function of time.The selection process is an important part of a complex purchasing process. The issue of MDs purchasing is very important and calls for much attention (World Health Organization, 2010). Work to formalise the process of controlling MDs is underway (Cruz, Haugan, & Rincon, 2014; Grennan, 2014; Pecchia et al., 2013). MDs’ methods of purchase stand out significantly in the set of controlling tasks (Brown, Smale, & Wong, 2006). Methodological recommendations (Angelo, 2009) describe a range of organisational and technical questions that must be answered by DMs at the equipment-selection stage. Usually, materials describing decision-making do not go beyond defining the need for the new equipment, the need to replacement of the old equipment, and the abilities of the medical institution, in addition to revealing the most critical technical parameters (Lerski, Nicholas, Macfarlane, Waugh, & McComb, 2010) that are sufficient for the equipment to fulfil its clinical tasks.Finding the vector of priorities for a small number of alternatives and criteria is often easy (Brunelli & Fedrizzi, 2015). Because MDs have so many demands and specifications, it is difficult to understand and acquire the relevant knowledge because of its heterogeneous nature. Clearly, MDs selection processes operate within a wide range of categories, which result in the need to take into account safety, scientific and technological progress and changing requirements for economic and social efficiency. An inefficient and irrational choice on the part of MDs may cause the ineffective operation of devices, additional financial losses and unsatisfactory medical service and healthcare quality.Because of the aforementioned and with the aim of reducing financial costs in the global system of public health, mistakes in the control system and the misuse of funds, there is a need to create a system for the selection of MDs (Ivlev et al., 2014). The purpose of this article is to provide methodological support and a theoretical justification for that support for selecting MDs in uncertain conditions, using the selection of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) systems for contributory health organisations administered by regional authorities (hereinafter referred to as “regional hospitals”) in the Czech Republic as an example. The regional hospitals in the Czech Republic are owned by the regional government, and this group of hospitals is the largest provider of country's inpatient acute care (Roubal & Sidlo, 2014).The goal of the developed approach application has been formulated as follows: determine a ranked list of MRI systems for regional hospitals in the Czech Republic. The list of alternatives and the most important specifications should be defined. An expert panel should be used to evaluate the criteria and alternatives. The competence of the experts should be identified and reflected in each expert's weighting coefficients. An informed decision based on expertise should be obtained.The analysis (Ivlev et al., 2014) of MCDA methods applications demonstrated that the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) method corresponds to major defined criteria for the selection of large medical equipment because of axiom of homogeneity and the hierarchical decomposition principle.For the purpose of determining the alternatives, MRI systems from nine manufacturers of MDs (Aurora Imaging Technology Inc.; Esaote SpA; GE Healthcare; Hitachi Medical Corp.; InnerVision MRI Ltd.; Neusoft Corp.; Philips Healthcare; Siemens Healthcare; Toshiba Medical Systems Corp.) available in the European market (ECRI Institute, 2013) were studied. All 44 alternatives, along with their default specifications, were analysed in terms of their inclusion in the study group. All manufacturers were contacted with the aim of identifying additional alternatives available on the Czech market or alternatives that will be offered on or removed from the Czech market. Based on the task, the following requirements were applied to all alternatives: (1) a device must be available on the market in the Czech Republic at the beginning of the study, (2) a device should be available for purchase, (3) a device should not be taken out of production over the four years after the beginning of the study, (4) the device should offer a clinical application for the whole body without any dedicated scanners and (5) the magnetic field strength should be 1.5 T. After all limitations were imposed, the 13 MRI systems (Appendix D and Suppl. 1) were selected for future assessment.The list of key specifications that play the most important roles when selecting MRI systems for purchase by hospitals were defined based on the literature review (ECRI Institute, 2013; Price, Delakis, Renaud, & Dickinson, 2008). Specific values for the default specifications were obtained from a report published by the ECRI Institute (2013) and information provided by the manufacturers and official suppliers of MRI systems in the Czech Republic.Within the framework of this research, we proposed to use a web-oriented means of polling using a Delphi multi-round polling procedure, with the aim of achieving consensus (Theißen & Spinler, 2014). The hybrid hierarchical decision model is used in this study (Appendix A). First, the objective or the overall goal of the decision is presented at the top level of the hierarchy “select new MRI system for regional hospitals in the Czech Republic”. In the first round, the experts compared the selection criteria and then compared the MRI systems relative to each criterion. The titles of the MRIs’ systems were hidden from the experts. The data received from the experts was processed to determine the mean and extreme values of the evaluations. The results of the each round were reported to the experts. If an expert's evaluation deviated significantly from the weighted mean value, the expert was asked to provide reasons for the opinion or to correct it. The experts' responses remained anonymous, which allowed us to avoid the influence of any authority.An expert panel was constructed based on the following method (Ivlev, Kneppo, & Bartak, 2015). This approach was devoted to bringing together subjective and objective experts’ characteristics, with the aim of determining each expert's total weighting factor (We), which reflects the overall competence of that expert in terms of solving problem. The weighting factor is based on the expert's overall work experience, experience in solving tasks, level of education, scientific record, interest in solving this particular problem, current position and awareness of how to solve the problem. This study also considered the relevance of the experts’ knowledge and their overall self-evaluation regarding their total competence in solving the task. Experts were interviewed through a web-based questionnaire.A comparison of the criteria used by the expert panel was conducted. The question for the experts was formulated as follows: “Which of the specifications is most important in the selection of a new MRI system for regional hospitals in the Czech Republic?” Each expert rated the specifications independently from other experts through a Web-based application (Section 3.3). The matrices for the pairwise comparisons of the criteria and alternatives were obtained from each expert.An assessment of the consistency ratio (CR) and consistency index (CI) were defined, as was recommended (Dahal, Al-Arfaj, & Paudyal, 2015; Saaty, 1980). The random consistency index (RI) was selected based on the data (Forman, 1990). The results of the paired comparisons were deemed inconsistent when CR > 0.1 and were returned to an expert for corrections, which must be guaranteed (Anojkumar, Ilangkumaran, & Sasirekha, 2014).To establish a measure of the consistency of the experts' opinions, we propose using Kendall's dispersive coefficient of concordance (correlation coefficient) (Gibbons, 1993). A matrix of the ranking results for n objects by m experts∥rij∥(i=1,2,…,n;j=1,2,…,m), where rijis the ranking assigned by the jth expert to the ith object, was created. It is necessary to find the dispersion (D) (Eq. (2.1)):(2.1)D=1n−1∑i=1n(Ri−R¯)2,where Riis value of the sum of the rankings andR¯is the evaluation of a mathematical expectation. The dispersive coefficient of concordance is defined as the relationship between the dispersion evaluation and the maximum value of this evaluation (Eq. (2.2)):(2.2)W=DDmax.The absence of related ranks is characterised by the absence of coincident ranks for the objects as determined by the experts. The absolute accord of experts is defined by the following structure of matrix ‖rij‖ (rijis the rank assigned by the jth expert to the ith object, and m is the number of experts), with corresponding-lines renumbering (Eq. (2.3)):(2.3)∥rij∥=∥11…122…2⋮⋮⋱⋮nn…n∥.The formula for the calculation of the coefficient of concordance (0 ≤ W ≤ 1) (Eq. (2.4)):(2.4)W=S112m2(n3−n),where S is the sum of the squares of the deviations of the rank sums obtained by each characteristic (n) from the mean sum of ranks. If the rankings coincide completely, W = 1, and if the opinions of experts are in absolute discordance, W = 0.If related ranks are present in the rankings (Pavlov & Sokolov, 2005), then the maximum value of dispersions in the previous formula becomes smaller than in the absence of related rankings. In this case, the coefficient of concordance is calculated using the following, Eq. (2.6):(2.5)Tj=∑k=1Hj(hk3−hk),(2.6)W=S112m2(n3−n)−m∑j=1mTj,where Tjis the indicator of related ranks in the jth ranking, Hjis the number of groups of ties in the jth ranking and hkis the number of tied ranks in the kth group of related ranks in the ranking by the jth expert. In the absence of coincident ranks, both formulae for the calculation of the coefficient of concordance become concurrent.The verification of the significance W is performed according to the procedure for the verification of the statistical hypotheses. When the critical value n ≤ 7, the use of an F-distribution is recommended (Siegel & Castellan, 1988). When there is a relatively large number of assessed objects (n > 7), then the verification of significance W is performed using the significance of Pearson's chi-square test (Kapetanopoulou & Tagaras, 2011; Legendre, 2005). In accordance with the level of significance α and the number of degrees of freedomdf=n−1, it is possible to determine the quantileχα,(table)2(n−1). Using the formula, we defineχcalc.2=m(n−1)W.Ifχα,(table)2(n−1)<χcalc.2, then at the level of significance α, we have reason to reject the hypotheses that have been put forward. The significance of the concordance coefficient is difficult to assess with small numbers of objects n. This allows us to test W for statistical significance. If the hypothesis of the homogeneity of the group evaluations is proven wrong, the possible actions are as follows: (1) to return the results of the assessment to the experts for the correction of their judgments according to the judgment of the majority, (2) to exclude from further analysis the alternatives or characteristics with the largest scattering of evaluations and (3) to exclude the experts whose opinion differed the most from the opinion of the group. After the corrections and other actions described above, it becomes necessary to determine the object to be excluded by comparing the mean-square deviations of the ranks for each of the objects.After each expert was assigned his/her weighting factor (Appendix C), using the developed software (Section 3.3), we conducted a comparison of alternatives and criteria, and n matrices of pairwise comparisons of alternatives were obtained from m experts, where n is the number of selection criteria. A matrix of pairwise comparisons of the specifications with respect to the aim of the selection was obtained from each expert. The objective was to obtain a weighted matrix of the combined experts' judgments. The matrix should (1) reflect the opinions of the experts and (2) take into account the competence of each expert regarding the importance of MRI specifications and alternatives. The use of a weight function in solving this task is proposed. The resulting set of matrices is named the ‘super expert matrix’ or ‘super expert’ judgment:The following designations were introduced: k is the number of the analysed alternatives, n is the number of analysed criteria, m is the number of experts involved in the selection and Neis the serial number of an expert. Calculations must be produced to obtain a super expert matrix (see the scheme in Fig. 1) (Eqs. (2.7) and (2.8)):(2.7)ai,kSE=1∑Ne=1mWeNe∑Ne=1mWeNeai,kNe,(2.8)wi,nSEwi,nSE=1∑Ne=1mWeNe∑Ne=1mWeNewi,nNewi,nNe.The judgments of many experts were combined. The experts' weights were considered to be the weight or probability of their making the right decision. The ‘super expert’ matrix judgments were obtained after combining all judgments from all experts.When implementing the method of selecting MRI systems, the price of the products, an important characteristic, was not taken into account. Price was not considered due to the lack of reliable information on the real market prices in the Czech Republic. Prices for MRI systems in the U.S. market are used to demonstrate how to take prices into account. All alternatives (Table 6) have been considered separately from their cluster. After assessing the importance of all criteria (except price) and after assessing all alternatives with respect to each criterion, a priority vector for alternatives was obtained (A), and each price corresponds to an alternative (B).A.B.w={b1b2b3⋮bk⋮bn}P={p1p2p3⋮pk⋮pn}In general, the task of considering the price when determining a ranked list of alternatives is as follows. Prices should be normalised. The overall vector of priorities is the quotient of a priority vector bnand a corresponding value pn. Thus, there arises the task of dividing the elements of the vector with length n by a number:(2.9)W=1/{p1/∑i=1npip2/∑i=1npip3/∑i=1npi⋮pk/∑i=1npi⋮pn/∑i=1npi}*{b1b2b3⋮bk⋮bn}={B1B2B3⋮Bk⋮Bn}.Priority vector W is a vector of priorities with the prices of products.According to various sources, the lifespan for MRI systems as high-tech medical diagnostic equipment ranges from 5 (Nevada Department of Taxation, 2010; Temple-Bird, Kawohl, Lenel, & Kaur, 2005) to 6 (Arizona Department of Revenue, 2012) years, or the lifecycle may be considered equal to 10 years (Chakravarty & Naware, 2008). One report claimed (Keller, 2005) that at least 60 percent of MRIs should be less than 5 years old and that no more than 30 percent of the devices should be 6 to 10 years old. Thus, as a border for the prediction period, 4 years, approximately half the lifespan of an MRI system, was chosen. To identify changes in priorities over a period of 4 years, the same expert group was interviewed again. The design for obtaining expert judgments corresponds to the method described above. The experts were tasked with assessing the importance of specifications when selecting MRI systems 4 years later. Weights (Suppl. 4, Table S.4.1) and ranked lists of alternatives and criteria were obtained. Special aspects of the experts' forecasting affect the reliability of the predictions. In this paper, the reliability of the forecast was provided by (1) the qualitative and quantitative composition of the expert group and (2) the justification and adequacy of the expert information retrieval technologies. The consistency of the experts’ views, as an integral estimate of the a priori reliability of the expert forecast, was evaluated.To implement long-term reprioritisation prediction, the weights of the specifications 4 years later were defined (Suppl. 4, Table S.4.1.) by the experts. The task of assessing the importance of the specifications 4 years ago was also given to the experts. The experts’ judgments regarding design and processing were similar, as in Section 2.7.1. Changing the weights of the specifications has been considered a stochastic (random) process. The weights of specifications at a point in time 4 years ago, at the current point in time, and at a point in time 4 years from now were used for a prediction. The fundamental concept of the method is based on the assumption that the law of variation of a variable, which has been identified in the past, can be predicted at a certain time interval in the future. To predict changes in the weights of criteria at the fourth and fifth levels of the hierarchical model, 8 years from now, Brown's method linear exponential smoothing, which provides good reliability and has often been successfully applied before (Costantino, Di Gravio, Shaban, & Tronci, 2015), was used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has presented methodological support and a theoretical justification for decision support for selecting MDs under conditions of uncertainty. The developed algorithm (Appendix C) has been tested for the task of MRI system selection on the part of regional hospitals in the Czech Republic.Depending on the goals of the expert evaluation, the following main tasks are required to process the survey results. It was suggested that during the first step in the selection of requirements, alternatives and criteria should be provided. Second, it is important to determine the experts' competences and build an expert group. Each expert should receive his or her own weighting factor regarding the importance of that expert's judgments. Third, it is important to determine the generalised evaluations and ranks of the objects by expert group.The MCDA approach presented in the paper was based on the AHP technique. The Delphi method is recommended for consensus-building, i.e., using a series of the Web-based questionnaires delivered in multiple iterations to collect experts’ opinions. Various strategies for achieving the best conformity and consistency may be used. The method of merging experts’ judgments has been created and justified. The method is intended to bring together the opinions of many experts in accordance with their competencies. As a result of the application of the method, it is possible to obtain the unified opinion of a ‘super expert’, which is weighted according to all experts. After a unified decision is obtained, a sensitivity analysis should be provided. This paper suggests the use of cluster analysis to find groups of alternatives and criteria having homogeneous importance. Thus, a group of the best alternatives will be presented to a DM. Another important task is to make the results of an assessment more flexible when as times change and thus provide sensitivity to a change in the ranked list over time. It was suggested that Brown's method of linear exponential smoothing may be used for long-term forecasting.Future work will be devoted to creating a decision support system for the selection of MDs. The system should take into account a wider range of selection criteria, such as the clinical effectiveness, patients’ preferences, medical purpose of an application, easy of use, reliability characteristics and safety, maintenance requirements, total cost of ownership, and sales contract terms and conditions. Our feature work will also focus on comparative modelling of a range of MCDA methods' results for the selection of medical equipment.