@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reference points in revenue sharing contracts—How to design optimal supply chain contracts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a behavioral decision model for revenue sharing contracts incorporating reference points.We conduct three laboratory experiments to test our behavioral model.We find significant deviations from profit-maximizing predictions.Reference prices can explain the observed decision biases.We discuss the consequences of reference points on supply contract design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Contracting,Behavioral operations research,Experiments,Reference-dependent valuation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Coordinating supply chains is an important goal for contract designers because it enables the channel members to increase their profits. Recently, many experimental studies have shown that behavioral aspects have to be taken into account when choosing the type of contract and specifying the contract parameters. In this paper, we analyze behavioral aspects of revenue-sharing contracts. We extend the classical normative decision model by incorporating reference-dependent valuation into the decision model and show how this affects inventory decisions. We conduct different lab experiments to test our model. As a result, human inventory decisions deviate from classical normative predictions, and we find evidence for reference-dependent valuation of human decision makers. We also show how contract designers can use the insights we gained to design better contracts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerous recent studies have analyzed the inventory decisions of human decision makers in a newsvendor setting and shown that stocking quantities differ significantly from expected-profit-maximizing predictions (e.g., Schweitzer and Cachon, 2000; Bolton and Katok, 2008; Bostian, Holt, and Smith, 2008, and many more in the literature review). These studies primarily focus on wholesale price contracts, whereas few studies have analyzed contracts other than wholesale price contracts. Among these few studies, Katok and Wu (2009) study buyback and revenue-sharing contracts from a retailer perspective, and Zhang, Donohue, and Cui (2012) analyze these two types of contracts from a supplier perspective. Both of these studies find evidence for contract-specific behavior—i.e., different contracts that are theoretically equivalent induce different behavior. Further, Becker-Peth, Katok, and Thonemann (2013) show that source-dependent valuation of money influences human inventory decisions under buyback contracts. In this paper, we analyze revenue-sharing contracts in detail. Under such contracts we have only one cash-in stream, so source dependency cannot be relevant in our context. In contrast to wholesale price contracts, revenue-sharing contracts do not allow retailers to retain all the revenue; rather, it must be shared with the supplier, which might lead to behavioral effects. We model these possible effects by introducing reference values concerning the contract parameters. The underlying theory assumes that the valuation of a decision outcome is determined by not only the absolute value of the outcome but also its difference from a reference point. Contract-specific reference points are part of mental accounting, which is defined as a “set of cognitive operations […] to […] evaluate […] financial activities” (Thaler, 1999). Reference dependency has received little attention in the behavioral operations literature so far, and we are the first to model reference-dependent contract parameters in supply contracts.The contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we incorporate reference-dependent valuation into the context of supply contract decisions and show how contract-specific reference points affect human inventory decisions. Second, we analyze how reference points are set in the context of revenue-sharing contracts. Third, we test our model analyzing actual decisions from laboratory experiments. We find evidence of reference prices, which significantly affect inventory decisions. The results of these analyses can serve as guidelines for contract designers to determine contracts and contract parameters.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the relevant analytical and behavioral background regarding supply contracting with a focus on revenue-sharing contracts. In Section 3, we incorporate reference-dependent valuation into the traditional newsvendor model. We then analyze different kinds of reference points and derive hypotheses for human inventory decisions. In Section 4, we report the results of different experiments to test these hypotheses. On the basis of the obtained results, we then derive guidelines for the parameterization of supply contracts for different supply chain settings (Section 5). We summarize our findings in Section 6.In this section, we first explain the supply contract used in this study in Section 2.1, and we then summarize the results of earlier studies on behavioral operations concerning supply contracts in Section 2.2.The typical setting analyzed in the literature considers a supply chain with a single manufacturer and a single retailer. In this setting, the retailer faces random demand with a cumulative distribution function F(·) and an exogenous retail price r, and a supply contract between the manufacturer and the retailer determines the transfer payments, e.g., the wholesale price for purchased products. Further, the retailer decides on the stocking quantity q and places the order with the manufacturer, and the manufacturer then produces the quantity and delivers the products to the retailer. This setting is also known as the newsvendor problem (Arrow, Harris, & Marschak, 1951; Edgeworth, 1888).Wholesale price contracts lead to double marginalization (Spengler, 1950). To overcome this problem, different contracts can be used to coordinate the channel, i.e., to incentivize the retailer to stock the channel-profit-maximizing stocking quantity (for an overview see Cachon, 2003, chap. 6).We focus on a commonly analyzed type of supply contract: the revenue-sharing contract (Cachon & Lariviere, 2005). Revenue-sharing contracts have received considerable attention in operations research but primarily from the normative perspective. The original single-period model (Giannoccaro & Pontrandolfo, 2004; Lariviere, 1998) has been extended in various directions, e.g., to cost sharing (Kunter, 2012), multiple periods (Li & Hua, 2008), asymmetric power distribution (Pan, Lai, Leung, & Xiao, 2010), and retail competition (Yao, Leung, & Lai, 2008). Chauhan and Proth (2005) analyze supply chain partnerships based on revenue-sharing, and Van der Veen and Venugopal (2005) show that implementation in practice yield in a win–win situation.The operations research literature has focused on examining rational profit-maximizing decision makers and designing contracts for such decision makers in different settings. In a recent study, Hämäläinen, Luoma, and Saarinen (2013) note the importance of incorporating behavioral aspects in operations research models, and we follow this line of research. Specifically, in this paper, we focus on behavioral decision making under a revenue-sharing contract. By gaining insight into actual decision making, we can extend existing models to design optimal contracts for actual (non-expected-profit-maximizing) decision makers.Decision making in the newsvendor setting that we analyze has been the topic of various recent studies in the field of behavioral operations (e.g., Schweitzer and Cachon, 2000; Benzion, Cohen, Peled, and Shavit, 2008; Katok and Wu, 2009; Bolton, Ockenfels, and Thonemann, 2012; Ren and Croson, 2013).11Studies with deterministic demand settings include Loch and Wu (2008), Cui, Raju, and Zhang (2007), Ho and Zhang (2008), Lim and Ho (2007), and Katok and Pavlov (2013).These studies make one common observation, the so-called pull-to-center effect, which refers to the observation that subjects tend to stock below profit-maximizing quantities for high critical ratios and above for low critical ratios. Several theories have been ruled out as explanations for this effect, such as risk-averse or risk-seeking behavior, loss avoidance or underestimation of the opportunity costs (Schweitzer & Cachon, 2000).Su (2008) uses random optimization errors to explain the pull-to-center effect; however, Kremer, Minner, and Van Wassenhove (2010) show that random errors cannot explain all effects, but that the decision bias is context dependent. A second explanation for the pull-to-center bias is the anchoring and adjustment heuristic (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). By anchoring on mean demand subjects adjust insufficiently toward profit-maximizing stocking quantities. This explanation is supported by numerous studies, and it can be modeled by using an anchoring parameter on the mean demand (Bostian et al., 2008). A third explanation for the pull-to-center bias is demand chasing. Bolton and Katok (2008) show that subjects overreact to recent demand realizations and adjust their stocking quantity in the direction of previous demands. Further, Ho, Lim, and Cui (2010) show that the pull-to-center effect can also result from psychological costs of stock-outs and left-over inventory.Behavioral supply contracting studies have primarily focused on wholesale price contracts, whereas few studies have analyzed other contract types. A notable exception is Katok and Wu (2009), who study inventory decisions under revenue-sharing and buyback contracts. They find evidence that human inventory decisions differ between contracts that theoretically lead to identical inventory decisions. However, their paper focuses on social preferences and does not analyze the rationales underlying the different stocking quantities under different contract types.Regarding buyback contracts, Becker-Peth et al. (2013) show that mental accounting (Thaler, 1985) and source-dependent valuation (Loewenstein & Issacharoff, 1994) can explain human inventory decisions that are not in line with standard theory. Zhang et al. (2012) also use mental accounting to explain human decision making but consider the problem from the manufacturer’s perspective. They analyze revenue-sharing and buyback contracts in a setting in which the manufacturer is the decision maker and is able to determine the contract parameters; the computerized retailer places expected-profit-maximizing stocking quantities. Zhang et al. (2012) find that the manufacturer uses different mental accounts for the different payment times. These payments differ between the two types of contracts, i.e., high upfront income but subsequent payback under buyback contracts and low upfront income but additional subsequent income under revenue-sharing contracts. Whereas Zhang et al. (2012) describe the contract choice and parameterization by the manufacturer using mental accounting, we analyze the actual ordering decisions of the retailer and will use reference prices to model actual decision making.In many situations, reference-dependent valuation can explain decision makers’ actual behavior that diverges from expected-profit-maximizing behavior. Kahneman (1992) uses negotiations on salary increases as an illustrative example. A salary increase offer can be evaluated as a gain relative to the status quo or a loss relative to certain reference points, e.g., the previous year’s increase. Winer (1986) and Kalyanaram and Winer (1995) model the effect of reference prices on customer’s brand choice. Further, Hardie, Johnson, and Fader (1993) show that reference points affect many decisions in the buyer behavior context. In a setting where two persons with identical tastes visit a high-quality restaurant, one person might be disappointed because he was previously accustomed to better quality in the restaurant, whereas the other one might be pleasantly surprised by the high-quality meal if he is accustomed to lower quality restaurants (Hardie et al., 1993).To the best of our knowledge, reference-dependent valuation has not yet been analyzed in the supply contracting literature. One notable exception is Ho et al. (2010), who model a reference point on selling all purchased products and analyze how reference dependency engenders the pull-to-center effect if psychological costs of leftovers and stock-outs are present. In this paper, we address another aspect of mental accounting and reference-dependent valuation. Ho et al. (2010) use an outcome-based reference point in their model where subjects have a dis-utility if the actual demand realization deviates from their order quantity. Such models can explain the pull-to-center effect, but the predictions are similar across contract types; i.e., different contracts with identical overage and underage costs lead to the same inventory decision. In our decision model, decision makers have reference points for the contract parameters and have dis-utility if the actual parameters deviate from their expectations/reference points.In this paper, we extend the existing contracting literature and incorporate reference values and prices regarding contract parameters into the decision model. We argue that people have reference prices for contract parameters (revenue shares and wholesale prices), and we provide experimental evidence that supports our arguments. Our experimental results cannot be explained by existing rational or behavioral operations models but can be explained by our model. Our results can thus help contract designers to better understand how people respond to different contract parameters and provide valuable insights for contract designers.Under a revenue-sharing contract, human subjects make inventory decisions that generally deviate from the expected-profit-maximizing quantities (Katok & Wu, 2009). A number of theories can generally explain human subjects’ deviation from expected-profit-maximizing behavior in newsvendor-type contexts (see the previous section for an overview). These theories interfere with each other, which makes it is difficult to decide which, if any, provides a good model for actual behavior under revenue-sharing contracts. We start our analyses with a simple but insightful experiment that will rule out the majority of these theories and provide an indication that reference-dependent utility is relevant (Section 3.1).We then introduce the general concept of reference-dependent valuation and discuss the behavioral literature (outside the operations context) that addresses this problem (Section 3.2). Finally, we adapt the concept to the supply-contracting context and derive a new behavioral decision model (Section 3.3).Under a revenue-sharing contract, the retailer purchases q units of a product at a wholesale price wRS per unit from the manufacturer to sell it for a retail price r. Additionally, the manufacturer receives a share of1−uof the revenue, and the retailer keeps a share of u of the revenue, with 0 ≤ u ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ wRS ≤ ur. The expected-profit-maximizing stocking quantity is:(1)q*=F−1(ur−wRSur),whereCR=ur−wRSuris referred to as critical ratio. Solving the critical ratio for u, we obtain(2)uCR(wRS)=wRSr(1−CR).Each combination of wRS and uCR(wRS) satisfying Eq. (2) has the same critical ratio and therefore the same expected-profit-maximizing stocking quantity q*.The classical wholesale price contract can be considered as a special case of the revenue-sharing contract. Under a wholesale price contract, the retailer pays a wholesale price of wWP for each unit and keeps all the revenue. Foru=1andwRS=wWP,a revenue-sharing contract and a wholesale price contract have the same optimal stocking quantity and the same costs, revenues, and profits. We refer to revenue-sharing contracts withu=1andwRS=wWPas reduced contracts because settingu=1leaves the contract with a single parameter and reduces it to the wholesale price contract.Most of the supply contracting literature assumes that people strive to optimize expected profit. Under such assumption, the expected-profit-maximizing stocking quantity depends only on the critical ratio and the demand distribution. Wholesale price contracts and reduced revenue-sharing contracts (revenue-sharing contracts withu=1) have the same critical ratioCR=ur−wRSur=r−wWPrand for a given demand distribution, F(y), the contracts have the same expected-profit-maximizing stocking quantity ofq*=F−1(CR). We take the expected-profit-maximizing stocking quantity as a baseline (null) hypothesis:Hypothesis 1The expected stocking quantity under a wholesale price contract and a reduced revenue-sharing contract isq*=F−1(CR).The behavioral operations literature shows that actual stocking quantities generally differ from the expected-profit-maximizing quantity and we do not expect Hypothesis 1 to be fully borne out. Although the actual quantity might differ from the expected profit-maximizing quantity, all outcome-based behavioral theories that are based on cost, revenue, or profit (including most of the theories described above, e.g., anchoring, prospect theory and psychological overage and underage costs), predict identical inventory decisions under both types of contracts. Hypothesis 2 formally addresses the similarities in inventory decisions under a wholesale price contract and a reduced revenue-sharing contract:Hypothesis 2The expected stocking quantity is the same under wholesale price contracts and reduced revenue-sharing contracts.We test our hypotheses by conducting a laboratory experiment with two treatments: one with a wholesale price contract and one with a reduced revenue-sharing contract. In Experiment 1, we set the wholesale price to 50 for both contracts (wWP=wRS=50), unit revenues tor=100and we use demand that is discrete uniformly distributed between 1 and 100. Most previous experimental studies also use this demand distribution because it is easier to understand for the subject than more complex distribution functions. For the chosen parameters, the inventory decision that maximizes the expected profit isq*=F−1((100−50)/100)=50.22And 51, which results in the same expected profit asq=50.The optimal solution equals mean demand for this experiment. We use this parameterization to account for the pull-to-center effect. In our setting, deviations from the expected-profit-maximizing quantities cannot be described by the pull-to-center effect for any of the contracts becauseCR=0.5. This feature is important because the underlying explanations (anchoring, bounded rationality) are unclear and might differ between contract types.Experiment 1Demand U(1, 100),CR=0.50,q*=50Revenue-sharing contracts:wRS=50,u=1,NRS=26.Wholesale price contract:wWP=50,NWP=23.In the laboratory experiment, we askedN=49students of the University of Cologne in the Cologne Laboratory for Experimental Research (CLER) to make inventory decisions under a wholesale price contract and under a reduced revenue-sharing contract. We briefed the subjects on the general setting and the contract that we used in the experiment (screen shots can be found in Appendix C and the instructions can be found in the supplementary material). To test the subject’s understanding of the setting, we had them calculate the profit for one setting. The experiment lasted ten rounds, and in each round, the subjects were reminded of the contract parameters, their previous decisions and the profit in the previous rounds. Each subject was exposed to exactly one type of contract and there was no communication or interaction between the subjects in any of the experiments. All experiments in this paper were programmed using the z-Tree system (Fischbacher, 2007).To test our hypotheses, we focus our analyses on the decisions in the first period of the experiment. We find significant differences between the reduced revenue-sharing and the wholesale price contract. The mean stocking quantity in the first round isq¯WP=53.3for the wholesale price contract andq¯RS=66.0for the revenue-sharing contract. The mean stocking quantity for the revenue-sharing contractq¯RSis significantly different from 50 (p=0.001,two-sided t-test) and significantly different fromq¯WP(p=0.039,two-sided t-test). Fig. 1shows the cumulative density of the stocking quantities between the contract types. As shown, the quantities for the wholesale price contract are stochastically below the quantities for the reduced revenue-sharing contract. Based on the results, we reject Hypotheses 1 and 2.33Analyzing the inventory decisions over time, we actually find demand chasing patterns in our data for 7 of our 49 subjects: there is a significant correlation between the inventory decision and last period’s demand (Kendall’s-tau, p < 0.05). As a result, the differences between contracts decrease over time. Learning and other theories could also explain this effect (for a discussion on this issue, see Section 6).The results of this simple experiment show that subjects make inventory decisions that are above the mean demand for reduced revenue-sharing contracts. This effect cannot be explained by the behavioral operations theories used in previous studies. In particular, mean anchoring and bounded rationality are often used to explain observed deviations from optimal ordering decisions (e.g., Schweitzer and Cachon, 2000; Bolton and Katok, 2008; Katok and Wu, 2009); however, these theories lead to order quantities that are pulled away from the optimal order quantity toward the mean demand. In our experiment, the mean demand equals the optimal order quantity for both types of contracts. Further, we observe significant deviations away from mean demand for the reduced revenue-sharing contract. The results of our experiment thus cannot be explained by mean anchoring or bounded rationality. Note that we do not claim that mean anchoring is invalid; rather, we eliminate it as an explanation for suboptimal behavior by our experimental design.Generally, no transformation function of the outcome—on final outcome and on separated cash streams (Thaler, 1985; Zhang et al., 2012)—can explain the differences between reduced revenue-sharing contracts and corresponding wholesale price contracts because the contracts are identical in all monetary streams. Furthermore, different framing and valuations of different streams cannot explain the observed stocking pattern, as might be the case for a second income stream for returns or a second cash stream toward the supplier (the revenue share the supplier receives). For our special case (reduced contracts), we have only a single simple revenue stream and a single purchase stream; hence, there is no reason to assume a difference in our setting.A possible explanation of these differences is reference-dependent valuation, where different contracts induce different reference points. Placing the first stocking quantity, an intrinsic expectation of the revenue share uRef < 1 might increase the stocking quantity facing a contract withu=1. To analyze the intrinsic expectations regarding the revenue share, we asked the subjects in Experiment 1 to set the contract parameters in the profit calculation task in the briefing part of the experiment. Note that to avoid an anchoring effect, we did not provide any value for wholesale prices or revenue shares beforehand. We provided only the selling revenue ofr=100. On average, the subjects set a revenue share ofu¯=61.2percent, offering an initial indication that the subjects might have reference prices uRef < 1, which might affect their inventory decisions. The use of such a reference point for the revenue share might explain subjects’ inventory decisions above the profit-maximizing prediction under the reduced revenue-sharing contract. We analyze the effect of reference points in detail in the next section.The valuation of a decision outcome is often determined by not only the absolute value of the outcome but also by its difference from a reference point. The reference point is not necessarily the status quo of a decision maker; rather, it can be affected by aspirations, expectations, or social comparisons (Tversky & Kahneman, 1991).Following (Thaler, 1985), we can divide the utility of a decision into two parts: the acquisition value and the transaction value. The first part is the context-independent value of the decision, e.g., the profit of a decision, or the value of a purchased product. The second part (the transaction value) compares the outcome of the decision to a certain reference value.In the context of consumer behavior, the acquisition value describes the utility of buying a product for a given (actual) price, and the transaction value describes the utility of making a good or bad deal, as the actual price might be below or above the expected (reference) price, e.g., in price promotions. Therefore, the total utility of a purchased product can vary for a given actual price, depending on the reference price (Thaler, 1985).In our context, the acquisition value can be interpreted as the profit generated by buying q units and selling min(q, y) units, where y is the realized demand. The transaction value compares the expected profit for the actual prices with the expected profit with certain reference prices.The overall expected utility EU of a stocking quantity q is(3)EU(q)=∫y(v(Π(q,y))+λv(Π(q,y)−ΠRef(RP))f(y))dy,where λ is a weighting factor of the transaction value and v(x) is the value function for the outcomes. We use the standard value function v(x) from Prospect Theory, which is convex for losses and concave for gains (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). To keep the analyses tractable, we assume that expected utility is linear in the probabilities (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Köszegi & Rabin, 2006) and use the linear form of the value function:(4)v(x)={xx≥0βxx<0,where β is the loss-aversion factor. Generally, people can be loss averse (losses count more than gains: β > 1), loss neutral (losses are equal to gains:β=1) or loss seeking (losses count less than gains: β < 1). Numerous studies show that most people are loss averse and that losses count about twice as much as gains (β ≈ 2) (Ockenfels & Selten, 2014).Π(q, y) is the profit for a stocking quantity q and demand y, and ΠRef(RP) is the reference profit regarding some reference point RP. An open issue is the structure of the reference profit ΠRef(RP). We discuss this issue in the next section.Köszegi and Rabin (2006) argue that the reference profit can be an external aspiration profit or an endogenous profit. Note that these (contract-independent) outcome-based explanations cannot explain the effect that we observe because the resulting stocking quantities for these explanations are similar between wholesale price and reduced revenue-sharing contracts. The same holds for other outcome-focused reference points, i.e., a reference point on sales quantities as in Ho et al. (2010). A reference point that can generally explain the results of the experiment is a reference value of contract parameters. We discuss this issue next.Rather than defining an external reference profit or a reference demand realization, subjects might have expectations regarding contract parameters. A revenue-sharing contracts might induce a reference point for the revenue share the retailer is keeping because customers pay him for selling his products.In general, subjects can have reference points on any contract parameter. For the revenue-sharing contract with wholesale price w, revenue share u and reference prices wRef and uRef, the expected utility for a given stocking quantity q is:(5)EU(q)=∫y[v(Π(u,w,q,y))+λv(Π(u,w,q,y)−Π(uRef,wRef,q,y))]f(y)dy.Using the linear value function from Eq. (4) yields the first-order condition in Property 1. All proofs can be found in Appendix A.Property 1The first-order condition for reference-dependent decision makers follows:(6)F(qRSRef)={ur−w+λβ(ur−uRefr+wRef−w)ur+w2(β−1)ur+λβ(ur−uRefr)ifAur−w+λβ(ur−uRefr+wRef−w)ur+w2(β−1)ur+λ(β(u−uRef)r−(w−wRef)2(β−1)(u−uRef)r)ifBur−w+λ(ur−uRefr+wRef−w)ur+w2(β−1)ur+λ(ur−uRefr+(w−wRef)2(β−1)(u−uRef)r)ifCur−w+λ(ur−uRefr+wRef−w)ur+w2(β−1)ur+λ(ur−uRefr))ifD,withA=uRef≥u∧wRef≤w∨u>uRef∧wRef≤w−(u−uRef)rB=uRef>u∧w<wRef≤w−(u−uRef)rC=u>uRef∧w−(u−uRef)r<wRef≤wD=uRef≥u∧w−(u−uRef)r<wRef∨u>uRef∧w<wRef.Usingβ=1as a special case simplifies the analysis. This simplification does not affect the general conclusion but highlights the effect of the reference point. Usingβ=1imposes the assumption that losses are valued equal to gains. Therefore, the conclusions are based solely on the effect of the reference point. When loss-aversion (β > 1) is integrated into the analysis, the results are qualitatively similar, but the magnitude is stronger, e.g., in the domain of reference losses. Forβ=1,the right-hand side of Eq. (6) reduces to one case, and we can derive the following Corollary:Corollary 1The optimal stocking quantity forβ=1is(7)qRSRef=F−1(ur−w+λ(ur−uRefr+wRef−w)ur+λ(ur−uRefr))).Forβ=1,the expected utility function is concave for sufficiently smalluRef≤1+λλu. The condition is violated if the reference loss is dominating the actual profit. Note that this condition is not restrictive in our setting; stocking quantities decrease in uRef and reach zero beforehand. To reduce the complexity of the analyses (without losing the relevant implications), we useβ=1for the remainder of the paper. Based on Corollary 1, we can derive the following effect of reference values on stocking quantities.Corollary 2ForwRef=w,the stocking quantities under reduced revenue-sharing contracts are greater than or equal to those under wholesale price contracts becauseuRef≤u=1:qRSRef(wRS=wWP,u=1,uRef)≥qWP.The effect for wRef is unclear because wRef might be greater or smaller than w; however, we assume the effect is equivalent for the contracts in Experiment 1. Note that the effect of wRef might also differ between the two contract types. Such difference would require the use of different utility functions for different types of contracts. In this paper, we use identical utility functions and therefore leave examining the other possibility to future research. Following Corollary 2, the observed differences in Experiment 1 can actually be explained by a reference revenue share uRef.Showing that the existence of reference prices can explain differences between wholesale price and reduced revenue-sharing contracts, the detailed effects of different reference prices have not yet been analyzed. Of special interest are contracts that theoretically lead to the same stocking quantity, i.e., that have the same critical ratio but different contract parameters (see Eq. (2)). We refer to such contracts as risk-sharing contracts because adapting the parameters shifts the demand and supply risk between the partners (and the profits accordingly).According to expected-profit-maximizing theory, different contract parameter combinations (should) lead to identical inventory decisions, if the combinations follow Eq. (2). In this section, we analyze whether inventory decisions remain identical if decision makers have reference prices, as shown in the previous section. To analyze the effect of uRef we setwRef=w. Using Eq. (2) in Corollary 1 yields:(8)q=F−1(w1−CR−w+λ(w1−CR−uRefr)w1−CR+λ(w1−CR−uRefr))Differentiating q for w yields:(9)dqdw=λuRefr(−1+CR)2((uRefr(−1+CR)+w)λ+w)2f(q),which is greater than zero for λ > 0. Hence, stocking quantities are higher for contracts with higher wholesale prices (and revenue shares); e.g., a contract withw=50,u=1leads to higher stocking quantities than a contract withw=5,u=0.1,althoughCR=50in both cases.Property 2Stocking quantities decrease for decreasing uCR(wRS), with the critical ratio held constant for λ > 0 for a fixed uRef.Forλ=0,Eq. (9) equals zero, and the model reduces to the newsvendor model with similar order quantities for different w with the same CR.Note that this effect is contradictory to an outcome-based utility function. In fact, a change in order quantities due to risk or loss-aversion should be in the opposite direction (if there is a change at all) because the risk decreases as w decreases. The observed effect also cannot be explained with a separated valuation of cash streams, which also leads to increasing order quantities for risk-sharing contracts (the proof to this argument can be found in Appendix A).The effect of wRef can be shown similarly. SettinguRef=uand differentiating q with respect to w yields:(10)dqdw=−λwRefw2f(q),which is smaller than zero for λ > 0. This result shows that the reference values of wholesale prices decrease order quantities for increasing w, which is reasonable.Property 3Stocking quantities increase for decreasing uCR(wRS), with the critical ratio held constant for λ > 0 for a fixed wRef.Because there are (almost) an infinite number of different structures of reference prices, we will test the structure of references prices next.The literature on reference-dependent valuation has primarily focused on the status-quo, external aspiration profits or decisions depending expected profits (Köszegi & Rabin, 2006). To the best of our knowledge, there is no consistent approach to determining how reference values are set for contracting parameters. For a multi-criteria decision-making context, Stewart (1992) argues that decision makers’ reference points are not necessarily the aspiration levels for each criterion; rather, they may be favorable options for the decision criteria. Transferring this approach to supply contracts, (favorable) contract parameter expectations can influence the decision maker in the newsvendor setting facing different supply contracts.Because we are the first to model reference points for supply contracts with more than one parameter, we conduct an experiment to analyze how subjects set reference points in the setting of a revenue-sharing contract. There are two main possibilities for constructing reference values in our setting. First, we can set fixed reference values for certain contract parameters independent of the other parameters; e.g.,uRef=0.95independent of the actual wholesale price. Second, we can have parameter-dependent reference values; e.g., uRef increases/decreases in the actual wholesale price. We design an experiment to differentiate between these two possibilities.Experiment 2Demand: U(1, 100),r=100,N=22.Reference wholesale price:wRef,wRef(u=1),wRef(u=0.75),wRef(u=0.5).Reference revenue share:uRef,uRef(w=25),uRef(w=50),uRef(w=75).We asked 22 new subjects of the University of Cologne to explicitly state their expectations regarding contract parameters. In this experiment, we first explained the revenue-sharing contract and the newsvendor setting in the briefing (screen shots can be found in Appendix C; there were no additional instructions - everything was displayed on the screen). To ensure that the subjects had an idea about the effect of the contract parameters on the resulting profit, we gave them the opportunity to test any combination of contract parameters, stocking quantities and demand realization. The subjects inserted any value for these parameters, and the computer calculated the corresponding profit. We did not present explicit examples of profit calculation to avoid any anchor of external reference point.As (our) main task, we then asked the subjects about their expectations regarding the contract parameters. In the first question, the subjects stated their expectations regarding both revenue shares uRef and wholesale prices wRef simultaneously. We then displayed three wholesale prices (w=25,w=50,andw=75) and the subjects stated their expectations regarding the corresponding revenue shares uRef(w). We also displayed three revenue shares (u=1,u=0.75,andu=0.5) and the subjects stated the corresponding expectations regarding the wholesale price wRef(u). We randomized the sequence of the six questions for each subject to avoid order effects. The stated expectations were not payoff relevant for the subjects. Afterward, the subjects placed order quantities for four sets of contract parameters (set by us) and received payment according to the expected profit of one randomly chosen parameter set. This part of the experiment was designed to ensure that the subjects really thought about the contracts and the resulting profits.Fig. 2 shows the results of the experiment. The black circles in the left graph show the average expected wholesale prices for given revenue shares (u=0.5,0.7,1.0), and the right graph shows the expected revenue shares for given wholesale prices. The white circle and triangle represent the unconditional reference values for wRef and uRef. For increasing wholesale prices w, the reference revenue share uRef(w) strictly increases. The same holds for reference wholesale price wRef(u), which increases for increasing revenue shares.Interesting insights can be gained from Fig. 2. Specifically, the data show that the reference values for contract parameters are not fixed; rather, they depend on the values of the other contract parameters. Note that this result is not surprising because the relations among the contract parameters are highly relevant for the payoffs. To achieve at least nonnegative profits, it is necessary for u · r ≥ w. Therefore,wRef=50is valid in a wholesale price contract withr=100,but for a revenue-sharing contract,wRef=50would not be appropriate for low revenue shares, i.e., u < 0.5.A simple form of modeling the dependency is(11)uRef(w)=w+χ(r−w)r,where χ can be interpreted as the share of unit profit(r−w)that the retailer is expecting to keep. We note that this equation is merely one way to model the dependency of reference points, but it has interesting properties because 0 ≤ uRef ≤ 1 for 0 ≤ χ ≤ 1 for all 0 ≤ w ≤ r.44The reference values for wRef(u) could be modeled accordingly but the results of our later experiments suggest that uRef is more relevant, and we leave wRef out here for clarity reasons.Estimating the parameter χ for our data with a fixed-effects least-squares estimation yieldsχ=0.51,which is significantly different from 0 and 1 (p < 0.01). Examining individual subjects, we find that expectations regarding the revenue share increase in the wholesale price for all subjects except for five subjects, who expectuRef=1for all wholesale prices. Note that this expectation is a special case of Eq. (11) forχ=1. The reference values for all subjects can be found in Appendix B.In sum, we conclude that reference points have an important effect on decisions in supply contracting settings. The subjects seem to have a reference value for contract parameters, which are indeed contract specific. To analyze the reference point effect for the revenue-sharing contract in detail and to test whether our model holds with human decision makers, we conduct an extensive experiment for revenue-sharing contracts. We describe the experiment next.Having shown the effect of possible reference prices on inventory decisions, we want to test the model in an extensive experiment with different revenue-sharing contracts. In this section, we first describe the experimental design and provide information on the laboratory protocol (Section 4.1). We then summarize the results of the experiment, highlight the key observations and discuss their implications (Section 4.2). Finally, we estimate the reference points based on our dataset (Section 4.3).In the experiment (Experiment 3), we offered subjects 28 different revenue-sharing contracts, and the subjects placed an order for each contract. We used contract parameter values that spanned an equidistant grid over the feasible region of the contract parameters for 0 ≤ w ≤ r and 0 ≤ u ≤ 1. In total, we had 23 different critical ratios. Further, we had two contracts withCR=0.2,two contracts withCR=0.8,and four contracts withCR=0.5,and the 28 contracts contained seven reduced contracts withu=1. The contracts used in the experiment, including the corresponding newsvendor order quantities, are displayed in the upper part of Table 1.We displayed the contracts sequentially, one contract at a time. No feedback was provided between the presentation of the different contracts to avoid demand realization effects (such as demand chasing). After all decisions were made, we showed the demand realizations for all rounds, and the subjects were paid according to their average profit over all 28 rounds.At the beginning of the experiment, we spent 15 minutes briefing the subjects on the revenue-sharing contract setting. The briefing included a description of the setting, exercises to test subjects’ understanding of the setting (with corrections for wrong answers) and an explanation of the software (screen shots can be found in Appendix C and the instructions can be found in the supplementary material). The subjects then performed five test rounds to become familiar with the decision task and the software before starting with the payoff-relevant decisions. The experiment lasted approximately 1 hour, and the subjects earned 15.34 EUR on average, including the 2.50 EUR participation fee for each subject. There was no communication between the subjects, and the subjects made their decisions independently.N=32students of the University of Cologne participated in this experiment. It was conducted at the Cologne Laboratory for Experimental Research (CLER).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
