@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Increasing the revenue of self-storage warehouses by optimizing order scheduling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider order acceptance for self-storage warehouses to maximize revenue.We model warehouse operations as scheduling n independent multiprocessor tasks.We propose a column generation and a branch-and-price method.Our algorithm can significantly increase the revenue of self-storage warehouses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scheduling,Self-storage warehouse,Multiprocessor task scheduling,Column generation,Branch-and-price,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a self-storage warehouse, facing storage orders for homogeneous or heterogeneous storage units over a certain time horizon. The warehouse operations manager needs to decide which storage orders to accept and schedule them across different storage units to maximize revenue. We model warehouse operations as scheduling n independent multiprocessor tasks with given start and end times, with an objective to maximize revenue. With operational constraints like the maximal upscaling level, precedence order constraints, and maximal idle time, the established mixed-integer program cannot be efficiently solved by commercial softwares. We therefore propose a column generation approach and a branch-and-price method to find an optimal schedule. Computational experiments show that, compared with current methods in self-storage warehouses, our method can significantly increase the revenue.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Our research is inspired by Shurgard (see shurgard.eu), an international corporation providing warehousing services to both family and business customers. Shurgard and Public Storage (see publicstorage.com) are among the largest corporations in an industry called self-storage warehousing, a considerable industry in the world. By the end of 2013, there were approximately 59,500 self-storage facilities worldwide. In the United States, for example, the national Self Storage Association (SSA) estimates that the self-storage industry had total gross revenues of about $24 billion (USD) in 2013, and “8.96 percent of all American households currently rent a self storage unit” (see 2013-2014 self-storage fact sheet report, selfstorage.org).By adopting a self-storage operation protocol (customers handle storage operations by themselves), Shurgard successfully controls its cost, and the revenue is the major concern. To increase the revenue of a self-storage warehouse, Gong, De Koster, Frenk, and Gabor (2013) deal with facility design problems. Our paper handles facility operations problems given a facility design.Shurgard provides storage units in different sizes. Customers can rent a storage unit for a certain period of time (measured by months). The rent depends primarily on the size of the storage units. At the beginning of a storage decision horizon (one to four months), a new storage plan is made. For Shurgard, most storage order requests for the coming two or three months are known at the beginning of a storage decision horizon since customers usually book the storage units with a lead time. Therefore we focus in this paper on the offline scheduling problem. However, the method we develop is sufficiently fast to allow rescheduling for new order arrivals. Offline scheduling is also justified due to the dynamic pricing strategy of self-storage warehouses. In this respect, self-storage warehousing has some similarity with revenue management in other industries (see Phillips, 2005). Customers who reserve storage space ahead of time obtain a discounted price, whereas last minute renting involves premium prices. This strategy changes customer behavior and customers will make reservations ahead of time.To specify the research problem and understand the problem background, we visited 61 self-storage warehouses (see the Appendix, Table 6) in the USA, Europe, and Asia, between December 2007 and June 2013. We collected price, design, and demand information, and interviewed managers, customers, and laborers. It appears the operation modes are highly dependent on the geographical location. According to the 2013-2014 self-storage fact sheet report, “the distribution of U.S. self storage facilities (Q4-2013) is as follows: 32 percent urban, 52 percent suburban and 16 percent rural” (see selfstorage.org).Among the 61 warehouses we visited, 19.7 percent are located in or close to city centers. These warehouses are inclined to reject customers when capacity is fully occupied as demand appears to be abundant. A total of 68.9 percent of the warehouses (could be urban, suburban, and rural) attempt to upscale customers when the desired storage types are fully occupied, and 11.4 percent facilities are commonly located in inappropriate places (e.g., remote outskirts) with low demand. This paper primarily considers the first two facility types, since a warehouse with low demand may need to consider relocation, which is another academic field (see, e.g., Wesolowsky, 1973).The main decision of a self-storage warehouse manager is to decide which new order to accept and which not to accept, given the current occupation of the warehouse. The storage decision relies on the revenue an order can generate for the warehouse, the duration of the order, and the requested storage types. The decision also depends on the current occupation of the warehouse. It is usually not possible to allocate currently occupied storage rooms for future demand, as customers can extend their contracts. Therefore, in the decision, only currently available storage rooms (or storage units) are included. If demand cannot be satisfied, two options will be adopted, dependent on demand status of warehouses: (1) In an area with high demand, orders are rejected when warehouses are fully occupied. We call this research problem as basic problem. (2) In most cases, there may be more alternatives for the customer. For example, a larger storage unit can be offered by the manager to the customer at the lower price. We call this problem the upscaling problem.We model the problem as a deterministic scheduling problem and regard each storage unit (in the Shurgard case, there are several heterogeneous storage types, each of which contains multiple homogeneous storage units ) as a machine, with arrival orders as jobs, and model the decision problem as a fixed-interval multiprocessor task scheduling problem. The fixed interval means we consider orders with given start and end times. Each order will generate a given revenue. The scheduling objective is to maximize the total revenue by a decision whether to accept an order or not over a finite horizon. Our models are particularly fit for the facilities with high demand, and less suitable for the facilities with low demand.We show that the problem in self-storage warehouses can be solved rather efficiently by a branch-and-price algorithm with a column generation approach. The algorithms can be applied to similar problems emerging in other business contexts.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In the following section, we conduct a literature review. In Section 3, we describe the research problem. In Section 4, we present an integer program model. In Section 5, we present analysis and algorithms, including the upscaling model and its solution. Section 6 shows computational results and experiments. We conclude with our contribution and suggestion for further research in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
