@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The benefits of consumer rebates: A strategy for gray market deterrence

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We establish a model where a manufacturer sells goods in two markets and the delegated retailer may potentially sell in a gray market.We show that the manufacturer can use rebates to deter the gray market (parallel importation).Consumer rebates are beneficial to the manufacturer and possibly to retailer.Partial redemption of rebates is not always a blessing to the manufacturer.Rebate leakage or rebate under-valuation by consumers is not always a bad thing to the retailer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Rebate,Gray market,Parallel importation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper analyzes a model where a manufacturer sells a product in two markets. One market is directly served by the manufacturer and the other is served by a retailer. While the manufacturer can offer consumer rebates, the retailer can potentially sell in a gray market, i.e., selling products outside of the authorized channel. Using a game-theoretic approach, we find that (1) rebates have a gray-market-deterrence effect, (2) rebates are beneficial to the manufacturer and possibly to retailer, (3) partial redemption of rebates is not always beneficial to the manufacturer, and (4) rebate leakage across markets or rebate under-valuation by consumers is not always detrimental to the retailer. These findings suggest the possible use of rebates even in scenarios where the conventional rationales for their use are absent.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rebates are widely employed as a promotional tool. There are two kinds of rebates issued by the manufacturer in a supply chain: retailer rebates and consumer rebates. Retailer rebates are payments from the manufacturer to the retailer based on the retailer’s sales performance. Consumer rebates, on the contrary, go directly to the consumers for each unit they purchase (Arcelus, Kumar, & Srinivasan, 2012; Aydin, Porteus, Agrawal, & Smith, 2009; Demirag, Keskinocak, & Swann, 2011). This paper focuses on consumer rebates. It is reported that nearly 30 percent of all consumer products and more than 20 percent of electronics are sold with rebate offers (Grow, 2005), 21 percent of shoppers use rebates every time they shop at a supermarket (Cho, McCardle, & Christopher, 2009), and the total U.S. redeemed rebates accounted for $3.7 billion in 2012 (NCH Marketing Services, 2013). Consumer rebates may take various forms such as peel-off coupons, free-standing inserts, mail-in rebates, to name a few. Some of them offer immediate value promotions while others provide delayed promotions (Chen, Li, Rhee, & Simchi-Levi, 2007).Why are manufacturers likely to bypass retailers to issue consumer rebates? Previous research in marketing and operations attributes it to the following reasons. First, rebates provide a means of price discrimination (Chen, Moorthy, & Zhang, 2005; Gerstner, Hess, & Holthausen, 1994; Narasimhan, 1984). It works when a proportion of customers ends up not claiming the rebates, possibly because they forget or just feel it is too much of a hassle. For this reason, the customers who redeem the rebate pay less for the product than those who do not. Second, rebates induce current sales (Gerstner & Hess, 1991; Lu & Moorthy, 2007; Nevo & Wolfram, 2002). As rebate companies are accustomed to designing complex rules, having a window of eligibility, and asking for the collection of proofs-of-purchase, consumers often spend time and energy in submitting the claim for a rebate. This is redemption cost. Consumers are heterogenous with respect to their redemption costs, and those who incur lower redemption costs are more likely to participate in promotions. Third, rebates help the manufacturer manage inventories when a supply chain survives in multiple periods (Arya & Mittendorf, 2013; Ault, Beard, Laband, & Saba, 2000). Under this circumstance, a forward-looking retailer tends to ration its orderings across periods so as to leverage a low transfer price from the manufacturer. This motive will be restrained if the manufacturer offers consumer rebates to subsidize early demand. By this token, rebates not only encourage customers to buy but also entice the retailer to sell.This paper provides an exception case where conventional rationales for the use of consumer rebates are absent. We assume that all consumers redeem the rebates, redemptions do not incur any cost, and the manufacturer sells in one single period; hence there is no price discrimination, sales promotion, or orderings rationing. Under these assumptions, we still find that consumer rebates can be beneficial. In particular, we find that the manufacturer can use rebate strategy to fight against gray market (or called parallel import), which refers to products that are sold through unofficial or unauthorized distribution channels.To illustrate, we develop a simple model where a manufacturer sells a product in two markets. One market is directly served by the manufacturer (direct market) and the other is served a privately-owned retailer who contracts with the manufacturer on a wholesale price basis (indirect market). The retailer is permitted to sell goods only in its authorized market, but it may privately enter into the unauthorized market. Examples of the cross-market sales are ubiquitous. In 2007, 1.4 million iPhones were sold overseas via unofficial distribution networks (New York Times, 2008). In the pharmaceutical industry, 20 percent of the products sold in UK are parallel imports (Ahmadi, Iravani, & Mamani, 2015). Costco has had lawsuits from Calvin Klein, Omega, and Yves Saint Laurent brought against it for product diversion (Bryant, 2015).Using a game-theoretic approach, we find that if there is no product flow across markets, the manufacturer has no reason to launch a rebate program. Interestingly, if the retailer finds it profitable to purchase goods in the indirect market and then privately resell them in the direct market, the manufacturer will distribute rebates in the indirect market. By doing so, the manufacturer can successfully prevent the retailer away from parallel importations. The rationale is that consumer rebates leverage for an increase in wholesale price and consequently in retail price. Once the (retail) price gap between different markets is filled-up, the retailer will no longer find it profitable to enter the unauthorized market.Furthermore, we also find that rebates are not only beneficial to the manufacturer but may also make the retailer better off. This is because the establishment of gray market may be a prisoner’s dilemma: The retailer, as well as the manufacturer, would be better off if the retailer could commit not to privately divert products. In light of this view, consumer rebates may achieve a Pareto improvement along the supply chain.The findings above apply in many other extensions of the model, for example, when each market contains one single retailer, when the actual redemption rate is not 100 percent, when there exists rebate leakage across markets, and when consumers value the rebate less than its face value.The literature on gray market claims that unauthorized product flows can exert negative or positive impacts on manufacturers. On one hand, gray market is harmful because (a) unlicensed products compete with those licensed, (b) brand value erodes as products become available everywhere, and (c) manufacturers have to make more efforts such as product improvement and advertisement to promote sales (Chen, 2009; Iravani, Dasu, & Ahmadi, 2013). On the other hand, gray market may also be beneficial because (a) a new stream of demand that is originally missed due to high prices becomes available (Ahmadi & Yang, 2000; Xiao, Palekar, & Liu, 2011), (b) retailers who divert to gray market carry more inventories and order more from manufacturers (Raff & Schmitt, 2007; Shulman, 2013), and (c) manufacturers get chances for arbitrage and price discrimination (Dasu, Ahmadi, & Carr, 2012; Yeung & Mok, 2013).Researchers also suggest a variety of approaches to counteract these nocuous gray markets. For instance, manufacturers are able to raise the wholesale price at the expense of vertical pricing efficiency (Chen & Maskus, 2005; Maskus & Chen, 2002; 2004), offer a uniform pricing scheme among different markets (Antia, Bergen, & Dutta, 2004; Antia, Bergen, Dutta, & Fisher, 2006), adopt strategic prices and quantities (Ahmadi et al., 2015), invest in sales effort or delegate sales effort to retailers (Iravani et al., 2013), and design sophisticated contracts with retailers (Hu, Pavlin, & Shi, 2013; Su & Mukhopadhyay, 2012).The current paper contributes to this stream of literature in that we present one more feasible measure that can be used to block gray market. Although consumer rebates have been widely practiced, they are typically considered within a single-market perspective. This paper claims that manufacturer-to-consumer rebates can also be deployed for multi-market settings. Besides, pervious research does not suggest ways to manage profitable gray market. This paper shows that even when gray market is beneficial, the manufacturer can still launch rebate programs to earn more profits.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 establishes the base model. Section 3 analyzes the base model and outlines the benefits of consumer rebates. Section 4 extends the base model toward several directions, including the indirect-indirect market structure, partial redemption of rebates, rebate leakage across markets, rebate under-valuation by consumers, and positive promotion and diversion costs. This section demonstrates the robustness of the results and presents other implications of rebates. Section 5 concludes this paper. All proofs are collected in the Appendix.Consider a manufacturer who sells a single product in two separate markets denoted as L and H, respectively. We say the two markets are “separate” because consumers in one market cannot buy goods from the other, for example, when L and H refer to two countries. Consumers in L (the low market) are heterogeneous in their valuation for the product, denoted by VL, which is distributed uniformly over the interval [0, vl]. Consumers in H (the high market) value the product more. Their willingness to pay for the product, denoted by VH, is distributed uniformly over the interval [0, vh], where vh> vl> 0. The mass of consumers in each market is normalized to 1, and therefore, consumer densities of markets L and H are1vland1vh,respectively.11The main results of this paper are not qualitatively changed if we assume that the two markets have different consumer bases.We begin the analysis with a base model in which the manufacturer sells goods directly to consumers in H and delegates the sales responsibility to a single retailer in L. This “direct-indirect” market structure is the simplest framework that can show the benefits of rebates.22In Section 4, we will examine the “indirect-indirect” setting where the manufacturer sells indirectly in both markets. Other market structures such as “direct-direct” and “indirect-direct” are not considered in this paper because in these settings there is no retailer or the retailer never diverts products.Since consumers in H have a higher willingness to pay than those in L, the retailer may find it profitable to purchase goods from the manufacturer and then resell them to H rather than to L. The private action of the retailer will generate a gray market, denoted as market G, which is not intended by the manufacturer. Products in G are the same as those in H, but consumers value them less, simply because they are bootlegs, do not have warranty, or might involve additional costs. For instance, in China’s iPhone-gray-market, to unlock the phone and add Chinese language software costs an additional $25 (New York Times, 2008). Let θ be the discount factor, where θ ∈ (0, 1), so that the value of the gray product isVG=θVH. To rule out trivial cases, we further assume thatθ24vh<vl<θvh,which implies that vl, compared with vh, should not be too large such that the retailer never diverts products or too small such that all the products are diverted.33When vl≥ θvh, the retailer never diverts products. Whenvl≤θ24vh,the retailer tends to divert all the goods to gray market, under which case the manufacturer has no reason to cooperate with the retailer.The two-separate-one-gray-market model is widely adopted in the literature on gray markets (e.g., Ahmadi et al., 2015; Ahmadi & Yang, 2000; Iravani et al., 2013; Maskus & Chen, 2002; 2004; Xiao et al., 2011). This paper differs in that we model the unique role of manufacturer-to-consumer rebates and in the process show how they can be used to manage gray market. Besides, for simplicity and clearer intuitions, we normalize all possible costs to zero.44In Section 4, we will discuss the influences of promotion cost incurred by the manufacturer and the diversion cost incurred by the retailer.We analyze a two-stage Stackelberg game as follows.In the first stage, the manufacturer sets simultaneously the wholesale price w in L, on a take-it-or-leave-it basis, and the retail price phin H. We impose the wholesale price contract assumption because this simple contract form is very common and popular in vertical interactions. The manufacturer also offers consumers a rebate of Δ ≥ 0 for per unit purchase, whereΔ=0refers to no rebate. Assume that all the actual buyers who get the rebate will redeem it at zero redemption cost. This assumption rules out the widely recognized benefits of rebates such as price discrimination and sales promotion.55In Section 4, we will investigate the case where the redemption rate is lower than 100 percent.Since market H is characterized by a direct channel and no product diversion occurs there, the manufacturer may only have incentives to offer rebates in the low market.66In Section 4, we will investigate the case where a fraction of customers in H have access to rebates that are not intentionally offered to them. We thank the anonymous reviewer for suggesting this extension.In the second stage, the retailer orders the products and sets the retail price plin market L. If profitable, the retailer also diverts some of the goods to market G, quoting a gray price pg. This assumption insinuates that the manufacturer is the price leader and sets phbefore pland pg, which conforms to the reality that the manufacturer in a supply chain is often more powerful than the retailer.77A retail store like Wal-Mart is generally more powerful than its manufacturer. Our main finding that consumer rebates can block gray market also applies to this case, for example, by assuming that the retailer is the price leader. The detailed derivation is available upon request. We thank the anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.Given all the prices and rebates, consumers optimally decide whether to buy and where to shop (consumers in H have access to the gray market if it exists). Assume that each consumer demands at most one unit of the product and there is no rebate trade among consumers.In this section, we analyze sequentially the cases where there is no gray market (case NG), where there exists a gray market but the manufacturer does not offer rebate (case GNR), and where rebates are offered in the presence of gray market (case GR). Comparing these cases will give rise to the benefits of consumer rebates.We first briefly discuss the case where there does not exist a gray market, for example, when consumers in H distrust gray items and refuse to purchase from any illegal channel.In the low market, consumers receive a net utilityVL−plif they buy the products or 0 if they do not buy. Thus, the demand equals1vl(vl−pl)=1−plvl. Similarly, the demand in the high market is given by1−phvh. In the second stage, the retailer optimally sets plconditional on w to maximize its profitπr=(pl−w)(1−plvl),yieldingpl=12(vl+w). In the first stage, expecting the retailer’s response, the manufacturer determines w and phto maximize its profitπm=w(1−plvl)+ph(1−phvh)=12w(1−wvl)+ph(1−phvh),based on which we havew=12vlandph=12vh. Then, the equilibrium results are available, as shown in the “NG” column of Table 1, where Dh, Dland Dgdenote the demand in markets H, L and G, respectively.Under the benchmark case, we can easily check whether consumer rebate is useful. Suppose that the manufacturer offers a rebate of Δ. Then, the demand in L changes to1−pl−Δvl,wherepl−Δis the discounted price because of the manufacturer’s rebate offer. The profits of the two firms are given byπr=(pl−w)(1−pl−Δvl)andπm=(w−Δ)(1−pl−Δvl)+ph(1−phvh). Solving the game backward, we get the equilibria as follows:w=12vl+Δ,pl=34vl+Δ,ph=vh2,πm=2vh+vl8andπr=vl16. These results show that the two firms’ profits are independent of consumer rebates. Therefore, we have the following proposition.Proposition 1Consumer rebates are of no use in the absence of gray market.Proposition 1 is very intuitive. If the manufacturer offers a rebate of Δ > 0, the retailer will raise the retail price from34vlto34vl+Δ,extracting all the additional surplus that consumers in L get from rebates. Expecting the retailer’s response, the manufacturer will increase the wholesale price from12vlto12vl+Δsince the retailer’s markup is amplified by a degree of Δ. By doing so the manufacturer offsets the expenditures on rebates and neither firm gets any benefit from rebates. Customers in L are not better off too. Although they get a rebate of Δ, they are also charged pricepl+Δfor each unit of purchase. The net price consumers pay is always pl. This conclusion is in accordance with the conventional wisdom that were it not for price discrimination or other promotional effects, manufacturer-to-consumer rebates would not be beneficial.Now suppose that the retailer can freely build up a gray market and the manufacturer does not offer rebates. Under this scenario, consumers in H can choose to buy a licensed product to get a utility ofVH−phor consume a gray good to obtainVG−pg=θVH−pgutility. The marginal indifferent consumer is located atVH=ph−pg1−θ. Those who have a higher valuation will shop in H while those with a lower valuation will shop in G. We should also ensure that no consumer gets a negative utility from a unit of purchase. As such, the demands of markets H and G are, respectively,(1)Dh=1vh(vh−ph−pg1−θ)=1−ph−pgvh(1−θ),and(2)Dg=1vh(ph−pg1−θ−pgθ)=θph−pgθ(1−θ)vh.Consumers in L derives a utilityVL−plby consuming the product. Thus, the demand of market L is given by(3)Dl=1vl(vl−pl)=1−plvl.We solve the two-stage game by employing backward induction. In the second stage, the retailer chooses pland pgconditional on w and phto maximize its profit, i.e.,(4)πr=(pl−w)Dl+(pg−w)Dg,where the first term of r.h.s. is the profit earned from market L and the second is from G. Solving the maximization problem yieldspl=12(vl+w)andpg=12(θph+w). These response functions imply that the retailer will divert products to the unauthorized market if the activity is profitable. The conditions for parallel importation occurring are pg> w and Dg> 0, which can be simplified to w < θph. In other words, only if w ≥ θphwill the retailer not participate in product diversion.In the first stage, expecting the expressions of pland pg, the manufacturer optimally sets w and phto maximize its profit, i.e.,(5)πm=wDl+wDg+phDh,where the first, second and third terms of r.h.s. are the profits obtained from L, G and H, respectively. Maximizing Eq. (5) yieldsw=12θ(4−θ)vhvlθ(2−θ)vh+2vlandph=vh22θ(1−θ)vh+(2+θ)vlθ(2−θ)vh+2vl,substituting which back into the retailer’s response functions (pland pg) and Eqs. (1)–(5) we can obtain the equilibrium results of the game, as shown in the “GNR” column of Table 1.Comparing cases NG and GNR we have the next proposition. Throughout this paper, we use the superscripts “NG”, “GNR” and “GR” to refer to the equilibria of cases NG, GNR and GR, respectively.Proposition 2In scenario where the retailer has access to gray market, (i) the manufacturer raises the wholesale price and reduces the retail price in H, and the retailer raises the retail price in L, i.e.,wGNR>wNG,phGNR<phNG,plGNR>plNG;(ii) parallel importations occur, the demand in L decreases, and the demand in H does not change, i.e.,DgGNR>0,DlGNR<DlNG,DhGNR=DhNG;(iii) the manufacturer is always worse off, i.e.,πmGNR<πmNG;and (iv) the retailer is worse (better) off when vl is sufficiently large (small), i.e.,{πrGNR≥πrNG,ifvl≤θ(4−5θ+θ2−1+θ)3vh,πrGNR<πrNG,ifvl>θ(4−5θ+θ2−1+θ)3vh.Proposition 2 indicates that gray market makes the manufacturer worse off, which conforms to the intuition. Surprisingly, the retailer may also be hurt by its own gray activity, particularly whenvl>θ(4−5θ+θ2−1+θ)3vh. The rationale is that if gray products flow into the high market and compete with the licensed products, market H will be segmented such that a proportion of consumers eventually pays a low price. This is the cannibalization effect (Xiao et al., 2011). To avoid too many unauthorized product flows, the manufacturer would rather cut phand raise w. By doing so, the retailer’s markup is eroded. Thus, although the retailer receives some profits in the gray market, it also incurs a loss in the low market. With the increase of vl, market L will be more and more important relative to market G. Once vlexceeds the thresholdθ(4−5θ+θ2−1+θ)3vh,the retailer’s gains from product diversion cannot balance the loss. That is why the retailer is worse off when vlis high enough.One might wonder why the retailer creates a gray market that seems to hurt itself. The reason lies in that the manufacturer, as a Stackelberg leader, makes decisions based not on the retailer’s action but on the retailer’s incentive. Unless the retailer could commit not to divert gray products, the manufacturer would not stop using the price leverage (raising w and lowering ph). As a response, the retailer has no choice but to divert products to get the lesser of two evils. This looks like a prisoner’s dilemma: The two firms would earn higher profits if the manufacturer does not use price leverage in the first stage and the retailer does not divert gray products in the second.We take a set of numerical examples, as shown in Fig. 1, to help understand Proposition 2. The input parameters are set asvh=1andθ=0.5or 0.9. We depict the profit curves of the two firms by varying vlwithin the interval[θ24vh,θvh]. It is clearly shown that gray market is always harmful to the manufacturer, and the retailer is also worse off when vlis high enough.Another interesting finding we obtain from Fig. 1 is thatπrGNRmay decrease with θ. It seems counter-intuitive: Why is the retailer worse off when its gray products are highly valued? This is because a large discount factor θ is a powerful commitment that the retailer has incentives to build up a gray market. If θ is sufficiently small, gray market will not be so attractive, and the retailer will refrain from diverting products, thereby suffering less attacks (price leverage) from the manufacturer. Yet if θ is sufficiently high, the retailer will not be so self-restrained. Under this case, the manufacturer will leverage the price to discourage the retailer from selling gray goods. Therefore, with the increase of θ, the retailer’s profit may decrease, depending on whether the positive effect (high valuation of gray items) dominates the negative (price leverage).The benchmark model shows that rebates are of no use in the absence of gray market. Now we demonstrate the benefits of consumer rebates in the presence of gray market.Suppose that the manufacturer offers consumers in L a rebate of Δ and all buyers redeem the rebates. Then, the demand in L is88Note that even if the customers eventually redeem the rebates, at the time of purchase, they may value the rebate less than its face value. This interesting case will be analyzed in Section 4.(6)Dl=1−pl−Δvl.The demands in H and G are still given by Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively. The retailer’s profit is still given by Eq. (4), maximizing which yieldspl=12(vl+w+Δ)andpg=12(θph+w). The manufacturer’s profit changes from Eq. (5) to(7)πm=(w−Δ)Dl+wDg+phDh.Maximizing πmyieldsw=12θvh,ph=12vhandΔ=12(θvh−vl). We collect all the equilibrium results of the game in the “GR” column of Table 1.Next proposition is directly obtained from Table 1 and Proposition 2.Proposition 3In scenario where the retailer has access to gray market, (i) consumer rebates can deter the gray market, i.e.,DgGR=0<DgGNR; (ii) consumer rebates make the manufacturer better off, i.e.,πmGR>πmGNR; and (iii) consumer rebates make the retailer better (worse) off when vl is sufficiently large (small), i.e.,{πrGR≤πrGNR,ifvl≤θ(4−5θ+θ2−1+θ)3vh,πrGR>πrGNR,ifvl>θ(4−5θ+θ2−1+θ)3vh.Proposition 3 and Table 1 show that using a rebate ofΔGR=12(θvh−vl),the manufacturer successfully deters the gray market. What is the rationale behind the gray market deterrence effect?Remember that only if w ≥ θphwill the retailer have no incentive to divert products. When rebate is not issued,wGNR<θphGNRas shown in Table 1. In this case, the manufacturer would be better off tolerating gray products; Otherwise, it would suffer more from losing vertical pricing efficiency (a higher w would decrease the demand in L, and a lower phwould not squeeze enough consumer surplus in H, e.g., Chen and Maskus, 2005; Maskus and Chen, 2002; 2004).Fortunately, Table 1 also shows thatwGR=θphGR,implying that the manufacturer can use consumer rebates to get out of the dilemma. Upon receiving a rebate of ΔGR, consumers in the low market will have a higher willingness to pay for the product. As a rational firm, the retailer will raise its retail price plto extract consumer surplus as much as possible. Anticipating this, the manufacturer will raise its wholesale price w to erode the retail markup. In other words, rebates can be used to leverage for a higher wholesale price. The “leverage” effect is of no use in the absence of gray market. However, in the presence of gray market, the manufacturer is more likely to use the leverage to meet the gray market deterrence condition.When the gray market is deterred, it is rather straightforward to see from Propositions 2 and 3 that both the manufacturer and the retailer are better off whenvl>θ(4−5θ+θ2−1+θ)3vh. Under this case, the conditions for prisoner’s dilemma have vanished and consumer rebates give rise to a “win-win” outcome: The retailer enjoys a larger markup, and the manufacturer induces more demands in L and enjoys a monopoly profit in H. On the other hand, ifvl<θ(4−5θ+θ2−1+θ)3vh,consumer rebates make the manufacturer better off at the expense of the retailer. These findings are summarized in Fig. 2(see Fig. 1 for numerical examples).Previous section has shown that consumer rebates can be used to block gray market. The gray market deterrence effect is beneficial to the manufacturer and possibly to retailer. In the section, we extend the base model towards several directions to check its robustness and present other implications of rebates. We find that the main insights of the base model persist in these extensions with only minor modifications.The profit mechanism of rebates shown in the base model is rather simple: It works as a leverage for a high wholesale price to create incentives such that gray market is deterred. In this extension, we will investigate the indirect-indirect market structure and show that consumer rebates can help “regulate” the gray market desired by manufacturer.Now suppose that in addition to market L, in market H the manufacturer also distributes the product through a retailer. Name the retailers in markets L and H as retailer L and retailer H, respectively. Then, the two-stage game is as follows. In the first stage, the manufacturer sets simultaneously the wholesale price wlfor retailer L, the wholesale price whfor retailer H, and the rebate Δ for consumers in the low market. In the second stage, the two retailers simultaneously order the products and set the retail prices pl, pgand ph.Similar to the base model, the demands in markets H, G and L are given by Eqs. (1), (2) and (6), respectively. The profits of retailer L, retailer H and the manufacturer are, respectively,(8)πrl=(pl−wl)Dl+(pg−wl)Dg,(9)πrh=(ph−wh)Dh,and(10)πm=(wl−Δ)Dl+wlDg+whDh.Using backward induction, we first maximize Eqs. (8) and (9) simultaneously to get ph, pland pg. Then, we maximize Eq. (10) to get wl, whand Δ. The equilibrium results are summarized in Table 2. For ease of comparison, in Table 2 we also list the equilibria of NG and GNR.Next proposition is obtained by comparing case NG and case GNR.Proposition 4Under the indirect-indirect market structure where retailer L has access to gray market, (i) the manufacturer is better off whenvl>θ(11−2θ−105−48θ+6θ2)2(4−θ)vh, (ii) retailer L is worse off when f(vl) < 0, wheref(vl)=4θ3(1−θ)(3−θ)2vh3−θ(1−θ)(40−28θ+5θ2)vh2vl−θ(28+8θ−11θ2+2θ3)vhvl2+3(4−θ)2vl3,and (iii) retailer H is always worse off.99The detailed solution for f(vl) < 0 is given in the Appendix.Proposition 4 shows that, in contrast to the base model, gray products can benefit the manufacturer under the indirect-indirect framework. This is because although parallel importation aggravates the competition in the high market, it also alleviates the double marginalization problem between the manufacturer and retailer H. That is, in the absence of gray products, retailer H is inclined to quote a higher retail price (i.e.,phNG=3vh4) than the optimal level that maximizes the entire channel’s profit (i.e.,vh2,seeing the “NG” column of Table 1). However, as gray products flow into the high market, retailer H has to reduce the price fromphNG=3vh4tophGNR=vh2(4−θ)4θ(3−4θ+θ2)vh+(12−2θ−θ2)vlθ(2−θ)vh+2vl,thereby mitigating the double marginalization problem.Fig. 3(a) presents a numerical example by settingvh=1andθ=0.4or 0.9, showing thatπmGNR>πmNGwhen vlis sufficiently large.The impact of gray market on retailer L’s profitability looks obscure in Proposition 4. For clearer illustration, we take a numerical example and depict the curves ofπrlGNRandπrlNGby settingvh=1andθ=0.4or 0.9, as shown in Fig. 3(b). It is seen that gray market is more likely to benefit retailer L at lower values of vlor θ—consistent with the base model.Unfortunately, retailer H is always the victim of gray market. This is because, first, retailer H cannot set price as a Stackelberg leader so as to prohibit damage (unlike the manufacturer). Second, retailer H has no access to gray channels, so it cannot directly affect the unauthorized market (unlike retailer L). Third, both the cannibalization effect and the double marginalization alleviation effect tend to reduce phand hence exert negative effect on retailer H’s profit.Next proposition is obtained by comparing case GNR and case GR.Proposition 5Under the indirect-indirect market structure where retailer L has access to gray market, (i) consumer rebates reduce the demand of the gray market, i.e.,0<DgGR<DgGNR; (ii) consumer rebates make the manufacturer better off; (iii) consumer rebates make retailer L worse off ifvl<θ(100−168θ+82θ2−15θ3+θ4−2+3θ−θ2)3(4−θ)vh; and (iv) consumer rebates do not affect retailer H’s profit.Proposition 5 shows that, under the indirect-indirect framework the manufacturer does not completely close the door of parallel importation. Instead, it intentionally permits some gray flows so as to optimally alleviate the double marginalization problem. However, it does not mean that consumer rebates are useless. Since retailer L tends to over-divert gray products, the manufacturer can deploy consumer rebates to control the amount of gray goods, even when gray market is beneficial. As shown in Fig. 3(a),πmGR>πmGNRandπmGR>πmNG,i.e., using rebates to control gray market is even better than the case when no gray market exists. The benefit of rebates also applies to retailer L, i.e.,πrLGR>πrLNG,as shown in Fig. 3(b).The base model assumes that consumers incur zero redemption cost and all rebates are redeemed. Now we investigate the role of partial redemption on the effects of consumer rebates. There is a consensus among analysts that partial redemption works as a vehicle of price discrimination and hence is beneficial to the manufacturer. This extension will show that partial redemption of rebates is not always beneficial.Suppose that a fraction of consumers in L does not redeem the rebate after purchase, possibly because their redemption costs are sufficiently high. Denote the redemption rate by ρ ∈ [0, 1], whereρ=0means zero redemption andρ=1implies 100 percent redemption. The demands in H and G are given by Eqs. (1) and (2), whereas the demand in L isDl=ρ(1−pl−Δvl)+(1−ρ)(1−plvl),i.e.,(11)Dl=1−pl−ρΔvl.The retailer’s profit function is still given by Eq. (4), whereas the manufacturer’s profit is(12)πm=w(Dl+Dg)+phDh−Δ·ρ(1−pl−Δvl).Solving the game yields the equilibria as shown in Table 3, where we list only the results of GR (see Table 1 for NG and GNR).Table 3 clearly shows that the case of partial redemption bridges the gap between GNR and GR. Whenρ=0(ρ=1), the results are the same as those shown in the “GNR” (“GR”) column of Table 1. Therefore, the results of our base model are robust when the redemption rate is lower than 100 percent.Furthermore, from Table 3 we can obtain the following proposition.Proposition 6If rebates are partially redeemed by consumers, the manufacturer is better off as the redemption rate ρ increases. Ifvl≥θ(36−44θ+9θ2−2+3θ)8vh,the retailer is better off as ρ increases. Ifvl<θ(36−44θ+9θ2−2+3θ)8vh,the retailer is better (worse) off as ρ increases when ρ > ( < )ρ*, whereρ*=2θ2(1−θ)vh2−θ(2−3θ)vhvl−4vl22θ2(1−θ)vh2−θ(2−3θ)vhvl−3vl2.Propositions 6 implies that, compared with 100 percent redemption rate, partial redemption by consumers is detrimental to the manufacturer. This conclusion is different to the conventional wisdom that regards partial redemption as one important factor that improves the manufacturer’s profit. In this paper, consumer rebate works as a leverage for high wholesale price. If a proportion of consumers ends up not redeeming the rebates, the leverage effect will be weakened (if ρ < 1 there always exist gray products that are not deterred, i.e., Dg> 0, as shown in Table 3).In addition, a high redemption rate may also be beneficial to the retailer, which happens when vlor ρ is sufficiently high. This is because a large vlimplies a relatively low importance of the gray market, and a large ρ promotes the retailer to rely more on authorized sales. Under these conditions, the higher the redemption rate is, the more benefits the retailer gains due to the gray market deterrence effect. In Fig. 4, we present two groups of examples to show the influence of ρ on firm profits, where the input parameters are given byvh=1,θ=0.5,andvl=0.3or 0.15.Our base model assumes that the manufacturer can issue rebates exclusively in the low market. This is in accordance with the widely applied “targeted marketing” practices such as price targeting, coupon targeting and advertising targeting which are now feasible because of the advances in information technologies that have enabled firms to identify individual consumers (e.g., Chen & Zhang, 2009; Iyer, Soberman, & Villas-Boas, 2005; Shaffer & Zhang, 1995; 2002; Zhang, Liu, & Zhong, 2015). Nevertheless, information technology is not perfect and the rebates targeted to the low market may leak to the high.Let λ ≤ 1 be the extent of leakage, which is the proportion of consumers in H who have access to the rebate. These consumers can redeem the rebate at the retail outlet via the gray market. Thus, we have the demand in H as following:(13)Dh=Dh0+Dh1,where we defineDh0=1−λvh(vh−ph−pg1−θ)andDh1=λvh(vh−ph−(pg−Δ)1−θ). Clearly, Dh0 and Dh1 are the demands from the segment with rebate of Δ and the segment with zero rebate, respectively. Similarly, the demand in the gray market is given by(14)Dg=Dg0+Dg1,where we defineDg0=1−λvh(ph−pg1−θ−pgθ)andDg1=λvh(ph−(pg−Δ)1−θ−pg−Δθ). The demand in the low market is given by Eq. (6).The retailer’s profit function is given by Eq. (4), while the manufacturer’s profit is given by(15)πm=w(Dl+Dg)+phDh−Δ·(Dl+Dg1).Solving the two-stage game with the same method as in the base model, we can obtain the equilibria under case GR as shown in Table 4. The results of NG and GNR do no change, which are shown in Table 1.Similar to the case of partial redemption, our model is also robust when there exists rebate leakage—if we letλ=0(λ=1), the results in Table 4 will be the same as the “GR” (“GNR”) column of Table 1. Therefore, we conclude that leakage to the high market will weaken the gray market deterrence effect of rebates. Under the extreme circumstance where all consumers in both markets have access to the rebate, rebate can no longer block any gray product.Next proposition is directly derived from Table 4.Proposition 7If a fraction λ of high-market consumers has access to the rebate, the manufacturer is worse off as λ increases. Ifvl≥θ(33−36θ+4θ2−1+2θ)8vh,the retailer is worse off as λ increases. Ifvl<θ(33−36θ+4θ2−1+2θ)8vh,the retailer is worse (better) off as λ increases when λ < ( > )λ*, whereλ*=θ(1−θ)vhvl2θ2(1−θ)vh2−θ(1−2θ)vhvl−4vl2.Fig. 5provides numerical examples that can explain Proposition 7 (the input parameters are set asvh=1,θ=0.5,andvl=0.4or 0.1). Since we have shown that gray market deterrence via rebates is always beneficial to the manufacturer, with the increase of λ (i.e., with the decrease of the deterrence effect), the manufacturer earns less and less profits, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Note that gray market deterrence may be harmful to the retailer, especially when vlis small (see Proposition 3). Thus, it is possible that when vlis sufficiently small the retailer’s profit increases with λ, as shown in Fig. 5(b).In the base model, a customer values the rebate amount exactly equal to its face value. Anecdotally, even if consumers eventually redeem the rebates, at the time of purchase they may value the rebate less than its face value. This under-valuation of rebate could be due to several reasons. For example, rebate promotion is different from price discount (Kumar, Madan, & Srinivasan, 2004; Lu & Moorthy, 2007). Consumers get the rebate only after they purchase the product. At the time they make a purchase decision, rebate is only a token for future gains, which may not be valued equally as the immediate price discount.In this extension, we will discuss the influence of rebate under-valuation on our results. Denote the discount factor by δ, which means that a rebate equal to Δ will be valued only(1−δ)Δby consumers. Under this assumption, the demand in L equals(16)Dl=1−pl−(1−δ)Δvl.The demands in H and G are still given by Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively. Although consumers under-value the rebate at the time of purchase, they finally get the rebate equal to its face value. Thus, the manufacturer should still pay Δ for each rebate. In this regard, the profit functions of the manufacturer and the retailer are still given by Eqs. (7) and (4), respectively.Analog to the base model, we can obtain the equilibrium results as shown in Table 5(case GR), where we impose the assumptionsδ<46−θandδθ2vh<vl<θ(4−4δ+δθ)4vhto avoid trivial cases that the manufacturer never issues a rebate or the retailer diverts none or all of the products (see Table 1 for NG and GNR).Next proposition is obtained based on Table 5.Proposition 8If rebates are under-valued by consumers, (i) the manufacturer’s profit decreases with the discount factor δ, and (ii) if δ ≤ δ*, the retailer’s profit decreases with δ; if δ > δ*, the retailer’s profit decreases (increases) with δ whenvl<(>)14δ2θ(−12+10θ+10δ−9δθ+δθ2)4−2(9−2θ)δ+(6−θ)(3−δ)δ2vh,whereδ*=7−2θ−17−20θ+4θ22(4−θ).As expected, rebate under-valuation by consumers reduces the manufacturer’s profit. This is because as δ increases, the manufacturer has to distribute a larger rebate in order to deter the same amount of gray products. In other words, the efficiency of rebates reduces as δ increases.As to the retailer, the role of rebate under-valuation is mixed. Note that δ stimulates the retailer to divert products, and whether product diversion is profitable depends on whether the gray market is important enough. If δ is small, the manufacturer can make use of rebates to reduce the importance of gray market. Under this case, the increase of δ is a bad thing to the retailer. Yet if δ is large, the manufacturer’s ability to control gray market is very weak. Under this case, provided that vlis not too small (under which the retailer will over-divert products), the retailer will be better off as δ increases. In Fig. 6we present two groups of examples to show the influence of δ on firm profits (the input parameters are set asvh=1,θ=0.5,andvl=0.2or 0.1).In the base model, we exclude all possible costs involved in running a rebate program. In this extension, we focus on the influence of costs of rebate promotion and product diversion.To launch a rebate program, the manufacturer incurs a fixed cost to advertise and distribute the rebates. When consumers redeem the rebates, the manufacturer also incurs a variable cost for each unit of redemption. The influence of the fixed cost is obviously seen from Proposition 3: If the cost exceeds the profit increment that the manufacturer gets from rebates, the manufacturer would not offer any rebate. Thus, a large fixed promotion cost makes the retailer better off when vlis small but makes the retailer worse off when vlis large (an opposite path to that shown in Fig. 2).Let cm> 0 be the marginal promotion cost. The expressions of Dh, Dg, Dland πrare given by Eqs. (1), (2), (6) and (4), respectively. The manufacturer’s profit is(17)πm=(w−Δ−cm)Dl+wDg+phDh.Following the same logic as the base model, we obtain the equilibrium results as shown in Table 6, where it is assumed thatcm<min{θvh−vl,vl}. If cmexceeds this threshold, the manufacturer would not offer any rebate.Table 6 clearly shows the influence of marginal promotion cost: First, it directly lowers the efficiency of rebate programs, and thus the manufacturer reduces the rebate amount to make a balance, i.e.,∂ΔGR∂cm<0. Second, consumers in the low market have a lower willingness to pay, inducing the retailer to lower the retail price, i.e.,∂plGR∂cm<0. Third, the manufacturer incurs a cost of cmDlfor each product provision in the low market; hence it tends to cutdown product provision there, i.e.,∂DlGR∂cm<0. As a result, cmnot only reduces the manufacturer’s profit but also negatively influences the retailer’s profit, i.e.,∂πmGR∂cm<0and∂πrGR∂cm<0.When the retailer engages in parallel importations, it should bear a fixed cost to build up the gray market and a variable cost for each unit of product diversion. The influence of the fixed cost is rather straightforward: A large cost prevents parallel importation and hence plays the same role as rebates as shown in the base model.Let cr> 0 be the marginal diversion cost. Then, the expressions of Dh, Dg, Dland πmare given by Eqs. (1), (2), (6) and (7), respectively. The profit of the retailer is equal to(18)πr=(pl−w)Dl+(pg−w−cr)Dg.Using the same method as in the base model, we obtain the equilibrium results as shown in Table 7(see Table 1 for case NG), where we assumecr<2θ(1−θ)vh(θvh−vl)θ(4−3θ)vh+2vl. If cris too high, the retailer would not divert any product.Table 7 indicates that under GNR the manufacturer’s profit increases with cr, i.e.,∂πmGNR∂cr>0. This is because with the increase of diversion cost, the retailer is less prone to divert products, i.e.,∂Dg∂cr<0. Although the existence of crimproves the manufacturer’s profit, it cannot deter all of the unlicensed products. Thus, the manufacturer is still hurt by parallel importations.1010In the Appendix, we prove thatπmGR>πmGNR.Interestingly, under GNR the retailer may be better off if it incurs a higher shipping cost.1111In the Appendix, we prove thatπrGNRincreases with crat larger values of vlor cr.Remember that in Proposition 2 we have shown that gray market is not always beneficial to the retailer. As such, a large crwill decrease the level of parallel importations, which may be a blessing for the retailer.From Table 7 we also see that the equilibrium results under GR are the same as in the base model, implying that crdoes not play any role under GR. The reason is obvious—crworks only when there exist product flows across markets, but the manufacturer blocks gray market under equilibrium.Manufacturers often bypass retailers to offer rebates to end consumers. Although previous literature has widely studied this phenomenon, there is still much to learn. In this paper, we provides additional benefits of consumer rebates from the view of gray market deterrence.In particular, we first establish a base model where a manufacturer sells products in two markets. One market contains a retailer while the other is directly controlled by the manufacturer. The retailer may participate in a gray market and the manufacturer may offer consumer rebates. Then, we use the game-theoretic approach to analyze the scenarios when there is no gray market, when the manufacturer does not offer rebates in the presence of gray market, and when the manufacturer offers rebates in the presence of gray market. Comparing the three scenarios, we find that without gray market the manufacturer has no reason to issue rebates. Once the retailer has an incentive of parallel importation, the manufacturer will embrace the rebate strategy, which can leverage a high wholesale price such that the retailer is discouraged from diverting gray products. Under certain conditions, the gray market deterrence effect benefits both the manufacturer and the retailer.We extend the base model towards several directions. The first extension analyzes rebates under the indirect-indirect market structure. Our analysis shows that gray market has both positive and negative effects on the manufacturer’s profit. In addition, we find that the manufacturer can use rebates to control the volume of gray products to improve profit. The second extension considers partial redemption of rebates. Contrary to conventional wisdom, higher redemption rates are found to be beneficial to the manufacturer and possibly, retailer. The third extension discusses the case when there exists rebate leakage across markets. It is shown that rebate leakage is harmful to the manufacturer and plays a mixed role in the retailer’s profit. The fourth extension is the case when rebates are under-valued by consumers. In this particular case, the retailer might be better off while the manufacturer is always worse off due to the under-valuation of rebates. The last extension considers the influence of the manufacturer’s promotion cost and the retailer’s product diversion cost. Although these costs affect the equilibria of the game, they do not qualitatively change the main findings derived from the base model.The contributions of this paper to the literature are three aspects. First, previous research claims the benefits of rebates from perspectives of price discrimination, sales promotion and inventory management. This paper complements this literature and shows that consumer rebates can also be used to deter gray market. Second, previous research has not studied how to regulate the gray market that is not harmful. This paper shows that even when gray market is beneficial, there are still ways for the manufacturer to induce profit improvement by deploying the rebate strategy. Third, it is widely believed that partial redemption of rebates is good for the manufacturer. In contrast, this paper provides evidence that this conventional wisdom may not hold.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
