@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Operation and preventive maintenance scheduling for containerships: Mathematical model and solution algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study considers the operation and maintenance scheduling problem for containerships.A mathematical programming model is suggested to represent the new maintenance scheduling problem.We suggest an algorithm that determines the operation and maintenance schedules at the same time.To show the applicability of the model and solution algorithm, a case study is reported on real data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Containerships,Operation and maintenance scheduling,Integer programming,Heuristic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper considers the problem of determining operation and maintenance schedules for a containership equipped with various subsystems during its sailing according to a pre-determined navigation schedule. The operation schedule, which specifies working time of each subsystem, determines the due-date of each maintenance activity and the maintenance schedule specifies the actual start time of each maintenance activity. The main constraints are subsystem requirements, workforce availability, working time limitation, and inter-maintenance time. To represent the problem mathematically, a mixed integer programming model is developed. Then, due to the complexity of the problem, we suggest a heuristic algorithm that minimizes the sum of earliness and tardiness between the due-date and the actual start time for each maintenance activity. Computational experiments were done on various test instances and the results are reported. In particular, a case study was done on a real instance and a significant amount of improvement is reported over the experience based conventional method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Maintenance is one of functional and operational activities to ensure operational consistency, efficiency and productivity of a system such as plants, transportation facilities, and bridges. In general, maintenance is defined as the work performed to keep a system in good condition and working order. The primary goal of maintenance is to avoid or mitigate the consequences of failures and hence provide economical and reliable operation of a system.According to Wang (2002), maintenance can be classified into two basic types: (a) corrective maintenance and (b) preventive maintenance. The corrective maintenance is the action performed as a result of failure in order to restore a system to a specified condition, e.g., repair of a television set when it fails. On the other hand, the preventive maintenance is the action performed with an attempt to retain a system in a specified condition, e.g., periodic maintenance of an airliner, oil change of a car, etc. Of the two maintenance types, preventive maintenance is the work, including test, measurement, adjustment and part replacements, performed specifically to prevent failures from occurring. Good preventive maintenance policies may reduce the probability of breakdown and hence increase the productivity of a system.Among various decision problems in preventive maintenance, this study focuses on the scheduling problem, which is the problem of allocating resources over time to perform maintenance activities while considering system-specific requirements such as available workforce and working time limitation. More specifically, the problem has two main decisions: due-date and actual start time of each maintenance activity. The due-date, determined by the operation schedule of the corresponding system component, is the time at which the maintenance activity is to be started, and the start time, together with the duration, determines the shutdown time of the corresponding system component. Here, the shutdown time, especially important in electric power or chemical plants, is the time over which the corresponding system component is stopped.The previous studies on preventive maintenance scheduling can be classified by application areas. One of major application areas is power plants on which the earlier studies were done by Zurn and Quintana (1975), Dopaz and Merril (1975), and Egan et al. (1976). Later, Satoh and Nara (1991) suggest a simulated annealing algorithm that determines the maintenance schedule and the generator output for a power generator unit while satisfying the limited workforce and the anticipated power demands for the objective of minimizing the sum of electric production and maintenance costs. Dahal and Chakpitak (2007) suggest various meta-heuristics that determine the maintenance schedule of a power generator unit under the reliability measure of minimizing the sum of squares of the reserve generation. The meta-heuristic approach is justified since most maintenance scheduling problems are NP-hard. Alardhi and Labib (2008) develop an integer programming model for generation and desalination units in a cogeneration plant that generates electric power and produces fresh water by desalting sea water at the same time. For other models and algorithms for maintenance scheduling in power and other plant types, see Alkhamis and Yellen (1995), Kralj and Petrovic (1988, 1995), Marwali and Shahidehpour (1999), Burke and Smith (2000), El-Sharkh and El-Keib (2003), Cheung and Hui (2004), Gharbi and Kenne (2005), and Alardhi et al. (2007), Feng et al. (2009), and Fetant and Shafipour (2011).Transportation facilities, such as railways, ships, and airplanes, are other major application areas. Higgins (1998) reports an improvement over the conventional manual method by suggesting a tabu search algorithm for the maintenance and crew scheduling problem in a railway track for the objective of minimizing the disruption to and from scheduled trains and the completion times of maintenance activities. Budai et al. (2006) suggest heuristic algorithms that determine the schedules of routine (cyclic) and project (non-cyclic) maintenance activities in railway maintenance for the objective of minimizing the sum of track possession and maintenance costs. Also, Joo (2009) consider the problem for a modularly designed engine installed in advanced jet trainers with limited spare modules, and suggest a dynamic programming algorithm that minimizes the total opportunity costs associated with premature maintenance. Deris et al. (1999) consider the problem of determining the schedule of cyclic maintenance activities of a battleship in a squadron for the objective of maximizing the availability of ship operation under time window and resource constraints, and suggest a genetic algorithm after formulating it as a constraint satisfaction problem.This study considers the preventive maintenance scheduling problem for containerships, called the containership maintenance scheduling problem (C-MSP) in this paper. The problem is to determine operation and maintenance schedules at the same time for a containership during its sailing from a start to a destination port. The operation schedule specifies the working times of subsystems and the maintenance schedule specifies the start time of each maintenance activity. The two schedules have a close relationship in that the operation schedule specifies the due-date of each maintenance activity, i.e., the expected time at which the corresponding maintenance activity is to be started. To cope with the just-in-time maintenance management, this study considers the objective of minimizing the sum of deviations between the due-dates and the start times of maintenance activities, i.e., total earliness and tardiness.To the best of authors’ knowledge, there is no previous study on ship maintenance scheduling while a ship sails according to a navigation schedule, i.e., a sequence of ports to be visited. For example, Deris et al. (1999) consider a ship maintenance scheduling problem while the ship is in a dockyard, i.e., maintenance activities of a ship are carried out only when it is in dockyard. Unlike this, we consider the problem while a ship is on a voyage. Also, compared with other maintenance scheduling for plants and railways, the C-MSP considered in this study has containership-specific considerations, e.g., navigation schedule, subsystem operation schedule, maintenance activity types, working time limitation, workforce availability, inter-maintenance time constraint, etc. These constraints will be explained in the next section.To represent the problem mathematically, a mixed integer programming model is suggested that incorporates the containership-specific constraints. Then, due to the complexity of the problem, we suggest a heuristic algorithm that determines operation and maintenance schedules at the same time. The heuristic suggested in this study consists of two main phases: constructing an initial solution and improvement. To show the performance of the heuristic, computational experiments were done on various test instances and the results are reported. In particular, a case study was done on a real instance and a significant amount of improvement is reported over the conventional method.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the problem is described in more details and the mixed integer programming model is presented. Section 3 presents the heuristic, and the results on computational tests are reported in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper with a summary and discussion of future research.This section presents the C-MSP considered in this study. First, we explain maintenance activities of a containership while illustrating its sailing schedule. Then, the problem is described mathematically with a mixed integer programming model.As stated earlier, a containership sails according to a pre-determined navigation schedule from a start to a destination port. Fig. 1shows an example of navigation schedule, adopted from a Korean shipping company, i.e., Korea (Ulsan) – Korea (Pusan) – Korea (Kwangyang) – China (Shanghai) – China (Hong Kong) – Malaysia (Portkelang) – Singapore – Malaysia (Pasir gudang) – China (Hong Kong) – China (Shanghai) – Korea (Uslan). Recall that the maintenance activities of a containership are done during its sailing from the start to the destination port.To explain the containership maintenance activities, a containership layout is shown in Fig. 2. In the figure, we can see that the containership has parallel and identical subsystems, e.g., four generator engines, two fuel oil purifiers, two lubricating purifiers, three air compressors, etc. During a sailing, some of the parallel subsystems are operated according to the operation schedule that specifies their working times. To complete a sailing successfully, the operation schedule must satisfy some practical constraints, e.g., the main propulsion engine must operate during sailing, but stop operating while the containership is anchored in a port.The maintenance activities of a containership, performed during its sailing, can be classified into two basic types: (a) routine maintenance activities and (b) operation-level maintenance activities. A routine activity, such as simple inspection and repair, is cyclic and deterministic one, while operation-level activity, such as part replacements, is the one performed at the time after the cumulative usage time reaches a pre-determined value. For example, an inspection of a cam shaft within the generator engine is a routine maintenance activity while a replacement of a piston ring within the main propulsion engine is an operation-level maintenance activity.Now, the C-MSP considered in this study can be briefly described as follows. For a given planning horizon, the problem is to determine operation and maintenance schedules for subsystems within a containership while satisfying subsystem requirements and containership-specific constraints for the objective of minimizing the total earliness and tardiness. It is assumed that the planning horizon, determined by the navigation schedule, consists of discrete periods, e.g., 1month (planning horizon) with 30days (day unit periods) or 720hours (hour unit periods). For each maintenance activity, the due-date, the period at which the activity is to be started, is determined by the operation schedule of the corresponding subsystem. Also, the start time, the period at which the maintenance activity will be actually started, is determined by the maintenance schedule. Therefore, the two sets of decision variables, operation and maintenance schedules, are closely interrelated. Recall that the due-date of an operation-level maintenance activity is determined by the number of periods for which the corresponding subsystem is to be operated, i.e., cumulative usage time.For a clear understanding, operation and maintenance schedules are illustrated in Fig. 3. In the operation schedule given in Fig. 3a, the value in a cell is equal to 1 if the corresponding subsystem is planned to be operated in the corresponding period, and 0 otherwise. For example, the main propulsion engine is idle in periods 5 and 6 during which the containership is anchored in a port. Also, Fig. 3b shows the maintenance schedule corresponding to the operation schedule. In the figure, shaded cells represent due-dates of maintenance activities, each of which is specified by the operation schedule and the maintenance types (routine and operation-level maintenances). As in Fig. 3a, the value in a cell is equal to 1 if the maintenance activity is planned to be done on the corresponding subsystem. For example, the maintenances of the main propulsion engine are done in periods 5 and 6.This study considers the objective of minimizing the sum of total deviations between due-dates and start times of maintenance activities, i.e., minimizing the sum of earliness and tardiness. Here, the earliness (tardiness) for a maintenance activity occurs when its start time is less (greater) than its due-date. In general, the concept of earliness and tardiness emerges from the just-in time production and hence the objective pursues timely maintenance. Also, in the practical aspect, the earliness reduces the level of worker satisfaction and the tardiness increases the probability of subsystem breakdowns. It is assumed that earliness and tardiness have the same importance with the same weight value 1, i.e., time unit.The C-MSP considered in this study has four types of constraints: (a) subsystem requirements; (b) workforce availability; (c) working time limitation; and (d) inter-maintenance time constraint. First, the subsystem requirements imply the set of subsystems that must be operated in each period. Here, the subsystem requirements are obtained from the basic load condition, i.e., the smallest subsystem requirements for normal containership operation. In other words, it specifies the set of subsystems that must work in a period for proper operation of a containership. For example, each of a single subsystem and at least one of parallel subsystems must be operated during sailing, all subsystems must be operated when entering and leaving a port, the main propulsion engine must be stopped in a port, etc. An example of subsystem requirements is shown in Fig. 4in which the number in each cell implies the number of subsystems per type that must be operated in the corresponding period. Second, the workforce availability implies the number of available workers in each period. Third, the working time limit implies the upper limit on the working time in each period. Finally, the inter-maintenance time constraint implies that the interval between two consecutive activities must be large than or equal to a pre-specified number of periods.It is assumed that there are no changes in the sailing schedule of a containership. Also, the duration of each maintenance activity is deterministic and given in advance. Besides these, other assumptions made are summarized as: (a) each worker is capable of performing at most one maintenance activity at a time; (b) maintenance activities are non-preemptive, i.e., once an activity is started, it will stay without interruption until its completion; (c) usage times of subsystems are deterministic and given in advance; and (d) inter-maintenance time of each activity is deterministic and given in advance.To represent the problem more clearly, a mixed integer programming model is suggested in this study. Before presenting the model, the notations used are summarized below.Indicesmsubsystem types, m=1, 2, 3, …, Miidentical subsystems of type m, i=1, 2, 3, …, Imamaintenance activities for subsystem i of type m, a∈Ami, whereAmi=Ami′∪Ami″(Ami′andAmi″denote the sets of routine and operation-level maintenance activities for subsystem i of type m, respectively. The required subscripts i and m are omitted for notational simplicity.)dperiod (day unit), d=1, 2, …, Dkperiod (hour unit), k=1, 2, 3, …, K, where K=D·R (R denotes the working hours per day, e.g., 24hours/day.)qfrequency of maintenance activity a for subsystem i of type m, q=1, 2, 3, …, FRmia, where FRmiadenotes the maximum number of maintenance activities of type a that can be done on subsystem i of type m during the planning horizon (The required subscripts i, m and a are omitted for notational simplicity.)ParametersOPmkrequirement of subsystem of type m to operate the containership in period k (number unit)TOmitotal usage time of subsystem i of type m over the planning horizon (hour unit) (This parameter must satisfy ΣiTOmi=ΣkOPmk.)DUmiaduration of maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type m (hour unit)Cmianumber of inter-maintenance periods for maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type m (hour unit)Vmiaminimum number of inter-maintenance periods for maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type m (hour unit) (This parameter must satisfy Vmia⩽Cmia.)Gmianumber of elapsed periods for maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type m at the beginning of the planning horizon (hour unit)WFmianumber of workers needed to perform maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type mWTtotal available working hours per dayWFtotal number of workersDecision variablesXmik=1if subsystem i of type m operates in period k, and 0 otherwiseDDmiaqk=1if due-date of qth maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type m is fixed in period k, and 0 otherwiseSmiaqk=1if qth maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type m starts in period k, and 0 otherwiseYmiaqk=1if qth maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type m is performed in period k, and 0 otherwiseEmiaqamount of earliness of the qth maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type mTmiaqamount of tardiness of the qth maintenance activity a on subsystem i of type mNow, the mixed integer programming model is given below. In the formulation, the parameter FRmia, the maximum number of maintenance activity a that can be done on subsystem i of type m, can be obtained from ⌊(TOmi+Gmia)/Gmia⌋, where ⌊•⌋ denotes the smallest integer that is greater than equal to •.(1)[P]Minimize∑m=1M∑i=1Im∑a∈Ami∑q=1FRmia(Emiaq+Tmiaq)subjectto∑i=1ImXmik=OPmkforallmandk(2)∑k=1KXmik=TOmiforallmandi(3)∑k=1k′Xmik⩾(Cmia·q-Gmia)·DDmiaqk′forallm,i,a∈Ami″,qandk′(4)∑k=1k′Xmik⩽TOmi-[TOmi-(Cmia·q-Gmia)]·DDmiaqk′forallm,i,a∈Ami″,qandk′(5)Xmik⩾DDmiaqkforallm,i,a∈Ami″,qandk(6)(Cmia·q-Gmia)·DDmiaqk⩽kforallm,i,a∈Ami′,qandk(7)[K-(Cmia·q-Gmia)]·DDmiaqk⩽K-kforallm,i,a∈Ami′,qandk(8)∑k=1KDDmiaqk=1forallm,i,aandq(9)∑k=1KSmiaqk=1forallm,i,aandq(10)∑k=1K(k·Smiaqk)+Emiaq-Tmiaq=∑k=1Kk·DDmiaqkforallm,i,aandq(11)∑k=1K[(k+Vmia)·Smiaqk]⩽∑k=1Kk·Smia(q+1)kforallm,i,aandq(12)Xmik+Ymiaqk⩽1forallm,i,a,qandk(13)Xmik+Smiaqk⩽1forallm,i,a,qandk(14)1-Ymiaqk′=1-k′+(d-1)·R+∑k=(d-1)·R+1k′(1-Smiaqk)(d-1)·R+1⩽k′⩽(d-1)·R+DUmia1-DUmia+∑k=1+k′-DUmiak′(1-Smiaqk)(d-1)·R+DUmia+1⩽k′⩽d·Rforallm,i,a,qandd(15)∑k=(d-1)·R+1d·R-DUmia+1Smiaqk⩽1forallm,i,a,qandd(16)∑k=d·R-DUmia+2d·RSmiaqk=0forallm,i,a,qandd(17)∑m=1M∑i=1Im∑a∈Ami∑q=1FRmia(WFmia·Ymiaqk)⩽WFforallk(18)∑m=1M∑i=1Im∑a∈Ami∑q=1FRmia∑k=(d-1)·R+1d·R(DUmia·Ymiaqk)⩽WTforalld(19)Xmik∈{0,1}forallm,iandk(20)Ymiaqk,Smiaqk,DDmiaqk∈{0,1}forallm,i,a,qandk(21)Emiaq,Tmiaq⩾0forallm,i,aandqThe objective function, together with constraint (10), minimizes the sum of earliness and tardiness. Constraint (1) represents subsystem requirements, i.e., number of operating subsystems of each type in each period, and constraint (2) ensures the total usage time of each subsystem. Constraints (3)–(5) specify the due-dates of operation-level maintenance activities using the cumulative usage time. More specifically, constraints (3) and (4) specify the possible periods that the due-date is set from the first to the last period and from the last to the first period, respectively. For example, see Fig. 5for an 8-period problem. Let Cmia(inter-maintenance periods), Gmia(elapsed periods) and TOmi(total usage time) be 2, 0 and 6, respectively. Also, let the subsystem operation schedule (Xmik) be 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1 and 1 over the planning horizon. Consider the first maintenance activity, i.e., q=1. Then, we obtain the following inequality according to constraint (3)2·DDmia1k′⩽∑k=1k′Xmikforallk′,which implies that its due-date can be set from period 3 to 8 as in Fig. 5a, i.e., the first two periods cannot be set as the due-date. Similarly, according to constraint (4), we can obtain the inequality6-4·DDmia1k′⩾∑k=1k′Xmikforallk′,which implies that its due-date can be set from period 1 to 4 as in Fig. 5b, i.e., the last four periods cannot be set as the due-date. Then, the intersection of the two sets of periods derived from constraints (3) and (4) becomes periods 3 and 4. Finally, according to constraint (5), the period to which the due-date can be assigned becomes only 3. Here, if the possible periods are more than one, the resulting due-date can be set with constraint (8) that ensures only one due-date be assigned to each maintenance activity. Similarly, constraints (6) and (7) specify the possible periods that the due-dates of routine maintenance activities can be assigned. Constraint (9) ensures that only one start period is assigned to each maintenance activity. Constraint (10) specifies the amount of earliness or tardiness for each maintenance activity, and constraint (11) ensures that the inter-maintenance periods between two consecutive activities be satisfied. Constraints (12) and (13) ensure that no subsystem can work at a period when the corresponding maintenance activity is done at that period. Constraint (14) ensures that each maintenance activity can be performed without interruption by the amount of its duration, which can be reformulated as follows:(14′)Ymiaqk′=∑k=1+max{k′-DU,(d-1)R}k′Smiaqkforallm,i,a,qanddAlso, constraints (15) and (16) specify the range of period in which each maintenance activity can be started. For example, let DUmia(duration), d (day unit period) and R (working hours per day) be 4, 1 and 8. Then, Smiaqkand Ymiaqkcan be set as in Fig. 6Also, as can be seen in Fig. 7, the possible range of the start period becomes 1–5 since (d−1)·R+1=1 and d·R−DUmia+1=5. Constraints (17) and (18) represent the workforce and the working time limitations, respectively. Finally, the remaining constraints (19)–(21) represent the feasible values of the decision variables.The optimal solutions can be obtained by solving the model [P] directly using a commercial software package. However, it is not practical due to excessive computation time. In fact, we failed to solve some practical instances using the CPLEX 11.0. Although it is not proved in this study that the problem is NP-hard, it can be conjectured that the problem is NP-hard since it contains the well-known knapsack constraints, i.e., the workforce and the working time constraints, and various binary variables.The solution algorithm suggested in this study consists of two phases: (a) constructing an initial solution and (b) improvement. In the construction phase, the due-date of each maintenance activity is assigned to a certain period after fixing the subsystem operation schedule and then the start time of each maintenance activity is determined as the nearest period from its due-date while considering the relevant constraints. In the improvement phase, the initial solution is improved by changing due-dates of maintenance activities, i.e., changing subsystem operation schedules.Before explaining the details, an overview of the solution algorithm is shown in Fig. 8. As can be seen in the figure, the final solution is the best one among those obtained from performing the two phases for a pre-determined number of iterations. In this figure, NIdenotes the number of iterations.In this phase, an initial solution is obtained by three main steps: (a) generating a subsystem operation schedule; (b) assigning the due-date of each maintenance activity; and (c) determining the start time of each maintenance activity.First, the subsystem operation schedule (Xmik) is generated randomly until a feasible solution is obtained while satisfying subsystem requirements (OPmk) and total usage time (TOmi). Two cases, single and parallel subsystems, are considered in this step. In the case of single subsystem, the operation schedule is fixed to the corresponding subsystem requirements, i.e., Xmik=OPmk. On the other hand, in the case of parallel subsystems, the operation schedules are generated randomly while satisfying their subsystem requirements and total usage time, i.e., ΣiXmik=OPmkand ΣkXmik=TOmi.Second, the due-date of each maintenance activity (DDmiaqk) is assigned differently according to the maintenance types. In the case of operation-level activities, their due-dates are determined according to cumulative usage times. More specifically, they are determined randomly among those specified by constraints 3, 4, 5 and 8 that specify the possible periods to which the due-dates of operation-level activities can be assigned. Similarly, the due-dates of routine activities are determined randomly in such a way that constraints (6)–(8) are satisfied.Finally, the start time of each maintenance activity (Smiaqk) is determined as follows. First, the maintenance activities are sorted using a priority rule. For this purpose, the following three priority rules are suggested in this study. (Ties are broken by giving a higher priority to the activity with lower frequency index q.)DU higher priority given to the activity with larger duration.WF higher priority given to the activity with larger number of required workers.DW higher priority given to the activity with larger one among those obtained by multiplying duration and number of workers.Then, according to the sorted list, the start time of each maintenance activity is determined for single and parallel subsystems. The detailed methods are explained below.For each single subsystem, the start time of a maintenance activity is set to the period that gives the smallest earliness or tardiness, i.e.(22)argmink′∈SPmiaq|DDmiaq-k′|,where SPmiaqis the set of periods to which the qth maintenance activity a on single subsystem i of type m can be assigned while satisfying the relevant constraints, i.e., inter-maintenance periods between two consecutive activities (11), no working subsystems during maintenance (12) and (13), no interruption of maintenance activities (14), possible start periods (15) and (16) and workforce and the working time limitations (17) and (18). If SPmiaq=∅, the start time of the directly preceding (q−1) th activity is set to the period that gives the second smallest earliness or tardiness and then the start time of the current qth activity is set. This is done repeatedly until feasible start times are obtained. (Ties are broken arbitrarily.)For each of parallel subsystems, the start time is also set to the period that gives the smallest earliness or tardiness. However, the operation schedule of parallel subsystems must be changed when the start time does not satisfy the relevant constraints. In other words, if a subsystem operates during the maintenance activity, i.e., Xmik=1 for some i and k such that Smiaq⩽k⩽Smiaq+DUmia−1, the operation schedules of the corresponding parallel subsystems are changed until the start time satisfies the relevant constraints. More formally, another subsystem i′ (≠i) of the same type is selected that satisfy the following conditions (from the smallest to the largest indexed one)(C1)Xmi′k=0and∑a∈A∑q=1FRmiaYmi′aqk=0,which ensure that no operation and maintenance activities be done on the subsystem i′ in the current period k. Then, for the selected subsystem i′, the new period k′ is selected (from the smallest to the largest indexed one) in such a way that the following conditions hold.(C2)Xmik′=0and∑a∈A∑q=1FRmiaYmiaqk′=0,(C3)Xmi′k′=1,(C4)Smiaq+DUmia⩽k′⩽K.Here, condition (C2) ensures that no operation and maintenance activities are done on subsystem i in period k′, and conditions (C3) and (C4) specify the set of possible new periods. If the set of possible periods is empty, another period is selected (from the smallest to the largest indexed one) that satisfies (C1), (C2), and (C3) and 1⩽k′⩽Smiaq– 1 for the selected subsystem i′. For the current and the selected subsystems i and i′ in the current and the new periods k and k′, their operation schedules are changed as follows.Xmik=0,Xmi′k=1,Xmik′=1andXmi′k′=0.Then, the start time of the current activity is determined using the method explained earlier. Here, the due-dates of the operation-level activities for the other subsystems of the same type are reassigned among those specified by conditions (C1), (C2), (C3), and (C4) since their operation schedules have been changed.Now, the procedure for the construction phase is summarized below.Phase I (Constructing an initial solution).Step 1:(Generate the subsystem operation schedule) For each subsystem type, do:If there is a single subsystem, set its operation schedule to its requirements. Otherwise, generate the operation schedules of the parallel subsystems randomly so as to satisfy the subsystem requirements and the total usage times, i.e., constraints (1) and (2).(Assign the due-date of each maintenance activity) For each maintenance activity, do:If the current activity is operation-level, assign its due-date randomly as one of those specified by constraints (3)–(5). Otherwise, assign its due-date randomly to one of those specified by constraints (6) and (7).(Determine the start time of each maintenance activity)Step 3.1Sort maintenance activities with a priority rule. (Ties broken by giving a higher priority to the activity with lower frequency index q.)From the first to the last activity in the sorted list, do:(a)If the activity is associated with a single subsystem, do:(a-1)Specify the set SPmiaqof periods that the activity can be started while satisfying the constraints (11)–(18) except for the periods considered previously.If SPmiaq≠∅, set its start time to the period that gives the smallest earliness or tardiness from its due-date, i.e., condition (22). Otherwise, set q=q−1 and go to Step 3.2(a-1).Otherwise (parallel subsystems), do:(b-1)Specify the set SPmiaqof periods that the activity can be started while satisfying the constraints 11, (12), (13), (15)–(17) and (18) except for the periods considered previously.If SPmiaq≠∅, set its start time to the period that gives the smallest earliness or tardiness from its due-date. Otherwise, set q=q−1 and go to Step 3.2(b-1).If the start time of the current activity does not satisfy the constraints, select another subsystem of the same type and the new period, and then, change the operation schedules of the current and the selected subsystems in the current and the new periods using the method explained earlier. Then, set its start time as in Step 3.2(b-2). After reassigning the due-dates of the operation-level activities for the other subsystems of the same type randomly among those specified by constraints (3)–(5), go to Step 3.2(b-1).In this phase, the initial solution is improved by changing the subsystem operation schedules of operation-level maintenance activities on parallel subsystems. Note that the start times, determined in Phase 1, are remained unchanged while their due-dates can be changed according to the new subsystem operation schedules.First, the operation-level maintenance activities are sorted using the method explained in Step 3.1 of Phase I, i.e., sort maintenance activity using a priority rule (DU, WF or DW), together with breaking ties using the frequency index.Second, according to the sorted list, the operation schedules of the parallel subsystems associated with the current activity are changed in such a way that the deviation between the start time and the due-date is reduced. Two cases, tardy and early maintenance activities, are considered in this step.If the current activity is tardy, i.e., Smiaq>DDmiaq, the operation schedules of the current and another subsystems of the same type are changed if an improved solution is obtained. More formally, the current period k is selected (from the smallest to the largest indexed one) such that(C5)Xmik=1and1⩽k⩽DDmiaq,i.e., subsystem i is operated in the current period k before the due-date of the current activity, and another subsystem i′ (≠i) of the same type is selected (from the smallest to the largest indexed one) that satisfy the following condition(C6)Xmi′k=0and∑a∈A∑q=1FRmiaYmi′aqk=0,which means that no operation and maintenance activities are done on the new subsystem i′ in the current period k. Then, a new period k′ is selected (from the smallest to the largest indexed one) that satisfy the following conditions.(C7)Xmik′=0and∑a∈A∑q=1FRmiaYmiaqk′=0(C8)Xmi′k′=1andDDmiaq<k′⩽K.Here, conditions (C7) and (C8) imply that no operation and maintenance activities are done on the current subsystem i in the new period k′ and subsystem i′ must operate in the new period k′ after the due-date of the current activity, respectively. Finally, the current solution is updated if we can obtain an improved solution after changing the operation schedules of subsystems i and i′ in periods k and k′ as follows.Xmik=0,Xmi′k=1,Xmik′=1andXmi′k′=0,On the other hand, if the current activity is early, i.e., Smiaq<DDmiaq, selected is another subsystem i′ (≠i), together with periods k and k′ that satisfy (C6), (C7) and(C9)Xmik=1andDDmiaq⩽k⩽K(C10)Xmi′k′=1and1⩽k′⩽DDmiaq.The others are the same as the tardy case.Now, the detailed procedure for the improvement phase is summarized below.Phase II (Improvement).Step 1:Sort the operation-level maintenance activities as in Step 3.1 of Phase I.From the first to the last activity in the sorted list, do:(a)If the current activity is tardy, i.e., Smiaq>DDmiaq, select another subsystem i′ (≠i), together with periods k and k′, which satisfy the conditions (C5), (C6), (C7) and (C8). Otherwise, select another subsystem i′ (≠i), together with periods k and k′, which satisfying the conditions (C9), (C6), (C7), and (C10).If an improved solution is obtained after changing the operation schedules of subsystems i and i′ in periods k and k′ asTo show the performance of the heuristic suggested in this study, computational experiments were carried out and the results are reported in this section. Two types of experiments were performed in this study: (a) test on randomly generated instances and (b) test on real data. Note that we tested three heuristics according to the three priority rules to sort the maintenance activities. The heuristics were coded in C, and tests were carried out on a personal computer with Intel i5 processor operating at 2.80GHz clock speed.For the test on random instances, we generated 80 small sized instances, i.e., 10 instances for each of eight combinations of two levels of workforce capacity (tight with 8 workers and loose with 10 workers), two levels of the number of periods (24 (3days with 8hours/day) and 30 (3days with 10hours/day)) and two levels of the number of subsystem types (3 and 4). The number of identical subsystems for each subsystem type was generated from U(1,3), where U(a,b) denotes the discrete uniform distribution with range [a,b]. The subsystem requirements in each period of the planning horizon (OPmk) were generated randomly using the basic load condition. Also, the number of maintenance activities for each subsystem was generated from U(1,4). For instances with 24 periods, the duration (DUmia), the inter-maintenance time (Cmia), the number of required workers (WFmia), the elapsed number of periods (Gmia) and the minimum inter-maintenance time (Vmia) of each maintenance activity were generated from U(1,3), U(7,16), U(1,3), U(0,9) and U(0,1), respectively. Similarly, for the instances with 30 periods, they were generated from U(1,4), U(11,22), U(1,4), U(0,10) and U(1,2), respectively. Finally, the total available working hours per day (WT) were set to 32 and 40 for 24 and 30 periods, respectively. The data generation method for the small sized test instances are summarized in Table 1.Test results for the small sized instances are summarized in Table 2that shows the percentage gaps from the optimal solution values (or lower bounds) and CPU seconds. Here, the optimal solutions (or lower bounds) were obtained by solving the mixed integer programming model [P] using CPLEX 11.0 under the time limit of 3600seconds. Note that the CPU time required by CPLEX is omitted here because most instances were not solved optimally within 3600seconds. Also, the iteration number (NI) was set to 1000. It can be seen from the table that among the three rules that sort the maintenance activities, the DW and WF rules were slightly better than the DU rule in overall average, especially when the workforce capacity is loose. However, no one rule dominates the others. In fact, the overall average gaps of the DW (WF) rule were 11.0% (11.1%) and 8.5% (8.0%) for the instances with tight and loose workforce capacities, respectively. Also, the gaps get higher as the number of subsystem types increases. Finally, compared with CPLEX 11.0, the CPU seconds of the heuristics were very short.Also, we tested the heuristics on 30 additional medium to large sized instances, i.e., 10 instances for each of three combinations of the numbers of subsystem types and periods (5 subsystem types with 96 periods, 6 subsystem types with 120 periods, and 7 subsystem types with 144 periods). The data generation method for the medium to large sized test instances is summarized in Table 3. Since we could not obtain the optimal solutions or effective lower bounds for medium to large sized instances, the three heuristics were compared using the relative performance ratio, which is defined as100·(Ch-Cbest)/Cbest,where Chis the objective value obtained using heuristic h and Cbestis the best solution value among those obtained from the three heuristics.Results of the medium to large sized instances are summarized in Table 4that shows the average relative performance ratios of the three heuristics. In the test, the iteration number (NI) was set to 100. As in those for the small sized instances, no one rule dominates the others. However, among the three priority rules, the WF rule (that gives higher priority given to the activity with larger number of required workers) was better than the others.The final test was done on real data. First, the sailing schedule with 528 periods (22days and 24hours) is given in Fig. 1. In this case, the numbers of workers, subsystem types and maintenance activities, were 7, 6 and 14, respectively. The test results are shown in Fig. 9that summarizes the earliness and tardiness of each activity for the conventional method (square shaped line) and the best one among the three heuristics (diamond shaped line), i.e., the heuristic with the WF rule. Here, the conventional method is the current one to obtain the operation and maintenance schedules for the case, i.e., no systematic procedure based on the manager’s experience. As can be seen in the figure, there is a significant amount of improvement, i.e., the total deviation was reduced by 17.9days.This study considered the problem of determining subsystem operation and maintenance schedules for a containership during its sailing from start to destination port. The two schedules have a close relationship in that the operation schedule specifies the due-date of each maintenance activity, i.e., the time at which the corresponding maintenance activity is to be started, and the maintenance schedule specifies the start time of each maintenance activity. To perform timely maintenance, we consider the objective of minimizing the sum of deviations between the due-dates and the start times, i.e., total earliness and tardiness. Compared with other maintenance scheduling for plants and railways, the problem considered in this study has containership-specific considerations such as sailing schedule, subsystem operation schedule, maintenance activity types (routine and operation-level), workforce availability, working time limitation and inter-maintenance time constraint. To represent the problem mathematically, a mixed integer programming model is suggested, and then a heuristic algorithm is suggested that consists of two phases: obtaining an initial solution and improvement. Computational experiments were done on a number of randomly generated test instances and the results showed that the WF and the DW rules are slightly better than the DU rule. In particular, we report a significant amount of improvement on a real case.As a beginning study on the new containership maintenance scheduling problem, this research can be extended in several ways. First, one may consider other features of real-life containership, e.g., bunkering of containership, general load condition, system deteriorations, weather condition during sailing, etc. Here, the bunkering implies the maintenance activities are stopped while refueling is done, and the general load condition represents the changes in the number of operating subsystems during sailing. Second, it is needed to develop more systematic algorithms, especially the method to generate subsystem operation schedules. Third, the model can be extended to include other decision problems, e.g., workforce management, maintenance crew scheduling, etc. Finally, it is needed to extend the application areas of the model to other systems such as plants and other transportation equipment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
