@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bricks vs. clicks: Which is better for marketing remanufactured products?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Selling remanufactured products via e-channel (Model M) or third-party (Model 3P).There is a larger (smaller) quantity of remanufactured (new) products in Model M.More importantly, Model M is always greener than Model 3P.Although Model M is greener than Model 3P, firms are reluctant to adopt it.The more retailers in the market, the greener Model M relative to Model 3P.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Distribution channels,Remanufacturing,Environmental impact,Game theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The economical and environmental benefits are the central issues for remanufacturing. Whereas extant remanufacturing research focuses primarily on such issues in remanufacturing technologies, production planning, inventory control and competitive strategies, we provide an alternative yet somewhat complementary approach to consider both issues related to different channels structures for marketing remanufactured products. Specifically, based on observations from current practice, we consider a manufacturer sells new units through an independent retailer but with two options for marketing remanufactured products: (1) marketing through its own e-channel (Model M) or (2) subcontracting the marketing activity to a third party (Model 3P). A central result we obtain is that although Model M is always greener than Model 3P, firms have less incentive to adopt it because both the manufacturer and retailer may be worse off when the manufacturer sells remanufactured products through its own e-channel rather than subcontracting to a third party. Extending both models to cases in which the manufacturer interacts with multiple retailers further reveals that the more retailers in the market, the greener Model M relative to Model 3P.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is profitable for a firm to engage in remanufacturing, because remanufacturing conserves not only the raw material content but also much of the value added during the processes required to manufacture new products (Giuntini and Gaudette, 2003). Overall, remanufacturing saves the company 40–65 percent in manufacturing costs (Ginsburg, 2001). As a result, more and more manufacturers, including Apple, Canon, HP, Lenovo, and Panasonic, have created business models in which remanufacturing is an integral part (Apple, 2014; Canon, 2014; HP, 2014; Lenovo, 2014; Panasonic, 2014). Moreover, remanufacturing can bring great environmental benefits, since it can eliminate the returned cores’ disposal impact, and consumes fewer natural resources and less energy than manufacturing new products. On the whole, remanufacturing a product requires only about 15 percent of the energy used to make the product from scratch (Giuntini and Gaudette, 2003). Therefore, governments and environmental groups spare no effort to encourage firms to engage in remanufacturing. For example, The Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) directive in the European Union promotes “extended producer responsibility” with which all original equipment manufacturers are required to take responsibility for treating and recycling their new products when the products are no longer wanted by their owner.Although interest in the management of remanufacturing has increased noticeably in the past decade, extant remanufacturing research focuses primarily on remanufacturing technologies, production planning, inventory control and competitive strategies (Fleischmann et al., 1997; Ferguson and Toktay, 2006). To the best of our knowledge, there is little literature addressing the economical and environmental benefits related to different channels structures for marketing remanufactured products. Yet marketing remanufactured products poses a number of questions related to the distribution channel decision. For example, there are many obstacles for retailers to market remanufactured products together with new ones: firstly, remanufactured products are often offered at a reduced price, which raises concerns that they may cannibalize the sales of higher margin new products and discourages retailers from offering remanufactured products. Secondly, some legislation such as the Sales of Goods Act (SoGA) appears to discourage retailers from retailing remanufactured products (Gray and Charter, 2008). Thirdly, selling remanufactured products through the retailer channel may do harm to the manufacturer. For example, in 2010, HP was involved in a scandal of selling remanufactured computers11The definition of remanufactured products can be found in Williamson et al. (2012). And note that some firms may use different terms for remanufactured, such as “refurbished,” “rebuilt,” “recycled,” etc. We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.in China: Hong Hengchang, the biggest dealer of HP and Acer in Asia, makes false representations in selling remanufactured HP computers as new and does incalculable harm to HP’s reputation (Lin, 2010). Similar case also appears between DELL and its reseller (i.e., TigerDirect).As a result, the manufacturer usually sells the remanufactured products through a manufacturer-owned e-channel Web sites, as well as auction sites such as eBay, or the authorized distributors (Ferguson and Souza, 2010).22We note that our analysis centers on how the channel decisions for remanufactured products affect all parties’ profitability as well as environmental performance. As such, whether the e-channel/third party sells new products or not is not our primary concern. We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.For example, all remanufactured Apple computers and notebooks, once collected from customers and given replacement parts for any defective modules identified in testing, are sold via Apple’s online store (Apple, 2014). Canon has similar Web sites for a wide variety of Canon’s remanufactured products, including EOS Digital SLR Cameras, PowerShot Digital Cameras, PIXMA Printers, and VIXIA Camcorders (Canon, 2014). In the second scheme, the manufacturer sells the remanufactured products via authorized third parties.33To distinguish the authorized reseller partners from those unauthorized retailers, we call them third parties.For example, Panasonic sells its remanufactured Toughbook computers through three authorized service center partners—Telrepco, Buy Tough, and Rugged Depot (Panasonic, 2014). This distribution choice is also common in automobile industry: in China, the Administrative Measures for Pilot Remanufacturing of Automobile Parts & Accessories, signed by China National Development and Reform Commission (China NDRC), requires all remanufactured automobile parts must be marked with labels for remanufactured automobile parts and only distributed by the authorized service center partners in after-sales service system, but not through the retail channels for new products (China NDRC, 2008).44We refer the interested reader to Hormozi (1997), and Ferrer and Whybark (2001) for more motivational examples in the automobile industry.In this paper, based on observations from current practice, we develop two channel models for a manufacturer sells new units through an independent retailer but with two options for marketing remanufactured products: (1) marketing through its own e-channel (Model M) or (2) subcontracting the marketing activity to a third party (Model 3P). Using these two models, we address the following research questions.(1)From the profit-maximization perspective, how do different channel structures for marketing remanufactured products affect all parties’ profitability? Which is better for the manufacturer, retailer, and third-party?From the environmental impact angle, how do different channel structures for marketing remanufactured products affect the environmental performance? Which is better for our environment?Our results show that although Model M is always greener than Model 3P, firms have less incentive to adopt it because both the manufacturer and retailer may actually be worse off under Model M than in Model 3P. Extending both our models to cases in which the manufacturer interacts with multiple retailers further reveals that the more retailers in the market, the greener Model M relative to Model 3P.Our overall contribution is twofold. First, we address an aspect mostly ignored by extant research in the remanufacturing area: the fact that manufacturers have a potential flexibility to choose different distribution channels to market their remanufactured products. In other words, rather than focusing on remanufacturing technologies, production planning, inventory control and competitive strategies, we provide an alternative yet somewhat complementary approach to consider how different channel structures for marketing remanufactured products impact all players’ profitability. Second, although the question of whether remanufacturing results in environmentally worse or improves the environmental performance has been well studied in remanufacturing literature; remanufacturing technologies, production planning, inventory control and competitive strategies concerns aside, little is known about how different channel structures for marketing remanufactured products can affect this issue. In this paper, we analyze the importance of such factor in impacting on the environmental performance.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature and explains our contributions in more detail. Section 3 describes the key elements of our basic model and introduces notations. Section 4 outlines our two models, Model M and Model 3P, and reports our main findings. Section 5 extends both models to the case in which a manufacturer interacts with multiple retailers. Section 6 concludes the paper.Although remanufacturing has been much studied, current research to this topic focuses primarily on technologies, production planning, inventory control, and competitive strategies. At first, the literature on remanufacturing technologies has been growing rapidly in the last decade. In an early study, Debo et al. (2005) and Debo et al. (2006) discuss the management of a portfolio of new and remanufactured products in a market. Robotis et al. (2009) then optimize a monopolist’s expected discounted profits and determine the optimal level of investment in reusability as well as the market prices. Subsequently, Atasu and Souza (2013) show that quality recovery and costly recovery lead to increased quality and decreased environmental impact, while profitable material recovery leads to decreased quality and increased environmental impact. Recently, Orsdemir et al. (2014) find that in the case where there is uncertainty in remanufacturing cost, the level of investment in reusability can increase with uncertainty.There is also an increased interest in researching production planning of hybrid manufacturing/remanufacturing systems. For example, DePuy et al. (2007) propose master production scheduling methods that take into account uncertainty in relation to the quality of the returned products. Denizel et al. (2010) then consider production planning for remanufacturing when inputs have different and uncertain quality levels, and there are capacity constraints. Recently, Ovchinnikov et al. (2013) provide a data-driven assessment of economic and environmental aspects of remanufacturing for product + service firms. Subsequently, Cai et al. (2014) study the acquisition and production planning problem for a hybrid manufacturing and remanufacturing system with core acquisition at high/low quality conditions. We refer the interested reader to Lage Junior and Godinho Filho (2012) for complete literature review for production planning and control in a remanufacturing environment.Inventory management of hybrid manufacturing/ remanufacturing systems is another major issue for firms. DeCroix (2006) analyze the problems into the multiechelon inventory system with used and returned products. Likewise, Gong and Chao (2013) explore a periodic-review hybrid system with inventory management for a production/remanufacturing firm. While, Georgiadis and Athanasiou (2013) deal with long-term demand-driven capacity planning policies in the reverse channel of closed-loop supply chains with remanufacturing. A review of related literature can be found in Guo et al. (2014). In addition, numerous researchers, including Majumder and Groenevelt (2001),Ferrer and Swaminathan (2006); 2010), Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006),Ovchinnikov (2011), and Bulmus et al. (2014), have studied various competitive strategies in a remanufacturing setting.Nonetheless, although a great deal of research is focused on remanufacturing, our work differs in two important aspects: First, instead of focusing on remanufacturing technologies, production planning, inventory control, and competitive strategies, we provide an alternative, complementary approach that considers how different marketing channel structures for marketing remanufactured products impact all players’ profitability. Second, although the question of whether remanufacturing results in environmentally worse or improves the environmental performance has been well studied in remanufacturing literature, none of these studies, however, pay any attention to how a manufacturer’s channel choice in marketing remanufactured products affects this issue. We, in contrast, allow the manufacturer to choose different distribution channels for marketing remanufactured products and strive to investigate its impact on the environmental performance.Our work is also closely related to the literature in marketing, operations, and economics that is associated with the use of different distribution channels. Particularly relevant is the work of Chiang et al. (2003),Tsay and Agrawal (2004),Arya et al. (2007), and Xiong et al. (2012), which focuses on competition between manufacturer-owned e-channels and independent retailers. In our analysis, rather than addressing the competition between new products from different channels, we focus on a setting when a manufacturer chooses different distribution channels to market remanufactured products and strive to investigate the competition between remanufactured and new products. Moreover, none of these studies, however, pay any attention to how a manufacturer’s channel choice impacts on environment performance. Unlike them, we investigate the impact on the environmental performance under different channel structures for marketing remanufactured products.Based on observations from current practice, we consider a manufacturer sells new units through an independent retailer but with two options for marketing remanufactured products: (1) marketing through its own e-channel (Model M, Fig. 1a) or (2) subcontracting the marketing activity to a third party (Model 3P, Fig. 1b).Our assumptions about distribution costs, consumer preferences, and the decision-making framework are as follows:Assumption 1In both models, all players have access to the same information and the sequence of events is as follows: the manufacturer announces the wholesale prices of both products, the retailer responds by determining the optimal units of selling, and the manufacturer (third party) then chooses the optimal number of remanufactured units are to be sold through the e-channel (the third party channel).The assumption that all players have access to the same information allows us to control for inefficiencies and risk-sharing issues resulting from information asymmetry (Savaskan et al., 2004). Assuming a similar sequence of events is a widespread practice in the supply chain literature (see, e.g., Arya et al., 2007; Xiong et al., 2012).Assumption 2The remanufacturing cores are derived only from new product sales; that is, any given unit has only two lives: one as a new product and one as a remanufactured product.Assumption 2 , although it precludes the possibility that a manufacturer might extract remanufacturing cores from remanufactured products, is consistent with the real world background of our topic: in electronic industries, cores obtained from remanufactured products are usually built on previous technology and thus obsolete, meaning that few firms extract remanufacturing cores from remanufactured products. We also note that Savaskan et al. (2004),Ferrer and Swaminathan (2010),Agrawal et al. (2011), and Xiong et al. (2013) all use a similar restriction when investigating remanufacturing issues.Assumption 3A consumer owns at most one product, whether new or remanufactured, and the size of the consumer population is assumed not to change over time and is normalized to 1. And consumer willingness-to-pay for a new product is heterogeneous and uniformly distributed in the interval [0, 1].Primary consumer value discount for the remanufactured product is a fraction δ (0 ≤ δ ≤ 1) of the willingness-to-pay for the new product.A consumer shows no preference between the two different marketing channels.Based on Assumptions 3–5, we can derive the inverse demand functions for new and remanufactured products from the consumer utility functions55See Ferrer and Swaminathan (2010) for the detailed derivation.:(1)pn=1−qn−δqr,(2)pr=δ(1−qn−qr).Assumption 3 is consistent with the remanufacturing literature (e.g., Ferguson and Toktay, 2006; Ferguson and Souza, 2010; Agrawal et al., 2011), for simplification, we normalized size of the potential market to 1.66Incorporating the size of the potential market complicates the problem substantially but does not affect our results. We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.It should be noted that the primary consumer value discount for the remanufactured product contributes to the problem of cannibalization between remanufactured and new units. For example, if δ = 0, consumers are willing to pay nothing for any remanufactured product, but if δ = 1, consumers see the remanufactured and new units as identical and are thus willing to pay the same amount for the remanufactured product as the valuation of new units. This lower willingness-to-pay model reflects certain key characteristics when remanufactured and new products are placed on the market simultaneously. First, it reflects customer concerns about remanufactured product quality. For example, many manufacturers, including Apple, Canon, Hewlett Packard, and Panasonic, offer a much shorter warranty for remanufactured products than for their new counterparts, leading to less consumer willingness-to-pay for a remanufactured product, which they expect will not be as good as a new product. Second, it reflects the fact that consumers want the price to be commensurate with the reality that producing a remanufactured product is less costly than making a new one. Hence, remanufacturers of short life-cycle products like cell phones and DVD players are more concerned with the availability of competing low-cost, more technologically sophisticated new products (Williamson et al., 2012).Assumption 6Marginal cost to produce a new product is cp= c > 0 and the marginal cost to make a remanufactured product is cm, to ensure that making a remanufactured product is less costly than producing a new one, we assume that cm= 0.Remanufacturing has a relative cost advantage is widely-accepted in previous research (e.g., Savaskan et al., 2004; Ferrer and Swaminathan, 2010; Zhou et al., 2013), and thus, like Arya et al. (2007) and Xiong et al. (2012), the assumption of cm= 0 is merely a convenient simplification.Assumption 7The unit cost of selling a new product via retailer is cn, while the unit cost of selling a remanufactured product via a manufacturer-owned e-channel or the third party is cr.As is apparent, we divide the cost of remanufacturing into two parts: the cost of making a remanufactured product (included the costs of collecting cores and remanufacturing) and the cost of marketing a remanufactured product. Because this assumption is a departure from the usual division in prior literature between the cost of collecting cores and the cost of making a remanufactured product (e.g., Savaskan et al., 2004; Zhou et al., 2013; Xiong et al., 2013), it deserves an extended explanation: first, in our both models, because cores are collected by manufacturer, there is no difference in the cost of collecting cores under both our models. Therefore, we need not pay any attention to the cost of collecting cores. Second, because consumers show no preference between the two different channels, we assume that the manufacturer and the third party have no incentive to make an investment on remanufactured products promotion, said differently, we assume that the unit cost of selling a remanufactured product via a manufacturer-owned e-channel equates to that of the third party.Assumption 8In both models, all decisions are considered in a single-period setting.To enable clear comparison among our models, we focus on the average supply chain profits per period and, like Savaskan et al. (2004) and Ma et al. (2013), assume that the product previously existed in the market and was thus returnable to the manufacturer for reuse.In this section, we consider our two distribution channel formats—Model M and Model 3P—in whichπuvrepresents the profit for player u under supply chain model v. Superscript v ∈ {M, 3P} denotes Model M and Model 3P, respectively, while subscript u ∈ {M, R, 3P, T} denotes the manufacturer, the retailer, the third party, and the total supply chain, respectively.In Model M, because the manufacturer can sell remanufactured products directly through its e-channel, the manufacturer’s problems are(3)maxwnπMM=(pr−cr)qr+(wn−c)qn,maxqrπMM=(pr−cr)qr+(wn−c)qn.Given the wholesale price (wnM*) and anticipating the manufacturer’s responseqrM*,the retailer’s problem is(4)maxqnπRM=(pn−wn−cn)qn.We solve these problems by using backward induction to determine the subgame perfect equilibrium: once the manufacturer’s maximization problem is solved with respect toqrM*,the retailer can maximize its profit by choosingqnM*,after which the manufacturer can do so by choosing the wholesale pricewnM*. The following proposition summarizes both parties’ optimal decisions.77For clarity, all proofs are provided in the appendix.Proposition 1In Model M, the equilibrium quantities, wholesale prices, and profits can be summarized as follows:wnM*=δ2+8+8c+(6cn−cr−6−4c)δ−8cn2(8−5δ),qrM*=3δ2+8cr−2δcn−2δc−3δcr−6δ2δ(5δ−8),qnM*=2(δ+c+cn−cr−1)(5δ−8),πMM*=(δ−cr−1)[δ(δ+1)+(8−δ)cr−8δ(c+cn)−8]−4δ(c+cn)2+5δ−84δ(5δ−8),πRM*=2(2−δ)(δ+c+cn−1−cr)2(5δ−8)2.Since the manufacturer wholesales new (remanufactured) units through an independent retailer (the third party distributor), the manufacturer optimizes(5)maxwn,wrπM3P=wrqr+(wn−c)qn.Given the wholesale prices (wn3P*andwr3P*) and anticipating the third party’s response (qr3P*), the retailer’s problem is then(6)maxqnπR3P=(pn−wn−cn)qn.Given the wholesale prices (wr3P*andwn3P*) and the retailer’s response (qn3P*), the third party’s problem is(7)maxqrπ3P3P=(pr−wr−cr)qr.We can then use standard backward induction to summarize the equilibrium quantities, wholesale prices, and profits as follows:Proposition 2In Model 3P, the equilibrium quantities, wholesale prices and profits, respectively, arewn3P*=1+c−cn2,wr3P*=δ−cr2,qr3P*=δ2−2δ−δcr−2δcn−2δc+4cr8δ(δ−2),qn3P*=2+cr−δ−2cn−2c8−4δπM3P*=(δ−cr)(δ2−2δ−δcr−2δcn−2δc+4cr)+2δ(1−c−cn)(δ+2cn+2c−2−cr)16δ(δ−2),πR3P*=(δ+2cn+2c−cr−2)232(2−δ),π3P3P*=(δ2−2δ−δcr−2δcn−2δc+4cr)264δ(δ−2)2.To ensure comparison of the interior point solutions to both models, as in Gupta and Loulou (1998),Gilbert and Cvsa (2003), and Savaskan et al. (2004), we impose the condition of 0 < qr< qn, (see Lemma 1 in Appendix C). From this condition, we derive the following assumption:Assumption 9The cost of selling a remanufactured product is not sufficiently small or large; that is,(2+δ+6c+6cn)δδ+8<cr<(2+2cn+2c−δ)δ4−δ.Assumption 9 implies that the marketing cost for a remanufactured product is neither too large (i.e.,cr<(2+2cn+2c−δ)δ4−δ), meaning that the manufacturer or third party distributor is willing to provide remanufactured products (i.e., qr> 0), nor too small (i.e.,(2+δ+6c+6cn)δδ+8<c), meaning that the retailer is willing to sell sufficient quantities of new products (i.e., qr< qn) which obtained as remanufacturing cores.Based on Propositions 1 and 2, we derive some interesting insights into different supply chain structures. First, in term of the differences in wholesale prices, we make the following observation:Remark 1The manufacturer always sets a lower wholesale price for new products in Model M than in Model 3P:wnM*<wn3P*.According to Remark 1, the manufacturer sets a lower wholesale price for new products in Model M than for similar products in Model 3P. The manufacturer does so for two reasons: first, in Model M, the unit profit from selling a remanufactured product through its own e-channel is higher than that from wholesaling a remanufactured product to the third party distributor, said differently, selling the remanufactured products through the e-channel is a more effective method. As a result, comparing with in Model 3P, the manufacturer is willing to set a lower wholesale price for new products which obtained as remanufacturing cores in Model M. Second, because earning a higher unit profit in Model M, the manufacturer has more incentives to sell more remanufactured products than in Model 3P (see Remark 2). In other words, in Model M, the retailer, who sells new products through the retail channel, faces fiercer competition from remanufactured products. Hence, to avoid reducing the retailer’s profit unduly, in Model M, the manufacturer sets a lower price for new products which distributed by the retailer.Having compared the optimal wholesale prices of both models, we now turn our attention to the equilibrium quantities; that is, we compare the optimal quantities of remanufactured and new products in both models. Based on Propositions 1 and 2, we offer the following remark:Remark 2There is a larger (smaller) quantity of remanufactured (new) products in Model M than in Model 3P; specifically,qrM*>qr3P*(qnM*<qn3P*).To explain the difference in the quantities of remanufactured (new) products, we first note that in Model 3P, the vertical competition between the manufacturer and third party induces a double marginalization problem,88As Spengler (1950) points out, all channel members independently seek to maximize their own profit, resulting in higher retail prices and lower sales quantities and profits than in a vertically integrated channel.whereas in Model M, the manufacturer sells the remanufactured products through its own e-channel. This double marginalization problem leads to lower sales quantities and profits in Model 3P than in Model M; specifically,qrM*>qr3P*. On the other hand, since earning a higher unit profit from a remanufactured product in Model M than in Model 3P, the manufacturer has more incentive to sell more remanufactured products in Model M than in Model 3P. As a result, the retailer, who sells new products through its retail channel, faces fiercer competition from remanufactured products and sells fewer new goods; specifically,qnM*<qn3P*.As regards both parties’ profitability, based on Propositions 1 and 2, we are able to summarize several key differences between the two models:Remark 3The profits of the manufacturer, retailer, and total supply chain in Model M are always smaller than those in Model 3P; specifically,πMM*<πM3P*,πRM*<πR3P*,πTM*<πT3P*.It is also worth noting that increasing the availability of remanufactured products impacts the manufacturer’s profits in two opposing ways. On the one hand, it causes the manufacturer to derive more revenue from remanufactured products; on the other, as the number of remanufactured products increases, the competition between remanufactured and new products becomes fiercer and the cannibalization effect intensifies, causing the manufacturer to derive less revenue from new products.Moreover, although the manufacturer earns a higher unit profit from a remanufactured product, giving more incentives to sell more products in Model M (i.e.,qrM*>qr3P*), she also suffers from the excessive encroachment in the retailer’s market, which leads to lower profits from new products sold through the retailer’s channel. In other words, Remark 3 shows that the profits from remanufactured products are not sufficient to compensate the “loss” from new ones; that is,πMM*<πM3P*. On the other hand, providing more (fewer) units through the e-channel (third party) means a smaller (larger) potential market for the retailer and a lower (higher) marginal revenue from new products in the retailer channel, meaning that the retailer earns less profits in Model M than in Model 3P (i.e.,πRM*<πR3P*). SinceπMM*<πM3P*andπRM*<πR3P*,the total supply chain profit in Model M is less than that in Model 3P; specifically,πTM*<πT3P*.We are now in a position to address the second question posed at the beginning of this paper: from the environmental impact angle, how do different channel structures for marketing remanufactured products affect the environmental performance? Which is better for our environment?A strategy’s environmental impact depends on the product volume in each phase multiplied by its per unit impact in each phase (White et al., 1999; Agrawal et al., 2011; Thomas, 2011). Accordingly, we draw on the previous analysis to explore the environmental impacts of both models.99We acknowledge that defining environmental impacts can be difficult, for example, it should take both in-use and non-use environmental impacts into consideration. We refer interested readers to White et al. (1999) for a complete discussion.In this analysis, we use inand iuto represent the per unit disposal impact of a new versus a remanufactured product. Since remanufacturing requires less material and energy than manufacturing new products, we make the following assumption:Assumption 10The per unit environmental impact of a new product is larger than that of a remanufactured one; that is, in> iu.We use EMand E3Pto represent the environmental impacts of Models M and 3P, respectively. Then, based on Propositions 1 and 2, and Assumption 10, we offer the following remark:Remark 4Model M is always greener than Model 3P; that is, EM< E3P.The rationale for Remark 4 is as follows: in Model M, when the manufacturer sells remanufactured products through its own e-channel, the retailer faces fiercer competition from these products and reduces the number of new products he is willing to sell (qnM*<qn3P*), which reduces the environmental impact from new products. In Model 3P, on the other hand, although the remanufactured products are more numerous that in Model M,qrM*>qr3P*,their environmental impact is insufficient to compensate the “loss” in environmental impact from new products, becauseqn3P*>qnM*>qrM*>qr3P*. Hence, Model M is always greener than Model 3P.In reality manufacturers always rely on many retailers to offer new products. We therefore modify our original model to allow the selling of new products by N symmetric retailers while all remanufactured products are still sold through the manufacturer-owned e-channel or third party distributor, represent by Models OM and O3P1010To distinguish those results for Model M and Model 3P, letting the superscript v ∈ {OM, O3P}, thus, in this section, superscript v ∈ {OM, O3P} denotes Model OM and Model O3P, respectively., respectively.Since all new products are distributed by N symmetric retailers, the inverse demand functions for new and remanufactured products can be defined as(8)pn=1−qin−∑j≠iqjn−δqr,pr=δ(1−qin−∑j≠iqjn−qr),where qinis the quantity of new products sold by retailer i, and qjnis the quantity of products supplied by retailer j that are currently in use.We can then write the manufacturer and the ith retailer’s problem as(9)maxwinπMOM=(pr−cr)qr+(wn−c)(qin+∑j≠iqjn),maxqinπiROM=(pn−wn−cn)qin,maxqrπMOM=(pr−cr)qr+(wn−c)(qin+∑j≠iqjn).Using standard backward induction, we are then able to derive the equilibrium quantities, wholesale prices, and profits:Proposition 3In Model OM, the equilibrium quantities, wholesale prices and profits, respectively, areqrOM*=4Ncr+δ2N+2δ2+4cr−2δNcn−2Nδc−2δN−δNcr−2δcr−4δ2δ(3δN+2δ−4−4N),qinOM*=2(δ+c+cn−1−cr)3δN+2δ−4−4N,winOM*=4Ncn+4cn−δ2N−(4Ncn+2cn−4N−2c−Ncr−2Nc−2)δ−4Nc−4−4N−4c2[(3N+2)δ−4−4N],πiROM*=2(δ+c+cn−1−cr)2(2−δ)(3δN+2δ−4−4N)2,πMOM*=(4Ncn2+4Nc2−2cr2−8cr+Ncr2−8Nccr+4N+8Ncnc−8Ncncr−8Ncn−8Nc)δ+(N−2)δ3+4Ncr2+4cr24δ(4N+4−3δN−2δ)+(8Ncn+8Nc+4+4cr−4N−2Ncr)δ24δ(4N+4−3Nδ−2δ).In Model O3P, which represents the third-party sale option, we can write the manufacturer, the ith retailer and the third party’s problem as(10)maxwin,wrπMO3P=wrqr+(win−c)(qin+∑j≠iqjn),maxqinπiRO3P=(pin−win−cn)qin,maxqrπ3PO3P=(pr−wr−cr)qr.Then, using standard backward induction, we obtain the following equilibrium quantities, wholesale prices, and profits:Proposition 4In Model O3P, the equilibrium quantities, wholesale prices and profits, respectively, areqrO3P*=δ2+2cr+2Ncr−2δ−2δNcn−2Nδc−δcr4δ(δ−2)(1+N),qinO3P*=δ+2cn+2c−2−cr2(δ−2)(1+N),winO3P*=1+c−cn2,wrO3P*=δ−cr2,πiRO3P*=(δ−2−cr+2cn+2c)28(1+N)2(2−δ),π3PO3P*=(δ2+2cr+2Ncr−2δ−2δNcn−2Nδc−δcr)216δ(δ−2)2(1+N)2,πMO3P*=δ3+2(N−cr−1−2Ncn−2Nc)δ2−2cr2−2Ncr2+(8Ncn−4Nc2−4Ncn2+8Nc−8Nccn+4Nccr+cr2+4cr+4Ncrcn−4N)δ8δ(δ−2)(1+N).To enable comparison of the interior point solutions to models OM and O3P, we again impose the condition of0<qr<qin+∑j≠iqjn,(see Lemma 2 in Appendix J), which yields the following assumption:Assumption 11The cost of selling a remanufactured product is insufficiently small or large; that is,(4+3Nδ+6Nc−2N+6Ncn−2δ)δ3Nδ+4N+4−2δ<cr<(2Nc+2+2Ncn−δ)δ2N+2−δ.When there is only one retailer in the market (N = 1), both thresholds are exactly identical to those in Assumption 9.When the manufacturer adopts multiple retailers to market new products, the competition among these retailers plays an important role in determining the equilibrium outcomes of all parties. In particular, we formulate the following remark:Remark 5As the number of retailers N increases, the manufacturer’s profit in both models increases,∂πMOM/∂N>0,∂πMO3P/∂N>0,while the retailers’ profits in both models decrease:∂πROM/∂N<0,∂πRO3P/∂N<0. Likewise, as the number of retailers N increases, the third party’s profit decreases:∂π3PO3P/∂N<0.Not surprisingly, the retailers’ profits in models OM and O3P decrease as the number of retailers increases. Yet interestingly, Remark 5 also shows that the manufacturer’s profit increases as the number of retailers increases, an observation that we interpret as follows: On the one hand, as the number of retailers increases, the competition becomes fiercer so all retailers are more likely to offer a lower price and larger quantity of new products, which then mitigates the double marginalization problem. Thus, the more retailers in the market, the more the manufacturer benefits from selling new products. On the other hand, an increase in the number of retailers results in an increase in the availability of remanufactured cores, as a result, the manufacturer benefits more from the remanufacturing.Our model also reveals that the third party’s profit decreases as the number of retailers increases due to that all retailers will offer lower prices and larger quantity of new products: recalling that the primary consumer value discount for the remanufactured product is a fraction (δ) of the willingness-to-pay for the new product, thus, a lower new product price leads to a lower price for remanufactured products. That is, an increase in the number of retailers reduces the third party’s margins per remanufactured product. Yet it is also important to recall the sequence of our models: the manufacturer announces the wholesale prices for both products, the retailer responds by determining the optimal units of selling, and the manufacturer (third party distributor) then chooses the units to be sold through the e-channel (third party channel). Hence, increasing the availability of new products also means that the third party’s potential market is smaller and the remanufactured products face fiercer competition from new products. Overall, therefore, the third party is worse off when the number of retailers increases.Additionally, because competition among retailers increases the availability of used cores, making the remanufacturing behavior an apparent boon for the manufacturer, an increase in the number of retailers might be expected to increase the manufacturer’s incentives to invest in marketing remanufactured products; that is, to decrease cr. The following remark, however, reveals that such is not the case:Remark 6(i)∂2πMOM/∂N∂cr>0,∂2πMO3P/∂N∂cr>0,so as the number of retailers N increases, in both Model OM and Model O3P, the less incentive the manufacturer has to invest in the remanufactured products marketing; that is, to decrease cr.∂2πROM/∂N∂cn>0,∂2πRO3P/∂N∂cn>0,so as the number of retailers N increases, in both Model OM and Model O3P, the less incentive all retailers have to invest in new product marketing; that is, to decrease cn.∂2π3PO3P/∂N∂cr>0,so as the number of retailers N increases, the less incentive the third party has to invest in the remanufactured products marketing; that is, to decrease cr.Because the retailers’ profits in both models decrease as the number of retailers increases, the retailers in both models have less incentive to invest in new product marketing. Similarly, owing to the profit decreases as the number of retailers increases, the third party has less incentive to invest in remanufactured products marketing. Yet the first part of Remark 6 also reveals that the manufacturer too has less incentive to invest in selling because—recalling that the more retailers in the market, the more the manufacturer benefits from selling new products—the greater the number of retailers, the more the manufacturer cares about the profit from selling new products. At the same time, however, cannibalization of new products by remanufactured ones causes the manufacturer to derive less profit from new products, so the more retailers in the market, the less attention the manufacturer pays to the third party’s revenue and is less likely to promote the selling of remanufactured products.This first part of Remark 6 also highlights an interesting consistent with the results from Xiong et al. (2013), who find that the non-integrated manufacturer may be worse off with a lower remanufacturing cost. But note that our models’ focus on channel structures for marketing remanufactured products rather than from the production planning for new and remanufactured products.Because remanufacturing can eliminate the impact of returned core disposal, and consumes fewer natural resources and energy than new product manufacture, in exploring the environmental impacts of Models M and 3P, we first assume that the per unit disposal impact of a new product is larger than that of a remanufactured one; that is, in> iu. For simplicity, in Models OM and O3P, we further assume that the per unit disposal impact of a new product equals one, in= 1, while the per unit disposal impact of a remanufactured product is zero, iu= 0.1111Although relaxing this assumption increases the complexity of the analysis, all our results remain unaffected. We also note that in the remanufacturing literature, Xiong et al. (2013) use a similar assumption to simplify their analysis.The following remark summarizes our key finding:Remark 7Model OM is always greener than Model O3P; that is, EOM< EO3P. Moreover, the difference in the environmental impacts of both models increases as the number of retailers N increases; that is, ∂(EOM− EO3P)/∂N < 0, meaning that the more retailers in the market, the greener Model OM relative to Model O3P.Like Remark 4, Remark 7 clearly shows that selling of the remanufactured products through the manufacturer’s own e-channel is greener than subcontracting the selling to a third party; that is, EOM< EO3P. We also find, however, that the difference in the environmental impacts of both models increases as the number of retailers increases; that is, ∂(EOM− EO3P)/∂N < 0. This observation can be explained as follows: On the one hand, in Model O3P, there is a double marginalization problem between the manufacturer and the third party that leads to a higher price and a lower quantity of remanufactured products than in Model OM. That is, as the number of retailers increases, a larger quantity of remanufactured products is sold in Model OM than in Model 3P. On the other hand, in Model M, the retailers, because they face fiercer competition from remanufactured products, are reluctant to increase the quantities of new products. Said differently, as the number of the retailers increases, a smaller quantity of new products is sold in Model OM than in Model O3P. As a result, the difference in the environmental impacts of both models increases as the number of retailers increases; that is, ∂(EOM− EO3P)/∂N < 0. In other words, the more retailers in the market, the greener Model OM relative to Model O3P.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Even though many manufacturers, including Apple, Canon, HP, and Panasonic, have adopted different supply chains through which to market remanufactured products, there is scant literature addressing the issue of a manufacturer’s distribution channel decision in marketing remanufactured products and its environmental impacts. In this paper, therefore, we examine manufacturers’ decisions on distribution channels for remanufactured products and assess the impact of these decisions on environmental performance. Specifically, based on observations from current practice, we develop two channel models that not only account for the strategic effects of marketing costs, channel structure, and cannibalization problems but also throw light on the environmental performance of each model.To generate managerial insights into channel structures for marketing remanufactured products, we characterize the optimal strategies of all parties and derive a number of observations. Our analysis shows that although Model M is always greener than Model 3P, firms may have no incentive to adopt it because both the manufacturer and the retailer may actually be worse off when the remanufactured products are sold through the manufacturer’s own e-channel. Extending both models to the case in which the manufacturer interacts with multiple retailers further reveals that the more retailers in the market, the greener Model M relative to Model 3P.We do acknowledge that our analysis is subject to four limitations. First, we assume a monopoly manufacturer, complete information, and zero remanufacturing costs, all of which could be relaxed in future research. Second, to develop a more comprehensive understanding of marketing-related issues, we abstract away other factors, including product return costs, used product quality, reverse channel structures, and affects from the new products from the e-channel/third party, which may potentially play an important role in a closed-loop supply chain with remanufacturing.1212Savaskan et al. (2004), for example, show that the agent, who implements the used-product collection effort, plays quite an important role in a closed-loop supply chain.Third, we assume that consumers show no preference between the two channels, whereas in reality, consumer preferences may exhibit different distributions.1313A survey by Jupiter Research finds that 45 percent of respondents with online access prefer to shop in physical stores because otherwise they cannot “touch, feel, or see the product” (Ofek et al., 2011).Fourth, we do not address the competition among manufacturers in this paper, but it may be a fruitful direction of future research.In sum, in this paper, we turn away from the usual focus on remanufacturing technologies, production planning, inventory control, and competitive strategies with remanufactured products. Instead, we provide an alternative and somewhat complementary approach focused on how different channel structures for marketing remanufactured products impact all players’ profitability. We also provide valuable insights into the environmental impacts of different marketing channels. We thus contribute important knowledge on remanufactured product selling that can benefit not only the related firms themselves but also environmental groups and agencies.