@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Flexible capacity strategy with multiple market periods under demand uncertainty and investment constraint

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a flexible capacity strategy with n market periods and demand uncertainty.We formulate and obtain the optimal solution of this 3-stage problem.We obtain the formulae of the two thresholds for the unit capacity cost.We explore and obtain the endogenous safety production level.A firm gains profit only when the planning horizon is longer than a threshold.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Flexible capacity strategy,Multiple market periods,Capacity constraints,Demand uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We establish a flexible capacity strategy model with multiple market periods under demand uncertainty and investment constraints. In the model, a firm makes its capacity decision under a financial budget constraint at the beginning of the planning horizon which embraces n market periods. In each market period, the firm goes through three decision-making stages: the safety production stage, the additional production stage and the optimal sales stage. We formulate the problem and obtain the optimal capacity, the optimal safety production, the optimal additional production and the optimal sales of each market period under different situations. We find that there are two thresholds for the unit capacity cost. When the capacity cost is very low, the optimal capacity is determined by its financial budget; when the capacity cost is very high, the firm keeps its optimal capacity at its safety production level; and when the cost is in between of the two thresholds, the optimal capacity is determined by the capacity cost, the number of market periods and the unit cost of additional production. Further, we explore the endogenous safety production level. We verify the conditions under which the firm has different optimal safety production levels. Finally, we prove that the firm can benefit from the investment only when the designed planning horizon is longer than a threshold. Moreover, we also derive the formulae for the above three thresholds.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays firms are facing incredible challenges ever, particularly due to volatile demand, fierce competition and critical financial environment. Worldwide financial crises make firms more cautious about their capacity investments. Meanwhile, the customer demand is getting more unpredictable and uncertain. To deal with these challenges, firms are doing their best to adopt different methods. On the one hand, firms are trying to get more flexibility in adjusting their productions to deal with demand uncertainty. On the other hand, firms need to keep and increase their market shares under competition and, therefore, they will keep at the lowest production level at least. Due to the competition pressure and fear of being forgotten by the customers, firms are not likely to stop their productions even when there is little demand. For example, manufacturers still produce ice cream even in winter when there is little demand. As a result, an appropriate ability in adjusting production is needed for a firm to survive, while keeping a suitable level of operation. Furthermore, a firm needs financial support when it builds up its capacity at the beginning of a planning horizon over multiple market periods. This financial support is so critical to the success of a capacity strategy. The financial budget often determines the affordability of a firm’s capacity investment, and, therefore, determines a firm’s capacity upper bound.This paper investigates the flexible capacity strategy in terms of the firms’ ability in adjusting its production level under demand uncertainty. Particularly, we explore a firm’s flexibility throughout two stages: (1) production adjustment stage and (2) optimal sales stage. Furthermore, we integrate the financial budget into the model to formulate a firm’s financial consideration at the beginning of the planning horizon, which is over multiple market periods. To do so, we propose a general model which is able to present a firm’s flexibility to adjust the production, with full consideration of the financial investment constraint and the planning horizon of the business.In the proposed model, the planning horizon includes n production/market periods. At the beginning of the planning horizon, the firm makes its capacity investment decision, i.e., determining its optimal capacity, aiming at maximizing the total profit over the n periods under the financial budget constraint. In each production period, the firm makes a safety production decision before the demand information is known. This safety production decision is due to some reasons, such as: (i) sustaining its market share in a competitive market; (ii) keeping its customers to remember the products; (iii) promoting its products to some potential markets; and (iv) dealing with some unexpected and urgent demand. After knowing the real demand in each market, the firm decides whether to make additional production to meet the unsatisfied demand and by how much, under the capacity constraint. To capture the interaction among a firm’s supply, market demand and market price, we adopt the responsive pricing. It means that the product price in the market is determined by the real demand and the total supply in the market. The responsive pricing has been adopted by a few previous studies, such as Van Mieghem and Dada (1999), Goyal and Netessine (2007), Anand and Girotra (2007).As the capacity strategy is usually a relatively long-term decision, it often involves a great amount of capital and multiple cycles of consumption (demand). Some capacity investment, such as purchasing new equipment and recruiting new staff, usually covers at least a few market periods before the next capacity investment. Furthermore, the multiple period model is a generalization of the single period model. Therefore, results of the multiple period model can be applied to the single period model, but the converse is not true.Differing from most studies in the literature which assumed firms to put all produced products into the market, we explore a firm’s flexibility in two stages: determining the optimal sales and making additional production decision. We solve for the optimal safety production, the optimal additional production and the optimal sales of each period under four different situations. Second, we solve for the optimal capacity over the entire planning horizon under the financial budget constraint. We show that there are two thresholds of the unit capacity cost. When the unit capacity cost is very low, the firm builds up the capacity to its upper bound which is determined by its financial budget; when the unit capacity cost is very high, the firm only builds the capacity to maintain at the lowest production level; and when the unit capacity cost is in between of the two thresholds, we obtain the analytical solution for the optimal capacity. Third, we analyze the impact of the planning horizon on the optimal capacity of the firm. We find that the firm benefits from the investment only when the designed planning horizon is longer than a threshold. Furthermore, a numerical example demonstrates that the optimal capacity is concavely increasing in the number of market periods. Finally, we explore the endogenous flexibility by investigating the safety production level in each market period. Interestingly, we find that higher flexibility is not always beneficial to the firm. Depending on the situations, there are different optimal safety production levels to maximize the firm’s expected profit.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we review the recent research in the literature and find out a research gap. In Section 3, we introduce a styled multiple-period capacity strategy model. In Section 4, we formulate the production decisions in each period under demand uncertainty. In Section 5, we investigate the endogenous safety production level that leads to the maximum profit over the entire planning horizon. In Section 6, we conduct some discussion with respect to our partial flexibility. Finally, we draw conclusions, explore management insights, and provide suggestions for further research in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we consider the flexible capacity strategy over multiple market periods under demand uncertainty. We formulate a firm’s flexible capacity strategy with full considerations of a few issues: (i) to deal with fluctuating demand, the firm is trying to built flexibility into its operation process; (ii) to keep the market share and its customers to remember its products, the firm will have a lowest production level; and (iii) to consider the financial affordability, the firm will build its capacity restraint to financial budget. In the model, a firm makes its capacity decision at the beginning of the planning horizon of n market periods. In each market period, a firm goes through safety production stage, additional production stage and optimal sales stage.First, we present a general flexible capacity model which is able to present a firm’s ability in adjusting its production in response to the demand uncertainty. We consider a firm has a safety production level and an additional production level. The analytical results show that as the demand increases, the firm’s operational decisions in each period consist of four pieces. (i) When demand is very low, the firm will put part of inventory into the market and will not make any additional production. (ii) When demand is relatively low, the firm will put all products produced at the safety production stage into the market, but will not make any additional production. (iii) When demand is relatively high, the firm will make an optimal additional production and put all products produced into the market. (iv) When demand is very high, the firm will use all its capacity to explore the maximum production.Second, we analytically find the optimal capacity over multiple market periods under demand uncertainty, with consideration of its financial constraints. There are two thresholds of the unit capacity cost. When the capacity unit cost is lower than the lower thresholdC̲k, the firm will build the capacity as high as possible under the financial budget constraint. When the capacity unit cost is higher than the upper thresholdC‾k, the firm will built the capacity at its lowest operation level, and use all capacity to maintain a safety production level in each market period. Then, we investigate the impact of the number of market periods on the optimal capacity. It is demonstrated that as the number of market periods n increases, the optimal capacity also increases, but with a smaller slope.Third, we explore the endogenous safety production levelτin the model. Interestingly, we find that a higher flexibility is not always better-off for the firm. When the safety production cost is relatively high, a firm will benefit from keeping the safety production level as low as possible to get more flexibility. When the unit safety production cost is relatively low but the unit cost of additional production is relatively high, there exists an optimal flexibility (which is reflected by the optimal safety production levelτ), to which the firm could maximize its expected profit over the planning horizon.Forth, we verified a threshold which is the minimum number of market periods the planning horizon should embrace to get a positive expected profit. Only when the designed planning horizon is longer than the threshold, the firm could benefit from the capacity investment. Furthermore, the threshold is determined by capacity and production costs. When the capacity cost increases, the firm needs to design a longer planning horizon to make up for a higher cost. When the production costs increase, the expected profit of each period will decrease, and therefore, the firm needs to lengthen the planning horizon. Thereby, the threshold value suggests the firm to ensure a sufficiently long planning horizon.In this paper, we only consider the monopoly situation. However, one of the biggest challengers in a competitive market comes from the competitors. A firm has to consider not only its own decisions, but also decisions of its rivals. Such consideration will affect a firm’s decisions over the entire planning horizon. The competition is an interesting and challenging direction for future research. Another direction deserved attention is the financial constraint structure. In this paper, we have simplified the financial constraints as the budget of the total capacity cost. It should be noticed that the financial constraints are much complex than a budget. It is interesting to explore more influential perspectives of financial constraints in a firm’s capacity planning. The third direction is the inventory structure. In this paper, the inventory is not delivered into the next market period when there is inventory left. However, in reality, for some products with a relatively longer life cycle, the firm may benefit from holding the inventory till the next market period. Such problem would be a very interesting and practical issue to investigate.