@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel Lagrangian relaxation approach for a hybrid flowshop scheduling problem in the steelmaking-continuous casting process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The SCC scheduling problem is modeled as a mixed-integer programming (MIP) problem.A Lagrangian relaxation (LR) approach based on machine capacity relaxation is presented to address the MIP problem.An improved subgradient level algorithm with global convergence is presented to solve the Lagrangian dual problem.To deal with the unboundedness of the LR problem in iterations, we propose a boundedness detection method and a time horizon method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scheduling,Hybrid flowshop,Subgradient optimization,Steelmaking-continuous casting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One of the largest bottlenecks in iron and steel production is the steelmaking-continuous casting (SCC) process, which consists of steel-making, refining and continuous casting. The SCC scheduling is a complex hybrid flowshop (HFS) scheduling problem with the following features: job grouping and precedence constraints, no idle time within the same group of jobs and setup time constraints on the casters. This paper first models the scheduling problem as a mixed-integer programming (MIP) problem with the objective of minimizing the total weighted earliness/tardiness penalties and job waiting. Next, a Lagrangian relaxation (LR) approach relaxing the machine capacity constraints is presented to solve the MIP problem, which decomposes the relaxed problem into two tractable subproblems by separating the continuous variables from the integer ones. Additionally, two methods, i.e., the boundedness detection method and time horizon method, are explored to handle the unboundedness of the decomposed subproblems in iterations. Furthermore, an improved subgradient level algorithm with global convergence is developed to solve the Lagrangian dual (LD) problem. The computational results and comparisons demonstrate that the proposed LR approach outperforms the conventional LR approaches in terms of solution quality, with a significantly shorter running time being observed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The hybrid flowshop (HFS) scheduling problem is a complex combinatorial problem encountered in many real-world applications Ruiz, Serifoglu, and Urlings (2008), Ribas, Leisten, and Framinan (2010). A wide variety of solution approaches, such as exact methods Gicquel, Hege, Minoux, and van Canneyt (2012), approximation methods Zhang and van de Velde (2012), heuristic algorithms Oguz, Ercan, Cheng, and Fung (2003) and meta-heuristic algorithms Ruiz and Maroto (2006), have been applied to HFS. An overview of research on HFS scheduling problems, including that investigating processing complexity, scheduling criteria and scheduling approaches, has been provided in a recent review Ruiz and Vazquez-Rodriguez (2010). This paper considers a realistic case of HFS arising from the SCC process, which exhibits the following features: job grouping and precedence constraints, no idle time within the same group of jobs and setup time constraints at the last stage.Because most HFS scheduling problems are NP-hard and large-scale in practical applications, it is extremely difficult to obtain a high-quality schedule within an acceptable computation time Ruiz and Vazquez-Rodriguez (2010). Lagrangian relaxation (LR) is a decomposition and coordination approach that can yield near-optimal schedules in a reasonable computational time with a quantifiable accuracy. LR has emerged as a practical approach to complex scheduling problems, including single-machine Tang, Xuan, and Liu (2007), parallel-machine Luh, Hoitomt, Max, and Pattipati (1990), practical jobshop Hoitomt, Luh, and Pattipati (1993), Chen, Chu, and Proth (1998), Chen and Luh (2003) and HFS scheduling Tang, Luh, Liu, and Fang (2002, 2006), Xuan and Tang. (2007), Nishi, Hiranaka, and Inuiguchi (2010). In addressing these problems in previous studies, machine capacity constraints or operation precedence constraints were relaxed with Lagrangian multipliers. The relaxed problems were decomposed into a set of subproblems that could be solved by dynamic programming. The Lagrangian dual (LD) problems were often solved by subgradient optimization methods. The multipliers were iteratively adjusted at the ”high level” based on the subgradients corresponding to the degrees of constraint violation. At the end of each iteration, simple heuristics were applied to obtain a feasible schedule.The conventional subgradient algorithm (CSA) is easy to implement and usually provides rapid improvement in early iterations. However, the CSA yields guaranteed convergence to the optimum of the dual problem only if the optimal dual function value is known a priori Bertsekas (1999). In the LR approach, the CSA usually sets a maximal iteration number as the termination criterion, which is selected experientially. To overcome this shortcoming, Goffin and Kiwiel (1999) proposed a simple subgradient level algorithm (SSLA) by applying a Brannlund’s level control strategy to estimate the optimum value Brannlund (1993). On the other hand, the CSAs for addressing LR problems only consider the nonnegativity constraints of the multipliers for primal problems with inequality constraints. However, even though all multipliers satisfy these constraints, some of them might result in unboundedness during the iterations (see Section 5.2.1). Therefore, it is necessary to consider not only the nonnegative constraints of multipliers but also the effects of multipliers on the objective function.This paper considers the relaxation of the machine capacity constraints for the SCC scheduling problem and develops the SSLA to solve the LD problem. Compared with SSLA and CSA, the proposed algorithm, named the improved subgradient level algorithm (ISLA), has the following features: (1) the Brannlund’s level control strategy is embedded in the proposed algorithm to estimate the optimal value; (2) three fine-adjusting strategies are introduced to improve the efficiency of SSLA; (3) two efficient approaches considering the sufficient and necessary bounded condition of LR problem are presented to address the unboundedness during iteration; and (4) numerical results show that these strategies improve the efficiency of the algorithm dramatically.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we provide a description of the SCC process, along with the characterization of SCC scheduling in Section 2. Section 3 gives a brief review of the methods for planning and scheduling in SCC production and LR approaches for the HFS scheduling problem. The SCC scheduling is formulated as an MIP in Section 4. In Section 5, the relaxation approach and the ISLA are presented. Computational experiments are described and comparisons made in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes this study and discusses our future work.The iron and steel industry provides raw materials for a number of other important industries, which is the most basic industry in the world economy. The manufacturing process is a multi-stage process that can be roughly divided into three phases: iron-making, steelmaking-continuous casting and steel rolling Kumar, Kumar, Chan, and Tiwari (2006). This paper studies the steelmaking-continuous casting (SCC) phase, which is often a bottleneck in the manufacturing process. The principal processes for primary SCC consist of three stages: steelmaking, refining and continuous casting as shown in Fig. 1.In the first step, the steelmaking stage (LD process), hot molten iron arrives from a blast furnace in insulated vessels, often by rail, and is poured into converter furnaces or basic oxygen furnaces along with scrap steel. The produced molten iron in the same converter is called a charge (job), a basic unit of SCC production. In the second step, the refining stage (RH process and LF process), molten steel is poured into a ladle, which is transported by a crane to a refining furnace for refining. The operations at this stage aim to produce molten steel of the correct grade or chemistry. At the refining stage, a charge undergo several refining processes (such as the RH process and the LF process). Finally, graded liquid steel from the refining stage is poured into a ladle and transferred to a continuous caster, which can process multiple charges consecutively in the form of a cast (batch). The production process is detailed in Kumar et al. (2006), Tang et al. (2002). The salient features of the SCC process are summarized as follows.(1) All jobs (charges) follow the same process route and cannot skip stages. A job can be processed at most on one machine and a machine can process at most one job at a time. Job processing is nonpreemptive.(2) Each machine (caster) of the last stage must process multiple jobs consecutively as a cast (batch). The operation sequence of the jobs in a cast is predefined. The processing machine of a cast at the last stage is known.(3) A sequence-independent setup time is incurred between two adjacent casts on the same machine. Transportation time is separated from the processing time.Because all jobs visit three or more stages in the same direction and each stage has multiple parallel identical machines, the SCC process can be viewed as a complex HFS problem with the following features: job grouping and precedence constraints, and a setup time constraint on the machines used in the last stage. The objective of the scheduling problem is to minimize the total weighted earliness/tardiness and the total waiting-time between two operations. Regarding complexity, the single-machine problem with the objective of minimizing the sum of the weighted deviations of the job completion times from a given common due date is already NP-hard Hoogeveen and de Velde (1991). Because this problem is a special case of the SCC scheduling problem, we can conclude that the SCC scheduling problem is also NP-hard.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposed a novel LR approach to a HFS scheduling problem arising from the SCC process. The LD problem was solved by an improved subgradient level algorithm, which guarantees convergence without requiring the optimal dual value in advance. Furthermore, three fine-adjusting strategies were introduced to improve the efficiency of the algorithm. Other approaches based on subgradient algorithms, including CSAs and SSLAs, were also proposed to solve the dual problem. We also addressed the unboundedness problem of Lagrangian relaxation. Comparisons among all algorithms demonstrated that the algorithm IHP is the most promising one in terms of robustness, duality gap and running time. In particular, the running time of IHP is far shorter than that of other algorithms for large-scale problems. Moreover, the comparisons between IHP and the CPLEX (12.4) MIP solver demonstrated that IHP is notably effective and efficient. Further research will be focused on the development and application of the proposed approaches and other similar approaches, such as cutting plane methods.