@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Image collection planning for KOrea Multi-Purpose SATellite-2

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper studies an image collection planning problem for a Korean satellite, KOMPSAT-2 (KOrea Multi-Purpose SATellite-2).We present a binary integer programming model for this problem in a multi-orbit long-term planning environment.A heuristic solution approach based on the Lagrangian relaxation and subgradient methods is provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image collection planning problem,Large scale optimization,Decomposition,Lagrangian relaxation,Subgradient method,Scheduling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies an image collection planning problem for a Korean satellite, KOMPSAT-2 (KOrea Multi-Purpose SATellite-2). KOMPSAT-2 has the mission goal of maximizing image acquisition in time and quality requested by customers and operates under several complicating conditions. One of the characteristics in KOMPSAT-2 is its strip mode operation, in which segments of continuous-observation areas with known sizes are captured one at a time. In this paper, we regard the segment as a group of adjoining geographical square regions (scenes), whose size must also be determined. Thus, the problem involves the determination of proper segment lengths as well as an image collection schedule. We present a binary integer programming model for this problem in a multi-orbit long-term planning environment and provide a heuristic solution approach based on the Lagrangian relaxation and subgradient methods. We also present the results of our computational experiment based on randomly generated data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The satellite imagery, one of the major satellite-based services, has been utilized in various practical areas, such as natural disasters management, Geographic Information System (GIS), and cartography. KOMPSAT-2 (KOrea Multi-Purpose SATellite-2), a Korea’s earth observing satellite, was launched with the goal of high level resolution image acquisition. It is equipped with a multi-spectral camera that can acquire panchromatic images in 1meter resolution and color images in 4meter resolution. With KOMPSAT-2, the pictures of buildings and even a car can be obtained. KOMPSAT-2 operates under several complicating operational constraints such as camera roll tilt, satellite resource availability, weather conditions, and order priorities.The satellite image collection planning problems are known to be difficult in practice. Because customer requests usually span large geographical areas and their images can only be obtained from certain satellite orbits, each of the requested areas is usually divided into several small-size continuous-observation areas, which are called segments. Under the strip mode operation, the satellite collects the segments one at a time. The length of a segment is determined beforehand by an expert based on the configuration of the region of interests before the image collection planning starts. Given a set of several segments, many of which are overlapping, the planning problem becomes a selection problem to choose as many non-overlapping segments as possible under several operational constraints.The expert-oriented approach, which is currently used for KOMPSAT-2, has two significant drawbacks. The first is the dependence on expert’s intuition. Depending on who the experts are, the outcome varies. It is hard to tell whether a poor schedule is due to an inadequate choice of segment lengths or an ill-judged selection of non-overlapping segments. The second is the difficulty with the growing number of customer requests. The number of feasible task sequences to schedule explodes as the number of customer orders increases. Such an explosion brings many challenges to the service providers who try to satisfy customer requests as much as possible under the complicated operational constraints.In this paper we present an approach that deals with the Korea’s satellite image collection planning problem. Specifically, we present a practical method that is free from expert intuition and that can also handle a large number of customer requests. To this end, we consider the segment as a group of adjoining geographical square regions (scenes), whose size must also be determined. Thus, the problem involves the determination of proper segment lengths as well as an image collection schedule. Our approach includes a binary integer programming model for the problem in a multi-orbit long-term planning environment and a heuristic solution procedure that uses the Lagrangian relaxation and subgradient methods.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides previous studies in the literature. In Section 3, we describe the satellite image collection planning problem and the parameters for KOMPSAT-2. A pre-processing procedure is also described in that section. In Section 4, we present a binary integer programming model for the problem. In Section 5, we describe a heuristic decomposition method which uses the Lagrangian relaxation and subgradient methods to solve the problem. Section 6 provides the computational results of our numerical experiments on randomly generated test data. The concluding remarks and future works are provided in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
