@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using discrete event simulation cellular automata models to determine multi-mode travel times and routes of terrestrial suppression resources to wildland fires

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Forest fire suppression requires vehicles to travel both on roads and cross country.We developed a cost distance method for estimating travel times and routes to forest fires.Our method produced identical routes to a road network analysis for road travel.A grid based approach was effective in finding cross country routes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transport,Network,OR in environment and climate change,Routing,Simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Periodic forest fires are a part of natural processes in many parts of the world (Fuller, 1991; Mooney &#38; Dunn, 1970). Where fires burn into populated areas, they have the potential to cause substantial impacts, including the loss of assets, productivity and lives (Mendes, 2010). As a result, fire suppression activities are typically implemented to minimise such impacts (Martell, 1982). Such activities involve the use of specialised vehicles, crews and aircraft (hereon described as resources) to directly extinguish flames or prevent further fire spread. Suppression has been demonstrated to be effective in reducing the sizes and consequential costs of fires. In particular, the sooner suppression resources arrive at a fire, the smaller the resultant impact is likely to be (Cumming, 2005; DeWilde &#38; Chapin, 2006).Inherent stochasticity in the initiation of forest fires results in uncertainty as to where and when future ignitions will occur (Dayananda, 1977). Consequently, fire suppression is reactive; resources are dispatched from home base locations as fires are detected (Kourtz, 1987). As the time that elapses between fire detection and resource arrival is directly correlated with the final fire sizes, an understanding of emergency vehicles response times is critical for optimising deployment decisions and planning efficient suppression (Haghani &#38; Yang, 2007). In addition, the suppression algorithms in operational dynamic fire spread simulators (including FARSITE (Finney, Sapsis, &#38; Bahro, 2002) and PHOENIX Rapidfire (Tolhurst, Shields, &#38; Chong, 2008)), require detailed information on available suppression resources to be manually specified. Consequently, the automation of the process of determining resource availability and likely arrival times of suppression resources at a fire location has the potential to yield gains in suppression efficiency. At a strategic level, the optimisation of the placement of resource bases has long been a major focus of operational research (Li, Zhao, Zhu, &#38; Wyatt, 2011). Vehicle response times are a key input required for such models (Badri, Mortagy, &#38; Alsayed, 1998), and if such inputs do not accurately consider all necessary travel, outcomes may be sub-optimal. The determination of the shortest, fastest or most efficient paths through networks has long been a focus of graph theory and operational research (Prodhon &#38; Prins, 2014). Dijkstra's algorithm (Dijkstra, 1959), was a major development in this field, providing a foundation for much of the work that followed (Sniedovich, 2006). Variants of Dijkstra's algorithm are commonly used to estimate the routes and probable travel times for vehicles in road networks (Zhan &#38; Noon, 1998). Such algorithms ‘crawl’ through vector networks, accumulating costs, such as distance or time, as they progress between nodes to determine the least-cost path between a start point and destination.However, the need to estimate travel times and routes to forest fires provides an additional level of complexity; fires often occur in isolated areas and require substantial cross country travel where movement is independent of the road network. The vegetation and terrain properties that affect cross country travel are typically heterogeneous and information dense, and consequently are more efficiently stored as raster grids than vector networks. In contrast to the development of methods for optimising road network travel, there has been relatively little consideration given to the problems where vehicles may have to travel both on and off road. Multi-model travel has been considered in mixed vector networks, such as those that include road and rail travel (Bielli, Boulmakoul, &#38; Mouncif, 2006), but there has been limited attention in raster landscapes. Hatfield et al. (2004) proposed a combined method for estimating both road and cross country travel times for fire suppression vehicles in a gridded landscape using a minimised accumulated cost surface approach (Douglas, 1994), where costs are specified as the time to cross a unit of space. Pathfinding algorithms, including Dijkstra's algorithm, can be used to accumulate weighted costs based on travel between grid cell centroids (Geitl, Doneus, &#38; Fera, 2008; Soltani, Tawfik, Goulermas, &#38; Fernando, 2002). Such approaches have been used in the generation of least cost routes in continuous terrain; however their application for real-time travel planning remains experimental (Dalton, 2008; Hatfield et al., 2004; Stahl, 2005).The simulation of a chronological sequence of events occurring within regular grid is highly amenable to analysis via discrete event simulation (DEVS) cellular automata (CA) approaches (Wainer &#38; Giambiasi, 2001). Such models have been successfully used in modelling physical systems and processes and have been used in relation to fire management for simulating fire spread and suppression activities (Ameghino, Troccoli, &#38; Wainer, 2001; Ntaimo, Xiaolin Hu, &#38; Yi Sun, 2008). We propose an alternative, novel framework for the determination of multimode estimated vehicular travel times and optimal routes to fires using a DEVS CA emulation of Dijkstra's algorithm in a gridded raster landscape. The method is intended to be processed in real time (once a fire location is reported) and provides output as a surface of travel times to the fire location within a specified period. Parent–child relationships between adjacent cells are retained to allow the identification of the fastest routes from each point in the landscape to the fire location. Our approach provides for the use of heuristic rules within the CA, allowing processing times to be minimised by reducing unnecessary calculations.The method is demonstrated using example fire locations and resource bases situated in the vicinity of the Black Saturday fires that occurred in Victoria, Australia in 2009. The Black Saturday fires were Australia's worst ever forest fire disaster, with 173 people killed and over 2200 buildings destroyed in less than 12 hours (Cruz et al., 2012).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Cost distance DEVS CA approaches using have been demonstrated to have potential for evaluating vehicular travel times and routes where progression is required both on and off road. While such methods require a large number of computations, processing times can be reduced to operationally relevant levels by initiating the algorithm at the vehicular destination and applying heuristics to limit computations for cells unlikely to be of interest. There are currently no alternative methods broadly used for managing travel of vehicles for forest fire suppression; however there is demand for good intelligence on resource travel, driven in part by the increasing use of dynamic fire spread models that accommodate the effects of suppression.T.D. researched the problem, conceptualised the solution and wrote the manuscript. D.C. developed the algorithm and provided comment on the manuscript. K.T. defined the problem, provided group leadership and input on the manuscript.