@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A game theoretic model for resource allocation among countermeasures with multiple attributes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A counter-terrorism game is defined with multi-attribute utilities for both players.Extends existing games to include multiple countermeasures, targets and attack types.A case study illustrates optimal allocation of defensive resources.Equilibrium results show which attacker’s utility function is worst for defender.Equilibrium results show when attacker will be indifferent between multiple attacks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multicriteria analysis,Game theory,Decision analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study a strategic, two-player, sequential game between an attacker and defender. The defender must allocate resources amongst possible countermeasures and across possible targets. The attacker then chooses a type of threat and a target to attack. This paper proposes a model for determining optimal resource allocation by combining game theory with a simple multi-attribute utility model. Given a set of possible attributes representing goals or preferences, we allow each player to choose a weight for each attribute, where the subset of attributes with nonzero weights represents that player’s preferences. Every countermeasure is given a score for its effectiveness at both mitigating the effects of an attack in terms of each attribute and reducing the probability of the success of an attack. Furthermore, the consequences of each possible attack are scored in terms of each attribute. The multi-attribute utility aspect of this model uses these scores, along with the players’ weights, to form the basis of the utility (or disutility) for each player. We find that (i) the zero-sum game where the attacker’s and defender’s weights are identical results in the worst losses for the defender, (ii) in general cases the defender’s equilibrium strategy has the result of making the attacker indifferent between multiple attacks and (iii) the use of target-independent countermeasures (i.e. countermeasures which operate at national levels as opposed to operating at differing levels for each target) can increase the cost-effectiveness of countermeasures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the events of 9/11/2001, the study of game-theoretic models in the context of national security has been growing rapidly. Intentional attacks are fundamentally different than natural disasters and hazards in that the attacker can adopt different strategies in order to obtain his/her desired result. Golany, Kaplan, Marmur, and Rothblum (2009) give a clear distinction between probabilistic risk and strategic risk. Whereas many hazards including those due to nature can be modeled through probabilistic decision analysis, threats by intentional attackers lend themselves well to game theory. Game theory has been applied in security settings in order to assess the effectiveness of deterring possible attacks (Keohane & Zeckhauser, 2003), and recently game theory has been used to help determine which targets to protect against intentional attacks, which is the topic of this paper. A simple heuristic which has been previously proposed and deemed sub-optimal is to protect only the targets which could suffer the most damages. However, this extreme tends to be ineffective since attackers are adaptive, and thus it is not frequently used on a global scale (Arce & Sandler, 2001). Recent game theoretic models take into account factors such as the likelihood of the success of an attack in order to determine optimal defense budget allocation, and some of these models have produced more realistic results where the resulting strategy is to spread the budget allocation across many targets–hedging our bets between targets (Major, 2002; Woo, 2003). A general Nash Equilibrium approach to resource allocation across defended assets was proposed by Powell (2007). Each game-theoretic model has different features depending on the assumptions that are made.The most current papers consider a sequential game between a defender and attacker developed by Bier, Oliveros, and Samuelson (2007). In this model, the defender (she) moves first and allocates her resources among potential targets. The attacker (he) moves second, using his best response function to choose a target to attack. One of the key elements for the defender is being able to predict the attacker’s best response function, which stems from his utility function. The most recent work adds complexities to this base model in order to better represent real-world scenarios. Some research focuses on optimizing the defender’s strategy when she is uncertain about the attacker’s preferences (Wang & Bier, 2012; 2011), determining robust allocations when information is unknown (Nikoofal & Zhuang, 2012), and more effectively eliciting attacker preferences based on subject-matter experts’ opinions and rankings (Wang & Bier, 2013). Models for defender and attacker learning also provide more realistic scenarios for analysis, as proposed by Xu and Zhuang (2014). In addition, adversarial risk analysis notes that the attacker’s utility function itself may be a variable in the defender’s calculations (Rios & Rios-Insua, 2012).Other complexities include allowing for secrecy and deception in the game where one can consider the attacker to be either strategic or non-strategic (Zhuang & Shan, 2013). Zhuang, Bier, and Alagoz (2010) discuss possible reasons for secrecy and deception and present situations in which it is preferable for the defender to keep some resource allocations hidden, for instance when the defender has private information. Strategies involving secrecy and deception have been found to occur in equilibrium when the scenario is modeled as a sequential game and the attacker can choose between presenting correct information, incorrect information, or no information (Zhuang & Bier, 2011). A recent paper by Nikoofal and Zhuang explores the value of exposing defenses by comparing sequential and simultaneous games (Nikoofal & Zhuang, 2015), and finds that moving first in a sequential game is only valuable when the attacker and defender share similar target valuations. In this paper, we do not focus on strategies involving secrecy and deception and thus the defender’s resource allocation is fully visible to the attacker.Most current models, while becoming more complex in certain aspects, only provide optimal budget allocations to varying targets. That is, they can help us decide how much money to send to a certain target, but not what to do with that money. It is important to expand our toolbox on resource allocation to not only tell us where to put our resources, but also tell us how we should allocate our resources to minimize losses across all the attributes of concern. Using richer assumptions in order to explore the position of utility functions to such games, we allow the attacker and defender to have any number of attributes, and use a linear multi-attribute utility function in order to elicit more realistic results. We use a target-threat-countermeasure formulation similar to Linkov, Tkachuk, Canis, Mohan, and Keisler (2012), however we formulate the scores for each scenario differently.Mo, Xie, and Levitin (2015) and Wang, Ren, Korel, Kwiat, and Salerno (2014) also consider multiple types of countermeasures in a very general setting, categorizing defenses into two groups: increasing protection, and increasing construction of redundant parts in the network. Golany, Goldberg, and Rothblum (2015), formulate a model to address allocating multiple scare resources across multiple targets. This formulation differs in that they consider a zero-sum, simultaneous game where the defender’s goal is to minimize the cost of an attack, and the attacker’s goal is to maximize. This paper considers a sequential game in which each player can choose their own preferences to formulate a goal. This game in general is non-zero sum, but as a special case if both player’s choose the same preferences it could be zero-sum. Haphuriwat and Bier (2011) also consider resource allocation between two fundamentally different types of countermeasures. They consider difference between target hardening and overarching protection, but do not differentiate between specific countermeasures within these categories. Furthermore, they assume that the attacker and defender have the same valuations for each target.Drawing from the model developed by Bier et al. for defense resource allocation, we consider a one-period sequential game between an attacker and defender. The defender first allocates her resources amongst all combinations of countermeasures and targets, and then the attacker strikes with his best response to this allocation. There is extensive work considering situations in which the attacker receives imperfect information such as false targets and misinformation (see Hausken & Levitin, 2009; Ma, Yau, Lou, & Rao, 2013; Zhang & Ramirez-Marquez, 2013; Zhuang et al., 2010). Incorporation of secrecy and deception in such defensive strategies has been studied as well. These have often been found to be counterproductive (Board, 2002; Oliveros, 2005; Zhuang, 2008) and are beyond the scope of our effort. Allowing for secrecy and deception is a possible extension of our model, however it has often found to be counterproductive (Bier et al., 2007; Levy, 2007; Sandler & Arce, 2003) and we do not focus on this possibility.Given a set of possible attributes representing the preferences of each player, we allow each attribute to be weighted, where the subset of attributes with nonzero weights represents that player’s preferences. Note that the players may have different weights for the same attribute. Every countermeasure is given a score for its effectiveness at both mitigating the effects of an attack and reducing the probability of the success of an attack in terms of each attribute. The consequences of each possible attack are also scored in terms of each attribute. These scores, along with the players’ weights are used to calculate the payoff (utility or disutility) for each player. The multi-attribute game formulation not only allows optimal allocation of the defender’s budget across targets, as previous research has done, but also allows allocation among different types of countermeasures. Furthermore, the incorporation of a multi-attribute model allows us to explore how different sets of preferences for the attacker and defender affects the optimal strategy and payoff.In Section 2 we describe basic model: the variables, inputs, and the calculations for the payoff of each player. Section 3 presents the definition and conditions for an equilibrium solution. Section 4 presents the main theoretical findings. Section 5 presents a number of illustrative examples to show how the model works and demonstrate some interesting results. Section 6 extends the model by allowing for target-independent countermeasures. Section 7 discusses areas for future research.As do Bier et al., we consider a sequential, two player game, between an attacker (he) and defender (she). The defender has a number of targets to defend, and can defend them using a number of countermeasures. The attacker can choose any one of these targets to strike with a number of possible threats. The defender moves first and must decide how to allocate her resources amongst all possible countermeasures and targets. The attacker moves second, choosing the combination of threat and target which maximizes his utility. The goal of the defender is to allocate her resources (this can be thought of as budget) amongst countermeasures and targets such that, given the attacker’s best response to her allocation, she minimizes her disutility from the attack. An extensive form of the game is shown in Fig. 1for a scenario with three countermeasures (CM1, CM2, CM3), two targets (T1, T2), and two threats (TH1, TH2).We will formulate the payoff for each player as a linear multi-attribute utility function, where the user may choose a set of attributes, and each player is given a weight for each attribute between zero and one, where the sum over all attributes is one. Thus for each player there is a subset of attributes with nonzero weight corresponding to that player’s preferences. We assume that, for each attribute, the defender is seeking minimization whereas the attacker is seeking maximization. For example, if the attribute is “infrastructure damage,” the defender would be attempting minimization whereas the attacker would be seeking maximization.Each attack is scored with respect to each attribute, and these scores drive the payoffs for each player. However, the countermeasures that the defender chooses to employ also play a role in the payoffs, as they can reduce the consequences of the attack or reduce the likelihood of the success of an attack. Thus, each countermeasure receives a score for how much it reduces the probability of success of each threat, and for how much it mitigates the effect of each type of attack in terms of each attribute. In practice, the scores for each attack and each countermeasure would be elicited via judgement from subject matter experts and data.Our model characterizes the impact of various threats and countermeasures for differing targets across the given attributes. We associate the following indices with the elements of the model.h:indexforthreats,|{h}|=Hi:indexfortargets,|{i}|=Ij:indexforcountermeasures,|{j}|=Jk:indexforattributes,|{k}|=KCountermeasures taken by the defender can either reduce the probability of the success of an attack or the reduce the consequence of an attack in terms of some attribute.Πh,j∈[0,1]:thepercentagethatcountermeasurejcanreducethelikelihoodofthreathoccurringifmeasurejisfullyfunded,μh,j,k∈[0,1]:thepercentagebywhichcountermeasurejcanmitigatetheconsequenceofthreathintermsofattributekifjisfullyfunded,λh,j,k∈[0,1]:ascoreforthedestructivenessofthreathattargetiintermsofattributek,relativetothemostdestructiveattackintermsofattributek.The defender and attacker place weights (not necessarily the same) on the attributes, based on their relative importance to each side.wk(D):theweightfordefenderattributek,wk(D)∈[0,1],∑k=1Kwk(D)=1wk(A):theweightforattackerattributek,wk(A)∈[0,1],∑k=1Kwk(A)=1Resources from an available budget will be allocated by countermeasure and target, thus,B∈R+:Thetotalbudgetbi,j∈[0,B]:Theamountofmoneyallocatedtocountermeasurejattargeti.Wealsodefinebi,.:=∑jbi,j,and∑ibi,.=Bcj:Theunitcostofcountermeasurejgj(bi,jcj):acontinuous,increasingfunctionmappingR+→[0,1]representingtheeffectivereturnoninvestmentofacountermeasure.11Prior work considers a function which represents the success probability of an attack given a resource allocation to a specific target, p(bi,). For example, Bier, Haphuriwat, Menoyo, Zimmerman, and Culpen (2008), use the exponential functionp(bi,)=bi,.eλbi,.where λ represents the cost-effectiveness of the overall investment to that target. For this paper, we use a similar idea, but prefer a more general approach. Instead of specifying a family of functions to be used, we allow for arbitrary specification of a return-on-investment function which best fits each particular countermeasure. In addition, we define the function in terms of the failure probability of an attack, rather than the success probability. We make this change so that the external parameter, Πh, j, can be used as a generalization of λ that can be applied to whichever function has been selected. Πh, jstipulates the failure probability of an attack at h assuming that all resources are allocated to j.Definition 1We define an attack Ω as a pairing of threat and target, so thatΩ={h,i}.Once an attack is carried out, the resulting payoffs to defender and attacker depend on whether the attack is a success, and if so, the degree to which the attack has been mitigated. In particular, a successful attack has consequences ranging from none to some maximal level on each attribute for each target, and the payoffs for each player are weighted sums of the consequences in each attribute.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
