@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Multi-Tree Committee to assist port-of-entry inspection decisions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We tackle the difficult port-of-entry inspection problem by adding coherency.A decision-based logical model is defined under realistic assumptions.We develop a simple yet widely applicable algorithm for real sequential inspections.Combination of binary decision trees and minimization of boolean functions.The efficiency and flexibility of the algorithm is measured against real data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk analysis,Port-of-entry,Inspection policy,Binary decision tree,Multi-Tree Committee,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A natural way to avoid the injection of potentially dangerousor illicit products in a certain country is by means of protection, following a strict port-of-entry inspection policy. A naive exhaustive manual inspection is the most secure policy. However, the number of within containers allows only to check a limited number of containers by day. As a consequence, a smart port-of-entry selection policy must trade cost of inspection with security, in order to fit into the dynamic operation of a port.We explore the design of port-of-entry container inspection policies with imperfect information (unavailable or untrusted data). Starting from an a-priori classification provided by port-of-entry customs operator, a combinatorial optimization problem is introduced. The goal is to match an a-priori container classification with a logically coherent one, subject to a given level of container inspection. Inspired in the related literature, a novel Multi-Tree Committee is introduced in order to find a solution to the previous combinatorial problem. It combines the strength of binary decision trees and minimization of logical functions. The algorithm is easy-to-handle and useful for an on-line production. We highlight the effectiveness of our proposal, regarding real traces available from the port of Montevideo. The results show the capability to detect the most risky containers and its conservative nature, respecting any desired level of inspection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The decisions ruled by a port-of-entry customs operator must overcome several challenges, as the presence of illicit products or even foreign attacks. The source of inspiration is their experience to detect anomalies and sometimes, it is assisted with electrical detection by sensors and operational research-based algorithms for manual inspection.The real problem is so complex that theoretical tools and automatic algorithms usually assist, but do not replace, the decision of an operator. The main difficulties arise when the available information is untrusted, incomplete or imperfect. Furthermore, there is no international agreement in the encoding of information. As a consequence, an automatic approach is highly desirable, but it is hard to design. Moreover, it is difficult to compare the sensibility of different models against the presence of suspicious containers. So far, the proposed approaches from the operational research community ranges from game-theoretic models (Wein, Wilkins, Baveja, & Flynn, 2006), design of logical functions (Young, 2010), binary decision trees (Madigan, Mittal, & Roberts, 2007; Stroud, 2003), multi-objective optimization  (Xue & Villalobos, 2012; Young et al., 2010), dynamic programming techniques (Young et al., 2010), and Bayesian approach (Candy, 2013), among many other ad-hoc models for screening under budget constraints (Dreiding & McLay, 2013) and prophylactic models for terrorist attacks (McLay & Dreiding, 2012).In this paper, we propose a novel approach with the objective of “correcting” inconsistencies found within the a-priori classification provided by port-of-entry customs operators according to their work experience. The decisions are supported by a set of rules or risk-indicators, that suggest which containers are suspicious and which are not. The goal is to enforce coherence in the classification, i.e. a container with more risk-indicators should be classified as more suspicious, and therefore should be pointed out to be manually checked with higher probability. As far as we know, the detection and correction of inconsistencies in a real-life port-of-entry inspection policy has not been addressed in previous works in the related literature. The main contributions of this paper are summarized in the following items:•To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper in the area that enriches an operational research approach based on previous experience offered by customs operators in a real port.Previous works assume perfect knowledge of detection/false alarm probabilities, or percentage of illicit containers (Anand, Madigan, Mammone, Pathak, & Roberts, 2006; Boros, Fedzhora, Kantor, Saeger, & Stroud., 2009; Candy, 2013; Madigan et al., 2007; Stroud, 2003; Young, 2010). However, a pointwise estimation of those probabilities are usually performed with small sample size in relation with the whole container population. We believe this assumptions lead to unaccurate models. In this sense, our model seems to be more realistic.We provide an explicit formulation of a combinatorial optimization problem, called Coherence Problem. The goal is to enrich an a-priori classification given by real customs operators, adding coherence and respecting a desired level of inspection (i.e. the fraction of containers to be inspected).A novel Multi-Tree Committee is introduced in order to provide a feasible solution. It combines the strength of Binary Decision Trees (BDTs) and minimization of logical functions.We obtained real traces offered by our National Port Operator, called Administración Nacional de Puertos, located at Montevideo, Uruguay. We will appreciate the capability of our Committee-based approach to detect the most risky containers, and its conservative nature, respecting the level of inspection imposed by customs operators.This document is organized as follows. Section 2 contains related work, mainly focused on binary decision trees and logical design of inspection policies. In Section 3, an ideal approach is developed. Here, we try to follow the classification provided by customs operators as close as possible. A Mirror solution presents the minimum gap. However, it is not coherent, in the sense that more risky containers are not opened. Inspired in the deficiencies of the previous approach, a Realistic Approach is presented in Section 4. It captures a notion of coherence in the decision which is usually not met in real-life, giving possibilities of enhancement and automation. Furthermore, a desired fraction of containers is selected to be inspected, hence it achieves a realistic level of inspection.In Section 5, an algorithm called TreeCommittee is introduced for the general Coherence Problem. It tries to unify the strength of both worlds: binary decision trees and logical functions. As we will see, the role of the committee is to cope with imperfect information and to adjust to a desired level of inspection. Section 6 illustrates the results on the lights of real traces from our national port of Montevideo. There, we study the gap between TreeCommittee and Mirror. Finally, in Section 7 we point-out concluding remarks and discuss trends for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In a real-world port-of-entry inspection problem, misclassification probabilities are hard to estimate, and customs operators use their experience but sometimes lack of a theoretical foundation. However, to the best of our knowledge, prior works assume perfect knowledge of these probabilities, which is not our case. Additionally, our context is hostile, since the training data is inaccurate.In this article, a Coherence Problem has been introduced, and a Multi-Tree Committee algorithm has been developed in order to define a port-of-entry inspection policy. Both the model and its resolution are deterministic and easy-to-handle, which is a relevant aspect in practice.We show that an arbitrary classification can be optimized in two aspects. The first is to introduce coherence in the decision, while the second is to develop a fully-automatic solution, saving time and human-resources. In a first ideal approach, an automatic solution is presented. Then, we introduce coherence to the previous solution.The main benefits of Multi-Tree Committee are its adaptability to an arbitrary number of sensors n, classification range [r], and level of inspection, without a need of misclassification probabilities (whose estimation is non-trivial) and historical feedback, since the new classification can extend the training set.Regarding these elements and the recommendations from the port operators, as a future work we want to contrast stochastic-based mechanisms with respect to the current development, and tune our algorithm here described adding randomness, in order to cope with purely deterministic attacks.