@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Horizontal coordinating contracts in the semiconductor industry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study horizontal capacity coordination in one-market settings.We extend the study of wholesale price contracts to horizontal settings.First-best reservation contracts may not satisfy individual rationality condition.We identify conditions under which reservation contracts are coordinating.The sourcing structure (sole or dual sourcing) is studied in coordinated cases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Horizontal capacity coordination,Reservation contract,Wholesale price contract in horizontal setting,Sourcing structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Integrated device manufacturers (IDMs) and foundries are two types of manufacturers in the semiconductor industry. IDMs integrate both design and manufacturing functions whereas foundries solely focus on manufacturing. Since foundries often have cost advantage over IDMs due to their specialization and economies of scale, IDMs have incentives to source from foundries for the purpose of avoiding excessive capacity investment risk. As the IDM is also a potential capacity source, the IDM and foundry are in a horizontal setting rather than a purely vertical setting. In the absence of sophisticated contracts, the benchmark contract for the IDM and foundry is a wholesale price contract. We define “coordinating” contracts as those that improve both the IDM’s and foundry’s expected profits over the benchmark wholesale price contract and also lead to the maximum system profit. This paper examines if there exist coordinating capacity reservation contracts. It is found that wholesale price contracts in the horizontal setting cannot achieve the maximum system profit due to either double marginalization effect, or “misalignment of capacity-usage-priority”. In contrast, if the IDM’s capacity investment risk is not too low, there always exist coordinating capacity reservation contracts. Furthermore, under coordinating contracts, the IDM’s sourcing structure, either sole sourcing from the foundry or dual sourcing, is contingent on the firms’ cost structures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The cost of establishing a semiconductor fabrication plant (commonly called as wafer fab or fab; see for instance, Geng, Jiang, & Chen, 2009) is extremely high, and equipment technology becomes obsolete quickly as new technologies and demanding product requirements emerge. Therefore, the fabs have to be highly utilized in order to pay back the capital expenditure in a timely manner. In the semiconductor industry, there are three types of firms. Integrated device manufacturers (IDMs) both design and manufacture semiconductor devices. Fabless firms design semiconductor devices, but do not possess any fab. Foundries concentrate only on manufacturing and take orders from IDMs and/or fabless firms.On the demand side, the customers of such firms are themselves established firms that produce products such as cell phones, personal computers, and automobiles, among others. To gain orders from these customers, the semiconductor manufacturers (i.e., IDMs or foundries) need to be cost-effective, responsive, and flexible in accommodating highly fluctuating and uncertain order quantities. Because of this hard-to-match supply and demand situation, only a small number of IDMs and foundries – typically the larger ones in terms of capacity, such as Intel (IDM), Samsung (IDM) and TSMC (foundry) – are consistently profitable. The rest fare less well on their own and are in need of horizontal coordination to justify the needed investment to reach a competitive level of economies of scale and flexibility. It was estimated that in 2009, IDMs like Texas Instruments, Freescale Semiconductor, STMicroelectronics, and Renesas Electronics outsourced their production to foundries at percentages of 55%, 23%, 20%, and 10–20%, respectively (IC Insights, 2011).Due to the significant lead times required to add capacity, capacity decisions and related investment outlays are made well ahead of actual demand. Once the capacity is installed, the rest of the production activities are conducted in a make-to-order fashion. When an IDM and a foundry interact in a decentralized fashion, from the IDM’s perspective, it is important to secure enough capacity internally and/or externally to meet uncertain demand without incurring excessive costs. Since only the IDM has access to the end market, the foundry has to work with the IDM in order to be profitable. On the other hand, the foundry is concerned about over-committing capacity. The IDM has to offer the foundry incentives to induce sufficient capacity commitment.In the absence of sophisticated contracts, the benchmark contract for the IDM and foundry is a wholesale price contract. In the vertical supply chain setting, a wholesale price contract cannot coordinate the supply chain due to the well known double marginalization effect (Spengler, 1950). The IDM and foundry are not in a vertical supply chain relationship, because the IDM himself can produce the product in addition to the option of sourcing the product from the foundry. Thus, the IDM and foundry are in a horizontal setting. This paper identifies new features of wholesale price contracts in the horizontal setting compared with the vertical setting, and investigates whether wholesale price contracts can achieve the maximum system profit (i.e., the maximum sum of the IDM’s and foundry’s expected profits).A prevailing type of contract used in the semiconductor industry is capacity reservation contract. According to the structure of reservation contracts, the IDM reserves capacity R from the foundry by paying a reservation fee per unit. The reservation fee is refundable, which means the IDM pays to the foundry a wholesale price deducted by the reservation fee for a unit of product when the purchasing quantity is less than R. WhenR=0, the IDM always pays the wholesale price. That is, the pathological case ofR=0in reservation contracts involves a single contract parameter, “wholesale price”, and is actually a wholesale price contract in the horizontal setting. Hereafter, we refer to wholesale price contracts in the horizontal setting as zero reservation contracts(ZRCs). We emphasize two differences between ZRCs and traditional wholesale price contracts in the vertical setting. First, under ZRCs, the foundry may or may not build capacity, even in some cases with the wholesale price exceeding her cost. That is, even though the IDM is willing to pay the wholesale price, there may be no available supply from the foundry. In contrast, in traditional wholesale price contracts, the buyer can always buy whatever quantity he needs from the supplier for a reasonable wholesale price (e.g., a price that exceeds the supplier’s cost). Second, under ZRCs, the IDM may himself be a source of supply in addition to the foundry. But under traditional wholesale price contracts in the vertical setting, the buyer solely relies on the supplier. Due to these nuances of wholesale price contracts in the horizontal setting, we refer to them as “ZRCs”.We refer to reservation contracts with positive capacity reservation(R>0)as positive reservation contracts (PRCs). A PRC is coordinating if it satisfies the following three conditions.(1)Capacity investment coordination: The resulting capacity investments are the same as in the centralized system that maximizes the system profit.Production coordination: The production decisions (i.e., the demand allocation decisions) are consistent with those in the centralized system.Individual rationality: The resulting IDM’s and foundry’s expected profits are both greater than what they can earn under the benchmark wholesale price contract.Conditions (1) and (2) are required to achieve the maximum system profit. Condition (3) guarantees that the contract is individually rational for both the IDM and foundry. We refer to coordinating PRCs, if they exist, as CPRCs.In our paper, we pursue answers to the following questions: (1) What are the centralized capacity investments of the IDM and foundry that maximize the system profit? What are the main factors affecting such capacity investments? (2) Can ZRCs maximize the system profit? If not, are the underlying reason(s) the same as in the vertical setting? (3) Under what circumstances do CPRCs exist? What is the resulting sourcing structure for the IDM? The answers to these questions will offer us a better understanding of the distinctions between horizontal capacity coordination and traditional vertical supply chain coordination.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature. Section 3 introduces the model assumptions and notation. Section 4 derives the centralized capacity investments. Sections 5 and 6 study ZRCs and PRCs, respectively, to investigate their roles in achieving the maximum system profit when the IDM and foundry interact in a decentralized scheme, and check if there exist CPRCs. Section 7 compares the firms’ expected profits under PRCs with those under ZRCs and illustrates the impact of profit margin. Section 8 provides concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
