@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Incentive strategies for an optimal recovery program in a closed-loop supply chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose closed-loop supply chain model with operational and marketing benefits.We introduce the concept of incentive strategies in closed-loop supply chain.We show how the coordinated solution can be implemented as an incentive equilibrium.We provide a numerical example to illustrate the results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Closed-loop supply chain,Coordination,Incentive strategies,Pricing,Product recovery programs,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a dynamic closed-loop supply chain made up of one manufacturer and one retailer, with both players investing in a product recovery program to increase the rate of return of previously purchased products. End-of use product returns have two impacts. First, they lead to a decrease in the production cost, as manufacturing with used parts is cheaper than using virgin materials. Second, returns boost sales through replacement items.We show that the coordinated solution can be implemented by using so-called incentive strategies, which have the property of being best-reply strategies if each player assumes that the other is also implementing her incentive strategies. A numerical example illustrates the theoretical results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Improving the performance of a closed-loop supply chain (CLSC) with respect to what it can achieve when the different agents act selfishly, has been the topic of a significant literature during the last two decades or so. In a recent survey of CLSC literature, Souza (2013) classifies the research into four topics, namely: (i) types of incentives; (ii) time-dependency of returns; (iii) waste vs. active return policy; and (iv) firms’ motivations to close the loop. In this paper, we implement incentive equilibrium strategies in a dynamic setting to coordinate a CLSC made up of one manufacturer and one retailer, with both agents being actively involved in product return and recovery policy. Our contribution therefore falls under topics (ii)–(iv).The use of incentive strategies allows us to embed the coordinated solution, that is, the jointly optimal payoff, with an equilibrium property. This means that each player will find it individually rational to implement over time her part of the cooperative solution rather than deviating to a noncooperative strategy. By closed loop, we essentially refer to the return by (some) consumers of past-purchased products. We note from the outset that we focus on the returns of end-of-use products and disregard commercial returns. End-of-use products are goods that have been intensively used over a period of time and may be returned so that some of their components can be used in manufacturing new items (Guide & van Wassenhove, 2009). Commercial returns are products that have barely been used and can be reintroduced quickly onto the market (Guide, Souza, van Wassenhove, & Blackburn, 2006). Whereas companies may be interested in collecting end-of-use products for remanufacturing purposes, they generally try to avoid costly commercial returns (Ferguson, Guide, & Souza, 2006).11There is a significant literature dealing with different issues related to the control of the flow of commercial returns; see, e.g., Pasternack (1985), Davis, Gerstner, and Hagerty (1995), Padmanabhan and Png (1997), Tsay (2001), Ferguson and Tokay (2006), Su (2009) and Shulman, Coughlan, and Savaskan (2010).We consider the following two motivations for the supply chain to close the loop: (i) cost savings, as producing with used materials or parts extracted from returned products is cheaper than manufacturing with new materials; and (ii) demand expansion, as consumers who return their used products are likely to replace them with new ones. While there are empirically observed situations in which consumers who return/recycle products also buy new ones, this marketing aspect of recycling and remanufacturing has been largely overlooked by the CLSC literature. Indeed, research has focused on operational aspects aimed at improving the economic performance, more specifically on cutting costs through the remanufacturing of returns rather than using new raw materials (see, e.g., Savaskan & Van Wassenhove, 2006; Savaskan, Bhattacharya, & van Wassenhove, 2004). Put differently, the implicit assumption has been that neither the return rate nor the advantages of remanufacturing exert an impact on demand, which has mainly been modeled as a function of price only (see, e.g., Atasu, Guide, & van Wassenhove, 2008a; Atasu, Sarvary, & van Wassenhove, 2008b; Bakal & Akcali, 2006; De Giovanni & Zaccour, 2013, 2014; Debo, Toktay, & van Wassenhove, 2005; Ferguson & Tokay, 2006; Ferrer & Swaminathan, 2006; Guide, Jayaraman, & Linton, 2003; Hammond & Beullens, 2007; Robotis, Bhattacharya, & van Wassenhove, 2012; Savaskan & Van Wassenhove, 2006; Savaskan et al., 2004). A first contribution of this paper is in accounting for both the operational (cost-saving) and marketing (demand-expansion) potential benefits of remanufacturing in a dynamic model of a CLSC.As regards product return policies, firms can follow either a passive (waste) or active (market-driven) approach. In a waste return approach, the product recovery system is considered a cost center, with returned products typically being old and of poor quality. Consequently, the recovery options for these products are often limited (Dobos, 2003). Generally speaking, the assumption in the waste-return-approach literature is that the return rate is a given parameter or a realization of a random variable, that is, independent on the firm’s decisions; see, e.g., Atasu et al. (2008a, 2008b); Dobos (2003)Ferrer and Swaminathan (2006)Minner and Kleber (2001). In an active return policy, firms invest in some activities to increase the return rate. Guide and van Wassenhove (2002) provide a framework for the market-driven product acquisition system to effectively control product returns, especially product quality. Guide et al. (2003) propose a price-incentive scheme aimed at consumers to enhance product returns. In Savaskan et al. (2004) and Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006), companies invest in promotional activities to boost the return rate. Debo et al. (2005) equate the return rate to the remanufacturability level, which is the fraction of sold products that can be remanufactured after one period of use. In De Giovanni (2014) and De Giovanni and Zaccour (2013), the return rate is linked to the green activities undertaken by the manufacturer. In this paper, we also adopt an active approach to returns. However, we depart from the literature (and contribute to it) by assuming that both members of the CLSC, i.e., the manufacturer and the retailer, invest in a product recovery program (PRP) that aims at increasing returns by consumers. The rationale behind involving both players in a PRP is that returned used products affect not only (re)manufacturing cost, but also demand and consequently both players’ revenues. One reason often cited by the literature to explain used products returns is that consumers want to repurchase greener products (see, e.g., Han, Hus, & Lee, 2009; Ko, Hwang, & Kim, 2013). In such context, there is an easy case for marketing that invites consumers to even anticipate their rebuys.When the main purpose of product recovery is reducing production costs, then the benefits go to the manufacturer, and the retailer has no direct incentive to contribute to a product recovery program. Of course, one can argue that if the production cost is lower, then this will be reflected in a lower wholesale price, resulting in the retailer also benefiting from product recovery. In any event, when returns boost demand in the retailer’s outlet, then it becomes crystal clear to that player that it is in her best interest to participate in a PRP to increase the return rate. Now, although both members of the CLSC are interested in the PRP, this does not imply that the manufacturer and the retailer will choose the optimal investment levels that would maximize the total chain profits. To increase the players’ contributions in a decentralized supply chain, one needs to implement some incentive schemes. Here, the literature has focused on per-return incentives, that is, the collector (manufacturer, retailer or third party) receives a per-return amount, which is often an exogenous parameter. References in this area include, e.g., Corbett and DeCroix (2001), Majumder and Groenevelt (2001), Fleischmann, van Nunen, and Grave (2002), Savaskan et al. (2004), Ray, Boyaci, and Aras (2005), Bakal and Akcali (2006), Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006), and De Giovanni and Zaccour (2013)2014). Other types of incentive schemes have been developed that depend on other features, such as the product acquisition price through a buy-back mechanism (Hammond & Beullens, 2007; Kogan & Tapiero, 2007), and the players’ efforts and CLSC performance (De Giovanni, 2015).A CLSC is a dynamic phenomenon and we believe it should be studied as such. Consumers purchase a product today and return it in the future; therefore a dynamic approach should be used when investigating CLSC problems. This claim finds confirmation in the paper by De Giovanni and Zaccour (2014), who demonstrate that, when using a per-return incentive mechanism to coordinate a CSLC while shifting from a static to a two-period model, the suitability of that coordination mechanism is not always granted as it is in a static setting (e.g., Savaskan et al., 2004). Ray et al. (2005) evaluate profits and pricing policy under both time-dependent and time-independent scenarios–namely, age dependent and age-independent differentiation–and show that remanufacturing success substantially changes under non-static models. Similarly, Minner and Kiesmuller (2012) present both a static and a dynamic product acquisition policy to show that a static model can only be used as a basic representation of the findings, which should then be evaluated in a dynamic setting. Moving from a single-period to an infinite-period dynamic programming model, Debo et al. (2005) investigate the impact of cost parameters, consumer profiles, technology choice and industry structure on the profitability of remanufacturing in a dynamic setting. Debo, Toktay, and van Wassenhove (2006) extend the results in Debo et al. (2005) by proposing a Bass diffusion model with repeat purchases in a remanufacturing context. They show that remanufacturing is more attractive for slowly diffusing products and that a single-period analysis limits the investigation of the overall problem. Although the use of dynamic models seems somehow natural, previous research in CLSC has focused either on static (e.g., Aras, Boyaci, & Verter, 2004; Savaskan & Van Wassenhove, 2006; Savaskan et al., 2004) or on two-period games (e.g., Atasu and Çetinkaya, 2006; Ferrer and Swaminathan, 2006; Majumder and Groenevelt, 2001 ), while dynamic models have been rarely used (e.g., De Giovanni & Zaccour, 2013; De Giovanni, 2014; 2015; Robotis et al., 2012).We model the CLSC as a two-player dynamic game and show that incentive strategies lead to the implementation of the joint optimal solution. The manufacturer chooses the wholesale price and her investment in the PRP, and the retailer selects the price to consumers and also invests in the PRP. The idea of implementing some form of incentive strategy in dynamic supply chains (or marketing channels) has previously been discussed by Jørgensen and Zaccour (2003a, 2003b) and Jørgensen, Taboubi, and Zaccour (2006). In these papers, the (dynamic) pricing and remanufacturing were not an issue and, in Jørgensen et al. (2006), the incentive game was one-sided, that is, there was a leader in charge of designing the incentive. In our setting, we have a two-sided incentive problem. The implementation of dynamic incentive strategies in a CLSC to reach the collectively optimal outcome is, to the best of our knowledge, new in the literature.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the models and notations. Section 3 characterizes the equilibria in those models and presents some results. Section 4 presents a numerical simulation to compare strategies and profits, and discusses some managerial implications. Section 5 provides some concluding remarks and suggestions for future research.We consider a closed-loop supply chain (CLSC) composed of one (re)manufacturer, player M; and a retailer, player R. Time t is continuous and the planning horizon is [0, ∞). The manufacturer chooses the wholesale price, ω(t), and the retailer fixes the retail price to consumers, p(t). Both players are actively engaged in a product recovery program (PRP) whose objective is to induce consumers to return previously purchased products. The rationale of the PRP is twofold. First, investments in a PRP have a marketing purpose, since consumers who return the product are likely to replace it by buying a new one, and that boosts total demand, benefiting both members of the supply chain. Second, returns contribute to reducing the production cost.Denote by Gi(t) the level of investment in the PRP undertaken by player i ∈ {M, R} at time t ∈ [0, ∞). Examples of PRP activities include monetary and symbolic incentives to consumers to return used products, logistics services, employee-training programs, advertising and communications campaigns about recycling policies. These investments influence the consumers’ willingness to return used products, represented by the return rate r(t). The latter consists of the fraction of consumers who are willing to return past-purchased products directly to the manufacturer or to specific drop-off locations. For instance, Samsung has undertaken some collection programs (e.g., S.T.A.R.—Samsung Takeback and Recycle Program—www.samsung.com) by which consumers can return end-of-use toner cartridges through reusing the shipping box from new Samsung toner cartridges: customers simply print and attach a label to the box and drop it off at any U.S. postal office, and Samsung takes care of the shipping cost (see Samsung, 2014). Samsung invests in such programs to enhance consumers’ willingness to return end-of-use toner cartridges, as a demonstration of its commitment to their sustainability policies. In this context, the return rate r(t) also represents a proxy for environmental performance, as it provides information about the percentage of products that have been returned to manufacturers rather than discarded into the environment.We suppose that the return rate r(t) depends on the whole history and not only on the current level of green activities. A common hypothesis in such a context is to assume that r(t) corresponds to a continuous and weighted average of past green activities, with an exponentially decaying weighting function. This assumption is intuitive because the return rate is related to environmental awareness, which is a “mental state” that consumers acquire over time, not overnight. This process is captured by defining r(t) as a state variable whose evolution is governed by the linear-differential equation(1)r˙(t)=bMGM(t)+bRGR(t)−δr(t),r(0)=r0≥0,where δ > 0 is the decay rate and represents the proportion of consumers who forget to return end-of-use products; r0 is the initial rate of return and consists of the initial fraction of consumers willing to voluntarily return products, i.e., independently of the firm’s PRP investments; bi> 0, i ∈ {M, R} is the PRP’s effectiveness and measuring the marginal impact of the firms’ PRP on the return rate.We interpret the state variable r(t) as the fraction of consumers who return their used products to the manufacturer when the product reaches its end-of-life stage, and hence r(t) ∈ [0, 1] for all t. (We will come back to the technical implications of this assumption later on.) Whenr(t)=1,all consumers return end-of-life products to the manufacturer and may repurchase new ones to continue satisfy their needs. Whenr(t)=0,consumers do not return their products to the manufacturer. The rate of return is also an indicator of the supply chain’s environmental performance, i.e., the higher r(t), the lower the number of products discarded in landfills.We assume that the cost of PRP activities is given by the following increasing convex function:(2)Ci(Gi(t))=κi(Gi(t))22,i∈{M,R},where κi> 0 is a scaling parameter. To save on parameters, we letκi=1,i ∈ {M, R}. This normalization is by no means severe as the players are still asymmetric with respect to their green activities through the b parameters.The demand for the product depends on the retail price and on the return rate, that is, d(p, r), with∂d∂p<0and∂d∂r≥0. We adopt the following functional form:(3)d(p(t),r(t))=(1+μr(t))(α−βp(t)),where α and β are strictly positive parameters representing the market potential and consumer sensitivity to price, respectively. Note that sales are reinforced by the return rate according to μ ≥ 0, which shows the capacity for market expansion. The caseμ=0corresponds to a setting where closing the loop has no effect on demand, an assumption often adopted in the literature (e.g., Ferrer & Swaminathan, 2006).The second purpose of implementing a successful return policy relates to the traditional operational benefits gained by the manufacturer when using returns in production. The related cost savings are a function of the return rate, i.e., of the number of previously sold products that are returned. Following Savaskan et al. (2004), Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006), and De Giovanni and Zaccour (2013), we suppose that the unit production cost is given by the downward sloping function(4)C(r(t))=c0−crr(t),where c0 > 0 is the cost of producing one unit with only new raw materials, andc0−cr>0is the unit cost when producing with only used materials, i.e., whenr(t)=1. We assume that returns can be remanufactured an infinite number of times; thus the cost savings do not depend on the number of times that returns have already been remanufactured. Remanufacturing activities, in fact, allow returns to be sold “as new” in the market, regardless of their condition. For instance, HP sells remanufactured products “as new” and uses the advertising slogan: “Sitting side-by-side, you can’t tell the difference between a new HP product and a Renew product other than the serial number” (HP, 2014). We are only concerned with end-of-use returns, whose “as new” functionality can be restored through remanufacturing operations. In our model, the operational efficiency is captured byco−cr.Assuming profit maximization behavior, the objective functionals of the manufacturer and the retailer are as follows:(5)JM=∫0+∞e−ρt(((1+μr(t))(α−βp(t)))(ω(t)−c0+crr(t))−(GM(t))22)dt,(6)JR=∫0+∞e−ρt(((1+μr(t))(α−βp(t)))(p(t)−ω(t))−(GR(t))22)dt,where ρ > 0 is the common discount rate. To wrap up, by (1), (5) and (6) we have defined a two-player infinite-horizon differential game having one state variable (r ) and four control variables (ω and GMfor the manufacturer, and p and GRfor the retailer). Note that the case were returns only affect the unit cost (no demand expansion) is obtained by settingμ=0. Similarly, if returns do not contribute to lowering the unit cost, then it suffices to takecr=0. From now on, we shall omit the time argument when no ambiguity may arise.Suppose that the two players of the supply chain are vertically integrated. By this, we mean that the pricing and green activities are determined such that they maximize the joint optimization objective of the two players, given byJ=JM+JR=∫0+∞e−ρt((1+μr)(α−βp)(p−c0+crr)−GM22−GR22)dt.Observe that the wholesale price has been cancelled out in J and therefore has to be determined ex post. We will come back to this issue later on.The current-value Hamiltonian of this optimal-control problem reads as follows:HC=(1+μr)(α−βp)(p−c0+crr)−GM22−GR22+λ(bMGM+bRGR−δr),where λ is the adjoint variable appended to the state dynamics in (1), and the superscript C stands for cooperation.Assuming an interior solution, the first-order optimality conditions include(7)HpC=(1+μr)(α−β(2p−c0+crr))=0,(8)HGMC=−GM+λbM=0,(9)HGRC=−GR+λbR=0,(10)λ˙=(ρ+δ)λ−(α−βp)(μ(p−c0+2crr)+cr),(11)limt→∞e−ρtλ(t)=0,(12)r˙=bMGM+bRGR−δr,r(0)=r0.The first three conditions are equivalent to(13)p=α+β(c0−crr)2β,GM=λbM,GR=λbR.Interestingly, the price is state-dependent and is negatively influenced by the return rate. Thus, a larger environmental performance r(t) allows the retailer to set a lower price, which in turn increases sales. Thus, the return rate has a dual benefit for the CLSC: (i) it contributes to increasing the demand through the expansion effect μr(t), which is a marketing effect; and (ii) it has an operational effect, that is, it lowers the production cost byc0−crr,which leads to a lower price and larger demand.Substituting for p, GMand GRin (10)–(12) leads to the following pair of differential equations:(14)r˙C=(bM+bR)λC−δrC,(15)λ˙C=(ρ+δ)λC−(α−β(c0−crrC)2)(μ(α−β(c0−3crrC))2β+cr),with the boundary conditionslimt→∞e−ρtλ(t)=0andr(0)=r0.Notice that (14) depends on the costate variable λ, while the latter depends, among other things, on the demand parameters α and β. This highlights the indirect influence of the demand on the return rate. Specifically, a two-sided effect between demand and product returns exists. First, the larger the number of consumers returning products, the larger the demand through the market expansion effect (see the demand function in (3)). Second, the larger is the number of consumers who purchase the product, the larger the number of consumers who will return it in the future (see (10) and (14)). Reinserting λCand rCin (13), we get the optimal retail price pCand green activitiesGMCandGRC.The optimization problem under vertically integrated supply chain is an infinite-horizon, discounted and autonomous, one-state optimal-control problem. We make the following assumption on the parameters and nature of the optimal solution of the system (14) and (15).Assumption 1The state variable rC(t) takes values in [0, 1] for all t. Here, we seek optimal candidates where the state trajectory rC(t) starts in [0, 1] and stays in this set for all times.Ifα−βc0>0,then the optimal demand is strictly positive at all times t. Indeed, at retail pricepC=α+β(c0−crrC)2β,we haved(pC(t),rC(t))=(1+μrC(t))(α−βpC(t))=(1+μrC(t))(α−βc0+βcrrC(t)2),which is strictly positive forα−βc0>0. This means that demand is positive if the price is equal to the initial (highest) marginal cost, which is a typical assumption in economics.Under Assumption 1, the above remark, and from the detailed bifurcation analysis of the optimal vector field, it is obvious that saddle points and their stable manifolds are identified as the most important candidates for optimal solutions. We have the following proposition regarding the solution of the optimal system (14 and 15). The proposition follows from the detailed bifurcation analysis of the system (14 and 15), which is provided in the Appendix.Proposition 1Let the following conditions on the parameters hold true:(16)max{Δ,1−Δ}≤2δ(ρ+δ)3(bM+bR)μβcr2−13(1μ+2[α−βc0βcr])≤1+Δ,where Δ > 0 and given byΔ=(2δ(ρ+δ)3(bM+bR)μβcr2+13[α−βc0βcr−1μ])2−4δ(ρ+δ)9(bM+bR)μβcr2(2μ+[α−βc0βcr]).Then, Assumption1holds true. The optimal solution satisfies (rC, λC) ∈ Ws(E1), where Ws(E1) is the stable manifold of the saddle point E1. Further, the optimal state trajectory is monotone for all t ≥ 0.Recall from the Appendix that if Δ > 0 then there exists two equilibrium points for the optimal system (14-15); a saddle point (E1) and an unstable node or focus (E2). Further, we have thatr¯1C<r¯2C. So, the right branch of the stable manifold Ws(E1) starts at E2 and approaches E1 as t → ∞. From Assumption 1, it is required that the state trajectory rC(t) starts in the set [0, 1] and stays in the set [0, 1] for all times. This requirement can be met with the following two restrictions. First, the rCco-ordinate of the equilibrium point E1 lies inside the interval [0, 1], which leads to0≤2δ(ρ+δ)3(bM+bR)μβcr2−13(1μ+2[α−βc0βcr])−Δ≤1.Second, the interval [0, 1] in rCaxis lies inside the projection of stable manifold Ws(E1) on rCaxis, which is met by takingr¯2C≥1(recall Appendix, item 3). This leads to2δ(ρ+δ)3(bM+bR)μβcr2−13(1μ+2[α−βc0βcr])+Δ≥1.Combining the above two inequalities we obtain the sufficient condition (16). In the present problem only the stable manifold Ws(E1) is the optimal solution as other candidates grow unbounded. Then, following the result of Hartl (1987) the optimal state trajectory rC(t) is monotone for all t ≥ 0; see also Proposition 3.85 of Grass, Caulkins, Feichtinger, Tragler, and Behrens (2008). More precisely, ifrC(0)>r¯1C(<r¯1C) then the optimal state trajectory rC(t) is monotone decreasing (increasing).□Recall that the return rate is interpreted as the fraction of consumers who bring back their used products to the manufacturer. The above proposition provides a sufficient (not necessary) condition to have the return rate in the interval [0, 1]. This means that it may well be the case that for a given (possibly empirical) parameter value, condition (16) does not hold true, but the solution makes sense, i.e., 0 ≤ r(t) ≤ 1 for all t. Further, as this condition involves a highly nonlinear relationship between all model parameters, it does not offer any straightforward economic interpretation.As the cooperative solution is not (in general) an equilibrium, it makes sense to argue that each player would like to be assured that if she implements her part of this solution, her partner will also do the same. One way of realizing the desired cooperative outcome is to apply the concept of an incentive equilibrium. This concept was used in resource games by Ehtamo and Hämäläinen (1993, 1995), and by Jørgensen and Zaccour (2003a, 2003b) in marketing channels and retail promotions, respectively. The incentive equilibrium originates in Stackelberg games, where the leader designs an incentive for the follower in a way that is desirable to the leader. An incentive equilibrium may be seen as a two-sided “Stackelberg incentive” problem: when one player implements her incentive strategy, the other player can do no better than to act in accordance with the agreement.Define byuM=(ω,GM),uR=(p,GR),the control vectors of the two players, and byγM(uR)=(γM1(p),γM2(GR)),γR(uM)=(γR1(ω),γR2(GM)),the manufacturer’s and retailer’s incentive strategies.22A more general form of the incentive strategies would beγM(uR)=(γM1(p,GR),γM2(p,GR)),γR(uM)=(γR1(ω,GM),γR2(ω,GM)),that is, each player uses both control variables at her disposal to obtain the right (cooperative) choice for each of the other player’s controls. In our context, the simpler incentive strategiesγM(uR)=(γM1(p),γM2(GR)),γR(uM)=(γR1(ω),γR2(GM)),do a perfect job of coordinating the supply chain. Given that coordination is the sole purpose of these incentive strategies, the simpler they are the better.Denote by UMand URthe set of feasible controls for the manufacturer and the retailer, respectively. (Feasibility in our setting is simply the non-negativity of the control variables ω, p,GMand GR). Denote by ΓMand ΓRthe set of feasible strategies for the manufacturer and the retailer, respectively, that is,ΓM={γM|γM:UR→UM},ΓR={γR|γR:UM→UR}.It is readily seen that each player’s strategy is a function of the other player’s control variables. We now define the incentive equilibrium at cooperative solution(uMC,uRC),withuMC=(ωC,GMC)anduRC=(pC,GRC).Definition 1The strategy pair γM∈ ΓM, γR∈ ΓRis said to be an incentive equilibrium at(uMC,uRC)ifJM(uMC,uRC)≥JM(uM,γR(uM)),∀uM∈UM,JR(uMC,uRC)≥JR(γM(uM),uR),∀uR∈UR,uMC=γM(uRC),uRC=γR(uMC).The above definition states that when the incentive strategies are jointly carried out, then the cooperative outcome is realized. Observe that the above definition could be written for any desired point, and not only for the cooperative controls. The two inequalities in the definition mean that when one player implements her incentive strategy, the best choice for the other player is then to implement her part of the cooperative solution.Although different functional forms can be envisioned for incentive strategies, we keep things as simple as possible and retain the following linear specifications:(17)γM1(p)=ωC+ηM(p−pC),(18)γM2(GR)=GMC+ψM(GR−GRC),(19)γR1(ω)=pC+ηR(ω−ωC),(20)γR2(GMC)=GRC+ψR(GM−GMC),where the incentive (penalty) coefficients ηM, ψM, ηRand ψRare positive time functions. The idea behind the above formulation is simple: Each player is letting her choice depend on the other player’s controls. The manufacturer’s strategies described in (17) and (18) state that if the retailer implements the cooperative retail price and PRP investment, then the manufacturer plays the cooperative wholesale price (yet to be defined) and PRP investment. The retailer’s strategies in (19) and (20) have a similar interpretation. Note that the assumption here is that if the manufacturer cheats on the cooperative solution, then she will increase the wholesale price and decrease her investment in PRP, that is, ω > ωCandGM<GMC,causing an increase in the retailer’s price and a decrease in advertising. Similarly, if the retailer deviates from the desired strategy, then she will select a higher retail price and a lower advertising effort than under cooperation(p>pC,GM<GMC). The manufacturer reacts by increasing the wholesale price and decreasing her PRP investment.As stated before, the cooperative wholesale price ωCvanishes in the joint optimization problem. Therefore, it cannot be determined endogenously but has to be chosen ex-post. What is important to note is that the incentive strategies in (17) and (19) are defined for any choice of ωC. We make two observations:1.Mathematically, the only assumption needed is the convergence of the time function ωC(t) to a non-negative real number when t goes to infinity, that is,limt→∞ωC(t)=ωC.As this time function is selected by the players and is not part of the solution of an optimization problem, the above condition does not cause any difficulty. In fact, one can even choose a wholesale price that is constant throughout the whole planning horizon, that is,ωC(t)=ωC,∀t. However, to keep the formalism more general, we do not impose a constant wholesale price but make the above assumption.Economically speaking, the exogenously defined wholesale price can be used as a device to divide the fully integrated supply chain profit between the two players. For instance, ωC(t) can be determined such that the players split equally the dividend of cooperation, which is given by the difference between the total profits realized under coordination minus the total noncooperative payoffs. These payoffs can be the result of a Nash or Stackelberg game, with one of the players acting as leader and the other as follower. This type of approach has been implemented repeatedly in the literature, and there is no need to repeat here. Also, the players may wish to implement a wholesale price that is greater than the unit production cost and lower than the retail price, that is,c0−crr(t)≤ωC(t)≤pC(t)=α2β+(c0−crrC(t))2.The following proposition gives the values of the incentive parameters or penalty terms.Proposition 2The optimal incentive parameters in(17)–(20)are given byηR=α−β(c0−crrC)2β(ωC−(c0−crrC)),ψR=bMbR(λC−λMI)λMI,ηM=2β(ωC−(c0−crrC))α−β(c0−crrC),ψM=bRbM(λC−λRI)λRI.The steady-state values of the costate variables are given by the following expressions:λ¯MI=(α−β(c0−crr¯1C)2(ρ+δ))(μ(ωC−c0)+cr),λ¯RI=μ(α−β(c0−crr¯1C)2(ρ+δ))(α+β(c0−crr¯1C)2β−ωC),λ¯C=(α−β(c0−crr¯1C)2(ρ+δ))(μ(α−β(c0−3crr¯1C))2β+cr),wherer¯1Cis the steady-state value of the returnsr¯C,which is obtained by solving the second-degree polynomialr¯C−(bM+bR)δ(α−β(c0−crr¯C)2(ρ+δ))×(μ(α−β(c0−3crr¯C))2β+cr)=0.To determine the incentive coefficients, we have to solve an optimal-control problem for each player, assuming that the other player will indeed implement her part of the cooperative solution. Put differently, we characterize for each player her best response to the incentive strategies of the other player. The current-value Hamiltonians of the manufacturer and the retailer are given byHMI=(1+μr)(α−β(pC+ηR(ω−ωC)))(ω−c0+crr)−12GM2+λM(bMGM+bR(GRC+ψR(GM−GMC))−δr),HRI=(1+μr)(α−βp)(p−(ωC+ηM(p−pC)))−12GR2+λR(bM(GMC+ψM(GR−GRC))+bRGR−δr),where λMand λRare the adjoint (costate) variables appended by the players to the state dynamics. Observe that in each player’s Hamiltonian, we have substituted the incentive strategies for the other player’s controls from (17)–(20).Assuming an interior solution, the first-order optimality conditions for the manufacturer are given by(21)∂HMI∂ω=α−β(pC+ηR(2ω−ωC))+βηR(c0−crr)=0,(22)∂HMI∂GM=−GM+λM(bM+bRψR)=0,(23)λ˙M=(ρ+δ)λM−(α−β(pC+ηR(ω−ωC)))(μ(ω−c0+crr)+cr(1+μr)),(24)r˙=bMGM+bR(GRC+ψR(GM−GMC))−δr,and those for the retailer, by(25)∂HRI∂p=α(1−ηM)−β(2p−(ωC+ηM(2p−pC)))=0,(26)∂HRI∂GR=−GR+λR(bR+bMψM)=0,(27)λ˙R=(ρ+δ)λR−μ(α−βp)(p−(ωC+ηM(p−pC))),(28)r˙=bRGR+bM(GMC+ψM(GR−GRC))−δr.From (21) and (22) and (25) and (26), we get (superscript I stands for incentive)ωI=α−βpC+βηR(ωC+c0−rcr)2βηR,GMI=λMI(bM+bRψR),pI=(α(1−ηM)+β(ωC−pCηM))2β(1−ηM),GRI=λRI(bR+bMψM).To determine the penalty coefficients, we equate the incentive strategies and optimal (cooperative) policies, that is,ωC=ωI⇔ηR=α−β(c0−crrC)2β(ωC−(c0−crrC)),pC=pI⇔ηM=2β(ωC−(c0−crrC))α−β(c0−crrC),GMC=GMI⇔ψR=bMbR(λC−λMI)λMI,GRC=GRI⇔ψM=bRbM(λC−λRI)λRI.Substituting for the incentive strategies in the adjoint variables(29)λ˙MI=(ρ+δ)λMI−(α−β(pC+ηR(ω−ωC)))(μ(ω−c0+crr)+cr(1+μr))(30)λ˙RI=(ρ+δ)λRI−μ(α−βp)(p−(ωC+ηM(p−pC))),we getλ˙MI=(ρ+δ)λMI−(α−βpC)(μ(ωC−c0)+cr)λ˙RI=(ρ+δ)λRI−μ(α−βpC)(pC−ωC).Substituting for the cooperative pricepC=α+β(c0−crrC)2βyields the following pair of differential equations:λ˙MI=(ρ+δ)λMI−(α−β(c0−crrC)2)(μ(ωC−c0)+cr),λ˙RI=(ρ+δ)λRI−μ(α−β(c0−crrC)2)(α+β(c0−crrC)2β−ωC).Here, the transversality conditionslimt→∞e−ρtλMI(t)=0andlimt→∞e−ρtλRI(t)=0should hold true as a part of the manufacturer’s and retailer’s optimization problems.Considering the pair of differential equations in (14) and (15) and the above equations, the steady-state values of the costate variables are given by the following expressions:λ¯MI=(α−β(c0−crr¯1C)2(ρ+δ))(μ(ωC−c0)+cr),λ¯RI=μ(α−β(c0−crr¯1C)2(ρ+δ))(α+β(c0−crr¯1C)2β−ωC),λ¯C=(α−β(c0−crr¯1C)2(ρ+δ))(μ(α−β(c0−3crr¯1C))2β+cr),wherer¯1Cis the steady-state value of the returnsr¯C,which is obtained by solving the second-degree polynomialr¯C−(bM+bR)δ(α−β(c0−crr¯C)2(ρ+δ))×(μ(α−β(c0−3crr¯C))2β+cr)=0.□The incentive coefficients call for the following comments:1.The incentive (penalty) parameters ηRand ηMdepend on the time varying return rate rCwhen the supply chain is fully integrated, and consequently, they are also time functions, and not constants that are determined once for the whole game. Similarly, though here the dependency is through the adjoint variables, the incentive coefficients ψRand ψMalso vary over time.Each of the PRP penalty coefficients involves the product of two quantities, namely: (i) the ratio of the other player’s PRP efficiency coefficient to own coefficient, that is,bMbRin ψR, andbRbMin ψM; and (ii) the difference in the marginal valuations by the other player of the returns between coordination and noncooperation, divided by that player’s marginal value of returns under noncooperation, that is,λC−λjIλjI,j=M,R. This ratio can also be interpreted as the relative gain that cooperation brings when assessing the marginal value of returned products with respect to noncooperation.The price-penalty coefficient ηMcan be rewritten equivalently as follows:ηM=ωC−(c0−crrC)(pC−ωC)+(ωC−(c0−crrC)).In words, this givesηM=M"smarginundercoordinationR"smarginundercoordination+M"smarginundercoordination,that is, the manufacturer’s share in the total coordinated supply chain’s margin. The retailer’s wholesale-price-penalty coefficient ηRis simply the inverse of ηM, i.e.,ηR=R"smarginundercoordination+M"smarginundercoordinationM"smarginundercoordination.To interpret the steady-state values of the costate variables, we first write the steady-state values of the coordinated retail price and demand:p¯C=α+β(c0−crr¯1C)2β,d¯C=(1+μr¯1C)(α−β(c0−crr¯1C)2).Suppose thatμ=0and denote byd¯μ=0Cthe steady-state value of the corresponding demand, which would then be given byd¯μ=0C=α−β(c0−crr¯1C)2.Consequently, the steady-state costate values can be written in a more compact form as follows:(31)λ¯MI=μ(ωC−c0)+cr(ρ+δ)·d¯μ=0C,(32)λ¯RI=μ(ρ+δ)·(p¯C−ωC)·d¯μ=0C,(33)λ¯C=d¯C(ρ+δ)(μβ·d¯μ=0C+cr).To gain additional insight into the above values and the steady state of the return rate, let us consider the following two special cases:μ=0:When returns involve only operational benefits, then the system of differential equations to be solved(λ˙C,r˙C)becomes linear, and its steady state is given byr¯C=cr(bM+bR)(α−βc0)2δ(δ+ρ)−βcr2(bM+bR),λ¯C=crδ(α−βc0)2δ(δ+ρ)−βcr2(bM+bR).The steady-state values of the adjoint variables in (31)–(33) becomeλ¯MI=λ¯C=cr(ρ+δ)·d¯μ=0C,λ¯RI=0.The reason for havingλ¯RI=0is that whenμ=0,the retailer’s payoff function is independent of the return rate. The shadow price of the returns in the fully coordinated supply chain is equal to the shadow price for the manufacturer in the noncooperative (or incentive) game. This price is given by total cost reduction due to returns, i.e.,cr·d¯μ=0C,adjusted by discounting and decay rates.cr=0:When returns involve only marketing benefits, then the system of differential equations to be solved(λ˙C,r˙C)also becomes linear, with its steady state given byr¯C=μ(bM+bR)(α−βc0)24δβ(ρ+δ),λ¯C=μ(α−βc0)24β(ρ+δ),The steady-state values of the adjoint variables in (31)–(33) becomeλ¯MI=μ(ωC−c0)(ρ+δ)·d¯μ=0C,λ¯RI=μ(ρ+δ)·(p¯C−ωC)·d¯μ=0C,λ¯C=d¯C(ρ+δ)(μβ·d¯μ=0C).In this case,λ¯MIcorresponds to the net revenues of the manufacturer in the absence of demand expansion, that is,(ωC−c0)·d¯μ=0C,multiplied by the expansion parameter μ, with the total adjusted by the discounting and decay rates. A similar interpretation applies to the retailer’s shadow priceλ¯RI,with the margin now being(p¯C−ωC)instead of the manufacturer’s one, namely,(ωC−c0).To illustrate the theory presented above, we provide a numerical example. We choose the following parameter values:Demandparameters:α=1,β=0.5,μ=0.15,Costparameters:c0=0.4,cr=0.5,PRPefficiencyparameters:bM=0.2(or0.05),bR=0.05(or0.20),Decayanddiscountparameters:δ=0.1,ρ=0.1,Cooperativewholesaleprice:wC=0.85.For the PRP efficiency parameters, we consider two cases, namely, a case where the manufacturer is more efficient than the retailer(bM=0.2,bR=0.05),and the mirror case where the retailer is more efficient(bM=0.05,bR=0.20). It is easy to verify that the above parameters satisfy Assumption 1and the conditions stated in Proposition 1. The cooperative solution is obtained by computing the stable manifold of the saddle point E1 associated with the optimal system (14 and 15). Next, the incentive strategies are obtained by augmenting the costate variables (29) and (30) with the above optimal system. Further, as alluded to before, the wholesale price, which is a decision variable in the incentive-equilibrium problem, cancels out in the vertically integrated (or cooperative) solution, and therefore, wChas to be chosen in some way, e.g., by negotiation or by requiring a property to be satisfied, such as a fair division of total revenues. Although the selection of a particular value for wCis not a focal point of this paper, we shall vary wCand see its impact on the players’ profits.The results call for the following observations:1.Figs. 1(a) and 2(a) show that the price is monotonically decreasing over time. This follow-the-cost pricing scheme has also been obtained in other dynamic-pricing models where the cost declines over time because of, e.g., learning-by-doing in the production process. In such a case, the unit-production cost decreases with cumulative production (state variable in learning-by-doing literature), whereas here, it decreases with the returns of previously purchased products. The price reaches the steady state according to the manufacturer’s production benefits,c0−crrC. When the difference is small (large), the price reaches its steady state earlier (later) over the planning horizon. In addition, its shape is governed by the return rate. When the CLSC achieves all the environmental performance, i.e., rC≃ 1, the pricing strategies quickly reach the steady state. For a discussion of pricing in a dynamic oligopoly (horizontal competition) and a dynamic vertical structure (supply chain or marketing channel), see, e.g., Jørgensen and Zaccour (2004). Finally, the CLSC seeks to promptly adjust the price at the steady state to fully take advantage of a higher demand and market expansion.Figs. 1(b) and 2(b) show that the investment levels of both players in the product recovery program are somewhat constant over time and this suggests that firms within a CLSC should substantially invest at the beginning to exploit the market expansion and increase profits. Plus, manufacturers fully benefit from increasing PRP rates from an operational perspective. The environmental performance drives firms’ PRP strategies. In fact, when the CLSC’s environmental performance is near perfect (rC≃ 1), investments in PRP aim at maintaining a good consumer portfolio that would otherwise naturally decrease. While firms’ PRP investments assume the same shape, the difference in the firms’ operational efficiency, bi, determines the different investment levels at each instant of time (see Figs. 1(b) and 2(b)). When the manufacturer’s (retailer’s) operational efficiency is higher than that of the other firm, she invests a higher amount. Interestingly, an efficient manufacturer reaches its steady state at the same speed as an efficient retailer, although firms have misaligned interests for closing the loop: the manufacturer has both operational and marketing motivations to invest in PRP, while the retailer only exploits the market-expansion potentiality. This result depends on the construction of credible incentives where when one player sets an incentive strategy, it is in the best interest of the opponent to act in accordance with the agreement. If the latter cheats on the cooperative solution, the former deviates from the cooperative solution as well.The return rate increases over time and reaches a steady-state value (of approximately 0.92) really early on the planning horizon, independently of the firms’ operational efficiency (see Figs. 1(c) and 2(c)). The behavior of the return-rate trajectories is the product of an increase in PRP spending over time, market expansion and a decline in production cost (and consequently a lower price). Firms within a CLSC are aware of the operational and marketing benefits that the return rate supplies; thus reaching the steady-state value represents a major target. In fact, whilerC(0)=0,the CLSC performsrC(20)=0,8,that is, incentives drive firms through the implementation of the cooperative solution, which represents the best deal to perform the return rate. Plus, firms in CLSCs should be aware of the fact that the effectiveness of the incentives already provides environmental and economic advantages at the beginning of the planning horizon.Looking at the shadow prices under cooperation (Figs. 1(d) and 2(d)) and under incentive strategies (Figs. 1(e) and 2(e)), we observe that λC(t) is larger than the sum ofλMI(t)andλRI(t),independently of the difference in the firms’ operational efficiencies. This result can be interpreted as follows: in the absence of cooperation, each firm values the returns only in terms of its own payoff while disregarding the positive impact they have on the other player’s profit. It is a well-known result that in a noncooperative game, the level of provision of public good (here, the investment in PRP) is lower than in a cooperative solution. By implementing incentive strategies, the two CLSC partners eliminate the temptation to deviate from the cooperative solution, which would otherwise signify underinvestments in PRP. This is achieved by imposing some penalty terms on any deviation from the cooperative solution. By design, these penalties imply that each player is economically better off implementing the cooperative solution than deviating from it, conditional on the fact that the other player also chooses to cooperate. Interestingly,λMI(t)andλRI(t)reach their steady state through opposite trajectories: whileλMI(t)shows an increasing path before reaching the steady state,λRI(t)decreases in the beginning of the planning horizon. This is probably due to the fact that the retailer’s price incentive is constructed through ωC, which is exogenous; therefore, the rate of improvement in the retailer’s objective function decreases in the short term and then reaches its steady-state value as the benchmark valueωC=0.85,which is not optimal.Figs. 1(h) and 2(h) display the total individual profits at the steady state as a function of the wholesale price ωC. As one would expect, the manufacturer’s payoff is increasing in ωC, and the retailer’s profit is decreasing in ωC. Independent of the firms’ operational efficiency, there exists aωC=ωC*through which a CLSC equally shares the total cooperative value. As Figs. 1(h) and 2(h) show,ωC*=0.8.Finally, as mentioned earlier, the ultimate choice of ωCdepends on several exogenous elements, such as, firms’ decisional power, the implementation of specific contracts and the presence of competition. Thus, CLSC parties should identify and negotiate its amount according to the most appropriate profit-splitting rule.The trajectories of the price-penalty terms ηi(t) are exhibited in Figs. 1(f) and 2(f). These trajectories do not depend on the firms’ operational efficiency while it always results that ηR(t) > ηM(t). Therefore, the manufacturer’s (retailer’s) strategy has a high (low) weight on the retailer’s (manufacturer’s) pricing strategy. This result derives from the fact that the manufacturer has a dual motivation (operational and marketing) to close the loop; therefore the low incentive ηM(t) signifies that she already sets her pricing strategies to do more. Her move to the cooperative solution is thus simple. In contrast, the retailer only has marketing motivations to contribute to the return rate; therefore, the cooperative solution is a substantial challenge, and the high incentive ηR(t) translates into a high dependency on ω. Notice that the trajectories ηi(t) (as for λi(t)) have opposite directions. The manufacturer’s price incentive to set the wholesale price at the cooperative solution increases over time and reaches the steady-state value quickly. In contrast, the retailer’s price incentive decreases over time and the steady state is reached later than the manufacturer’s price incentive. This difference is again due to the effect of ωC, which plays an opposite role inside ηM(t) and ηR(t). High values for ωClead to a lower impact of the manufacturer’s pressure on the retailer’s pricing strategy and thus, a lower willingness to perform the cooperative solution.The trajectories of PRP-penalty terms are exhibited in Figs. 1(g) and 2(g). Note that in Fig. 2(g), as ψR(t) is very small, its value has been multiplied by 75 for readability purposes. All trajectories are always increasing over time, independent of the firms’ operational efficiency. This result demonstrates that both firms wish to set their PRP efforts at the cooperative solution because it is a firm’s best interest to invest in PRP to increase the return rate, and this is the best decision for the opponent as well. Interestingly, the difference in the firms’ efficiency biplays a role. In fact, the PRP incentive will be lower for the most efficient firm. This result is intuitive: when a firm is efficient, she already invests more in PRP (e.g., see Figs. 1(b) and 2(b)) and the move to the cooperative solution will be much easier.In this paper, we showed how to implement a cooperative (joint-maximization) solution in a supply chain by using incentive strategies. We recall that in a vertical structure, coordination has three important implications. First, it leads to higher total payoffs than does decentralization. Second, it leads to lower prices and higher investments in product recovery programs. Finally, coordination allows for a higher environmental performance. These results are not surprising, as it has been repeatedly shown in both the supply chain and marketing channel literatures that coordination is better than decentralization for all parties involved. What is new, and therein lies our main contribution, is (i) the use of incentive strategies to reach the coordinated solution in a dynamic CLSC; and (ii) the development of a model that combines both operational and marketing aspects in a dynamic CLSC. The marketing-operations interface has clearly been overlooked in the literature up to now.In any modeling effort, some hypotheses are needed either for mathematical tractability or to enable the authors to focus on some particular points in a parsimonious way. Our study does not escape this rule, and consequently, we believe some extensions are worth conducting. First, the assumption that demand is influenced by returns, but not the other way around, is clearly a simplifying one. In an extension, one could add lagged demand in the dynamics of returns to account for the missing loop.33We thank one reviewer for suggesting this idea.Second, the assumption of infinite reuse for returned products should be relaxed and should instead suppose a finite number of reuses. In the same vein, we could analyze the deteriorating quality of reused products with the number of times they enter the manufacturing process. Third, the assumption that the return rate is a function of PRP activities may be a strong one in some industries. Here, monetary incentives to the consumer could be explicitly added to boost the returns. Also, we could analyze the case where the returns also depend on some stochastic parameter. Moreover, the case where competition is present in the returns market is clearly of empirical interest. Finally, as take-back legislation provides incentives to producers for taking responsibility over the entire product life cycle (e.g., Atasu & Subramanian, 2012), it would be of interest to consider the case where the remanufactured product is destined for a secondary market. This would raise challenging issues, related to pricing, product labeling and product cannibalization, which are worth studying.In this section, we analyze the optimal vector field (14) and (15) in more detail. Note that the optimality conditions are incomplete, as the transversality conditionlimt→∞e−ρtλC(t)=0still does not help to single out an optimal solution (see section 3.7 in Grass et al., 2008). We show that this vector field displays different qualitative behaviors, also called bifurcations, depending upon the parameter values. Since (14) and (15) is a one-state model with ρ > 0, we note, following Proposition 3.83 in Grass et al. (2008), that unstable equilibria are the only possible limit sets for the system (14) and (15). This property naturally rules out the presence of closed orbit as an equilibrium.We suppose that μ and crare strictly positive; otherwise, the problem becomes fully static because the state variable r would be completely absent from the payoff functions of both players. To simplify calculations, we denotex=bM+bR,s=3μβcr24,n=(13[α−βc0βcr−1μ])2andm=13(1μ+2[α−βc0βcr]). The optimal system (14) and (15) in state-costate coordinates is given by(34)r˙C=−δrC+xλC(35)λ˙C=(ρ+δ)λC−s((rC+m)2−n).The equilibrium points(r¯C,λ¯C)of the above system are obtained by solving(36)(r¯C+m)2−n−δ(ρ+δ)xsr¯C=0(r¯C+m−δ(ρ+δ)2xs)2=Δ=n+(δ(ρ+δ)2xs)2−δ(ρ+δ)mxs.Next, the Jacobian matrix, to be analyzed at the equilibrium points for stability, is given byJ=[−δx−2s(r¯C+m)(ρ+δ)].The eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix at the equilibrium point(r¯C,λ¯C)are then given byz1=ρ2−ρ24−2xs(r¯C+m−(ρ+δ)δ2xs)z2=ρ2+ρ24−2xs(r¯C+m−(ρ+δ)δ2xs).The system (34) and (35) displays bifurcations, that is, varying qualitative behaviors depending on the values of the parameters. We characterize these bifurcation scenarios as the following four possibilities:(1)When Δ < 0, there exist no equilibrium points for the system (34) and (35). The phase diagram for this case is illustrated in 3(a). Here, the trajectories grow unbounded in magnitude with time.WhenΔ=0,there exists one equilibrium point for the system (34) and (35). The eigenvalues associated with the Jacobian matrix are {0, ρ}. So this equilibrium point is not asymptotically stable. The phase diagram for this case is illustrated in 3(b).When Δ > 0, there exist two equilibrium points for the system (34) and (35) given byE1:(r¯1C,λ¯1C)=(δ(ρ+δ)2xs−(m+Δ),δx(δ(ρ+δ)2xs−(m+Δ)))E2:(r¯2C,λ¯2C)=(δ(ρ+δ)2xs−(m−Δ),δx(δ(ρ+δ)2xs−(m−Δ))).Clearly we haver¯2C>r¯1Candλ¯2C>λ¯1C. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix associated with equilibrium point E1 arez1=ρ2+ρ24+2xsΔ>0andz2=ρ2−ρ24+2xsΔ<0. So, E1 is a saddle point. Then we have the following two cases regarding the stability properties of the equilibrium point E2.(a)Whenρ2>8Δxs,the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix associated with the equilibrium point E2 arez1=ρ2+ρ24−2xsΔ>0andz2=ρ2−ρ24−2xsΔ>0. So, clearly E2 is an unstable node. The phase diagram for this case is illustrated in Fig. 3(c). Further, the stable manifold is not defined for the entire state space, i.e., only forrC(0)∈(−∞,r¯2C)do we have trajectories (rC(t), λC(t)) converging to(r¯1C,λ¯1C)along the stable manifold Ws(E1).44The stable manifold associated with the saddle point (E1) is the set of points starting from which the solution of the planar dynamical system (34) and (35) tends to the equilibrium E1 as t → ∞, for a more formal definition see Hirsch and Smale (1970).Whenρ2<8Δxs,the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix associated with the equilibrium point E2 arez1=ρ2+i−(ρ24−2xsΔ)andz2=ρ2−i−(ρ24−2xsΔ). So, clearly, E2 is an unstable focus. The phase diagram for this case is illustrated in Fig. 3(d). Again, the stable manifold is not defined for the entire state space. Here, there exists anruCsuch that forrC(0)∈(−∞,ruC)we have trajectories (rC(t), λC(t)) converging to(r¯1C,λ¯1C)along the stable manifold Ws(E1).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
