@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Synthetic indicators of mutual funds’ environmental responsibility: An application of the Reference Point Method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We address the evaluation of mutual funds from the Socially Responsible Investment point of view.We use a double reference point (reservation–aspiration) scheme to evaluate the funds.We build synthetic indicators (weak, strong and mixed) for each fund, as a result of the study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Socially Responsible Investment,Environment,Equity mutual funds evaluation,Multicriteria decision analysis,Reference Point Method,Synthetic indicators,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Socially Responsible Investing (SRI) is broadly defined as an investment process that integrates not only financial but also social, environmental, and ethical (SEE) considerations into investment decision making. SRI has grown rapidly around the world in the last decades. In the last years, given the causes of the 2008 financial crisis, ethical, social, environmental and governance concerns have become even more relevant investment decision criteria. However, while a diverse set of models have been developed to support investment decision-making based on financial criteria, models including also social responsibility criteria are rather scarce.The aim of this paper, in which we focus on the environmental dimension, is to assist individual investors in their investment decisions providing them with a synthetic indicator of mutual funds’ environmental responsibility, which is by nature a multicriteria concept and therefore multicriteria techniques are to be used to measure it.The proposed approach is based on the double (reservation–aspiration) Reference Point Method. This scheme is applied to each fund of a randomly selected set of U.S. equity mutual funds, in order to determine, on the basis of a given set of indicators, a pair of synthetic indicators that measure the weak and the strong environmental responsibility degree of each mutual fund, relying on the particular preferences of the investor.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The majority of investors follow a conventional investment strategy based on maximization of wealth. Traditionally, choosing an alternative or non-conventional investment strategy (as a SRI strategy) is associated with a higher psychological risk than that associated with the selection of a conventional investment strategy (non-SRI strategy). There is then a gap between perceived financial risk and psychological risk when investing conventionally as compared with investing in SRI. But, although marginal at its beginning, the stream of investors seeking to invest only on Social and Environmental Responsible (SER) firms has grown to become an unavoidable fact in capital markets. Indeed, the last financial crisis and the succession of financial scandals have catalyzed and reinforced the SER investors’ movement. This growing interest on Socially Responsible Investment has also been reflected in the increasing number of publications focusing on portfolio selection with non-financial criteria. Some recent examples are Dorfleitner and Utz (2012); Ballestero, Bravo, Pérez-Gladish, Arenas-Parra, and Plà-Santamaria (2012) and Utz, Wimmer, Hirschberger, and Steuer (2014).In order to assist these investors to identify and select socially and environmentally responsible companies, several signals and measurements have reached financial markets: certifications, codes of conduct and social notations by agencies. Because certifications are specific to the industry where companies operate, and the codes of conduct are often distinctively and independently developed by each firm, the social rating agencies tried to standardize social and environmental information conveyed in connection with the companies. MSCI is a leading provider of investment decision support tools. MSCI ESG STATS (known under the name of KLD Research & Analytics Inc.) is a statistical summary of MSCI ESG Research’s US environmental, social and governance research database. KLD offers an aggregate rating of corporate social responsibility for more than 3000 U.S. companies. To meet the needs of social investors, KLD provides research, benchmarks, compliance, and consulting services analogous to those provided by financial research service firms. KLD has been providing research products and services to the financial services market since 1988. Featuring the largest corporate social research staff in the world, KLD produces high-quality consistent research that institutions have come to rely on. This rating is based on 8 social and environmental dimensions, which are in turn, integrated by more than 60 criteria. Nevertheless, given their heterogeneity, SER investors are motivated by different values and will seek companies respecting particular dimensions of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). However, very few studies can be found aimed at assisting the investors in their selection of SER companies which serve best their social and environmental values (e.g. Hallerbach, Ning, Soppe, & Spronk, 2004). This lack of tools assisting investors in SRI is even more important when we refer to the main tool for SRI, socially responsible mutual funds (SRMF).Social responsible mutual funds, also known as socially responsible invested funds, are one of the main instruments of SRI. The SRI strategy most used by mutual fund managers is screening, positive and/or negative, which means the evaluation of mutual funds based on social, environmental, ethical and/or good corporate governance criteria. Positive screening implies investing in profitable companies that make positive contributions to society. Conversely, negative screening implies avoiding investing in companies whose products and business practices are harmful to individuals, communities, or the environment.Several attempts have been done to measure mutual funds’ social responsibility degree based on the above described investment strategy. Barnett and Salomon (2006); Renneboog, Horst, and Zhang (2008); Lee, Humphrey, Benson, and Ahn (2010); Jegourel and Maveyraud (2010); and Scholtens (2007) propose screening intensity (number of applied screens) as a proxy of mutual funds’ social responsibility degree. Renneboog et al. (2008) and Scholtens (2007) take into account not only the number of applied screens but also their type: positive, negative, direct and/or indirect infringement. Pérez-Gladish and M’Zali (2010) propose an AHP-based ranking method for socially responsible mutual funds based on screening which also takes into account the engagement policy of the fund, the followed SRI research process, control of companies, external control of the fund, competence of fund managers and communication with companies and investors, among others. Pérez-Gladish and M’Zali (2010) call these criteria “Quality of Information” as referred to the transparency and credibility of the non-financial information provided by the fund manager about SRI funds.The evaluation model proposed in this paper, instead of using screening intensity for measuring the environmental responsibility degree of the mutual funds, evaluates the Corporate Social Performance of each of the firms invested in by the equity mutual funds. Then, given the percentage invested by the mutual fund in each company, the scores are aggregated into one quantitative measure for each mutual fund. In addition, a new criterion, quality of SRI management, is included in the model to incorporate information about the companies’ selection process, investment policy, screening process, research process and the level of expertise of the fund managers with respect to SRI. Thus, the evaluation model considers two different levels when measuring the environmental responsibility of mutual funds: the company level and the mutual fund management level.The proposed evaluation model depends on the particular preferences about the importance to each decision criterion of a concrete investor with knowledge in the field of SRI (in what follows, Decision Maker, DM). The list of decision making criteria to be considered, especially socially responsible criteria, could change from one DM to another as they depend on diverse facts as the country, culture, religion or personal values and beliefs of the DM.The uncertainty, imprecision and/or ambiguity associated to social responsibility measurement have not been included in this paper although they can affect the investor’s perception of risk. We have relied on the precise measures of CSR provided by KLD rating agency for US companies including in the model only financial risk and return based on historical data provided by Morningstar Ltd. In this work, a mutual funds’ evaluation model was designed for U.S. equity mutual funds. The proposed model is based on a Multicriteria Decision Making Technique: the Reference Point Method. This technique, which is briefly described in Section 2, has been applied in order to develop weak and strong synthetic indicators for each fund. These indicators are based, respectively, on the weak sustainability paradigm, which allows compensations among the different indicators (that is, a bad performance in one can be compensated by a good performance in another one), and on the strong sustainability paradigm, which does not allow such compensations.The following steps have been considered in the proposed approach in this paper:Step 1. Identification of the relevant investment criteria.Step 2. Definition of descriptors of qualitative performance for each criterion.Step 3. Definition of “targets” associated with each criterion: “good” (aspiration) and “neutral”(reservation) performance levels.Step 4. Criteria weighting through MACBETH approach.Step 5. Construction, using the reference point approach, of synthetic indicators for measuring the weak and strong environmental responsibility of the considered mutual funds.The structure of the paper is the following: in Section 2, the multicriteria techniques used are briefly described; Section 3 presents the main decision making criteria; in Section 4, the descriptors of performance for each criterion are presented and reference levels are obtained from dialogue with the DM; Section 5 presents criteria weighting obtained using MACBETH and based on the qualitative judgments of the DM; Section 6 is devoted to the construction of the synthetic indicators that measure the weak and strong environmental responsibility degree of each mutual fund; finally, conclusions are presented.In general, a Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) problem consists of analyzing (ranking, classifying, choosing) a series of possible alternatives, taking into account different criteria simultaneously. In our case, the set of alternatives is the set of mutual funds, while the criteria are the different SRI indicators. The idea is to give an overall measure of the social responsibility of each fund, by means of taking into account the values of all the indicators. Many different MCDM techniques have been developed so far (see, for example, Steuer (1986) or Miettinen (1999), for overviews). When the decision makers can give desirable values for each criterion, then it is natural to measure the goodness of each alternative in terms of its closeness to these desired levels. This is precisely the basic idea underlying the reference point approach, where the reference point is formed by these desirable values (called reference levels). Originally proposed in Wierzbicki (1980), this approach consists of considering a so-called achievement scalarizing function, which somehow gives an idea of how far is the alternative from satisfying the reference values. In a traditional multiobjective problem, where I objective functionsfi,i=1,…,I, have to be simultaneously optimized (let us say maximized), the simplest achievement scalarizing function takes the following form:(1)s(f(x),q,μ)=mini=1,…,I{μi(fi(x)-qi)},wherefis the vector of objective functions (criteria),xis the vector of decision variables (alternatives),q=(q1,…,qI)is the vector formed by the reference values, andμis a vector of weights, whose role can range from purely normalizing (scaling) factors to fully preferential parameters (Ruiz, Luque, & Cabello, 2009). Under this formulation, the best alternative is the one that maximizes the achievement scalarizing function (1).The original reference point scheme can be generalized if a double reference point (reservation–aspiration) is used. Namely, the decision maker is asked to give, for each criterion, a reservation level (i.e. a level under which the values of the function are not regarded as acceptable), and an aspiration level, with the same meaning as before (that is, desirable values for the criteria). Wierzbicki et al. (2000) proposed this scheme as a means of carrying out objective rankings of alternatives. Namely, if we denote byqirandqiathe reservation and aspiration (respectively) values for criterion i, then, the following individual achievement scalarizing function can be used:(2)si(fi(x),qia,qir)=βfi(x)-qirqir-qilo,ifqilo⩽fi(x)⩽qir,fi(x)-qirqia-qir,ifqir⩽fi(x)⩽qia,1+αfi(x)-qiaqiup-qia,ifqia⩽fi(x)⩽qiup,whereα>0is a parameter that rewards the values of the function that improve the aspiration level,β>0is a penalizing factor for values under the reservation level, andqiupandqiloare, respectively, upper and lower bounds forfiover the feasible set of alternatives. This individual achievement function measures the behavior of the alternative with respect to criterion i (the higher the value ofsi, the better the performance is). Later on, these individual achievement functions can be aggregated in order to obtain an overall measure of each alternative. Wierzbicki et al. (2000) proposed to use the following achievement function:(3)s(f(x),qa,qr)=mini=1,…,I{si(fi(x),qia,qir)}+ρ∑i=1Isi(fi(x),qia,qir),whereρis a small positive number.As mentioned before, the strong sustainability paradigm does not allow compensations among the different indicators. On the other hand, the weak paradigm does allow this kind of compensation. In this sense, the first term of the achievement function (3) can be regarded as an aggregation that follows the strong paradigm, while the second term can be considered to follow the weak paradigm. These facts have led us to adapt this double reference point scheme to our problem, as described next. This scheme is based on the one described in Ruiz, Cabello, and Luque (2010) for the determination of synthetic sustainability indicators.Let us denote by N the number of indicators and by M the number of funds considered in the study, and letδijbe the value of indicator i for fund j(i=1,…,N,j=1,…,M). In this study, all the indicators are of type “more is better” (which corresponds to the maximization scheme). As described in Sections 4 and 6, the double reference points (reservation–aspiration) for each indicator have been chosen according to the DM’s opinions about what is neutral and good (respectively) for each criterion.Then, for each indicator i(i=1,…,N), and taking into account the reference points given by the decision maker,qiaandqir, the following individual achievement function is considered:(4)si(δij,qia,qir)=δij-qirqir-qimin,ifqimin⩽δij⩽qir,δij-qirqia-qir,ifqir⩽δij⩽qia,1+δij-qiaqimax-qia,ifqia⩽δij⩽qimax,whereqiminandqimaxare, respectively, the minimum and maximum value that the indicator can take. Therefore, we have adapted expression (2) by consideringα=β=1. This way, as seen in Fig. 1,sitakes values between-1and 0 ifδijis under the reservation value, values between 0 and 1 ifδijis between the reservation and aspiration values, and values between 1 and 2 ifδijis over the aspiration value. Note that different values of parametersαandβcan be used in order to control the slopes of the first and last linear pieces of Fig. 1, allowing the DM to penalize more or less values under the reservation level, or to reward more or less values over the aspiration level. They can also be used in order to guarantee properties like concavity (traditionally assumed for utility functions in portfolio selection) of the achievement function. Nevertheless, in portfolio selection, concavity is usually assumed for utility functions regarding expected return, as greater return expectations are usually linked to greater risk assumptions. In our case, the return indicator, as will be seen in Sections 3 and 4 is already a risk adjusted one, but still, the achievement function for this indicator, withα=β=1is concave.The weight factors used in the reference point schemes have traditionally had a normalization (scaling) aim. But it is also possible to use preferential weights in such schemes (Luque, Miettinen, Eskelinen, & Ruiz, 2009; Ruiz et al., 2009). In our case, we have used preferential weights, obtained from the judgements of the DM, using the MACBETH technique, as described in Section 5. MACBETH (Measuring Attractiveness by a Categorical Based Evaluation Technique) (Bana e Costa & Vansnick, 1994) is an interactive method for multiple criteria decision analysis based on semantic judgments about the differences in attractiveness of several options to help a Decision Maker (DM) quantify the relative attractiveness of each option (see Bana e Costa & Vansnick, 1999, Bana e Costa, De Corte, & Vansnick, 2003, 2012, for references & mathematical foundations). The weighting process has been supported using the M-MACBETH software.Letωidenote the weight given to indicator i, and let us assume that the weights have been normalized so that∑i=1Nωi=1. Then, the weak synthetic indicator of each fund j is built using the classical additive scheme:(5)Iwj=∑i=1Nωisi(δij,qia,qir).This weak scheme allows full compensation among indicators. That is, a poor performance in one indicator can be compensated by a good performance in another one. Let us now describe how to build the strong synthetic indicator, which does not allow any compensation among the different indicators. The use of the direct minimization scheme (first term of achievement function (3)) can produce certain undesired effects:•It would be desirable that, if a given alternative had the worst possible achievement value (in our case,-1) for the indicator with the greatest weight (the most important one), then the value of the strong indicator was the worst possible one (-1). This is not guaranteed by the direct minimization scheme.If all the achievement values of a given alternative are greater than 1 (that is, the alternative performs over the reference levels for all the indicators), then the strong indicator should also be greater than 1. Again, the direct minimization does not guarantee this.When the direct minimization scheme is used, the effect of the weights is opposite for negative and positive achievement values. For negative achievement values, a greater weight produces a worse value of the strong indicator, and for positive achievement values a greater weight produces a better value of the strong indicator.In order to avoid these effects, we have designed a modified procedure to develop the strong indicator. The idea underlying this procedure is to consider only indicators in the worst set (if there are negative achievement values, only these values are considered; if there are not negative values, but there are values under 1, only these values are considered; if all the values are over 1, all of them are considered). Then, a translation is made to put the values considered in the[-1,0]interval, so that the effect of the weights is the desired one, and after calculating the minimum value, it is again translated to the original interval. Besides, weights are modified so that the greatest weight is 1. To build the strong indicator, the following procedure must be followed:•Build the modified weightsω¯i:ω¯i=ωimaxk=1,…,Nωk,i=1,…,NLet us denoteI={1,…,N}. For each fund j, let us denotesij=si(δij,qia,qir), and let us define the following sets of indexes:Ij0={i∈I/sij<0},Ij1={i∈I/sij<1},I‾j=Ij0,ifIj0≠∅;Ij1,ifIj0=∅,andIj1≠∅;I,otherwise.We define the correction constantkj=0,ifIj0≠∅;1,ifIj0=∅,andIj1≠∅;2,otherwise.and the corresponding corrected values of the achievement functions for fund j:s¯ij=sij-kj,i∈I‾j.We define the strong synthetic indicator of fund j:(6)Isj=kj+mini∈I‾jω¯is¯ij.In Table 1, a hypothetical example with three alternatives and three indicators is shown. The value under eachsiis the corresponding weightωi, and the value unders¯iis the corrected weightω¯i. Alternative 1 has achievement value −1 for the indicator with the greatest weight, and thus, the strong indicator equals −1, while the direct minimization scheme would have produced value −0.40. For alternative 2, all the achievement values are over 1 and, while the direct minimization scheme produces value 0.39 (under 1), our scheme produces value 1.4. Finally alternative 3 achieves the worst value (0.5) for the indicator with the greatest weight (indicator 2), but the direct minimization scheme takes the value corresponding to indicator 1. The strong indicator takes the value corresponding to indicator 2.Finally, given that the weak and strong indicators are extreme cases, allowing full compensation and no compensation (respectively), partially compensatory synthetic indicators can be built as follows:(7)Iλj=λIwj+(1-λ)Isj,whereλ∈[0,1]is the compensation coefficient: the larger the value ofλ, the more compensation is allowed. Forλ=0, we obtain the strong indicator, and forλ=1, we obtain the weak indicator. In practice, it is not simple to decide which value of parameterλis the most suitable one. One possibility is, as we have done in this paper, to calculate the rankings for different values ofλ, and let the DM decide which one (s) he prefers. Another possibility is making some questions to the DM to estimate a value ofλ. For example, if one indicator showed a bad performance, how many indicators would have to show a good performance in order to compensate for this? If the DM answers that it is impossible to compensate a bad performance, then we would takeλ=0. If the answer was one (only one good performance compensates a bad performance), thenλ=1. If the answer was a numberνbetween 2 andN-1, then we can perform a linear interpolation and takeλ=N-νN-1.In this work we have concentrated on the U.S. case, although the proposed ranking could be adapted to other countries in order to assist investors with different beliefs or personal values. Three main areas of concern or dimensions have been considered. One, ”Quality of the SRI Management” related to the managers’ investment practices, their experience and the transparency and credibility of the information provided (Dimension 1); second, “Social, Environment and Governance, SEG”, corresponding to socially responsible practices of companies invested in by the mutual funds (Dimension 2); and, finally, “Financial Performance” (Dimension 3). For each of these areas of concern several criteria have been defined to a total of 10 (see Fig. 2).Mutual funds managers can influence the degree of social and environmental responsibility of their funds as they define investment strategies, the research processes and selection rules (Koellner, Weber, Fenchel, & Scholz, 2005). Therefore, it seems adequate to incorporate in the evaluation model criteria about the quality of the SRI management. Pérez-Gladish and M’Zali (2010) propose, from review of literature and current practice, relevant criteria related to the quality of the SRI management. Thus, based on Pérez-Gladish and M’Zali (2010), we have considered 4 criteria: screening approach, advocacy and public policy, research process, external control, and we have added a new criterion, which, from further revision of current practice, has also been found relevant within this dimension: the mutual fund manager’s SRI competence (see Table 8).Criteria within the Environmental Dimension were derived taking into account KLD’s methodology for their Corporate Social Ratings Monitor (KLD, 2007). In this work we will evaluate the environmental responsibility of equity mutual funds from the evaluation of the firms invested in by the mutual fund taking into account KLD criteria: climate change, products and services, operations management and other (see Fig. 3). KLD uses screens to monitor corporate social performance of U.S. firms. They have positive and negative screens. The positive screens indicate strengths of a firm and the negative screens indicate weaknesses or concerns. A strength suggests that the firm is engaged in some socially responsible actions which may have positive effects on society, and a concern implies that the company actions may have negative effects on society. Fig. 3, and Tables 9 and 10show the criteria (strengths and concerns) used under the “Environment” heading.Finally, for the financial dimension, the risk-adjusted return has been considered as the only indicator.A total of 46 real U.S. domiciled large cap equity mutual funds constitute our set of alternatives or investment options. Our universe is composed by seasonal funds (age equal or greater than 10years). These funds have at least 70% of assets in domestic stocks. They are characterized by Morningstar Ltd. based on style and size of the stocks they own. In this paper, we have considered large market capitalization funds belonging to growth or blend categories. Growth funds main goal is capital appreciation with little or no dividend payouts. Blend funds are funds with portfolios made up of a combination of value and growth stocks. Financial and non-financial data have been considered for 2007 in order to illustrate the presented example.Performance of mutual funds on criteria belonging to the “Quality of SRI Management” and “Environment” areas of concern is of qualitative nature. The descriptors proposed in this work are constructed on the basis of the identification, for each criterion, of equity mutual funds’ strengths and concerns which are based on KLD’s strengths and concerns for U.S. companies on 31-12-2007. For the ”Quality of SRI management”, and based on dialogues with experts from rating agencies, only strengths have been considered (see Table 11) with the aim of rewarding “good” practices.Based on information provided in the mutual funds websites and Social Investment Forum (SIF), we have computed for each criterion within the “Quality of SRI management” concern i (i=1,…,5), the number of strengths accomplished by each mutual fund, j:(8)δij=∑k=1KiSik(j),j=1,2,…,46,whereSik(j)is a binary variable which takes value “1” when the fund j accomplishes strength k within criterion i, and value “0” otherwise.Kiis the number of strengths considered for criterion i.The values of the Quality of SRI Management indicators for all the funds considered, built as described above, can be found in Table 13, (columns 1–5).From discussions with the DM, different levels of qualitative performance have been identified for these criteria based on the number of strengths accomplished by the fund. The DM established several reference levels for each criterion. Reference levels for “neutral” and “good” have been highlighted with yellow and green colors, respectively, in the following tables, given that they will be used as reference levels in Section 6. The levels considered for the Quality of SRI Management dimension are displayed in Table 2.For the “Environment” dimension we have defined descriptors of qualitative performance for each of the criteria. With this aim, we first computed the qualitative environmental performance of the companies invested in by the equity mutual funds using KLD’s binary variables for strengths and concerns. Following KLD procedure, the variable is equal to one if the firm meets a strength/concern of the environmental criterion and equal to zero otherwise.Then, for each firm s, we compute its performance for each criterion i belonging to the environment dimension(Fis)in the following way (see Table 12for the description of the strengths,(Sik), and concerns(Ciu), for each criterion i):(9)Fis=∑k=1KiSik-∑u=1UiCiu.The descriptor of the qualitative performance of each mutual fund j, in each criterion i (i=6,…,9), belonging to the environment dimension, is obtained as follows:(10)δij=∑s∈Pjαs(j)Fis,j=1,2,…,46,wherePjis the set of firms invested in by mutual fund j, andαs(j)is the weighting of firm s in mutual fund j, with∑s∈Pjαs(j)=1(this information was provided by Morningstar).The values of the Environment indicators for all the funds considered, built as described above, can be found in Table 13, (columns 6–9).Again, performance levels (including reference levels) for the above criteria have been obtained from discussions with the DM, as displayed in Tables 3–6.Finally, financial performance of each mutual fund is measured using Morningstar RatingTM for funds. This rating, often called the “star rating”, debuted in 1985 and was quickly embraced by investors and advisors. The rating is a quantitative assessment of a fund’s past performance – both return and risk – as measured from one to five stars. It uses focused comparison groups to better measure the fund manager skill. Thus, the rating allows investors to distinguish among funds that use similar investment strategies. The method rates funds based on an enhanced Morningstar Risk-Adjusted Return measure, which also accounts for the effects of all sales charges, loads, or redemption fees. The original methodology defined risk as the underperformance relative to the 90-day Treasury Bills. With the enhanced methodology, risk is measured as the amount of variation in the fund’s performance, with more emphasis on downward variation. The Morningstar RatingTM is based on “expected utility theory”. The rating accounts for all variations in a fund’s monthly performance, with more emphasis on downward variations. It rewards consistent performance and reduces the possibility of strong short-term performance masking the inherent risk of a fund. Morningstar Risk Adjusted Return (MRAR) is a measure of a fund’s annualized historical excess return (excess is measured relative to risk-free investment in US Government Treasury Bills) adjusted for the fund’s historical volatility. The exact formula for MRAR is:(11)MRAR=1T∑t=1T(1+rt)-γ-12γ-1,wherertis the monthly geometric excess return, i.e. [(1+load-adjusted fund return)/(1+return for the risk-free asset)-1],γis a constant risk tolerance parameter and T is the number of months in the time period. Morningstar’s analysts have concluded thatγ=2results in fund rankings that are consistent with the risk tolerances of typical retail investors. MRAR is calculated fort=36,60,and120months depending on the length of performance history available for a fund (see www.morningstar.com). The values of the Financial indicator for all the funds considered, built as described above, can be found in Table 13, (column 10), and Table 7displays the levels of performance defined by the DM.Once relevant investment criteria have been identified as well as the descriptors of quantitative performance for each criterion and the respective reference levels, next step consists of obtaining the criteria weights using the MACBETH approach.Following MACBETH method, we first defined a fictitious mutual fund called “neutral” mutual fund (a mutual fund which is neutral in every criterion). The DM was first asked to answer the following questions: How much would a swing from neutral to each of the good performance levels for the 10 criteria, increase its overall attractiveness? With these answers the DM filled the last column in the judgments matrix. Then, the DM was asked to judge the difference in attractiveness from the most attractive swing to the second most attractive swing: How much more attractive is a swing from neutral to good in climate change than a swing from neutral to good in products and services? And so on, until completing the M-MACBETH judgments matrix (see Bana e Costa et al., 2003, for more technical details). The final judgements matrix obtained can be seen in Fig. 4.The histogram in Fig. 5shows the derived M-MACBETH weights (in percentages).Making use of these weights, in the next section we will construct the synthetic indicators for measuring the weak and strong environmental responsibility of the mutual funds considered in this study.Now, we will describe the process followed to obtain the synthetic environmental responsibility indicators, and we will display and comment the results obtained. In order to do so, we have followed the steps presented in Section 2.First, we have calculated the individual achievement functions for each indicator. To this end, we have applied expression (4), making use of the data about the performance of the funds for all the criteria, displayed in Table 13. For the calculation of the achievement functions, we need to use the maximum and minimum values of each indicator, together with the reservation and aspiration levels, which have been obtained as described in Section 4. All these data are displayed in Table 14. The values of the achievement functions for each fund can be seen in Table 15.These values are easy to interpret. A value smaller than 0 in an achievement function of a given fund means that the fund performs under the reservation value for the corresponding criterion. In particular, value −1 indicates that the fund has the worst performance of all funds for this criterion. A value between 0 and 1 means that the performance is over the reservation value, but under the aspiration value. Finally, a value over 1 means that the fund performs above the aspiration value for the given criterion, and if the value is 2, the fund is the best for the criterion.Next, we have built the weak synthetic indicator for each fund, making use of the weights obtained in Section 5, which are also displayed in Table 14 (6th column). The weak synthetic indicator is obtained using expression (5) (Section 2). The numerical values of the weak synthetic indicators, together with the corresponding ranking of funds, can be seen in Table 16(last column), and they are graphically represented in Fig. 6(top).It can be seen that the best funds for the weak synthetic indicator are funds 6, 8 and 9, whose score is 0.89. There are no funds scoring over 1, which means that no one is above a theoretical global aspiration level. Nevertheless, 28 of them have a score greater or equal to 0, meaning that they are above a theoretical global reservation level.It must be noted that the weak indicator allows full compensation among the indicators, so the results previously commented compensate bad performances with good performances. In order to obtain a result without compensations, we use the strong indicator, which is a measure of the worst performance of each fund.In order to build the strong synthetic indicator, we use the modified weights defined in Section 2, and displayed in Table 14 (last column). With this information, the strong indicator is built using expression (6). The numerical values of the strong synthetic indicators, together with the corresponding ranking of funds, can be seen in Table 16 (first column), and they are graphically represented in Fig. 6 (bottom).As can be seen, funds 13, 14, 15, 16, 25 and 35 share the first position of the ranking with a score of −0.53. All the funds have negative scores. This means that all of them perform under the reservation value for at least one indicator. It must be noted that the score −1 in this strong indicator means that the corresponding fund is the worst fund for the indicator with the highest weight. Funds 6, 8 and 9, which were the best for the weak indicator, do not have a good position with respect to the strong one. This means that funds 6, 8 and 9 perform poorly for some indicator (in this case, indicatorδ6), but compensate this performance with good performances in other indicators.Fig. 7gives a joint overview of the weak and strong indicators, depicted as a point cloud, with the weak indicator in the x-axis and the strong indicator in the y-axis.As can be seen, the strong indicator does not present a wide dispersion (most of the funds rank around −0.6), while the weak indicator has a greater dispersion. In this figure, the best funds are the ones placed more to the top and to the right of the graphic.Finally, given that the weak and strong indicators give the two extreme cases, we can build several mixed synthetic indicator, by varying the compensation coefficientλin expression (7) (Section 2). The results obtained forλ=0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8can be seen in Table 16, and they are depicted in Fig. 8.We can see how the scores range from the strong indicator score (λ=0) to the weak score (λ=1), asλgrows. It is worth noticing that funds 6, 8 and 9 reach quickly the first positions, as soon as a little compensation is allowed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Investors have a limited capacity for handling large amounts of information and a rating of a fund taking into account both, financial and non-financial aspects can provide a useful tool for investment decision making. In this paper we have proposed an evaluation model for mutual funds based on their socially responsible and financial performance which allows individual investors to make investment decisions taking into account socially responsible information about the mutual funds.The proposed method, the Reference Point Approach requires from the DM the establishment of two references (reservation–aspiration levels) for each environmental, social and financial indicator and, relaying on the definition of an achievement function, the model allows objective rankings of the mutual funds. A main feature of this model is that sometimes criteria can be, in the DMs opinion, of non-compensatory nature, i.e. a bad performance in one criterion cannot be compensated with a good performance in another criterion. In this case, strong synthetic indicators are a useful tool for the DM as providing a ranking of mutual funds that takes into account any bad performance in at least one criterion. On the other hand, weak indicators allow total compensation among criteria. Besides, we have also built partially compensating synthetic algorithms, which allow different degrees of compensation ranging between the two extreme cases (strong and weak). A simple way to determine the degree of compensation of the DM has been proposed, but more elaborated schemes are topics for further research.Due to the specific characteristics of the database used for measurement of the environmental and social performance of mutual funds, there seems to be little general variation between the environmental and social performance levels of the funds. Nevertheless the proposed methodology allows taking into account all the existing differences even if they are small differences.The objective of this work is just to rank mutual funds based on several criteria. Future research will incorporate the obtained environmental scores in a wider multi-objective portfolio selection model, together with the classical financial objectives: minimization of risk and the maximization of the return (or the maximization of risk-adjusted return), extending Markowitz’s portfolio selection model which considers as a measure of risk the variance. Besides, the proposed model in our paper could be easily applied to the evaluation (ranking) of any other types of assets including a mixed feasible set allowing then a higher diversification when solving the portfolio selection model.The ultimate goal of future research would be the development of a publicly available decision making tool, which allowed individual investors to evaluate each level of performance and to give weights to the criteria reflecting their opinions about the relative importance of each criterion.