@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessing productive efficiency of banks using integrated Fuzzy-DEA and bootstrapping: A case of Mozambican banks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose new Fuzzy-DEA α-level models to assess data uncertainty.Bootstrap truncated regressions are used to identify relevant variables on efficiency.Proposed models have been demonstrated using an application in Mozambican banks.Findings reveal that fuzziness is predominant over randomness in the results.Price of labor, price of capital, and market-share were found to be significant factors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis,Mozambique,Fuzzy-DEA,Banking efficiency,Bootstrapped regression,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Performance analysis has become a vital part of the management practices in the banking industry. There are numerous applications using DEA models to estimate efficiency in banking, and most of them assume that inputs and outputs are known with absolute precision. Here, we propose new Fuzzy-DEA α-level models to assess underlying uncertainty. Further, bootstrap truncated regressions with fixed factors are used to measure the impact of each model on the efficiency scores and to identify the most relevant contextual variables on efficiency. The proposed models have been demonstrated using an application in Mozambican banks to handle the underlying uncertainty. Findings reveal that fuzziness is predominant over randomness in interpreting the results. In addition, fuzziness can be used by decision-makers to identify missing variables to help in interpreting the results. Price of labor, price of capital, and market-share were found to be the significant factors in measuring bank efficiency. Managerial implications are addressed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the major research areas in banking is the measurement of the relative efficiency of banks by means of popular non-parametric techniques such as Data Envelopment Analysis (Hemmati, Dalghandi, & Nazari, 2013). In recent years, several scholars have developed new Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) models to handle input and output uncertainty (Hatami-Marbini, Tavana, Saati, & Agrell, 2013). A possible path to handle input/output uncertainty in DEA relies on the use of probability distributions to model their inherent randomness. These distributions are subsequently employed in stochastic DEA models (Morita & Seiford, 1999; Brázdik, 2004; El-Demerdash, El-Khodary, & Tharwat, 2013; Vaninsky, 2013). In such cases, however, these probability distributions require to be somewhat estimable a priori or a posteriori, limiting the use of stochastic DEA models in cases where the event is unique or deterministic. Alternatively, however, uncertainty in input/output may be related to imprecision or vagueness, rather than to randomness. This being the case, imprecision or vagueness in input/output values can be expressed by membership functions within the ambit of fuzzy logic (Coroianu, Gagolewski, & Grzegorzewski, 2013).This paper analyses the efficiency of Mozambican banks with three major Fuzzy DEA (FDEA) models based on the α-level approach. Thus far, applications of FDEA to measure bank efficiency have been scarce and focused on ranking DMUs rather than predicting their efficiency levels based on a set of contextual variables (Chen, Chiu, Huang, & Tu, 2013; Puri & Yadav, 2013, 2014; Wang, Lu, & Liu, 2014; Hsiao, Chern, Chiu, & Chiu, 2011; Wu, Yang, & Liang, 2006). This paper innovates first by focusing on Mozambican banks and second by simultaneously adopting three major FDEA models based on the α-level approach in combination with the conditional bootstrapped truncated regression, proposed in this research, in a two-stage approach. The third innovative venue in this research relies on the further testing of the global separability between efficiency scores and contextual variables using Monte Carlo methods, as suggested in Daraio, Simar and Wilson, (2010). In summary, the novelty resides in the practical application of different FDEA models combined with conditional bootstrapped regression in the second stage. This combination of fuzzy and probabilistic approaches also represents a contribution to the emerging literature on possible analytical venues within the ambit of 2-Dimentional Fuzzy Monte Carlo Analysis (2D FMCA).Specifically, the motivations for the present research are related to the following issues. The first relates to the evaluation of the relative efficiency of Mozambican banks using FDEA for the first time, using the popular α-level approach. Despite the existence of different types of fuzzy approaches for handling vagueness and uncertainty within the ambit of DEA models—see Emrouznejad and Tavana (2014) for a comprehensive literature review on this subject—the α-level approach was chosen here not only in terms of its popularity among researchers, but also because in this approach an FDEA model is solved by parametric programming using α-levels. Solving this model at a given level of α produces interval efficiency for the decision making unit (DMU) under assessment (Zerafat Angiz, Emrouznejad, & Mustafa, 2010). Although these intervals, when taken in a certain number, can be used to infer the respective fuzzy efficiency, in this paper we are interested in using the crisp values for their lower and upper bounds to assess efficiency drivers in Mozambican banks in the second stage.The second motivation pertains to expanding the literature by using conditional bootstrapped truncated regression to assess the role of major contextual variables in achieving higher levels of efficiency, considering the impact of three different FDEA models based on the α-level approach as fixed factors. In order to achieve this objective, bootstrapped truncated regressions are reformulated within the context of a two-stage approach, considering different levels of α. The third goal concerns the coverage of a significant time span of a representative sample of Mozambican banking—2003 to 2011—so that uncertainty in its different forms can be assessed. As a matter of fact, the outputs and inputs of banks present different forms of uncertainty within their relationships. For example, credit granting is an output embedded in fuzziness because of the ex-ante risks associated with non-performing loans (Li, 2003). On the other hand, the investment income of a bank, which is not a constant number, changes randomly on account of the market value of the investment target. To evaluate Mozambican bank efficiency more realistically and accurately, this study employs the fuzzy DEA model with data specified in bounded forms to measure the efficiency of banks.Therefore, this study proposes a predictive model for banking efficiency in Mozambique based on the financial and operational criteria commonly found in the literature and considers uncertainty in the collection of input and output data. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the contextual setting; Section 3 reviews the literature; Section 4 presents the data source and the model; results are discussed and presented in Section 5; and Section 6 sets out the conclusion.According to KPMG (2014), banking credit is the most important driver of Mozambique economic growth. The average credit interest rate was 20.22% in 2014, which resulted in private sector debt to banks of 28.7%. Adding to this growth, the increase in public debt in 2014 was 16.37%; that is, the Mozambican economy is being pumped up by money to induce growth.The banks analyzed in the present context account for about 90% of the banking industry and their data are representative of Mozambique banks. BIM-Banco Internacional de Moçambique is the country's largest bank, with a 40% market share. This bank was formed in 2001 through a merger of Millennium BCP and Banco Comercial de Moçambique. BCI – Banco Comercial de Investimentos – is a small investment bank. It is owned sixty percent by the Portuguese public bank Caixa Geral de Depósitos and 40% by small shareholders. Standard Bank is a South African bank and the largest in Africa. Barclays Bank is an English bank with international operations and is active in Mozambique. Barclays Bank Mozambique was founded in 2002 with the acquisition of Banco Austral, a Portuguese owned bank, and is Mozambique's largest bank for personal and commercial banking. BancABC (previously African Banking Corporation) was originally a British Overseas Bank, headquartered in London albeit with all branches overseas; main shareholders currently include the International Finance Corporation, Old Mutual, Botswana insurance Fund Managers and Citi Venture Capital. In 1999, ABC Mozambique was incorporated as BNP NedBank, a joint venture between the Brazilian BNP Paribas and NedBank of South Africa. Mauritius Commercial Bank SA is a subsidiary of The Mauritius Commercial Bank Limited, a Mauritius based bank. Banco ProCredit Mozambique is a Mozambique private bank. SOCREMO – Banco de Microfinanças is a Mozambique microfinance private bank. BMI (Banco Mercantil e de Investimentos) is a private investment bank. ICB – International Commercial Bank is a bank controlled by the ICB Banking Group based in Switzerland and specializes in emerging markets. It focuses on international bank services and foreign trade finance. BOM (Banco Oportunidade de Moçambique) is a microfinance bank. Banco Tchuma provides credit and savings services to emerging Mozambican entrepreneurs, in particular, women.Competition is high in banking and will continue to be so as long as new competitors seek to enter the Mozambique market. For example, in 2013, Ecobank, a pan-African bank, entered the market by buying Banco ProCredit. Furthermore, Nedbank of South Africa acquired Mozambique's Banco Único.Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978) first proposed DEA for the case of constant returns-to-scale, which became known as the CCR (Charnes, Cooper and Rhodes) model. Subsequently, Banker, Charnes, and Cooper (1984) extended the model to the case of varying returns-to-scale; the model came to be known as BCC (Banker, Charnes and Cooper). Both models apply linear programming and allow output/input weighting to compute efficiency scores. Nowadays, several different DEA models are employed in different circumstances, e.g., industries, countries, and organizations involved in efficiency assessment.Despite the numerous studies focusing on banking efficiency and productivity using DEA (Berger & Humphrey, 1992, 1997; Fukuyama & Weber 2009a, 2009b, 2010; Holod & Lewis, 2011; Sufian, 2010), an in-depth analysis of banks in Africa is still missing (O'Donnell & Westhnizen, 2002; Azam, Biais, & Dia, 2004; Figueira, Nellis, & Parker, 2006; Kirkpatrick, Murinde, & Tefula, 2007; Okeahalam, 2008; Ikhide, 2008; Kiyota, 2009; Assaf, Barros, & Ibiwoye, 2010; Kebede & Wassie, 2013), thus indicating a literature gap. The situation contrasts with the extensive research that has been carried out on American banks (Berger, Hanweck, & Humphrey, 1987; Bauer, Berger, & Humphrey, 1993; Berger & Humphrey, 1997), on European banks Asian banks (Assaf et al., 2010; Barros, Peypoch, & Williams, 2010; Barros, Managi, & Matousek, 2012b; Berger et al., 2009; Chen, Skully, & Brown, 2005; Kumbhakar & Wang, 2005), and even South American banks (Staub, Souza, & Tabak, 2010; Wanke & Barros, 2014).Even though DEA might be sufficient to determine efficiency levels, this method does not per se provide details of the determinants related to inefficiency. In this sense, several studies proposed a combination approach of measuring and explaining bank efficiency scores (Fethi & Pasiouras, 2010) using DEA in the first stage to determine efficiency scores and a regression model in the second stage to explain the respective drivers. For example,Ariff and Can (2008),Casu and Molyneux (2003), and San, Theng, and Heng (2011) employed Tobit regression to explain bank performance in terms of contextual variables after running DEA models.Traditionally, however, DEA models consider that output and input are crisp numbers. If input and output values were fuzzy, traditional DEA could not be able to assess efficiency levels in a proper manner. This being the case, several researchers (Cooper, Park, & Yu, 1999; Despotis & Smirlis, 2002; Guo & Tanaka, 2001; Jahanshahloo, Soleimani-damaneh, & Nasrabadi, 2004; Kao & Liu, 2000b) started structuring FDEA models, allowing for the measurement of outputs and inputs as fuzzy numbers. Particularly with respect to FDEA applications on banking, studies to assess efficiency in the financial sector still remain scarce, and their major focus tends to relate to ranking of DMUs based on computed fuzzy efficiencies rather than predicting or explaining efficiency levels in terms of contextual variables (Chen et al., 2013; Puri & Yadav, 2013, 2014; Hsiao et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2006).Wu et al. (2006) introduced fuzzy logic into DEA formulation in order to deal with the environmental variables and thus assess the performance of bank branches in different regions. The inner-province and inter-province comparison were given based on the fuzzy DEA results. The authors also compared these results with those obtained from traditional DEA analysis. Hsiao et al. (2011) proposed the use of a fuzzy super-efficiency slack-based measure DEA to analyze the operational performance of 24 commercial banks facing problems on loan and investment parameters with vague characteristics. Wang et al. (2014) investigated the association between the performance of bank holding companies and their intellectual capital. The authors applied fuzzy multiple objective programming approaches to calculate efficiency scores. Puri and Yadav (2013) evaluated the fuzzy input mix-efficiency using the α-level based approach for the State Bank of Patiala in the Punjab state of India, with districts as the DMUs. Puri and Yadav (2014) proposed another fuzzy DEA model with undesirable fuzzy outputs, which can be solved as a crisp linear program for each α in (0, 1] using the α-level based approach, which will be further discussed in Section 4.2. The authors applied the model in the public banking sector in India for the period 2009–2011. Chen et al. (2013) applied the Fuzzy Slack-Based Measurement model in the Taiwan banking sector under market risk.According to Hatami-Marbini, Emrouznejad, and Tavana (2011a), the huge dissemination of different models within a large scope of applications in terms of efficiency measurement demonstrates that FDEA models represent an effective path for handling uncertainty and vagueness when inputs/outputs are imprecise (Kao & Liu, 2000b). However, the authors point out research challenges that should be addressed in future studies. Although these challenges will be further explored in the methodology section, we briefly present their implications in light of the literature review on banking efficiency and provide additional details on how our study differs from previous ones.One of the challenges is the imperative for a unified FDEA approach to account for the numerous FDEA models and frameworks. In this research, we employed a two-stage approach as an attempt to allow the simultaneous application of different major FDEA models, since it is very often not possible to know what model should be chosen over another. Here, in the first stage, three major FDEA models based on the α-level approach are used to compute crisp values for the efficiency scores; in the second stage, these underlying models (Guo & Tanaka, 2008;Kao & Liu, 2000a; Saati, Memariani, & Jahanshahloo, 2002) and the nature of their efficiency scores (whether lower, upper, or middle values) are used as fixed factors in a proposed approach called conditional bootstrapped truncated regression in order to control for the impact of several contextual variables related to bank efficiency in Mozambique.Another relevant challenge pointed out by Hatami-Marbini et al. (2011a) is related to the sensitivity analysis issue, since fuzzy data are, by definition, less robust and not fixed. In this paper, given the difficulty of obtaining reliable data sources on Mozambican banking and the fact that the conversion of the values originally expressed in the Mozambican national currency into the US dollar is often subject to financial crisis and/or currency board controls, we decided to treat, as triangular fuzzy numbers – following Puri and Yadav (2013) – all the outputs and the inputs, with their lower and upper values defined by an offset of 20% from their respective mean crisp values. Further, in this research, the sensitivity analysis conducted on fuzzy efficiency scores observes the combined probabilistic-fuzzy approach advocated by Arunraj, Mandal, and Maiti (2013), where both randomness and uncertainty are jointly considered as useful properties of probabilistic and fuzzy methods.One last challenge mentioned by Hatami-Marbini et al. (2011a) concerns real-life applications in a sense, since most published papers have used hypothetical data or simple examples to support their rationale. Here, we use a case study, obtained from the real world, on the banking sector of Mozambique in assessing its efficiency drivers despite all sources of uncertainty – probabilistic (randomness) and possibilistic (fuzziness) – surrounding the data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
