@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Operational transportation planning of freight forwarding companies in horizontal coalitions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Collaborative transportation planning of freight forwarders is studied.Routing of own vehicles is extended by subcontracting and request exchanging.Considering all request fulfillment options may result in considerable cost savings.A new planning framework is proposed for forwarders in horizontal coalitions.Computational results show very high efficiency of the proposed planning framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Logistics,Distributed decision making,Transportation planning,Subcontracting,Collaborative planning,Request exchange,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to improve profitability, freight forwarding companies try to organize their operational transportation planning systematically, considering not only their own fleet but also external resources. Such external resources include vehicles from closely related subcontractors in vertical cooperations, autonomous common carriers on the transportation market, and cooperating partners in horizontal coalitions. In this paper, the transportation planning process of forwarders is studied and the benefit of including external resources is analyzed. By introducing subcontracting, the conventional routing of own vehicles is extended to an integrated operational transportation planning, which simultaneously constructs fulfillment plans with overall lowest costs using the own fleet and subcontractors’ vehicles. This is then combined with planning strategies, which intend to increase the profitability by exchanging requests among members in horizontal coalitions. Computational results show considerable cost reductions using the proposed planning approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increasing pressure on modern freight forwarding companies to improve profitability has strongly influenced their fleet management and transportation planning strategies. In order to utilize resources more efficiently, it is no longer sufficient for forwarders to optimize the usage of their internal resources, but they also have to improve the management of external relations with other carriers. Forwarders can fulfill their acquired customer requests by applying the following options: (1) keeping the execution in-house using their own fleet (self-fulfillment), (2) forwarding requests to other carriers (subcontracting), and (3) exchanging requests with partners in horizontal cooperations (collaborative planning). Using all three options may result in considerable cost-savings. However, due to the high heterogeneity of these different options, forwarders have to apply new planning schemes to realize the embedded potential. In this paper, we study the operational transportation planning under consideration of all three fulfillment options.Besides self-fulfillment, forwarders can subcontract some requests to subcontractors in vertical cooperations and to common carriers to reduce their fleet size. Due to the high fixed costs of vehicles, many forwarders strongly downsize their own fleet. This enables them to do “cherry-picking”, i.e., assigning the most profitable tours to their own vehicles and filling the gap between the own fleet capacity and customer demand by using capacities of other carriers. As a consequence, the process of forwarding requests to subcontractors has to be integrated into the traditional vehicle routing and scheduling. Krajewska and Kopfer (2009) refer to this extension as the integrated operational transportation planning (IOTP).In addition to subcontracting, the operational efficiency can be improved further by building up horizontal coalitions enabling collaborative planning. According to Stadtler (2009), collaborative planning can be understood as a joint decision making process for aligning plans of individual coalition members with the aim of achieving coordination in light of information asymmetry. Wang and Kopfer (2014) refer to the joint decision making process for fulfilling transportation requests in a horizontal coalition as collaborative transportation planning (CTP). CTP aims to reach a reallocation of requests among the coalition members through request exchange, with total costs less than the sum the partners’ individual costs would be without cooperation.The main differences between the cooperations in IOTP and CTP is that CTP is performed on the basis of an equal partnership, while in IOTP the players are in a hierarchical relation with the forwarder being the client of carriers acting as subcontractors. In IOTP, forwarders plan independently for their internal and external capacities without explicitly coordinating with their subcontractors. In CTP, all partners plan for themselves (i.e., for their own fleet and, if applicable, for their subcontractors either) and try to harmonize their plans with those of other coalition members.Although both approaches, IOTP and CTP, have been investigated in literature, a systematical integration of both approaches into vehicle routing strategies has not been discussed yet. In this paper, we study how the operational planning of the forwarders should be performed taking subcontracting and collaborative request exchange into account. The purpose is to develop an appropriate mechanism to realize the cost-saving potential at the highest level, which is embedded in the integration of IOTP and CTP.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Related literature is reviewed in Section 2. Different planning strategies are formally described in Section 3. The solution approaches for the IOTP problem are presented in Section 4 and integrated into a collaborative planning framework in Section 5. Section 6 shows the computational results. Section 7 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
