@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Benchmarking and target setting with expert preferences: An application to the evaluation of educational performance of Spanish universities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new DEA model for performance benchmarking.Target setting minimizing the gap between actual and efficient performances.Expert preferences are incorporated into the analysis.A real-world application to the evaluation of educational performance of Spanish universities.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Benchmarking,Closest targets,DEA,Higher education,Educational performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Benchmarking and target setting should identify best practices that are not only technically achievable but also desirable in the light of prior knowledge and expert opinion. It should also be considered the possibility of finding targets by minimizing the gap between actual and efficient performances, so that the units under evaluation can achieve these targets with less effort. We extend here the DEA models that provide closest targets for use when expert preferences are incorporated into the analysis. This approach is illustrated by applying the model proposed to the evaluation of educational performance of public Spanish universities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In management, organizations use benchmarking for the evaluation of their processes in comparison to best practices of others within a peer group of firms in an industry or sector. In the best practice benchmarking process the identification of the best firms enables the setting of targets, which allows these organizations to learn from others and develop plans for improving some aspects of their own performance.Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) (Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978), which is a methodology that evaluates the relative efficiency of decision making units (DMUs) involved in a production process, has been widely used for benchmarking purposes. In DEA, an empirical production possibility set is constructed from the observations by making some technological assumptions. The envelopment of such technology determines an efficient frontier formed by the efficient units, which is used as reference for assessment of the remaining DMUs. As stated in Cook, Tone, and Zhu, (2014), In the circumstance of benchmarking, the efficient DMUs, as defined by DEA, may not necessarily form a “production frontier”, but rather lead to a “best-practice frontier”. Specifically, the points on the best practice frontier are potential benchmarks for the inefficient units, while the targets are actually the coordinates of these benchmarks and represent levels of operation for the inefficient DMUs that would make them perform efficiently. For some recent references on DEA and benchmarking see Adler, Liebert, and Yazhemsky (2013), Andrejić, Bojović, and Kilibarda (2013), Costa (2012), Dai and Kuosmanen (2014), Hung, Lu, and Wang (2010) and Zanella, Camanho, and Dias (2013).In this paper, we propose a model for performance benchmarking as an extension of the classical DEA models. This new model has two main features: (1) it allows us to find the closest benchmarks for the DMU that is being evaluated. The standard DEA models yield targets that are usually determined by the “furthest” efficient projection to the assessed unit. However, the distance to this efficient projection should be minimized, so that the resulting targets are as similar as possible to the inputs and outputs of the assessed unit. The idea behind this reasoning is that closer targets suggest directions of improvement for the inefficient units that may lead them to the efficiency with less effort. The problem of finding closest targets with DEA has been addressed in Aparicio, Ruiz, and Sirvent (2007), Portela, Borges, and Thanassoulis (2003) and Tone (2010) (see also Estrada, Song, Kim, Namn, & Kang, 2009; Lozano & Villa, 2005) for a couple of related approaches based on sequential steps to setting targets). And (2) the new model allows us to incorporate into the analysis the expert opinions regarding the relative importance of the different inputs and outputs, so the selection of benchmarks and the setting of targets reflect their accepted views. In general, benchmarking and target setting should include value judgments from group management in order to identify what is desirable in addition to what is technically achievable. In order to do so, we add some weight restrictions to the DEA formulation and set targets by using the optimal solutions of the resulting model. Traditionally, weight restrictions are used as a way to incorporate value judgments and avoid unreasonable results, in particular to prevent inappropriate selections of benchmarks (see Cooper, Ruiz, & Sirvent, 2011 for a discussion on choices and uses of DEA weights). Alternative approaches to incorporate preference information in efficiency analyses and target setting with DEA include the use of hypothetical DMUs (Golany, 1995), the DEA-benchmarking models in Cook, Seiford, and Zhu (2004), the specification of preference weights in weighted non-radial models in Zhu (1996) or the combination of DEA and interactive MOLP techniques (Yang, Wong, Xu, & Stewart, 2009). The proposed approach therefore makes a contribution both to the area of benchmarking in DEA, because the incorporation of expert preferences had not been investigated in the context of the models that yield closest targets, and to that of the DEA models with weight restrictions, because the setting of targets with the existing models does not ensure minimization of the gap between actual and efficient performances.This paper was initially motivated by a real-world application to the evaluation of educational performance of Spanish universities. The incorporation of the Spanish universities into the European Space for Higher Education (ESHE) after the Bologna Declaration has been a very important challenge for these institutions. The convergence with the ESHE has entailed changes not only in the structures of the university system, with a new framework of degrees at undergraduate and postgraduate levels, but also in the processes of teaching and learning, with new (or renewed) methodologies which promote the role of the students. In fact, the existing regulatory framework in Spain emphasizes the importance of undergraduate education as a key issue in the performance of the universities, in line with the higher education policies and practices in Europe. This regulation also raises the need to design mechanisms for the evaluation of the universities’ teaching performance, independently from their performance in other areas, such as those of research or knowledge transfer. To be specific, the Royal Order (RD) 1393/2007 (amended in the RD 861/2010), which regulates the organization of official university studies, together with the verification program (VERIFICA) of the National Agency for Quality Assessment and Accreditation (ANECA), require the new degrees to have a quality assurance system available for their verification (in a first step) and their subsequent accreditation (6 years after their establishment). These quality assurance systems must include procedures for the evaluation and improvement of the quality of teaching and of the academic staff.The present paper evaluates educational performance in Spanish higher education institutions (HEIs) by means of an efficiency analysis of the public universities. From the perspective of university managers and policy makers, it is important not only the achievement of results but also the availability of resources of the universities to that end. For this reason, we evaluate here the efficiency of the universities as the result of an assessment of their educational performance in a process in which several inputs are used to produce several outputs. From a methodological point of view, DEA is the most commonly used methodology in efficiency analyses, due precisely to the multi-factor nature of educational production. See, for example, Abbott and Doucouliagos (2003), Flegg and Allen (2007), Johnes (2006), and Johnes (2008). Nevertheless, it should be noted that stochastic frontier analysis (SFA) has also been used (see Izadi, Johnes, Oskrochi, & Crouchley, 2002; Johnes & Johnes, 2009; Kuo & Ho, 2008), and even DEA and SFA in conjunction with each other (Bayraktar, Tatoglu, & Zaim, 2013).The analysis of efficiency undertaken here focuses specifically on benchmarking and target setting, and is carried out with the new DEA model we propose. The practice of benchmarking is growing among universities, which see comparisons with their peers as an opportunity to analyze their own strengths and weaknesses and to establish directions for improving their performance. DEA is a suitable methodology for benchmarking, which has been used in particular for the evaluation of performance of HEIs. As Cook and Zhu (2007) state, the appropriate setting to which the DEA models apply is one wherein the DMUs are assumed to be comparable, yet with each having its own unique circumstances. Specifically, each DMU is permitted to choose, probably within bounds (as is the case in the present paper where expert preferences are incorporated into the analysis), its own set of multipliers for its output/input bundle. Thus, through a choice of DEA weights which are DMU-specific the circumstances under which the different DMUs operate can be taken into consideration in the analysis. In terms of the setting of targets, this means that DEA makes a selection of DMU-specific benchmarks in a piece-wise linear frontier. This is one of the key features in the evaluation of relative efficiency with DEA models. As a result, in the efficiency analysis of Spanish HEIs, DEA allows each of the universities to identify specific best practices (in line with the views of experts), which they may learn from. Therefore, managerial implications of the DEA analysis may offer suggestions for the universities to consider in order to orient their policies towardthe achievement of educational performance improvements, specifically setting university-specific targets.Universities are institutions with different missions, which can be generally categorized into teaching, research and service. Many of the existing studies on the efficiency of universities analyze the overall performance in producing research and teaching (see, for example, Thanassoulis, Kortelainen, Johnes, & Johnes, 2011; Worthington & Lee, 2008). Our study, which deals specifically with educational performance, is more akin to the analyses made in Avkiran (2001), Archibald and Feldman (2008), Agasisti and Dal Bianco (2009) and Breu and Raab (1994). As stated in Avkiran (2001), designing different efficiency models generates insight into the performance of universities on various dimensions, thus guiding managerial action. The model used here, which is similar to the one concerned with the delivery of educational services in that paper, is focused on analyzing how successfully the universities manage their resources in delivering educational services that contribute to the graduation, retention and progress of students. In the current context of the HEIs in Spain, which started with the reforms motivated by the convergence with the ESHE mentioned above, different studies have evaluated universities’ performance providing disaggregated information for teaching, research, innovation and technological development. See, for example, the one carried out by the BBVA11Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria Bank.Foundation and the IVIE22It could be translated as Valencian Institute for Research in Economics.and that of the Foundation FCyD.33It could be translated as Foundation for the Knowledge and Development.The present study can complement those reports with a different view of the educational performance of HEIs in Spain.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 includes the theoretical developments that lead to the model for performance benchmarking that allows to incorporating expert preferences. In Section 3 we carry out an application to the assessment of educational performance of Spanish universities. The last section concludes.In this section we develop a model for performance benchmarking that seeks to find closest efficient targets while taking into account the expert opinion, which is incorporated into the analysis by adding weight restrictions to the DEA formulation. Methodologically, we follow an approach which is in the same vein of the models used in Aparicio et al. (2007) to find closest targets. The resulting model is used in the next section for an application to the assessment of educational performance of the public Spanish universities.Consider that we have n DMUs which use m inputs to produce s outputs. These are denoted by (Xj, Yj), j = 1, …, n. It is assumed that Xj=  (x1j, …, xmj)′ ≥ 0, Xj≠ 0, j  =  1, …, n, and Yj=  (y1j, …, ysj)′ ≥ 0, Yj≠ 0, j = 1, …, n. The relative efficiency of each DMU0 in the sample is assessed with reference to the boundary of the so-called production possibility set (PPS) T = {(X, Y)/X can produce Y}, which is empirically constructed from the observations by assuming several postulates (see Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984). If, in particular, the classical variable returns to scale technology is assumed, then T can be characterized as followsT={(X,Y)|X≥∑j=1nλjXj,Y≤∑j=1nλjYj,∑j=1nλj=1,λj≥0}.The efficient frontier of the PPS, ∂(T), consists of the non-dominated points of T, that is, ∂(T) = {(X, Y) ∈ T|(X', Y') ∈ T, X' ≤ X, Y' ≥ Y⇒(X', Y') = (X, Y)}. ∂(T) can also be expressed in terms of input and output weights as∂(T)={(X,Y)∈T|−vX+uY+u0=0,−vXj+uYj+u0≤0,j=1,…,n,v>0m,u>0s,u0∈R}. Actually, in this latter set, it suffices to consider the conditions − vXj+ uYj+ u0 ≤ 0 only for the units in the set of extreme efficient points of the PPS, E.44Following Charnes, Cooper, and Thrall (1991), the DMUs in E and E’ are Pareto-efficient. E consists of the extreme efficient units, whereas those in E’ are Pareto-efficient units that can be expressed as a combination of DMUs in E. F is the set of weakly efficient units. The DMUs in NE, NE’ and NF are inefficient, and are projected onto points on the frontier that are in E, E’ and F respectively.Definition 1DMU0 with input–output vector (X0, Y0) is said to be technically efficient if, and only if, (X0, Y0) ∈ ∂(T).The following theorem provides a useful characterization of ∂(T), which will be used in the formulation of the benchmarking models we develop here:Theorem 1(1)∂(T)={(X,Y)∈R+m+s|X=∑j∈EλjXj,Y=∑j∈EλjYj,∑j∈Eλj=1,−vXj+uYj+u0+dj=0,j∈Ev≥1m,u≥1sdj≤Mbj,j∈Eλj≤M(1−bj),j∈Edj,λj≥0,bj∈{0,1},j∈E,u0∈R∑j∈E}See Appendix A.□This is a key result when we are interested in minimizing, instead of maximizing, the distance to the Pareto-efficient frontier of the PPS, because it provides a characterization of ∂(T) in terms of a set of linear constraints that can be added to the efficiency models.As a consequence of the theorem above, the following model minimizes the L1-distance from a given DMU0 to the points of ∂(T) that dominate this unit55Model (2) can be straightforwardly formulated by using some other distances such as the weighted L1-distances; see Aparicio et al. (2007) for other formulations.(2)Minz0=∑i=1msi0−+∑r=1ssr0+s.t.:∑j∈Eλjxij=xi0−si0−i=1,…,m(2.1)∑j∈Eλjyrj=yr0+sr0+r=1,…,s(2.2)∑j∈Eλj=1(2.3)−∑i=1mvixij+∑r=1suryrj+u0+dj=0j∈E(2.4)vi≥1i=1,…,m(2.5)ur≥1r=1,…,s(2.6)dj≤Mbjj∈E(2.7)λj≤M(1−bj)j∈E(2.8)bj∈{0,1},dj,λj≥0j∈Eu0freesi0−,sr0+≥0∀i,rTherefore, the following proposition holdsProposition 1DMU0 is technically efficient ⇔z0*=0.Trivial.□Model (2) is a non-oriented additive-type model, which accounts for both the input excesses and output shortfalls. It ensures an evaluation of efficiency in the sense of Pareto. For the inefficient units, (2) can be used as a model for performance benchmarking and setting efficient targets. Note that, in contrast to the usual formulations of the additive models, the slacks here are minimized instead of maximized, because we seek to find the closest targets.As said in the introduction, the efficient frontier of the PPS represents a best practice frontier whose points enable the setting of efficient targets for the different DMUs. However, in spite of being technically efficient points of the PPS, some of them might not reflect the prior knowledge or accepted views of experts. Model (2), like all of the DEA models, allows total flexibility in the choice of weights.66The expression “total weight flexibility” is often used in DEA papers dealing with weights to highlight the freedom of the DMUs to choose weights. However, it should be noted that the DEA weights are required to be non-negative and provide efficiency scores lower than or equal to 1 for all the DMUs.This is an interesting feature of the DEA methodology although in practice it is often a source of trouble. As a result of the total weight flexibility, the selection of benchmarks that is made and the subsequent setting of targets are sometimes inconsistent with the preferences of experts. To deal with this issue, the use of weight restrictions in the DEA models has been proposed as a way to incorporate these preferences into the analysis. For instance, we can use AR-I type restrictions (Thompson, Dharmapala, Rothenberg, & Thrall, 1986), which have the form(3)Lii′I≤vi/vi′≤Uii′Iforsomei,i′Lrr′O≤ur/ur′≤Urr′Oforsomer,r′If the constraints (3) are added to (2), then the different DMUs will be assessed with reference to an efficient frontier that will usually be a subset of the original ∂(T). This is because the weights v and u, which are the coefficients of the supporting hyperplanes that contain the efficient facets of the frontier, would now be forced to satisfy some extra conditions. Next, we introduce the following definitions and resultsDefinition 2∂AR(T) = {(X, Y) ∈ ∂(T) for which input and output weights satisfying (3) exist}.DMU0 with input–output vector (X0, Y0) is said to be AR-efficient if, and only if, (X0, Y0) ∈ ∂AR(T).∂AR(T) is the best practice frontier based on the preferences of experts and, consequently, the points in ∂AR(T) are the ones that should be used as potential benchmarks for the rest of the DMUs. As said before, in practice, we usually have that ∂AR(T)⊂∂(T). Thus, the DMUs in ∂(T) that do not belong to ∂AR(T) can no longer be identified as best practices in line with the views of experts and they should therefore not be used as a benchmark for others. The following holds for these DMUsProposition 2Let DMU0 be a given unit with input–output vector (X0, Y0). Ifz0*=0and (X0, Y0)∉∂AR(T), then the setting of targets for this unit involves reallocations between inputs and/or outputs at the efficient frontier.Trivial.□Obviously, the statement in Proposition 2 might also apply to some of the DMUs not in ∂(T). That is, the setting of targets for them could involve the deterioration of some of their inputs/outputs (and, in return, improvements to other variables accordingly) in order to perform efficiently in a manner consistent with the expert opinions (that is, to reach ∂AR(T)). In other words, when expert preferences are incorporated into the analysis, dominance does not necessarily fulfill. This happens in general with the classical DEA models with weight restrictions. For this reason, Thanassoulis, Portela, and Allen (2004) state that in those cases we actually move from technical efficiency to a kind of overall efficiency.Bearing in mind the discussion above, when expert preferences are incorporated into the analysis through the addition of weight restrictions, we propose the following problem as a model for performance benchmarking that allows to finding the closest targets while taking into consideration the expert opinion(4)Minz0AR=∑i=1m|si0−|+∑r=1s|sr0+|s.t.:∑j∈Eλjxij=xi0−si0−i=1,…,m(4.1)∑j∈Eλjyrj=yr0+sr0+r=1,…,s(4.2)∑j∈Eλj=1(4.3)−∑i=1mvixij+∑r=1suryrj+u0+dj=0j∈E(4.4)vi≥1i=1,…,m(4.5)ur≥1r=1,…,s(4.6)dj≤Mbjj∈E(4.7)λj≤M(1−bj)j∈E(4.8)Lii′I≤vi/vi′≤Uii′Iforsomei,i′(4.9)Lrr′O≤ur/ur′≤Urr′Oforsomer,r′(4.10)bj∈{0,1},dj,λj≥0j∈Esi0−,sr0+free∀i,ru0freeModel (4) minimizes the L1-distance from DMU0 to ∂AR(T). As said before, when weight restrictions are added to the DEA models, dominance cannot be required for benchmarking and target setting. This is why the slacks now are not non-negative but free variables, because the DMUs are allowed to increase some of the inputs and/or reduce some of the outputs, if needed, in order to reach ∂AR(T) (otherwise, the resulting problem might become infeasible).The following proposition shows that model (4) can be used to identify the DMUs that are efficient according to the expert preferences.Proposition 3DMU0 is AR-efficient ⇔z0AR*=0.Trivial.□The DMUs AR-efficient are the ones that can play a role as potential benchmarks for the rest of the units. In addition, the optimal solutions of (4) can be used for setting targets, which are the coordinates of the benchmark identified by this model, and can be obtained as follows(5)y^r0=∑j∈Eλj*yrj,r=1,…,sx^i0=∑j∈Eλj*xij,i=1,…,mwhereλj*,j∈E,are optimal solutions of (4). Comparisons between the actual data of each DMU0 and its targets for the different inputs and outputs may suggest possible directions of improvement.As a result of having absolute values in the formulation, model (4) is a non-linear problem. Nevertheless, it can be easily linearized, as explained next: we introduce the new decision variablesδi0I+,δi0I−≥0,i = 1, …, m,δr0O+,δr0O−≥0,r = 1, …, s, and add to the set of constraints of (4) the restrictionssi0−=δi0I+−δi0I−,i = 1, …, m, andsr0+=δr0O+−δr0O−,r = 1, …, s. Then, minimizing the non-linear objective in (4) is equivalent to minimizing the linear objective function∑i=1m(δi0I++δi0I−)+∑r=1s(δr0O++δr0O−)subject to the resulting set of constraints.It should also be noted that, in practice, we might have to consider the units of measurement because both the objective in (4) is an aggregation of the slacks of inputs and outputs and this model includes absolute weight restrictions. When that happens, the data should be normalized. For example, in the application in this paper, model (4) is used with data normalized by the averages of the corresponding inputs and outputs. In that case, model (4) is equivalent to the following invariant model(6)Minz0AR=∑i=1m|s˜i0−|x¯i+∑r=1s|s˜r0+|y¯rs.t.:∑j∈Eλjxij=xi0−s˜i0−i=1,…,m(6.1)∑j∈Eλjyrj=yr0+s˜r0+r=1,…,s(6.2)∑j∈Eλj=1(6.3)−∑i=1mv˜ixij+∑r=1su˜ryrj+u0+dj=0j∈E(6.4)v˜ix¯i≥1i=1,…,m(6.5)u˜ry¯r≥1r=1,…,s(6.6)dj≤Mbjj∈E(6.7)λj≤M(1−bj)j∈E(6.8)Lii′I≤v˜ix¯i/v˜i′x¯i′≤Uii′Iforsomei,i′(6.9)Lrr′O≤u˜ry¯r/u˜r′y¯r′≤Urr′Oforsomer,r′(6.10)bj∈{0,1},dj,λj≥0j∈Es˜i0−,s˜r0+free∀i,ru0freewhich involves the minimization of a weighted L1-distance (this specification of the weighted L1-distance has already been proposed in the related literature; see Thrall, 1996), and the use of weight restrictions on virtual inputs and outputs, specifically on an average DMU (see Wong & Beasley, 1990). The equivalence between models (4) and (6) actually results from the following change of variables:si0−=s˜i0−/x¯i,i = 1, …, m,sr0+=s˜r0+/y¯r,r = 1, …, s,vi=v˜ix¯i,i = 1, …, m, andur=u˜ry¯r,r = 1, …, s.This section illustrates the use of the proposed DEA model by applying it to the evaluation of educational performance of the public Spanish universities. In order to do so, we use the data in the 2010 report by the Conference of Rectors of the Spanish Universities (CRUE), which is entitled “La Universidad española en cifras 2010”.77It could be translated as “The Spanish University in figures 2010”.These data correspond to the academic year 2008–2009, when the universities in Spain were immersed in the reform of their studies (which had to be completed in 2010 according to the action program set out in the Bologna Declaration). Until 2009–2010, students studied for a “laurea” degree, equivalent to a master, but since 2010 a bachelors/masters structure has been pursued. In 2008–2009, only a few of the public Spanish universities had started to transform their programs. While the university UCAR had started the transformation of all its studies into the new study programs, in the Valencia region no new program was offered in that academic year. Obviously, the data used here refer to study programs previous to the reforms, because no new program had been completed in the academic year 2008–2009. Thus, their analysis provides an insight into public universities at the point at which they started to join in the transformation of the higher education system in Spain.The DEA efficiency analysis here is concerned with educational performance. Therefore, in our production model we choose as outputs several rates that provide some assessments of teaching performance, and as inputs different variables that represent human and physical capital are considered. As discussed in Dyson et al. (2001), DEA makes some homogeneity assumptions about the units under assessment (the universities in our case). One such assumption is that the DMUs are assumed to be undertaking similar activities and producing comparable products or services so that a common set of outputs can be defined. Another assumption is that a similar range of resources is available to all the units. Additionally, the units are assumed to operate in similar environments (see Daraio & Simar, 2007 for the treatment of external-environmental variables). In Spain, there is a high degree of homogeneity across the public Spanish universities, which makes it possible to define a set of variables (those listed below) to be used for evaluating their performance and making comparisons. The public Spanish universities are not specialized either in teaching or research. They all offer a wide range of disciplines, except perhaps in the case of the few that are purely polytechnics. All the universities come under the same set of general regulations. Procedures for recruiting students are very similar in the different universities. There is a unique university district, and students all have the same opportunities for access to the different universities in the country. They often choose their universities by following criteria of geographical proximity to their homes.For the selection of the outputs, we only take into consideration the variables explicitly mentioned as requirements in the section “Expected Results” of the RD 1393/2007, which raises the need to provide quantitative estimates of indicators such as rates of graduation, drop out and progress of students. As for the inputs, we define four variables that account for the staff (both academic and administrative/service personnel) and the financial and material resources (expenditure and teaching spaces). Specifically, the following variables are considered•GRAD = graduation rate (y1): Percentage of students that complete the program of studies within the planned time, or in one more year, in relation to their entry cohort.RET = retention rate (y2): It is computed as 100 minus the drop out rate, in order to be treated as an output, i.e., a “the more the better” variable. The drop out rate is the ratio between the number of students of the entry cohort of 2006–2007 enrolled for the first time in a subject which do not enroll in their corresponding subjects either in 2007–2008 or 2008–2009 and the total of students of the entry cohort of 2006–2007 (in percent).PROG = progress rate (y3): Ratio between the number of passed credits88Credit is the unit of measurement of the academic load of the subject of a program.corresponding to all the students enrolled in 2008/2009 and the total enrolled credits in that academic year (in percent).The variables below, which are used as resources, are adjusted according to the number of students in order to take into account the effect of the size of the university. To be precise, the inputs are defined as the ratios between staff (academic and non-academic), expenditure and teaching spaces to the number of students enrolled in 2008–2009, measured in terms of equivalent full-time student units (FTStud):•AStaff (x1): The ratio between FTAStaff and FTStud, where FTAStaff is the academic staff with full-time equivalence. For example, if AStaff = 0.10 for a given university, this can be interpreted by saying that there are 10 teachers for each 100 students.NAStaff (x2): The ratio between the total number of administrative and technical support personnel and FTStud.EXPEND (x3): The ratio between expenditure (in euros) and FTStud. Expenditure exactly accounts for staff expenditure, expenditure on goods and services, financial expenditure and current transfers. EXPEND therefore expresses the current expenditure of a given university per student, and reflects the budgetary effort made by the universities in the delivery of their teaching practices. This indicator is traditionally used for comparing institutions, in particular in studies dealing with teaching quality.SPAC (x4): The ratio between the total space in square meters (corresponding to classrooms, labs and other teaching spaces) and FTStud.We can see that EXPEND accounts for staff expenditures, so x1 and x2 might be correlated with x3. Nevertheless, AStaff and NAStaff are considered as essential inputs to retain and, following Dyson et al. (2001), who state that omission of variables purely on grounds of correlation should be avoided, we do not omit them from the input set.99However, in order to check the sensitivity of the results (which are reported in Section 3.3) to the omission of these two inputs, we repeated the analysis without AStaff and NAStaff, and found that the set of universities rated as efficient (potential benchmarks) changed substantially.It is usually argued that, aside from the factors affecting performance considered in the efficiency analysis, there are often considerable variations in goals, policies, etc., among DMUs. In these situations, DEA is a suitable methodology because, as stated in the introduction, each DMU is permitted to choose its own input and output weights (or, equivalently, selecting DMU-specific benchmarks in a piece-wise linear frontier), as a way to take into account in the analysis its own unique circumstances. In fact, the variations in weights in DEA may be justified by the different circumstances under which the DMUs operate, and which are not captured by the chosen set of inputs and outputs factors (see Roll, Cook, & Golany, 1991 for discussions).Data for the inputs and outputs listed above corresponding to the different public Spanish universities have been taken from the last CRUE report previously mentioned. The study only considers the 42 public universities (out of 48) for which data for these variables were available. Table 1records the names of such universities. We also note that graduation rates of UAL, UBU, UCN and ULPGC have been calculated from those corresponding to the different fields (Science, Health Sciences, Social Sciences, Engineering and Architecture and Arts and Humanities) because the CRUE report does not directly provide these values. Table 2records the data and a descriptive summary.Some of the inputs and outputs listed above have already been used to assess and rank the Spanish universities according to teaching quality. For example, the 2010 report of the FCyD uses the ratios of students to academic staff and expenditure to students (with the same data) as quality indicators, so that larger values of these ratios are associated with higher teaching quality. Ours is a different approach concerned with efficiency. As stated before, the present study can thus complement the FCyD report with a different view of the educational performance of HEIs in Spain.One of the main objectives in this study is that benchmarking and target setting reflect the accepted views of experts regarding the importance attached to both the resources consumed by the universities and their rates of performance. For example, a given university should not be rated as efficient, and consequently it should not play a role as benchmark, as a result of either putting the weight mainly on teaching spaces or practically ignoring the rate of graduation. To deal with this issue, we use model (4), which allows the different universities to choose their own input and output weights, but within bounds that are determined on the basis of expert opinion. For the specification of the weight bounds of the AR-I restrictions in (4), we use the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) (Saaty, 1980).As stated in Cooper et al. (2011), incorporating value information or preferences into a DEA efficiency analysis has mostly been done by adding weight restrictions to the dual multiplier formulation of the DEA models. The key issue is therefore the setting of the corresponding weight bounds so that they reflect the information obtained from expert opinion. AHP has been one of the most sophisticated techniques used for that purpose. This technique allows us to use judgments about the variables' relative meaning and importance and converts these evaluations into numerical values. In a first step, the experts make pairwise comparisons between each couple of inputs (outputs) and their judgment is quantified and recorded in a matrix. Specifically, the experts are asked to give their opinion on the relative importance of both the inputs and the outputs considered by using the fundamental 1 to 9 scale (to avoid potential comparative inconsistency of these evaluations, a consistency index is calculated to ensure a reliable result from the AHP). AHP transforms the information in this matrix into a weight vectorωk=(ω1k,…,ωmk),∑i=1mωik=1, which represents the relative importance of each input in the efficiency evaluation (analogously for the outputs). The information provided by these weights has been used for setting bounds on weight restrictions in different ways. In Lee, Park, and Choi (2009) and Takamura and Tone (2003) the authors use constraints in the form Lij≤ vi/vj≤ Uij, whereLij=mink{ωik/ωjk}andUij=maxk{ωik/ωjk},k being the superscript associated with the experts involved. In Shang and Sueyoshi (1995), the restrictions used have the formLi≤vixi0/∑i=1mvixi0≤Ui,whereLi=minkωikandUi=maxkωik,ωikrepresenting in that case the importance of input i in relation to the improvement of output k in the opinion of the unique expert involved in this analysis. An alternative to AHP in order to obtain the weight vectors ωk's is the Budget allocation method, which has been used, for example, in Cherchye, Moesen, Rogge and Puyenbroeck (2006). However, the expert opinions must sometimes be processed in a different manner in order to incorporate value judgments into the analysis through the weights of the DEA models. For example, in the bank sector analysis in Brockett, Charnes, Cooper, Huang, and Sun (1997) the regulatory officials were not able to set bounds on specific variables, which made it impossible to use an AR (or like) approaches. Instead, their expertise was utilized to identify a collection of “excellent” banks (used as “model” DMUs) and a Cone-Ratio model (Charnes, Cooper, Huang, & Sun, 1990) was used with the multipliers of these “excellent” banks (in the unbounded model) as admissible directions. To be precise, the following constraints are to be added to (2): v ∈ V and u ∈ U, where V and U are the polyhedral convex cones spanned by the vectors of optimal input and output weights chosen by the “excellent” banks. There are still other ways to incorporate expert preferences in efficiency analysis through the weights of the DEA models. See again Cooper et al. (2011) for a detailed review of that literature.As for the experts that participated in the AHP, a panel consisting of 13 experts was selected, taking into account their professional career regarding teaching and research as well as their experience in university management, especially with university quality systems. Specifically, five of them had been vice-chancellors in different universities, so they brought us their academic view of management in HEIs. Two had been general directors of education in different administrations (regional or state governments), and they contributed their experience in the management of university policies. Three of the experts have published research papers dealing with educational performance in prestigious journals, so they brought us their knowledge about the processes of teaching and learning in universities. Experts with experience in technical and administrative areas also participated in the AHP: three had been heads of different quality services, while six had been members of evaluation committees of ANECA, including those concerned with the accreditation of degrees. In addition, diversity in terms of geographical origin and gender was considered. Eventually, the panel consisted of experts with different profiles, whose opinions were useful in providing a thorough view from different perspectives of the factors involved in determining the educational performance of the universities. The resulting AHP weights are recorded in Table 3. We can see that all the experts, except Expert 13, consider AStaff the most important input, whereas the weights of the outputs, especially those of GRAD and RET, differ widely between the experts.The weight bounds in (4.8) and (4.9) are determined as in Lee, Park, and Choi (2009) and Takamura and Tone (2003) mentioned above. Specifically, the following constraints are actually the AR restrictions to be added to (4)(7)2.01≤vAStaffvNAStaff≤10.960.17≤uRETuPROG≤4.480.5≤vAStaffvEXPEND≤8.470.09≤uRETuGRAD≤12.481.76≤vAStaffvSPAC≤11.150.44≤uPROGuGRAD≤6.300.16≤vNAStaffvEXPEND≤3.700.27≤vNAStaffvSPAC≤4.510.81≤vEXPENDvSPAC≤6Looking at these weight restrictions, we realize that we have wide ranges for the ratios of DEA weights, so in many cases these constraints will hardly restrict the total weight flexibility. In the case of the outputs, this is to some extent the result of the large differences between the AHP weights of GRAD and RET mentioned above. The analysis of drop out has been one of the most innovative and relevant actions included in the follow-up of the new degrees. Drop out may be revealing some deficiencies in the process of teaching-learning, and also shows the failure of the investment of resources in an uncompleted academic training. In the academic year 2008–2009, what student paid in tuition fees covered just 10% of the actual cost education, the remaining 90%being covered by the government. These AHP weights might be reflecting the views of some experts for whom it is more important that students complete their studies than that they do it within the planned time. As for the inputs, the corresponding weight restrictions are more restrictive, in particular those involving AStaff with both NAStaff and SPAC. The lower bounds larger than 1 indicate that, in the opinion of the experts, much more importance must be attached to the input AStaff than to NAStaff or SPAC in the assessments. This means, for example, that no university with little NAStaff or SPAC can be rated as efficient by putting the weight mainly on these inputs at the expenses of practically ignoring AStaff. In general, wide ranges for the ratios of DEA weights represent a good balance between the need/wish to allow for individual circumstances of the universities while at the same time have results which are in line with the accepted views of experts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
DEA has been widely used for benchmarking and target setting. DEA models evaluate relative efficiency and allow the setting of DMU-specific targets by means of an analysis of the inputs consumed and the outputs produced, which may also take into account the circumstances of the units under assessment. It is claimed that benchmarking and target setting should consider what is desirable in addition to what is attainable technically, and this is why we have extended the models of minimum distance to the efficient frontier for use when expert preferences are incorporated into the analysis. Methodologically, this can be seen as a contribution in the context of the DEA models used to find closest targets. Nevertheless, the ideas of the proposed approach could also be used with the classical radial DEA models with weight restrictions, perhaps in a second stage aimed at finding the closest targets.The key features of this approach have been highlighted in a real-world application to the evaluation of educational performance of public Spanish universities. Managerial implications may offer suggestions to orient university policies towardthe achievement of educational performance improvements. Benchmarking with the DEA models proposed has made it possible to identify best practices that are consistent with the views of experts. Moreover, the incorporation of expert opinions may help prevent inappropriate selections of benchmarks. This all by using models that allow us to find the closest targets, that is, those that require less effort to achieve efficiency. Despite the use of models that minimize the distance to the frontier, the results have shown that targets are in some cases difficult to achieve, if we take into account the starting point of the university being evaluated. As a future research, we suggest investigating a possible enhancement of the proposed approach which is oriented to setting targets in a sequential manner, as other authors have already proposed in the related literature.