@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Insights into the eldercare conundrum through complementary lenses of Boardman's SSM and TOC's Evaporating Cloud

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Explores common dilemma around caring for elderly family members.Uses two complementary soft systems methodologies, BSSM and TOC.BSSM's systemigram shows the consequences for non-resolution are dire.TOC's Evaporating Cloud surfaces/challenges assumptions underlying the dilemma.Together provide greater understanding of the system and avenues for resolution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Problem structuring methodology (PSM),Aged care/eldercare/residential care,Boardman Soft Systems Methodology, BSSM,Theory of Constraints, TOC,Multi-methodology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Whether an elderly parent should move/be moved into an assisted care facility can be a difficult decision for families and one that is increasingly evident as the ‘baby-boomer’ population ages. This paper explores decisions about care for elderly family members and in particular, whether a parent should move (or be moved) into an assisted care facility (ACF). The problematic situation based on personal experience of the authors is explored using two different methods as problem structuring aids, providing critical insights into the dilemma facing many families. Boardman's Soft Systems Methodology (BSSM) was used along with the Evaporating Cloud (EC) from the Theory of Constraints (TOC) methodology. This use of two methods in multimethodological fashion as complementary lenses allowed the elicitation, clarification and elaboration of assumptions underlying the issue of whether the parent should move into an ACF. Multiple avenues for resolving the issue are surfaced, along with several opportunities for further research. The paper contributes to community OR by showing how the different frames can work to address the fraught situation in which families can find themselves, as adult children seek to safeguard their elderly parents by accessing ACF, while also endeavouring to maintain satisfactory family relationships. The paper makes a unique contribution, not just in terms of highlighting the eldercare situation and suggesting ways forward, but also in terms of multimethodological use of BSSM and TOC. Finally, it is significant that the case study originated in the USA, where ‘Soft OR’ methods are rarely applied.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The issue of retirement planning and eldercare has become a near-universal problem due to the increasingly aging population. The weight of decision making falls on families who, typically, are ill-equipped to make such decisions. Family members do not necessarily have the skills, experience or the desire to engage in pro-active decisions in this area. This paper explores the increasingly common and problematic situation of caring for the elderly, from the point of view of families having to decide whether or not a parent should move into an assisted care facility (ACF). When the family believes that the parent would be better off in an ACF but the parent does not want to go, and other agencies become involved, then outcomes can be grim.The purpose of this paper is twofold: firstly to describe and understand the elderly care situation from a systems perspective; and secondly to suggest a way of resolving the situation using a multimethodological modelling approach. This approach provides insight into the problem by employing two complementary lenses, namely Boardman's Soft Systems Methodology (BSSM), and the Evaporating Cloud (EC) method from the Theory of Constraints (TOC). The problematic situation is first described and analysed using BSSM. The situation as portrayed through the BSSM analysis, in particular the systemigram (a diagrammatic depiction of the situation using Boardman's adaptation of the SSM), was then re-interpreted using the Theory of Constraints Evaporating Cloud (EC) method. This allowed the elicitation, clarification and elaboration of the critical assumptions underlying the issue of whether the parent should go into an ACF. As a result, several avenues for resolving the issue were developed.The research findings are based on the application of these methods to address a situation encountered by the first author, initially, and are inevitably illustrative rather than exhaustive. Accordingly, opportunities for further research have been identified, both for the specific problem facing an individual family and for any family in general that might be faced with this problem. These include developing a multi-criteria model to act as a decision aid for families to assess available care options, and working with ACF's to better meet client needs in the future. Future research on multimethodology could include a fuller analysis of the relative merits of BSSM and TOC modelling approaches, especially bearing in mind that the EC method applied here is only one part of the TOC methodology. Thus, its contributions do not represent the full advantages of the Theory of Constraints Thinking Processes (Cox & Schleier, 2010; Ronen, 2005; Watson, Blackstone, & Gardiner, 2007), and fuller use of the TOC methods may be warranted.The authors are unaware of other examples where BSSM (or even SSM) and TOC have been employed in tandem, in respect of eldercare, or in the broader areas of social development and health. This study therefore seeks to make a contribution to the area of eldercare, by applying a (thus-far) unique combination of problem structuring methods to a fraught situation, in which families can find themselves unwittingly embroiled, when it appears that one or both parents can no longer care for themselves in their own home. Fear of relationships breaking down can result in a stalemate of inaction, or ill-considered decisions, with sometimes serious consequences. The paper introduces the two methods, before applying them in sequential fashion to the eldercare dilemma. Inferences and conclusions from the two methods are then compared and contrasted, before suggesting areas for future research. The different thinking frames described in this paper offer great potential for improving the situation for all family members involved.Since the beginning of recorded human history, children under 5 years have outnumbered people over 65. However, this is forecast to change by 2017 (NIA, 2007, p. 6). The population aged 65 and over was estimated at 506 million as of midyear 2008, about 7 percent of the world's population. By 2040, this percentage is predicted to double, reaching 1.3 billion people aged 65 or more and accounting for 14 percent of the total global population (Kinsella & He, 2009, p. 7).In OECD countries, the population is generally older than in the developing world. In the United States, as the large birth cohorts of the post-World War II Baby Boom (people born from 1946 through 1964) have begun to reach age 65, the percentage of over-65's will rise markedly, likely reaching 20 percent by 2035 (Dodaro, 2012). The situation in Europe is even more pressing. With the exception of Japan and Georgia, the world's 25 ‘oldest countries,’ as measured by the percent of population aged 65 years and over, are all in Europe (Kinsella & He, 2009, p. 12). While Europe currently has four ‘working age’ people for every older person, by 2050, it will have just two. The share of gross domestic product (GDP) devoted to social insurance for older people can be expected to more than double for some nations (NIA, 2007, p. 3).New Zealand also has an aging population, although it has the ‘youngest’ population of the developed countries surveyed in 2008 (Kinsella & He, 2009, p. 17). By July 2012, approximately one-eighth of all New Zealanders were aged 65-plus, and by 2061, this age group is expected to make up one-quarter or more of all New Zealand residents (Commission for Financial Literacy and Retirement Income, 2013). The Commission report also points out that, contrary to popular belief, population aging is a long-term, permanent change, rather than being caused by the high numbers of baby boomers now reaching the age 65, although the baby boomer cohort has accentuated the situation. Aging has instead been caused by two persistent demographic trends: having fewer children and living longer.The aging population carries clear budgetary implications for governments around the world trying to provide financial support and assistance to their retired citizens (Dodaro, 2012). Other trends, such as changes in family structure, compound the issues. As people live longer and have fewer children, older people have fewer options for care (NIA, 2007, p. 16).While the above background centres on the collective issues at a national and trans-national level, the concern addressed in this paper is the case of a single individual and whether they should move/be moved into an ACF. There is some research on decisions surrounding moving into elder/aged care facilities such as retirement homes and nursing homes, mostly informed by the experiences of family members and caregivers (and occasionally the elderfolk), and identifying risk factors.For example, Buhr, Kuchbhatla, and Clipp (2006) interviewed caregivers of veterans with dementia, while Kim, Kim, and Kim (2010) looked at home factors influencing the transfer of elderly people from home and community-based long term care into residential care. Family carers are reported as speaking of feelings of guilt, sadness, uncertainty and confusion (Sussman & Dupuis, 2012), and talk of the loss of control; being disempowered; feeling guilt, sadness and relief simultaneously; possessing a sense of failure; and having to make a forced decision and negative choice, though the starting point shapes the family members’ experiences (Kellett, 1999).Brody (2010) provides many valuable insights into being ‘very, very old’ based not only on her long career as a gerontologist but also on her own life experiences as an 85+ year old. In particular, on the issue of when children feel the need to step in, she writes, “An almost universal experience is the shift in balance of dependence/independence between elderly parent(s) and adult child(ren). When the older person begins to need some help, the issue for him or her is the fear of losing autonomy—control over one's own life—and no longer having the essential sense of mastery. The beginning dependency of the elderly parent may initiate a struggle (mild or severe) that is reminiscent of the struggle between parent and adolescent. The adult child tries to ‘take over’ and make decisions, and the parent resists. The shift in independence/dependence is a central issue and reactivates unresolved conflicts about dependency in both generations. … In some families, the issue is resolved in a relatively orderly manner; in others, it may become an acute crisis. The struggle for control between the elderly parent and the middle-aged child is similar to the adolescent struggle. Yet, despite adolescence being generally seen as inevitable and expectable, it still daunts us. A parent's dependence is different in that it presages more dependence rather than independence as with the adolescent.” (Emphasis added.)How far is it possible to put oneself into the shoes of someone of a different age group? An expert on elder abuse, Biggs (2014) says it is particularly difficult to determine when people need to step in—whether these be family or professionals. In particular, when should a child step in to put an elderly parent into residential care due to increasing frailty, dementia or a perceived risk of harming themselves or others? This concern needs to be balanced against the parent's rights to live where and how they wish.Given that this issue is almost universal and one that most families find difficult, even acute, what guidance and support can we offer to help people though this process? Of particular concern for us was the question of how families themselves might tackle the decision of whether or not the elderly parent should move into residential care.Sussman and Dupuis (2012) report Nolan et al.’s (1996) conclusion that anticipation, participation, exploration and information are factors necessary for carers to perceive decisions as positive choices. However they quote several research studies that indicate that these pre-conditions are rarely met in practice. They posit that conceptual models to enable this positive view are only beginning to emerge, citing Davies and Nolan's studies undertaken between 2003 and 2006 that suggested there are three stages such as making the best of it, making the move and making it better. Five conditions are relevant to all three stages:(a)Being in control,Being in the know,Feeling supported,Working together, andFeeling no pressure.They describe ‘being in the know’ as having access to all the relevant information, while ‘working together’ means working with health and social care staff to ensure the best care for the older person. While ‘being in the know’ is represented as a single condition, our experience would suggest that acquiring all the information is problematic, and even when you have all the information, organising, structuring and making sense of it is not straightforward, especially when there are different stakeholders and conflicting information/stakes. Further, the social and healthcare lens leaves legal issues largely out of the frame. Our approach is focused on the decision making process using OR approaches which can take into account these multiple, often conflicting views.Even though two invited reviews on trends in OR in healthcare have highlighted the issues, the OR literature seems to have been slow to take on the challenges around eldercare. Royston (1998) pointed to a shifting balance towards more older people, fewer carers, and a swing towards in-home care, along with their funding implications and an increased expectation to be involved in decision making. ORMS practice has also been trending towards more participatory working, systemic analysis and ‘satisfying’ solutions. Royston includes soft systems methods in the list of methods available for such work.Brailsford and Vissers (2011) reiterate these points, concluding that, “the key challenges facing healthcare providers in future years are perhaps more organisational and logistical than medical and scientific advances. How can these complex healthcare organisations manage themselves, and deliver care efficiently and effectively to an aging and ever more demanding population, with limited budgets, advancing medical technology and increased expectations? A Grand Challenge indeed and a key role for OR!” It would appear from the few papers cited in the eldercare area that there is plenty of room for more OR, particularly using softer/systems methods.This paper hopes to shed new light on why the problem is difficult for families by taking an inside-family view, mapping connections, flows, and causal and necessity relationships using systems mapping methods from BSSM and the Evaporating Cloud from the TOC methodology. These frameworks provide alternative ways of viewing the issues which accommodate and legitimate the different ways that the two parties may view the problem and, due to their design and intention, should help to identify a win–win solution. The prompt for exploring these methods was the personal experiences of one of the authors, which was subsequently augmented by the experience of the other, both professionally and personally. While this may seem a blurring of objective and personal viewpoints, as Brody (2010) points out, it is hard to separate the two in such issues.SSM was developed by Checkland (Checkland, 1981, 1982, 1983, 1989a, 1989b; Checkland & Scholes, 1990) in recognition that many problems in the real world are ill-structured, and thus are not amenable to traditional ‘hard’ OR methods. There is no one way of modelling ill-structured problems. Indeed, just capturing the complexity is an enormous task, let alone formulating the problem as well-structured and amenable to analysis. Perhaps best suited are the Soft OR or problem structuring methods (PSMs), a collection of methods developed over the last 40 years, mainly in the UK (von Winterfeldt & Fasolo, 2009). A comprehensive review of PSMs in action is provided in Mingers and Rosenhead (2004), though they restrict their detailed discussion to a core group of PSMs, which includes SSM but not TOC. They conclude that the boundary between PSM and non-PSM is ill-defined, that the range of techniques in use is large, and that mixing methodologies is a commonly-adopted approach. Mingers (2011) points to the paucity of Soft OR usage in the USA, making this paper, arising out of a case study using a version of SSM in the US, noteworthy.Mingers and Rosenhead (2004) point to the natural occurrence of multimethodology using different PSMs arising from competence in the various methods, along with their relative suitability for the different stages of a project from problem appreciation through to acting to bring about change. While arising naturally, multimethodology does pose challenges as well as potential, as argued by Mingers and Brocklesby (1997). In the end, Mingers and Rosenhead (2004) endorse Thunhurst's (1987) argument that methodological pragmatism should be the order of the day.In the vein of pragmatic multimethodology, a second method is used to approach the problem from a different angle, in order to better understand and resolve the eldercare dilemma. Although not in Mingers and Rosenhead's list of PSMs, the Theory of Constraints (TOC) is arguably also a Soft OR or PSM, but developed from an entirely different route. Arising initially as a production scheduling technique (Cox & Schleier, 2010; Watson et al., 2007), TOC now encompasses a management systems philosophy complete with problem structuring and solution methodology, with strong similarities and complementarities to the core PSMs (Davies, Mabin, & Balderstone, 2005). The choice of TOC arose naturally out of the BSSM modelling process, but proved to be a good match, due to the complementarity of the methods—as will be discussed later.Both TOC and SSM have been used widely in practice, though the geographical pattern of usage has been markedly different, with SSM more prevalent in the UK than the USA, and TOC the reverse. In addition to the applications listed in Mingers and Rosenhead's (2004) review, SSM has been applied towards ill-behaving issues in many social sectors including healthcare (Braithwaite, Hindle, Iedema, & Westbrook, 2002; Jacobs, 2004; Loo & Lee, 2001). While eldercare is not specifically addressed, these papers show that social systems can benefit from SSM introspection. TOC too has had multiple applications in healthcare: Mabin and Balderstone (2000, 2003) provide a listing of applications of early TOC methods in healthcare, while Kim, Mabin, and Davies (2008) provide a review of TOC's later ‘thinking process’ applications, identifying several in healthcare, such as Breen, Burton-Houle, and Aron (2002), and TOCICO conferences have included many applications of TOC to healthcare, and two excellent books on TOC in healthcare (Inozu, Chauncey, Kamataris, & Mount, 2011; Knight, 2014), but none to this issue of eldercare in particular. Likewise there is a rich literature documenting Operational Research contributions in healthcare, but few that address eldercare issues. One exception is Clark and Mabin (2011), which will be commented on later.This paper uses an extension/adaptation of Checkland's (1999) SSM, namely Boardman Soft Systems Methodology (BSSM) (Boardman & Cole, 1996;Boardman & Sauser, 2008). BSSM provides a practical means of dealing with the ill-defined problems found in project management, concurrent engineering, and extended enterprises. Blair, Boardman, and Sauser (2007) provide a discussion of the evolution and use of BSSM and its component tool, the systemigram (a portmanteau of “system” and “diagram”). The systemigram is a diagramming tool used to summarise the textual descriptions of the system, representing the relationships between stakeholders using arrows between entities in the systemigram. With text presented in this visual format, patterns can be seen that might not be apparent from the less-structured approach associated with standard SSM. Application of BSSM in a broader systems thinking context is addressed by Boardman and Sauser (2008) and is described briefly in the next section.Checkland's (1999) SSM comprises seven connected steps:1.Appreciating the unstructured problematical situation.Understanding the worldviews of the key stakeholders.Creating root definitions of relevant systems.Making and testing conceptual models based upon worldviews.Comparing conceptual models with reality.Identifying feasible and desirable changes.Acting to improve the problem situation.These steps and their relation are illustrated in Fig. 1.Boardman's approach substitutes SSM Steps 3–5 with:3.Structured text.Systemigram(s) design.Dramatisation and dialogue.Fig. 2, the SSM topology does not change, but the operations do. In Step 3 of SSM, root definitions are extracted. In BSSM Step 3 is the creation of structured text as a means to encapsulate the results of CATWOE11CATWOE is a mnemonic from SSM used to prompt consideration of the following: Customers—who are the beneficiaries of the highest level business process and how does the issue affect them? Actors—who are involved in the situation, who will be involved in implementing solutions and what will impact their success? Transformation process—what processes or systems are affected by the issue? World view (Weltenschauung)—what is the big picture and what are the wider impacts of the issue? Weltanschauung—who owns the process or situation being investigated and what role will they play in the solution? Environmental constraints—what are the constraints and limitations that will impact the solution and its success?surveys and analysis into prose. This prose is diagrammed using the Systemitool application (Blair et al., 2007) in Step 4 to create the conceptual model. The structured prose and systemigram provide a means to address situations even if root-cause definitions are difficult to articulate.The aging of the most Western populations is an inexorable fact as millions of ‘baby boomers’ start to reach retirement age. In the US, the portion of the economy related to Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security has risen rapidly and by 2011 amounted to 40 percent of US Government spending (Dodaro, 2012). While this is a serious concern on the national level, this paper is focused on the individual and family realm, dealing with the personal and often painful issues involving what is euphemistically termed “eldercare”. These baby boomers are seeing their own future in the care they need to provide for their retired parents and grandparents who are no longer able to live independently. The world that has evolved around eldercare is actually a system of systems, involving a myriad of actors, views, motives, goals. These systems—in the US at least—include the aforementioned trio of Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security, as well as the courts, state social services, financial institutions, physicians, hospitals, assisted living facilities, nursing homes, and of course, the families. The situation constitutes a conundrum, due to the confusion, complexity and uncertainty that proliferates for the multiple stakeholders.This situation is an example of an “ill-defined problem in social systems” (Checkland, 1999), suited to the use of SSM. The analysis here begins by applying a soft systems approach to the issues confronted when an adult child perceives the need to move an elderly parent to assisted living.When a parent is no longer able to live independently, the adult child perceives the end goal is to provide a safe, healthy and comfortable location for the parent to live. The options become limited: move the parent to live with a family member who can provide care, arrange for live-in assistance, or locate the parent to an assisted care facility (ACF). In many, if not most, cases, an assisted care facility or nursing home will be the final destination.A person may need to enter an assisted living residence when they are mentally or physically unable to take care of themselves. In the best case all issues—including legal, financial, and estate planning—have been planned for well ahead of this time. This is the exception to the rule. The process of moving a parent to an ACF is not always simple and can become a drawn out conflict-ridden series of unfortunate events. While first-hand experience from the child-parent relationship and dealing with the complexities of the eldercare system in the US provided the basis and initial inspiration for this paper (Sommer, 2007a), complications and conflict seem to be common concerns (Brody, 2010).The process to enrol a parent into an assisted living facility often starts when a child (or other close associate) realises their parent is having difficulty properly meeting their own needs. Addressing the issue with the parent may lead to a smooth process for admitting the parent to a care facility as well as proper estate planning. Initial resistance is normal and maybe the parent's and child's wishes can be accommodated. But if there is fierce resistance on the parent's part, and the child still believes the parent needs help sooner rather than later, then the process becomes more difficult and the social services, courts, and other systems will require much more interaction and level of effort on the part of the child, to achieve the end goal.Despite the best of intentions, the child must work hard to have their parent ‘committed’. The Weltanschauung (Checkland, 1999) of the various systems focus on protecting the individual from an unwilling commitment until it is deemed to be in their best interest. When a parent is unwilling to cooperate, the child must file a petition for guardianship. When a parent and child work together, they can develop powers of attorney and allocate and protect financial assets. This step is mired in difficulty when the parent and child are in dispute. With a petition for guardianship, the courts first require a complete inventory of a person's material and financial assets. The courts will also direct social service agencies to perform an Independent Living Assessment. Conducted by an impartial third party, this documents a person's health, physical abilities, mental abilities and cognition, ability to perform basic tasks, hygiene, nutrition, emotional stability and attitude, and financial resources. Anecdotal evidence suggests that lawyers for the reluctant parent will work to prevent any success in this arena.Part of the process is in establishing powers of attorney, both durable and healthcare, as well as establishing trusts for financial assets. In the United States the Medicaid insurance system can be used to provide for much of the costs of eldercare. The Medicaid system for all its benefits, requires a person to live in near poverty to receive coverage, as a person may have no more than US$2000 in assets before Medicaid will pay for anything. A person receiving Medicaid will be given only a portion of their monthly Social Security cheque after Medicaid applies its formula to their circumstances. This low level of allowable cash reserves virtually guarantees a subsistence level of living, to receive care. Trusts and other estate planning instruments, such as long term health insurance, can provide a means to preserve finances that would otherwise be appropriated by Medicaid. Certain trusts can also be created to avoid much of probate. Trusts have to be created at least 5 years before Medicaid is anticipated, in order to protect individual assets.The next stage is finding and arranging for a care facility that can provide a comfortable and healthy living environment. Since the deciding factor for finding/choosing an ACF can often be due to dealing with mental problems such as dementia, exercising diligence in finding a good facility is paramount. Some of the factors to evaluate here are location, cost and level of care, cleanliness, and staffing levels, including medical professionals on call.With the basic checkpoints in place, though not providing all the answers, this summarisation of the process can serve as a map of for the Who, What, and some of the How questions that always have to be answered. Why is answered from the familial bond and responsibility. When and Where are answered via the process.Enrolling a parent into an ACF requires interactions not just with the parent but also with a long list of other involved parties: courts, social services organisations, lawyers, insurance programs, entitlement programs, assisted care facilities, and various financial entities—all of which have particular views on what is in the best interest of the parent. These views may oppose each other and still be perfectly valid. Navigating this system can be repetitive, costly, time consuming, and a strain on relations. The parent, child, social services, and courts may all come into strong conflict over issues of wellbeing (independence, finances, and what constitutes ‘proper care’). The process requires that the elements eventually come to an agreement, with the end purpose being to maintain a high quality of life for the parent, with dignity, health, and financial stability.The above summary is used as the basis from which to develop structured text for the situation and build a systemigram. The systemigram in turn is compared to the problem statement to verify it is a fair representation (in the systems thinking world) of the situation (in the real world). Refinements to the structured text and graphs take place iteratively, providing a model to use in the process.In looking at the problem statements and summary, it is evident that each actor is an independent system with different functions and imperatives for their role in the dilemma. They each have a different worldview of the situation (Table 1).The roles are articulated more fully:Parent:Does not want to relinquish independence of person, home, or finances. Views assisted living as being shut away.Child:Perceives the parent cannot take care of himself/herself without assistance. Does not want the parent to end up destitute and without proper care.Courts:Has a high standard to prove need of guardianship. Will not grant guardianship and thereby remove a person's liberties lightly. Requires child to report substantial information on parent's care as well of the custodial oversight of assets.Social services:Strive for well-being of residents. Will support guardianship petition with evidence from assessments and will advise against if the assessment does not support it. May force parent to go into assisted living even without child being part of process. Social services also coordinate directly with local assisted living facilities.Medicaid:Federal US health insurance that can provide costs for nursing home and health care. Views its role as providing care in a cost-effective manner.Lawyers:Eldercare lawyers (attorneys) specialise in this growing area of practice, especially with the baby boom generation aging. View role as educator and facilitator for very confusing legal aspects. Agents of advocacy for their respective clients.Trusts:Specifically non-revocable trusts (US) are permanent legal/financial instruments where financial and property assets are deposited. The trust is given a mandate towards the trust beneficiary (the parent) and is managed by trustees with stated duties. At the time of deposit the trust assumes ownership of assets from the donator. Trusts can be structured to dissolve upon various events, typically the death of the trust beneficiary. The trust imperative is spelled out in its mandate.From the perspectives given and the BSSM process, a structured text statement was generated. The complexity of trying to encompass all worldviews was not practicable for this project. Accordingly the main perspective is that of the first author, a ‘child’ in the system, who acknowledges that there is a bias in the statements. But the effort has been made to provide a first step for applying the soft systems methods to this cumbersome and unavoidable issue. The problem statement can now be summarised as:When a parent's condition deteriorates, the child tries to care for the parent by enrolling them into an assisted care facility (ACF). The child needs the parent's cooperation in assigning power of attorney and entering assets into trust that the child or other trustee will use for the parent's benefit. The ACF should provide the level of care and living facilities that meet the needs of the parent and that are affordable. When the parent is non-cooperative, the child will seek guardianship from the courts. All the parent's assets will be audited and provided as a record to the court. The court directs the relevant social service agency to conduct an Independent Living Assessment to provide evidence of the need for guardianship. Lawyers for the child and parent will be engaged to make the process speed up or slow down for the respective client's benefit. Once awarded guardianship of the parent, the child will receive power of attorney for decisions the parent cannot make themselves: durable POA for assets and real estate, and a health-care POA for medical decisions.Assets and real estate will be protected from Medicaid and other attachments by entering them into trusts which the child will administer. Costs of assisted care facilities will come from Medicaid, Social Security payments, and trust funds.Assisted care facilities will be visited and evaluated for cost, location, and quality of care provided. As guardian, the child will be responsible to the courts and social service for the well-being of their parent and will report on their status on a regular basis.Fig. 3is the corresponding systemigram that illustrates this text, its environment, and process. The systemigram describes who does what, to whom, when, how and why. The process starts with the parent and child (top left and bottom left), and flows (indirectly) towards the end goal of assisted care facility (bottom right). The diagram arrow and connected entities provide a sentence of the relationship between the subject and the direct object (the two connected stakeholders in the diagram) with the wording being the verb. The nodes and links are read together as sentences: the parent cooperates (or resists) the child; the child tries to care for the parent, etc. Other actors/entities are incorporated as intermediaries as appropriate. Once the graph is made, the system construction can be analysed in whole and in parts.Nested within the structure of Fig. 3 is the legal system, which consists of the courts, social service, and lawyers, as well as the living assessment and guardianship, as shown in Fig. 4.The loop with the lawyers introduces the potential for a zero-sum game between the parent's lawyer and the child's lawyer, if the legal system is brought into action. When one side gains, the other side loses. When the parent does not contest moving to assisted care, this legal system is not needed and can be removed from the structure. An interesting phenomenon is then observed as shown in Fig. 5. This, on reflection, should not be surprising, as it illustrates the independence of these systems, such that with the legal system removed, the whole of the outer structure remains intact.Fig. 6 illustrates the legal system's connections. Most of the interactions are tied to the family structure. Only a few are attached to elements on the right in this systemigram. Only one element, the living assessment, connects to the end-goal of the ACF. This reflects the fact that in order to reach the ACF, a living assessment is first required.The surprising element of modelling this process came from the independence seen between the assisted living process and the legal systems. On reflection, it seems just common sense that events of this sort have the potential to be addressed without involving courts and social services. Good solutions should appear obvious and ‘common sense’, but usually this only appears so in hindsight (de Bono, 1971), and the value of the BSSM modelling exercise should not be underestimated. The value of drawing the diagrams is that one can ‘see’ the system. In this case, the system shown in Fig. 5 appears to be like a spoke-less wheel. The legal system is akin to providing an axle and spokes to the wheel, which then allows force to be applied and directed to moving forward.While thesediagrams are by no means comprehensive to the issue at hand, they do provide a clear insight into the process and how the different systems interact. The central section involving the courts, social services, guardianships and the living assessments can be encapsulated into one system. The lawyers have been nested to represent their main role as tweedledee-tweedledum proxies for parent and child. These structures parallel the real world legal systems, illustrating why engaging in legal recourse can have negative connotations. Adding the legal layer to the frame creates greater complexity and introduces adversity in this system of systems, as the number of connections and relationships that have to be managed inevitably increases. This can contribute to a deterioration of the situation and reduction in resources available for care. In addition, because a living assessment is needed before the parent can enter an ACF, this can be a source of delays if the social services do not have sufficient capacity and/or the parent is non-cooperative.Since the outer structure (Fig. 5) can succeed without the inner structure (Fig. 4), it might appear that the inner set adds no value to the system. However, they do sometimes play a useful role. The value of the courts and social services only appears when the parent does not cooperate with an attempt to provide for their own well-being. Indeed, the courts protect the parent from overzealous or unprincipled relations. Starkermann (2003) has shown with control system models that cooperation between parties is fragile and relies on both sides agreeing to a common goal. When either party can no longer work in amity, then a stubborn and strong antagonism develops between both. Starkermann's models help explain why family disagreements are so acrimonious and resilient. And as Brody (2010) observed, conflicts between older parents and adult children often rekindle parent-adolescent struggles. With both parties now opposing each other, the legal and social entities at the centre of the system wheel, become the engine and axle that drive the process forward. By increasing the number of connections, the system may in fact become stronger and more resilient to challenges or problems that would affect the non-contested system.One thing that emerges from this process is that in order for the family to avoid the courts, social services, petitions for guardianship, living assessments and other legal strong-arms, it is necessary that the parent and child communicate, cooperate, and plan early for both their futures. By planning for long term care early and teaming up, the costs and the suffering can be reduced. By not doing so, the risk of inadequate facilities, or having insufficient funding for them, is very real.The diagrams and process developed here are illustrative, but the real transformation will be when this can be applied to change social and policy structures so they do not force a family system to have to fight itself in order to take care of itself.To complement the learning that takes place in the main part of an SSM or BSSM analysis, both Checkland's and Boardman's frameworks include in Step 4b a directive to use other systems thinking frameworks to offer alternative or additional insights. The method chosen by the first author was Goldratt's Theory of Constraints (TOC), which has elements of both hard and soft systems. We will first provide a brief background on TOC before resuming the narrative.Goldratt's Theory of Constraints started with the Five Focusing Steps for identifying the constraints that prevent a business from meeting its goal, and using these to focus improvements (Goldratt, 1990a, 1992; Watson, Blackstone, & Gardiner, 2007). The TOC Thinking Process was developed later (Goldratt, 1994; Dettmer, 1997), to help decision makers devise their own solutions, encapsulated in five change questions (Barnard, 2010):•Why change?What to change?What to change to?How to cause the change?How create a process of ongoing improvement to sustain the change?To answer these questions, a suite of logic tools may be used: the Current Reality Tree, Evaporating Cloud, Future Reality Tree, Prerequisite Tree, and Transition Tree, plus more recent additions (Mabin & Davies, 2010). These TOC Thinking Process tools provide specific directives for probing each of these change questions in turn: to map out goals and their necessary conditions, identify symptoms of malaise and their causes and effects, dilemmas and their assumptions, solutions and their (potential negative) side effects, through to implementation and project plans. The Strategy and Tactics Tree, now regarded as one of the Thinking Process tools, can be used to provide a summation of the logic behind the solution.The BSSM process helps frame the problem so it can be addressed in the first two change questions, and provides an experiential learning cycle with improvement over time as the main aim, without prescribing how these improvements might be constructed. TOC's Five Focusing Steps appear to reflect the thinking steps in SSM methodologies, while the TP tools prescribe more closely the steps to be taken and questions to be asked at each stage of the change process. The TP tools are designed to address the factors behind ‘resistance to change’ and turn them into a positive force.While TOC methods are often thought of as focusing on business conflicts and their resolution, they are increasingly being used in personal and social contexts as well as healthcare (Breen et al., 2002; Inozu et al., 2011; Knight, 2014; Phipps, 1999; Ronen, Pliskin, & Pass, 2006). In our view, TOC may be an effective tool for the processes involved in eldercare, as suggested also by Squire (2002). In this situation, the number of actors is fairly well defined as are the goals and possible outcomes. The chaos in this issue comes during the process and the unpredictability of the human element. Finding a means to understand and map the causes and effects of that chaos, and identify ways out of the situation, may be a benefit that baby boomers can give their children—when the roles switch once more. TOC offers several different ways for doing this, one of which will be explored next.The above analysis using BSSM portrays the negative outcomes that arise when the two parties cannot agree, and the net result is that only the lawyers win. This problematic situation signals that there must be barriers to cooperative working. One of the reasons could be that many families are ill-equipped to cope with such decisions, due to a lack of a means to understand and map the causes and effects of eldercare choices, without a process to resolve conflicts over choices, and anchored by past struggles. The result may be an impasse regarding the elder person's care, and a much worse outcome than would be achieved by an early resolution.After the BSSM analysis, the first author contacted the second author, and it was immediately apparent to the second author that the TOC Evaporating Cloud (EC) could be a useful lens to reevaluate the conflict. The EC can be a liberating process when facing a dilemma, conflict, tension or tradeoff, as it exposes assumptions that we and others have unwittingly made, and prompts users to come up with multiple possible win–win solutions, when previously it felt like a no-win situation (Mabin, Davies, & Kim, 2009). While the EC is just one tool in the aforementioned suite of TP tools, it is very frequently used on its own (Kim et al., 2008). The EC is at its simplest a five-box method. It was first published in Goldratt (1990a) when he used it to re-examine the Economic Order Quantity, questioning its foundational assumptions and providing several win–win ways of resolving the problem, rather than the traditional compromise solution. Full descriptions may be found in Dettmer (1998, 1999, 2003, 2007, chap. 5), Scheinkopf (1999, 2010), or Cox, Blackstone, and Schleier (2003). The format of the EC below follows the guidelines provided in Cox, Mabin, and Davies (2005) and Mabin et al. (2009).An EC was constructed in the usual fashion, starting with the two right hand boxes, D and D′, in which are inserted the two conflicting Prerequisites wanted by the two opposing sides respectively. Next, working to the left, the underlying needs of each side's prerequisites are identified, noting these as Requirements B and C. Lastly the Objective A, that is shared by both parent and child(ren), is identified. In this way, the Evaporating Cloud shown in Fig. 7was constructed. This represents a possible Evaporating Cloud for the eldercare dilemma, based on the situation as presented through the BSSM lens.The EC diagram is read using ‘necessity logic’ as follows: in order toA(maintain quality of life for my parent, including dignity, health and financial stability), my parent mustB(be kept safe and cared for), and in order forB, my parent mustD(go to an Assisted Care Facility). On the other hand, in order toA,my parent mustC(live with independence), and in order toC, my parent mustD′(not go to an ACF). ButDandD′ (Go and Not go to an ACF) cannot occur simultaneously, and hence the conflict. The wording is adjusted until the description makes sense, and once a reasonable depiction of the dilemma has been arrived at, the question becomes, “How do we resolve this dilemma?”The standard method to resolve an EC involves an examination of assumptions in order to identify possible solutions (Cox et al., 2003), and will be demonstrated shortly. However, it is usually possible to approach the resolution more directly using what we call the ‘quick way’ (Mabin et al., 2009). This approach will be demonstrated first.The EC is based on assumptions that lead us to conclude that taking action D jeopardises C, and taking action D′ jeopardises B. The ‘quick way’ of resolving the EC looks directly for ways to break the conflict by asking direct questions (that challenge these still implicit assumptions):•How can we do D′ and still get B (without D)?Asking this directed question prompts ideas for ‘breaking’ the conflict such as: the parent might have a carer at home who lives in; or the parent could live with siblings/offspring; or the parent could live with friends.How can we get C (without D′), while doing D?We could find an ACF with flexible structure, apartments with 24 hour care as needed.We can also ask:•How can we have both D and D′?Usually it is harder to think of ways of having both D and D′, as the two prerequisites are by definition viewed as being mutually exclusive. However, Mann's separation principles (Mann, 2004; 2nd ed., 2007), while proposed for use in the TRIZ method, can help by focusing the search for solutions through separation in time, space, personnel, parts versus whole, on condition, and more. These may lead to several ideas such as:Separate in space: have an independent unit within an ACF—indeed, many retirement villages provide a range of levels of care options;Separate in time: live in ACF during week and spend weekends with son/daughter;Separate with personnel: have one carer some of the time, and other carer/s at other times;Separate on condition: agree to move into ACF when the parent's health/mental condition deteriorates to a specified level.The above suggestions offer several ways of breaking the dilemma, which are referred to in TOC as ‘injections’. Another way of generating injections is described below.If the ‘quick way’ does not produce injections that resolve the conflict sufficiently, then one can use the standard method. This is a two-step process, consisting of listing out all the assumptions that underlie the dilemma, and then breaking these assumptions to identify injections—actions or decisions that ‘cure’ the problem. (Strictly any injections should be viewed as ideas that have yet to be developed into a workable solution.) This method is illustrated in Figs. 8 and 9. The assumptions in this case have been drawn from the BSSM analysis supplemented with the authors’ own experiences.First, as shown in Fig. 8, we restate each arrow (in order to A, we must B) and add because …, and then write down the reason that comes to mind, which is the assumption that causes one side and/or the other to believe that the relationship exists. There will usually be several assumptions underpinning each arrow. Fig. 8 presents some of the assumptions that underpin the relationships expressed in the EC diagram. For example, in order for the parent to BBe kept safe and cared for, the Parent needs to DGo to an ACF, because the Parent is no longer safe at home on his/her own.The final assumption is based on the situation in the US whereby when a person is considered destitute, the State may be required to provide their upkeep in an ACF. This involves being put on Medicaid and requires more detailed explanation than is possible here. Suffice to note that this is a permanent situation when it happens and the State/Medicaid does liquidate almost all property.Before proceeding, we must check whether each assumption is valid and really does exist currently for the case in question. Any assumptions that do not exist/are not valid are either reworded to something that is valid/does exist, or are deleted. (The assumptions listed in Fig. 8 may be adapted, deleted or augmented to suit each family's situation.)A resolution is now sought, by looking for ways to break the remaining valid and existing assumptions. For example, a common early intervention to counter the assumption listed above would be that BD. We make changes to the home, install alarms etc. so that the parent is safe (see Fig. 9, second column). If this removes the concerns, then it would be a valid ‘injection’ to resolve the conflict. Goldratt (1990b) states that if an injection can be found to break an arrow then the conflict is removed (or the cloud is evaporated). A number of such injections, prompted by challenging the assumptions, are provided for each arrow, in Fig. 9.Once as many injections as possible are identified, the one(s) that appears most workable and effective may be chosen. While a new problem may require just one injection to break the conflict, a complex or chronic problem usually requires a combination of several injections, which need to be developed through to a final robust solution, as per Cox et al. (2005). In this way, the Evaporating Cloud can be used in a directed way to generate ideas that could lead to actions that resolve the dilemma or conflict, tension or tradeoff.As can be seen, either of the above methods (the ‘quick’ or the ‘standard’ way) of ‘evaporating’ the EC, especially at the arrow DD′, leads us to question what is actually meant by ‘going into an ACF’. A deeper appreciation of the different types and levels of care possible is likely to emerge, along with the realisation that the parent and the child are likely to be looking for and seeing different attributes in the various options. The process is designed to get both sides thinking more openly and working together more constructively, and gaining a better understanding of the other's needs.In this case, we have illustrated the use of two methods from different methodologies, a practice known as multimethodology. The BSSM analysis was performed by the first author as part of a course based exercise. The use of BSSM calls for the use of other systems models, and in this case TOC was chosen by the first author, leading to a correspondence with the second author. The EC above was constructed by the second author, based on the BSSM analysis, with a few minor modifications added by the first author.The effectiveness of this albeit unplanned combination is evident from the sequence of events and reactions from the problem owner/BSSM analyst (first author) and EC analyst (second author). Firstly, the BSSM analysis had captured the picture so effectively that the second author could recognise the existence of a particular dilemma, and construct an EC that made complete sense to the problem owner. The BSSM model and discussion had captured the situation sufficiently well to enable the EC construction without further input from the problem owner. The second author was struck by the parasitic nature of the legal system, depleting the family victims of their funds if they got entrapped in the legal arguments because they could not or would not resolve this dilemma themselves. Thus is seemed the imperative was to find a way of helping them help themselves to resolve the dilemma, and the EC seemed the natural choice of ‘tool’.Secondly, the EC provided the problem owner with a ‘Eureka’ moment, adding clarity on the situation and on the relative merits of an ACF which had not been apparent from the BSSM, and leading to the identification of many ways of resolving such conflicts, as the following email extract indicates:Wow! In a very few pages you're able to articulate … the main issues of conflict that I've seen. The EC paints the main picture perfectly. It's truly been a one side wins/one side loses when there is no planning or cooperation. The BD assumptions really capture one of the main issues—finances. The cost of an ACF is substantial and there is no social safety net in the US other than Medicaid—it imposes a cruel poverty on those who have to take advantage of it. It's definitely a factor in the conflict even if I didn't explicitly address it. Up front and early planning would include the financials (Sommer, 2007b).Thirdly the particular combination was effective, due to both the outputs and the processes. Those familiar with TOC methods may question why we used the BSSM and not the TOC Current Reality Tree (CRT) to describe the situation. As mentioned above, this BSSM–EC combination was not preplanned, but emerged in a mode of action learning (Revans, 2011), and proved to be an effective combination in that it provided an approach requisite for the problem owner's needs (Phillips, 1984). The BSSM systemigram was effective at portraying the flows and interactions between the multiple players and factors in a complex system, which would have been very difficult to portray as clearly using a CRT. Even though BSSM had not helped resolve the dilemma, it had helped the problem owner to see the problematic situation more objectively and systemically, providing a thinking frame to ‘help us to step outside and view the problem more holistically’ Garvin and Roberto (2001).The process of constructing the systemigram, along with the subsequent BSSM steps of dramatisation and dialogue, was also beneficial, proving to be cathartic at least, even without resolving the conflict. In the problem owner's view, the ‘magic’ of the systemigram was not so much the product, but the process: working through, building the text, putting it into a systemigram, making the connections, reorganising the diagram to clarify the structures/flows, and then restating the reorganised idea. The process helped to see elements that are redundant (as in the legal system), and actions can be planned to remove them. Or there may be entities that are not connected to the rest of the system, or omissions that need adding. The process of constructing the systemigram gave a much needed understanding of the context. Being able to ‘see’ the interrelationships into the workings of the system helped to provide a roadmap to help navigate through the complex and detailed processes.Despite gaining all these insights from the systemigram, the EC analysis provided a Eureka moment for the problem owner—it crystallised the dilemma he and his family were trapped in, and provided insights into resolution, and perhaps more usefully, how the conflict may have been avoided in the first place. The BSSM modelling is designed to lead to feasible actions and desired plans (Steps 6 and 7). These were aided significantly by the EC analysis. Moreover, the BSSM significantly aided the EC analysis. The BSSM description was sufficient for an EC without needing to go through the process of constructing the CRT.The effectiveness of the combination should not be a surprise when one considers the relative strengths of the two methods/methodologies, or at least, TOC and BSSM's parent methodology, SSM. Mingers and Brocklesby (1997) and Davies et al. (2005) provide mappings to represent the strengths of the various problem structuring methodologies, including SSM and TOC. Mingers (2006, p. 231) argues that the major philosophical thrust of SSM is in surfacing and exploring individual participants’ beliefs and values. It therefore contributes mainly in the personal dimension, where it is particularly strong in generating and assessing alternative possibilities. However, it is less strong in terms of activities to bring about consensus and change. On the other hand, he argues, TOC is strongly associated with identifying and addressing constraints by challenging them in order to effect an improvement. Goldratt (1994) argues that constraints often manifest in the form of a conflict between opposing goals or actions, which block the system from moving forward. The EC in particular was designed to devise a win–win solution, by challenging assumptions leading to the conflict, which are acting as constraints that block improvement. Hence the use of the EC in combination with SSM can be seen to work by complementing SSM in an area in which SSM is less strong.Further, the problem owner benefited from use of the two approaches in complementary fashion, seeing the problem from another angle, and felt that the EC had gone straight to the nub of the problem, provoking more future-focused, solution-oriented thinking:In the US, there are some very progressive ACF's that have levels of living facilities starting at essentially a retirement community to a full service nursing care facility. Having such a wide spectrum is not the rule. But I can see where they would be more attractive. However […] by the time many people have to make this decision the time frame is short and the risk gradient is high. Frankly, the ACF is in an advantageous position since it is an expert—it gets a lot of practice and the families do not. […] Tools to facilitate these decisions would help a lot of people (Sommer, 2007b).The need for decision support tools alluded to here is echoed by the aged care literature (Sussman & Dupuis, 2012). The value of using such tools as thinking frames may, however, be underestimated, as the solutions proposed may seem to be obvious, but as de Bono (1971) points out, good solutions do seem obvious but only in hindsight. The value of these tools in particular is that they helped the problem owner ‘see’ the problem and gain a much better understanding of the situation, and how he and his family were caught in a process. Being able to see it as if from outside helped to regain a sense of composure by engaging a more objective rather than emotional response.In reality, there are many families facing the same issues unaided, experiencing considerable angst (Brody, 2010). They are unable to see that their situation is not unique, and they have difficulty seeing the problem from the perspective of other family members. Without a good process for resolving such dilemmas, it comes down to personal relationships, and it would appear that many families are not able to have constructive discussions about this issue (Brody, 2010). While the case presented here has been based on personal experience, of both authors independently, and has subsequently helped in several family situations, we hope that with appropriate adaptations, the approach and its lessons may aid other families in similar circumstances. The methods we have employed directly address concerns raised since 2003 by Davies and Nolan (reported in Sussman & Dupuis, 2012) about the need to see this decision as a process, and work together. The approach provides a rationale, a process for working together, and worked examples for others to adapt.The use of the two methods—in some combination—may hold great potential for use beyond the present example, for example for other complex societal issues, where multiple actors and multiple subsystems interact. The existence of multiple players would make it difficult to represent the system interactions succinctly as a CRT in a way that captures the dynamic nature of the flows, with the CRT being more useful as a snapshot. The Evaporating Cloud, on the other hand, would be ideal for investigating thoroughly any conflicts identified, leading to new avenues for resolution. The BSSM process helps frame the problem, and provides an experiential learning cycle with improvement over time as the main aim, without prescribing how these improvements might be constructed. The TOC tools take a more prescriptive approach by providing the questions to be asked at each stage of the change process. The TP tools are designed to address the factors behind ‘resistance to change’ and turn them into a positive force.Following on from this analysis, there are several directions for future research. Firstly, since this work was based on the authors’ own experiences within their own families and close friends, it would be useful to test with other families. This might identify the most common cause of complaint—possibly the lack of suitable and reasonably priced ACF's. One might then work with ACF's to develop more suitable facilities with graduated independence/assistance, at more reasonable cost.Secondly, it appears from both academic and grey literature that many people feel overwhelmed when making ACF-related decisions, causing considerable headache and heartache, because there are so many criteria that are important in choosing an ACF, such as cost, atmosphere, and quality of care to name but a few. This is a classic situation amenable to analysis using a multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) framework of eldercare facilities available for a given family, taking into account all the various criteria that are important in choosing an ACF. The researchers propose that an MCDA model of this situation, using a simple software package such as V·I·S·A (Visual Interactive Sensitivity Analysis) (Belton, 1990, 1995), would provide considerable help in structuring the problem to capture these multiple criteria, and then to aid selection. An example of such an approach developed for a specific family faced with this eldercare decision is described in Clark and Mabin (2011). Such a model could be developed into a more generic model, to be available for families to use, inputting their own weights on the various criteria to reflect their own preferences, to assist them in coming to a better understanding of the problem facing them and the relative merits of the various options open to them; or could be utilised by citizens advice services.Such a modelling exercise using MCDA could have several outcomes: it could come up with a clear winner, or it may come up with a few good alternatives, meaning that families still need to tradeoff their objectives to finally feel comfortable with a decision. The analysis may suggest that the ideal alternative does not exist. In this case, they could use an EC again, this time applied to the two competing alternatives, and if still no satisfactory solution, then there would appear to be a need to expand the options by developing better facilities. An example of ‘expanding the options’ is provided by the PACE (Program of All-inclusive Care for the Elderly) program, started in 1971 and now identified as “community-based”, which stemmed from a search for available institutional care for frail elders in the community (Hansen & Hewitt, 2012). New mental models of eldercare are also starting to gain ground, which may provide a way of avoiding the dilemma by reframing the way we think about and interact with elders into a highly-positive encounter, such as the ‘Eden Alternative’ based on decades of research by Costa and McCrae (2013).Thirdly, the case also opens up areas for research relating to methodological usage. While we employed the EC directly from the BSSM systemigram, there are other possible combinations. As with SSM, there are variants on the TOC process, and the process and outcomes of the EC method used here could be contrasted with one or more of the TOC thinking process tools. According to Cox et al. (2003), the first step in constructing an EC from scratch is to ‘write the storyline.’ We omitted this step here as the systemigram and its accompanying analysis provided sufficient description for the EC above. Other starting points for a TOC analysis include the construction of a ‘Current Reality Tree (Scheinkopf, 2010), the 3-UDE-Cloud method (Cox et al., 2003;Scheinkopf, 2010, p. 211), Dettmer's (2011) Goal Tree, or Barnard's (2010) method. For the Cox et al. (2003) process, we consult at least three people from different areas of the business/organisation (in this case, family members and eldercare providers), and ask each of them a set of eight questions. From their answers, we have enough information to construct individual Evaporating Clouds and then combine them into a Generic Cloud to represent the core dilemma facing the organisation or in this case, the family and other stakeholders (e.g. courts and social services). However, there is a paucity of research on the relative merits of these alternative approaches, of TOC processes with each other and with the SSM/BSSM processes.It should be noted that the full TP suite provides a complete methodology (Davies et al., 2005), and could have been used to develop a well-rounded implementable solution. Notwithstanding the argument surrounding the advantage of the BSSM to capture the dynamic processes inherent in the situation, the CRT could have been used to verify the root causes, prior to using the EC. The most promising solution ideas from the EC would then be checked using forward thinking, via the Future Reality Tree and its accompanying Negative Branch Reservation process, which verify that the solution idea will lead to positive outcomes, that any potential negative side effects can be mitigated, and that any additional injections to support the primary injection are added to develop a complete solution. The Prerequisite Tree (PRT) is then used to overcome obstacles to implementation and develop an implementation plan, with either a Transition Tree or Critical Chain Project plan to lay out needed steps to ensure success.More commonly, a subset of TP tools is found to be sufficient to meet decision makers’ needs as evidenced by the literature (Kim et al., 2008), and in this case, the selected pairing of the BSSM and EC were sufficient for the decision maker to feel comfortable that the options identified were suitable—in a satisficing rather than optimal manner. In particular, the systemigram was able to complement the EC in this case by describing the numerous flows among multiple entities in this complex environment, and the combination of TOC and BSSM would be worth testing in other complex environments. Finally we note that the BSSM (and SSM) encourage modellers to make recourse to other systems models/modelling frameworks to provide complementary insights, and suggest that TOC users would also benefit from looking beyond TOC tools for further insights.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The authors set out to find resolution in an increasingly common dilemma around caring for elderly parents, from the family's point of view. The importance of this area is supported by the aged care literature. Two complementary lenses were used to help to understand the problematic situation and hence to resolve issues surrounding eldercare, in particular, the decisions surrounding whether or not the elder person is moved to an assisted care facility. The problem encountered by the family of one of the authors was first analysed using Boardman's SSM (BSSM), showing that the process involves multiple systems and agendas that are by nature antagonistic towards each other. The system depicted by the BSSM analysis, in particular the systemigram, was then re-interpreted using the Theory of Constraints Evaporating Cloud (EC) method.Checkland (1999) takes time to discuss the development of social sciences and the attempt to develop scientific laws for social behaviour. SSM and BSSM have roots in that history, as much as they do hard systems engineering. An SSM analysis provides insight and understanding into the nature of the issue and the systemic interrelationships and emergent properties of the system. The EC provides a more directive approach to developing specific suggestions for resolving the dilemma, whose avoidance may otherwise lead to the dire consequences represented by the systemigram and BSSM analysis. The EC allowed the elicitation, clarification and elaboration of critical assumptions underlying the dilemma of whether or not the parent should go into an ACF. As a result, useful ideas for resolving the impasse were generated.While other systems methods such as Systems Dynamics and causal loop models Senge (1994) have been used with TOC (see for example Mabin, Davies, & Cox, 2006; Reid & Koljonen, 1999), the authors are unaware of any cases where BSSM (or SSM) and TOC's EC have been employed in tandem, certainly with respect to the eldercare situation. This paper therefore provides a unique contribution, not just in terms of highlighting the eldercare situation and suggesting ways forward, but also in applying BSSM and TOC together for mutual benefit and greater effect. Several avenues for further research have been identified, including working with ACF's to better meet client needs, developing a multi-criteria model to act as a decision aid for families, and exploring the relative merits of BSSM and TOC modelling approaches.It is hoped that the analyses presented here may prove to be of some assistance to the many other families facing similar circumstances, now and in the future. In particular, the authors hope the EC might be helpful to generate some possible ways of avoiding the all too common negative consequences of this type of dilemma, and avoiding the impasse and expense of going down the courts/agencies route. Extensions and applications to other social services may also prove to be beneficial.