@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A computationally efficient state-space partitioning approach to pricing high-dimensional American options via dimension reduction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Pricing high-dimensional American-style options suffers the “curse of dimensionality”.Bundling based on option payoff converts high-dimensional cases to one-dimensional one.A state-space partitioning pricing algorithm is proposed based on the bundling method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High dimensional American-style option,Dimension reduction,Stochastic dynamic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies the problem of pricing high-dimensional American options. We propose a method based on the state-space partitioning algorithm developed by Jin et al. (2007) and a dimension-reduction approach introduced by Li and Wu (2006). By applying the approach in the present paper, the computational efficiency of pricing high-dimensional American options is significantly improved, compared to the extant approaches in the literature, without sacrificing the estimation precision. Various numerical examples are provided to illustrate the accuracy and efficiency of the proposed method. Pseudcode for an implementation of the proposed approach is also included.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the alarm bells the on-going financial crisis rings, risk hedging has drawn much more attention than ever. Among various approaches of hedging and managing risk, high-dimensional American options are preferable by institutional investors. Unfortunately, it is difficult to value American options, even one-dimensional ones, in practice. It is much more challenging to price those with multiple dimensions because the high dimensionality worsens the computational difficulty dramatically.In the finance literature, the valuation of American-style derivatives is rooted in the application of continuous-time modeling to financial economics, which can be traced back to the seminal contribution made by Merton (1969, 1971, 1973). Whereas a generalized closed-form expression for valuing an American option has not been derived yet, various approaches to the American option valuation problems, including finite difference approximations pioneered by Brennan and Schwartz (1977) and Schwartz (1977), the quasi-analytical approaches introduced by Geske and Roll (1984), and Monte-Carlo simulations based on Boyle (1977), have been well addressed in the literature.In the practical world, since option values are usually affected by multiple factors and/or underlying assets, pricing high-dimensional American-style derivatives accurately and efficiently becomes increasingly important. The finance literature (e.g., Fu et al., 2001; Jin et al., 2007) has pointed out that traditional approaches do not work very well when multiple dimensions are involved due to the exponentially increasing computational costs. Faster methods based on approximating analytical solutions have been developed, but the cost is usually the lower accuracy (e.g., MacMillan, 1986; Barone-Adesi and Whaley, 1987). Moreover, most of these methods are limited to parameter selections due to the absence of convergence in their interpolation schemes (e.g., Johnson, 1983; Broadie and Detemple, 1996). Although computational efficiency and valuation accuracy can be balanced to some degree in previous studies (e.g., Ju, 1998; Chan et al., 2009; Chang et al., 2007), there is no widely accepted method which has dominating advantages for valuing high-dimensional American options.An alternative popular approach for valuing American-style options is the Monte Carlo-based simulation rooted in Boyle (1977). Recently, Monte Carlo-based path-dependent methods have been extensively developed based on Boyle’s seminal work and Tilley’s (1993) valuable extensions. The Least-squares approach (e.g., Glasserman and Yu, 2004, 2001), the duality method (e.g., Rogers, 2002; Andersen and Broadie, 2004; Haugh and Kogan, 2004), the stochastic mesh (e.g., Avramidis, 2004; Broadie and Glasserman, 2004), the parametrizing exercise boundary method (e.g., Wu and Fu, 2003; Ibanez and Zapatero, 2004), and methods based on partitioning of the state space (e.g., Bally et al., 2003, 2005; Jin et al., 2007), are the typical representatives. However, one of the remarkable shortcomings of these extant approximation methods is their computational inefficiency (Fu et al., 2001; Jin et al., 2007). For instance, Jin et al. (2007) generalize Tilley’s (1993) bundling algorithm and devise a state Space Partitioning method (SSPM) with significantly improved estimation precision, especially when the volatilities of underlying assets are highly diversified and/or when the dimensionality is high. Unfortunately, this SSPM suffers from poor computational efficiency when used for pricing high-dimensional American-style options, as the computational cost for the key step of searching for the nearest bundle center increases significantly with the number of dimensions. As such, the original SSPM is not amenable to pricing high-dimensional American-style derivatives. Barraquand and Martineau (1995) introduced the stratified state aggregation along payoff function method (hereafter referred to as BMM) which combines Monte Carlo simulation with a particular partitioning method of the underlying asset space, thereby effectively reduces the problem dimension to one. Their method was used to price American options up to 10 underlying assets with good computational efficiency.The purpose of this study is to introduce an improved SSPM for pricing high-dimensional American options which has significant improvement in computational efficiency over the original SSPM given in Jin et al. (2007). By adopting the dimension reduction methodology developed by Li and Wu (2006) for valuing high-dimensional European options, we are able to reduce the number of dimensions to one before applying the dimension-dependent bundling step in the SSPM. This results in savings of over 90% in the computational time required by the bundling step. Indeed, this also implies that the improved SSPM has a computational time which is insensitive to the number of dimensions. It is noteworthy that this significant improvement in computational efficiency is attained without losing Jin et al.’s (2007) advantages in estimation accuracy.Our method is closely related to the one in Barraquand and Martineau (1995) as both map the original high-dimensional state space onto one-dimensional one to form bundles. But ours differ from theirs in having different ways of choosing the state variable, the number of bundles and the number of paths in each bundle. The improved SSPM is optimal in the sense that it is based on the optimal quantization method proposed by Bally et al. (2003, 2005). More specifically, the number of bundles and number of paths in each bundle depend on the total number of simulated paths and thus the estimators of option holding values converge to the theoretical ones with the number of paths. By contrast, the bundle number used in Barraquand and Martineau (1995) does not depend on the number of simulated paths.Our paper is also related to Jain and Oosterlee (2012) in which an efficient dimension reduction approach, called stochastic grid method, is proposed by using the least-squares approach of Longstaff and Schwartz (2001), the stochastic mesh method of Broadie and Glasserman (2004), and the stratified state aggregation method of Barraquand and Martineau (1995). Unlike the method in the present paper, Jain and Oosterlee (2012) applies the least-squares approach to estimate the option’s continuation value after reducing the original high-dimensional case to a one-dimensional one.The improved SSPM can be applied to obtain lower bounds of option prices for high-dimensional American options which have payoffs based on the maximum, the minimum and the average of multiple asset prices, and with underlying assets following the typical geometric Brownian motions as well as those having stochastic volatility and interest rates. Numerical experiments involving the above-mentioned option types are used to illustrate the accuracy and efficiency of the improved SSPM, particularly in comparison with the original SSPM, the BMM and Longstaff and Schwartz’s regression-based method (LSM), both of which are popular simulation-based methods for pricing one- and high-dimensional American options. It should be noted that further research is still ongoing with the aim to extend our SSPM to pricing more exotic and complicated option types such as Asian options and Lookback options.This study contributes to the literature in three aspects. First, the improved SSPM is capable of comparable if not better computational efficiency and accuracy when compared with both BMM and LSM. Second, a rigorous convergence proof is available to provide a strong theoretical foundation to the improved SSPM. Third, the approach is easy to implement, giving it the potential of wide adoption by academics and practitioners.The rest of this article is structured as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the economic setting for pricing high-dimensional American options. The valuation approach for high-dimensional American options is described in Section 3, followed by Section 4 in which numerical experiments are presented to illustrate its performance, in terms of both valuation accuracy and computational efficiency. Concluding remarks and limitations are given in Section 5. Proofs are collected in Appendix A and the pseudocode for a SSPM implementation is given in Appendix B.Whereas holders of American-styled derivatives may have infinitely many early exercise opportunities according to the continuous-time models which serve as the basis of the option pricing theory, the real world only allows a finite number of them, say a set of time points Γ={0,1,…,T}. This practical fact actually supports one of the major assumptions made in the extant literature on Monte Carlo simulations for valuing American options, a finite number of early exercise opportunities (e.g., Fu et al., 2001; Broadie and Glasserman, 2004; Jin et al., 2007). As this study serves to improve on the original SSPM, we follow Jin et al. (2007) and formulate the American option pricing problems through a Markov process S={St, 0⩽t⩽T}, which represents the underlying asset prices at time t, to maintain the consistency.At t∈Γ, the option holder makes a decision. If the payoff at t is not lower than the continuation value at that time, she early exercises the option; otherwise, she continues to hold it. Technically, the payoff function is Ht(St)=(St−X)+ for a call option, where X is the pre-determined strike price. As indicated by Glasserman (2003), the option value at t∈Γ, if the option is not exercised prior to it, isVt∗(x)=supτ∈ΓE[D(t,τ)Hτ(Sτ)|St=x],where x denotes the state,D(t,τ)=e-∫tτruducaptures the discount factor, and rumeasures the interest rate. For analytical simplicity, we follow the literature and assume the interest rate over time to be constant; in other words, ru=r. Similarly, the continuation value isCt∗(x)=E[D(t,t+1)Vt+1∗(St+1)|St=x],and the value of the American call option isVt∗(x)=max{Ht(x),Ct∗(x)}.Note that this setting is the same as that presented in Section 2.1 of Jin et al. (2007, p. 402).Again, to make our problem setting comparable to that in Jin et al. (2007), we follow their study and consider a high-dimensional American option with d underlying assets, whose prices follow the Markov processesSt=(St1,…,Std). As described by Eq. (3.1) of Jin et al. (2007, p. 404), the price processes for the above risky assets follow the stochastic differential equation:dSt=(r1-δ)diag(St)dt+diag(St)σ(St)dWt,where 1=(1,…,1), the dividend of stocks δ=(δ1,…,δd), diag(St) denotes the diagonal matrix with Ston its diagonal and σ: Rd→Rd×mmeasures the volatilities and Wtis a standard m-dimensional Brownian motion.Since the exact simulation of a diffusion at time t is usually out of reach, a widely-accepted approach is to approximate a diffusion process by applying the Euler discretization scheme. Without loss of generality, the discretization epoches are assumed to be the same as the set of exercise dates {t0,t1,…,tN} of the American-style option in the economic setting, and therefore, for notational convenience, we still use S to denote a time-discretized approximation to St. Thus, the Euler approximation on the time grid 0=t0<t1<⋯<tN=T is defined bySt0=S0and, for i=1,…,N,(1)Sti=Sti-1+(r1-δ)diag(Sti-1)Δti+diag(Sti-1)σ(Sti-1)ΔtiZi,where Δti=ti−ti−1, and Z1,Z2,… are independent, m-dimensional standard normal random vectors. For simplicity, we denoteSi=Sti.Before introducing the improved SSPM for pricing high-dimensional American options, we discuss in this section some existing approaches, which are closely related to the one proposed in the current study.Tilley (1993) proposes a bundling method to price an American option on a single underlying asset. The algorithm computes an estimate for the option’s continuation value using backwards induction and a bundling technique. Barraquand and Martineau (1995) introduce a state aggregation algorithm, which is an embryo of various state-space partitioning algorithms. Unlike Tilley’s bundling algorithm, they partition the payoff space instead of the state space. Hence, only one single-dimensional space is partitioned at each time step, independent of the dimensions of the problem. However, the convergence of their algorithm is not guaranteed in higher dimensional situations.Another state-space partitioning algorithm, called quantization, is proposed by Bally and Pages (2003) and Bally et al. (2003, 2005), where the states are defined in advance based on partitioning of the state space of underlying risk-factor-vector. In their method, the risk-factor-vector is simulated by a “quantized approximation” taking values in a grid, and then a finite-state dynamic program is used to approximate the value of an American option. Its complexity, however, is exponential in the number of dimensions of the state space.Jin et al. (2007) propose an alternative state-space partitioning algorithm by extending Tilley’s (1993) bundling algorithm to higher-dimensional state spaces. Like Tilley’s bundling method, the key step in Jin et al. (2007) is to construct bundles using a Sobol sequence. In their method, stock price vectors generated from quasi-Monte Carlo points (known as QMC stock price vectors hereafter) are used to bundle different states. Concretely speaking, two different states are grouped together if they share the same QMC stock price vector as the nearest point. In particular, Jin et al.’s (2007) approach does not have to find the optimal centers of Voronoi tessellation as members of a quasi-Monte Carlo sequence are chosen to generate the centers (via price processes), or to calculate the transition probabilities between states. These, to some extent, solve the computationally demanding problems caused by the curse of high dimensionality. But the step of searching for bundle centers may be time-consuming when the dimension is high.The improved SSPM for pricing high-dimensional American options still uses the Sobol sequence proposed in Jin et al. (2007) to construct bundles, but to reduce the computational burden of searching for bundle centers, we change their way of forming bundles as elaborated below. We denote n as the sample size of “crude” Monte Carlo simulation for pricing an American option, and denote the jth element of a d×N-dimensional Sobol sequence byc(j)=(c1(j),…,cd×N(j)),j=1,2,….To apply these results to a Monte Carlo simulation based on normal random variables, we map the points in the m×N-dimensional cube using the inverse normal function Φ−1(·) to the sequenceZ∼i(j)=(Φ-1(c(i-1)d+1(j)),…,Φ-1(cid(j))),j=1,2,…,for i=1,…,N. WithS∼0(j)=S0, thus, the corresponding stock price sequences generated by the Sobol sequence are(2)S∼i(j)=S∼i-1(j)+(r1-δ)diag(S∼i-1(j))Δti+diag(S∼i-1(j))σ(S∼i-1(j))ΔtiZ∼i(j),for i=1,…,N, j=1,2,….For illustrative purpose, we consider an American maximum call option with exercise value at tigiven by H(Si)=(h(Si)−K)+, whereh(Si)=max1⩽l⩽dSil. Let {h(Si(k)): k=1,…,n} be a sequence generated by the standard Monte Carlo method. For notational simplicity, we use hi(k) andh̃i(j)to represent h(Si(k)) andh(S∼i(j)), respectively. Denoting ai(n) as the number of bundles at time ti, we define that, for i=1,…,N−1,Aj,n(i)={hi(k):k=1,…,nand‖hi(k)-h̃i(j)‖2⩽‖hi(k)-h̃i(ℓ)‖2,ℓ=1,…,ai(n)}is the jth bundle at time ti, j=1,…,ai(n). Using{h̃i(j):j=1,…,ai(n)}as the representative states for {hi(k): k=1,…,n}, and denoting bi(n) as a threshold on the number of path points in each bundle at time ti, we then defineBn(i)={h̃i(j):j=1,…,ai(n)such thatAj,n(i)has at leastbi(n)elements}as the set of centers of all bundles that have number of member path points exceeding the threshold bi(n). Given a path point x, we also define(3)cn,i(x)=h̃i(v)whereh̃i(v)is the element inBn(i)such that‖x-h̃i(v)‖2⩽‖x-h̃i(ℓ)‖2,allh̃i(ℓ)∈Bn(i).Essentially, cn,i(x) yields the center of the bundle to which x belongs at time ti. In other words, we use one-dimensional random variableh̃as bundle centers instead of the d-dimensional stock price vectorS∼used in Jin et al. (2007), and therefore significantly reduce the computational burden of searching for bundle centers when the dimension d is large.6Like the method in Barraquand and Martineau (1995), our approach may result in lack of convergence as discussed by Boyle et al. (1997) and Broadie and Detemple (1997). The reason is that the payoff value is not a sufficient statistic for determining the optimal exercise rules for a high-dimensional American option. We are grateful to an anonymous referee for pointing this to us.6The parameters ai(n) and bi(n) satisfy(4)limn→∞ai(n)=limn→∞bi(n)=∞,(5)limn→∞ai(n)bi(n)n=0.Following the rules presented in Bally and Pages (2003) and Jin et al. (2007), the parameters bi(n)=n1−β/ai(n) and ai(n) is given byai(n)=tid/2(d+1)N∼t1d/2(d+1)+⋯+tNd/2(d+1),withN∼=(N-1)nα,α=(3d+2)(1-β)3d+6,Δt=TN,β=10-3.In this paper, we use ai(n)/4 as the bundle number with ai(n) given above since the dimension is reduced to one and hence a smaller bundle number is required. This choice works well in all numerical examples we tested.Below are the detailed steps to estimate the lower bound for a high-dimensional American option with underlying assets in the economy described in last section. For simplicity, we use an American maximum call option to illustrate our algorithm. At epoch ti∈{t0,…,tN−1}, the improved SSPM requires the following six steps to estimate the lower bound for valuing a high-dimensional American option.Step 1.(Path Generation) Simulate n independent replications (paths) {Si(k): i=1,…,N}, k=1,…,n, of the underlying assets according to (1). At the same time, use the Sobol sequence and normal inverse functions to generate maxiai(n) representative stock prices{S∼i(j):i=1,…,N-1}, j=1,…,maxiai(n), according to (2).For each path k and epoch ti, compute the valuehi(k)=max1⩽l⩽dSil(k)and Hi(k)=(hi(k)−K)+.(Continuation Value) At maturity T, let the continuation valueC^n,N∗(x)=0,for allx.Then, recursively backward in time, for i=N−1,N−2,…,0, and for every path k, k=1,…,n, computeC^n,i∗(hi(k))=e-rΔti+1|Bn,i(hi(k))|∑j∈Bn,i(hi(k))maxHi+1(j),C^n,i+1∗(hi+1(j)),where∣Bn,i(hi(k))∣is the cardinality of path-index setBn,i(hi(k))given byBn,i(s)={j:j=1,…,n,andcn,i(hi(j))=cn,i(s)}.That is,Bn,i(s)contains path indices of all path points belonging to the same bundle as s. In particular,Bn,0(h0)={j:j=1,…,n}.For each path k, and i=0,…,N, define a “tentative” exercise-or-hold indicator variable xi(k):xi(k)=1,ifHi(k)⩾C^n,i∗(hi(k))exercise option,0,ifHi(k)<C^n,i∗(hi(k))hold option.For i=0,…,N, define the exercise-or-hold indicator variable yi(k):yi(k)=1,ifxi(k)=1andxj(k)=0for allj<i,0,otherwise.Define the option price estimator byL^n=1n∑k=1n∑i=0Ne-rtiyi(k)Hi(k),which can be expressed in terms of stopping times asL^n=1n∑k=1n∑i=0NHi(k)1(τ^n=ti),whereτ^n=τ^n(k)=ti,ifyi(k)=1,tN,otherwise.Remind that convergence is one of the key factors to guarantee the estimation accuracy in pricing high-dimensional American options, and therefore we now establish a convergence result for the SSPM described above. First of all, we show that for each i,C^n,i∗converges in the first moment toCi∗satisfyingCN∗(h)=0,Ci∗(h)=E[e-∫titi+1r(u)dumax{Hi+1,Ci+1∗(hi+1)}|hi=h],i=0,1,…,N-1.where Hi=(hi(Si)−K)+. To this end, some assumptions below are required.Assumption 1For i=1,…,N−1,{h̃i(j),j=1,2,…}is a dense set in the state spaceHiof the option payoffs hi.Consider an option whose payoff H(St) is a continuous function of St, for example, an American maximum call option. The assumption holds naturally for process (1) driven by a Brownian motion since a quasi-Monte Carlo sequence is a dense set and the function Φ(·) is continuous.Assumption 2Given y∈R, the function Fi(y∣x) is continuous with respect to x∈R, where Fi(y∣x) is the conditional probability ofVi+1∗(hi+1)=maxhi+1,Ci+1∗(hi+1)given hi, that is,Fi(y|x)=PVi+1∗(hi+1)⩽y|hi=x,y∈R,x∈R,i=0,1,…,N-1.For i∈{1,…,N},Ehi2<∞andESi2<∞.Given thatAssumptions 1–3hold,limn→∞E[|C^n,i∗(hi)-Ci∗(hi)|]=0,i=0,1,…,N-1.See Appendix A.□Define the earliest time at which an American option is exercised asτ=min{i:Hi⩾Ci∗(hi)},and defineL0∗=Ee-∫0τr(u)duHτ(Sτ).Obviously, τ is a suboptimal exercise strategy for the American option and, thus,L0∗⩽V0∗(S0), that is,L0∗is a lower bound of the value of the American option.Assumption 4P[Ci∗(hi)=Hi]=0for all i=1,…,N−1, we have Theorem 2 in which a lower bound estimation of the value of the American option is established.Given thatAssumptions 1–4hold,limn→∞EL^n-L0∗=0,that is,L^nis a consistent estimator forL0∗, a lower bound of the value of the American option.See Appendix B.□SPPM is relatively easy to implement as is seen in the pseudocode provided in Appendix C. The main steps of a typical SPPM implementated are also highlighted in a flow chart given in Fig. C.1.To illustrate the accuracy and the computational efficiency of the improved SSPM proposed in Section 3, we first value high-dimensional American options on the maximum and the minimum of prices of multiple assets where the prices following geometric Brownian motions. One of the reasons to choose these high-dimensional American options is their importance in the investment, financing, and corporate governance decisions of business organizations. As discussed by Stulz (1982), options on the maximum or the minimum of multiple assets have many applications in financial management, such as “the valuation of foreign currency debt, option-bonds, compensation plans, risk-sharing contracts, secured debt, and growth opportunities involving mutually exclusive investments” (Stulz, 1982, p. 161). For ease of reference, we will refer to the improved SSPM simply as SSPM for the rest of this paper where there is no ambiguity.We further show that the SSPM is sufficiently robust by including numerical examples for pricing an American arithmetic average put option written on multiple assets in a geometric Brownian model and for pricing single-asset American options with stochastic volatility and stochastic interest rate. Here the choice of having just one underlying asset is purely taken out of convenience of exploiting the availability of existing numerical results in the literature as benchmarks. The SSPM itself does not limit the number of underlying assets to one when applied to problems incorporating stochastic volatility and interest rate.To demonstrate the improvement over the original SSPM given in Jin et al. (2007), we also include numerical results obtained by the original SSPM with exact searches (denoted by mSSPM) and with approximate searches (denoted by aSSPM).In all numerical examples below, 30 runs each of the SSPM, the mSSPM, the aSSPM, the BMM and the LSM were performed for each example. The algorithm used to implement the BMM is described in Barraquand and Martineau (1995) where the option payoff is used as the (single) state variable. Both the SSPM and the LSM were applied to the reduced one-dimensional problem which uses the maximum price (for maximum call options), the minimum price (for the minimum put options) and the average price (for the average options) as the state variable. Both mSSPM and aSSPM were applied to the “full” multi-asset problems with no dimension reduction.The bundling parameters required for SSPM are those given in Section 3, whereas the parameters for mSSPM and aSSPM are taken from Jin et al. (2007). For approximate searches performed in the aSSPM, the search tolerance ∊ in the ANN rouinte was set to 100 for “best” possible reduction in search time. We found increasing ∊ further has negligible effect in reducing the search time further. The partitioning steps required in the BMM follows closely the procedure given in Barraquand and Martineau (1995) with number of “cells” set to 100 for all time steps. In our implementation of the LSM for pricing reduced one-dimensional problems, the basis functions used in the least-squares regressions are 1, x, x2 and x3 with x=hi(k). No variance-reduction techniques were employed for any of the Monte-Carlo simulations for all five methods.The Matlab environment was used to initialize simulation parameters and set up Monte-Carlo simulated paths where are then passed to the Matlab MEX-files7Here the MEX-files are Matlab executable files resulted from compiling the C++ codes implementing the five methods.7implementing the five methods. All computations were performed on an Intel Core i7-3770 3.40gigahertz machine.In Tables 1–5, the “Opt.Val.” column contains the mean value of option estimates obtained from 30 runs of the relevant method. The “Std.Err.” column gives the standard errors. The average CPU times per run (in seconds) taken to perform the algorithms are shown in the “CPU” column. Relative errors based on comparing the mean option estimates to the selected benchmark values are given in the “Rel.Err. (%)” column.Example 1Valuing American put options on the minimum of 3–5 assets.To illustrate that the SSPM is robust and stable when both the volatilities of underlying assets and the dimensionality of the American options are high, we apply it to American options with three to five dividend-free assets, each of which follows a geometric Brownian motion. This test example is taken from Broadie and Glasserman (2004). Besides the assumptions of symmetrical correlation coefficients ρ=0.1 and the same initial price for all underlying assets, other parameter values are the strike price K=$100, the risk-free rate r=0.06, the time to maturity T=0.5year and volatilities being 0.6 for all assets. For the simulated paths, we set n=100,000 and N=50. The benchmark values are those obtained via the stochastic mesh (SM) method proposed by Broadie and Glasserman (2004). The results are presented in Table 1.Lower and upper bounds of the SM estimates are obtained from using 15,000, 20,000 and 25,000 sample paths for d=3, 4, 5 respectively. The mid-point values between these lower and upper bounds are then used as benchmark values for comparison, and are listed under the “SM” column in Table 1.The option values obtained by the SSPM and BMM are comparable in accuracy, though SSPM estimates do have smaller errors than those obtained by the BMM for most cases. In term of CPU times, the two methods are mostly comparable with the BMM having a slight edge. For all test cases, the estimates obtained by LSM have the largest relative errors, but these are achieved at slightly lower computational cost than both SSPM and BMM.When compared against estimates by mSSPM and aSSPM, those obtained by SSPM have smaller errors at a much lower computational cost (from about one-fifth to one-tenth, with greater time reduction for higher dimension). This clearly shows the significant advantage in computational cost that the SSPM has over both mSSPM and aSSPM. As the SSPM (likewise for BMM and LSM) effectively solves a one-dimensional problem, we also find that the computational time of the SSPM (BMM and LSM) is not sensitive to the change in dimensionality.Example 2Valuing American call options on the maximum of 10 assets.To further illustrate the robustness and applicability of the improved SSPM in valuing options with longer maturity and higher dimensionality, we replicate Haugh and Kogan’s (2004) example presented in Table 3 of his paper for American call options on the maximum of 10 dividend-paying assets. The dividend rate is assumed to be identical, and underlying assets are assumed to be uncorrelated. The parameter values are: strike price K=$100, risk-free rate r=5%, dividend yield δ=10%, and time to maturity T=1year,8It is rare to have American options with maturity longer than a year.8N=100, and n=100,000. Initial prices of the 10 underlying assets are assumed to be the same, and they have the common volatility σ=20% per year.Results are presented in Table 2. The column labelled “HK” gives the mid-points of the intervals formed by the lower and upper bound estimates presented in Haugh and Kogan (2004). These point estimates are used as the benchmark values for computing the relative errors of estimates obtained by the five methods.The comparison in estimation accuracy and computational cost between the SSPM and the other four methods sees the same trend pointed out in Example 1, with the SSPM giving consistently smaller relative errors than the other four methods, while its computational cost is comparable to those for BMM, but 1.5 times of those for LSM. Here LSM estimates still suffer from a consistently large relative errors.It is noteworthy that option estimates by the SSPM are comparable to those mid-point estimates in Haugh and Kogan (2004), but at a much lower computational cost. Although Haugh and Kogan (2004) do not report the running time for valuing these options, they mention the running time for a typical 50-period, 5-asset problem is about 280min in total. Therefore, the time required for valuing a 10-asset problem via their method is expected to be much higher than that.Example 3Valuing American put options on arithmetic averages of d assets.We consider pricing American put options on the arithmetic averages of d assets following correlated geometric Brownian motions with d=2, 3, 4, 5, 6. For test parameters, we follow Kovalovv et al. (2007): initial stock price S0,i=100 and volatility σi=0.2 for i=1,…,d and correlation coefficient between Brownian motions of any two stocks ρij=0.2 for i≠j, strike price 100, time to maturity 0.25year and risk free rate 0.03. The option values obtained in Kovalov et al. are used as benchmarks and are given in the column marked “KLM” in Table 3. For the Monte-Carlo simulated paths, we used n=100,000 and N=50 for all runs.We observe from Table 3 that both the SSPM and BMM have similar relative errors and computational cost for the test cases presented, with the BMM having a slight edge for higher dimension cases of d=5, 6. Estimates by the LSM again have a low bias but the errors are comparable in magnitude to the other methods. The smallest error achieved by LSM at d=6 gives it an edge over the other four methods.Example 4Valuing American put options under stochastic volatility.Here we consider the two-factor problem of pricing a single-asset American put option under Heston’s model (1993) of stochastic volatility:dSt=μStdt+vtStdWt,1dvt=α(β-vt)dt+γvtdWt,2with vtbeing the variance process for the asset price St; Wt,1and Wt,2 being Brownian motions correlated with a coefficient ρ. For the test case, we follow Ikonen and Toivanen (2009) in using these parameter values:α=5,β=0.16,γ=0.9,ρ=0.1,r=0.1with the strike price being 10, initial variance value 0.0625, the initial stock price varies from 8 to 12, and time to maturity is 0.25 year. The values obtained by Ikonen and Toivanen via an operator splitting method are used as benchmarks and are given in the column marked “OS”. The number of simulation paths was n=100,000 for both stock price and variance processes, and N=64 time intervals.All results obtained are given in Table 4. The case with S0=8 has all five methods giving the exact option value of 2 (payoff for immediate exercise at time 0) as a continuation value at time 0 of about 1.99 were obtained by all. For the remaining test cases, we see that the SSPM has an edge over the BMM in having smaller relative errors for higher dimension cases but at a comparable computational cost. In comparison to SSPM, LSM estimates have larger errors which increase with S0 as the option becoming increasing out-of-money at time 0, in contrast, the computational cost decreases from a high cost at S0=8 to a much lower cost at S0=12. This is due to the decrease in the size of the regression problem as the number of the at-the-money paths decreases with increasing S0.Example 5Valuing American put options under stochastic volatility and stochastic interest rate.Here we consider the three-factor problem of pricing a single-asset American put option under both stochastic volatility and stochastic interest rate. Essentially we follow Medvedev and Scaillet (2010) in applying Heston’s model with Cox–Ingersoll–Ross (CIR) type of interest rate process:dSt=μStdt+vtStdWt,1dvt=αv(βv-vt)dt+γvvtdWt,2drt=αr(βr-rt)dt+γrrtdWt,3.For the test case, we follow Boyarchendko and Levendorskii (2012) in using these parameter values:αv=1.58,βv=0.03,γv=0.2,αr=0.26,βv=0.04,γr=0.08,with W1,tW2,tcorrelated with coefficient −0.26 and W3,tnot correlated with the other two Brownian motions. The initial stock price is 100, the initial interest rate is 0.04 and the time to maturity is 0.5year. Table 5 shows the numerical results obtained for initial variances of 0.04 and 0.09, and for strike prices of 90, 100 or 110. The results presented in Boyarchendko and Levendorskii (2012) are used as benchmarks here and are given in the column marked as “BL”. The number of simulated paths for each of the three processes (St, vt, and rt) is n=100,000 with N=150. In the SSPM, we reduce the three-dimensional problem to a one-dimensional one by using the asset price alone to form bundles.Results in Table 5 shows that the SSPM has an edge over the other four methods in having consistently smaller relative errors for all test cases. LSM is competitive in this example as its computational cost is the smallest while its errors are reasonable is size when compared to those obtained by BMM. As seen in the earlier example, estimates by LSM have smaller errors as the option becomes increasing in-the-money while the computational cost increases.In all empirical tests presented in this section, the SSPM required comparable, though slightly larger for most cases, computational cost as the BMM. Both methods essentially solve a one-dimensional problem by partitioning the state space at each time step. The two methods differ in the way the state variable is chosen and how the partitions are formed, resulting in the differences observed in the computational cost. It is possible that further code optimization and tweakings in the partitioning steps of the SSPM could bring down the computational time somewhat, but this would be beyond the scope of the current paper.This study is to price high-dimensional American options by establishing lower bounds through revising Jin et al.’s (2007) state space partitioning algorithm. Applying the idea of dimension reduction proposed by Li and Wu (2006), we reduce the computational cost by up to 90%. Numerical examples show that the estimation precision is at least as accurate as extant methods while the computational cost is comparable to one of the fastest methods available, the BMM. An advantage the improved SSPM has over the BMM is that a rigorous convergence proof is available (presented in Appendix A). Compared to the original SSPM, the improved SSPM has much lower computational cost which is not sensitive to the dimensionality of the option.In short, the proposed approach adds to the literature on high-dimensional American option valuation mainly in that it significantly improves the computational efficiency of the SPPM by a dimension reduction process. The estimation accuracy and the valuation stability are guaranteed by the established convergence results. It is easy to implement and, thus, has the potential of being widely adopted by academics and practitioners.We have shown via empirical studies that the improved SSPM is applicable to problems with asset prices following geometric Brownian motions as well as those coupled with stochastic volatility and interest rate. The current scope of American options it can handle includes those with payoffs based on the maximum, the minimum and the average of asset prices. Applications to options with more exotic payoffs, such as Asian options and lookback options, and more complicated dynamic processes, such as those with jumps, and more complicated payoff functions are currently beyond the reach of the improved SSPM, and would be the subjects of future research.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.05.035.Appendix

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
