@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Set-Partitioning-based model for the Berth Allocation Problem under Time-Dependent Limitations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Set-Partitioning-based model for solving this problem is proposed.This problem is extended to consider a multi-period planning horizon.Improvements in running time and solution quality over earlier approaches.A new benchmark suite is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Berth Allocation Problem,Set Partitioning,Optimization model,Maritime container terminal,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the Berth Allocation Problem under Time-Dependent Limitations. Its goals are to allocate and schedule the available berthing positions for the container vessels arriving toward a maritime container terminal under water depth and tidal constraints. As we discuss, the only optimization model found in the literature does not guarantee the feasibility of the solutions reported in all the cases and is limited to a two-period planning horizon, i.e., one low tide and one high tide period. In this work, we propose an alternative mathematical formulation based upon the Generalized Set Partitioning Problem, which considers a multi-period planning horizon and includes constraints related to berth and vessel time windows. The performance of our optimization model is compared with that of the mathematical model reported in the related literature. In this regard, the computational experiments indicate that our model outperforms the previous one from the literature in several terms: (i) it guarantees the feasibility and optimality of the solutions reported in all the cases, (ii) reduces the computational times about 88 percent on average in the problem instances from the literature, and (iii) presents reasonable computational times in new large problem instances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, maritime container terminals have to face increasingly rough requirements from shipping companies which claim real-time services. This pressure is even higher for terminal managers due to the fierce competitiveness among terminals for being selected as exchange points (hubs) or origin-destination points in shipping routes. Thus, maritime container terminals have to improve their management capabilities with the objective of enhancing their productivity. In this regard, an inefficient use of resources is translated into a bottleneck or a delay of the yard-side and land-side operations. This fact gives rise to a low overall productivity of the maritime container terminal. Notteboom (2006) indicates that 93.6 percent of the delays in the vessel schedules are attributable to terminal operations. In this context, the berth allocation operation can be highlighted as one of the most important ones, since it has a significant impact on terminal productivity (Beškovnik, 2008). Moreover, one of the main indicators used by the shipping companies to measure the performance of a certain maritime container terminal is the berth productivity, in terms of dwell time on berths and waiting time for a free berth (Yeo, 2010). Therefore, it becomes crucial for the container terminals to efficiently use the berths with the goal of improving their productivity and making them more attractive.The berthing process consists of several phases carried out sequentially. Once a container vessel arrives to a port, a berth is assigned to it according to its particular features (e.g., dimensions, stowage plan, contractual agreements, etc.). Once the vessels are berthed, their containers are unloaded and transferred to the yard, where they are stored temporally. Finally, the containers are loaded into trucks, trains, or other vessels to continue throughout their route. Exhaustive descriptions of the processes within each phase can also be consulted in the works by Steenken, Voß, and Stahlbock (2004), Stahlbock and Voß (2008), and Rashidi and Tsang (2013).Complex planning and management problems arise in each one of the aforementioned phases. In this regard, the inherent interrelation among the operations involves to treat the problems arisen at each phase and integrate them within functional schemes (i.e., by preprocessing or by feedback). Some examples of schemes can be consulted in the works Meisel and Bierwirth (2006), Meisel (2009), Meisel and Bierwirth (2013), and Lalla-Ruiz, Expósito-Izquierdo, Melián-Batista, and Moreno-Vega (2013). Thus, the effective scheduling of the isolated operations arising at each phase such as berth allocating incoming vessels may lead to an improvement of the overall performance of the terminal. This can be seen in the fact that a poor utilization of berths affects the yard-side (e.g., container arrival/departure schedule, container transshipment operations) and land-side operations (e.g., train or truck container pick-up schedule). Hence, this would result in a low overall productivity of the container terminal, and therefore dissatisfaction of the shipping companies.The previous discussion leads to the definition of a logistic problem known as Berth Allocation Problem. Its objective is to assign berthing positions along the quay to incoming container vessels. As indicate by Imai, Nishimura, and Papadimitriou (2001a), the berth allocation problem may be frequently solved since berth space is very limited at most container terminals as well as the high interrelation with other related problems (Meisel, 2009), and thousands of containers must be handled daily. Thus an effective berth allocation is crucial (i) for the efficient management of the container flows, (ii) minimize ships waiting time, and (iii) maximize port’s turnaround (Rashidi & Tsang, 2013).When determining the berth schedule, the maritime container terminal has to consider several factors, such as the vessel and berth time windows, number of loaded/unloaded containers, water depth, and tide constraints. In this regard, those maritime container terminals strongly affected by the tide, the water depth constraints have to consider the specific berth depth, vessel drafts, and tidal conditions over time. Therefore, in order to allocate incoming vessels to berthing positions, terminal managers have to take into account not only berth depths and vessel drafts, but also their arrival and berthing time. In this regard, the available depth at low tide may not be adequate for berthing some vessels since it can give rise to accidents or delays. In other situations, the vessels may require high tide for going through certain sections of their route when they are fully loaded. Moreover, empty vessels may not be able to pass under bridges at high tide. In this context, container terminal managers and shipping companies are aware that a small delay in the service for awaiting proper tidal conditions may be amplified to a greater delay. This fact may result in outstanding economical losses and competitiveness.The aforementioned issues give rise to the definition of the Berth Allocation Problem under Time-Dependent Limitations (BAPTL), which was introduced by Xu, Li, and Leung (2012). In this problem, the water depth of the berths (subject to the tidal conditions), the draft of the vessels, and the priorities of the vessels are considered.The main contributions of this paper are the following:•The optimization model proposed by Xu et al. (2012) for the BAPTL is limited to only a two-period planning horizon, i.e., one low tide period and one high tide period. However, as discussed in Section 3.2, when a longer planning horizon is required for providing a solution, this model extends the second period, either low-tide or high-tide to infinity. This may produce infeasible solutions in practice due to the fact that some vessels can be assigned to infeasible positions. On the other hand, in some cases, those infeasible solutions may have a better objective value than feasible ones within the two-period time horizon. Thus, in this work, we address this by proposing additional constraints to ensure the feasibility of the solutions.Developing a mathematical model based upon the Generalized Set-Partitioning Problem (GSPP), and termed GM-BAPTL for the BAPTL that considers a multi-period planning horizon. As discussed in this paper, this model overcomes those scenarios in which the model proposed by Xu et al. (2012) reports infeasible solutions. The computational experiments indicate that GM-BAPTL is able to solve all the problem instances from the literature to optimality in less than 0.5 second, which constitutes a reduction of about 88 percent in the computational time.Including container vessel and berth time windows in the definition of the BAPTL. This variant of the problem is referred to as Berth Allocation Problem under Time-Dependent Limitations and Time-Windows (BAPTL-TW), whereas the variant of GM-BAPTL for addressing the BAPTL-TW is termed GM-BAPTL-TW. In order to evaluate the performance of those set partitioning aimed at solving BAPTL and BAPTL-TW, a benchmark suite is proposed.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The literature review is presented in Section 2. The BAPTL is introduced in Section 3. The Generalized Set-Partitioning-based mathematical models for the BAPTL and BAPTL-TW are provided in Section 4. Afterwards, the computational experiments carried out in this work are summarized in Section 5. Finally, the main conclusions extracted from the work and several lines for further research are drawn in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
