@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust optimization policy benchmarks and modeling errors in natural gas

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Focus on the problem of regulating natural gas procurement by local distribution companies.Demonstrate that when modeling errors are present, policy benchmarks are not suitable for regulation.We extend the previous models by including LDC effort, deriving solutions and characterizing them.Construct a robust-optimization based benchmarking mechanism that inherits all the original benefits.Unlike the earlier benchmarks, these are robust against modeling errors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Procurement,Benchmarks,Incentive contracts,Robust optimization,Regulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The problem of regulating natural gas procurement has become a huge burden to regulators, especially due to the plethora of complicated financial contracts that are now being used by local distribution companies (LDCs) for risk management purposes. Muthuraman, Aouam, and Rardin (2008) proposed a new benchmarking scheme, called policy benchmarks and showed that these benchmarks do not suffer from the usual criticisms that are made against existing regulatory methods. Such policy benchmarks based regulation has however faced hurdles in being adopted. One of the primary reasons has been concerns over its robustness.We demonstrate in this paper that when modeling errors are present, the policy benchmarks proposed earlier can backfire and are hence, as suspected, not well suited for regulation. We begin our analysis with a more general model than the one that has been used earlier by accommodating the LDC’s ability to reduce cost by exerting effort, as in classical economics. We derive solutions to the LDCÕs problem, find closed form solutions for the regulator’s optimal fee fraction along with risk sharing implications, and provide insights into the policy benchmark selection. We then construct a robust-optimization based policy benchmarking mechanism that inherits all the original benefits. We further demonstrate that these, unlike the earlier benchmarks, are robust against modeling errors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Utility firms that usually have natural monopolies are always subject to government regulations (Laffont & Tirole, 1993). Firms that procure natural gas from various well-heads and suppliers, and distribute it to consumers, are called local distribution companies (LDCs). These consumers usually do not have a choice of their natural gas provider. Naturally, government oversight of this procurement process and the passing of a fee to consumers is necessary. This oversight has in the recent past become very complicated and unmanageable due to the multitude of derivatives and financial products that LDC’s have begun to use in their procurement for risk management. Deregulation of several related sectors and other market changes are further adding to this complication. Under the usual cost of service based regulation, the regulator carries the burden of digging through and understanding the rationality behind every line item of the LDC’s books. One can also argue that such a regulatory framework gives the LDCs little incentive to manage their procurement activities efficiently (Shleifer, 1985), and more incentive to just justify their activities. Formal models that demonstrate this lack of incentive can be found in Baron and Bondt (1981) and Isaac (1982). Instead, benchmarking-based regulatory schemes are being increasingly perceived as the right direction to pursue. Benchmarking schemes simply contrast the LDC incurred cost to a specific benchmark and provide incentives to beat the benchmark. Various regulatory bodies have been experimenting with simple benchmark mechanisms for several years now and still find inherent deficiencies in the ones they have tried. Existing benchmarking schemes are often criticized as unfair either to the consumer or to the LDC since they just use historical data or future spot prices to compute the benchmark, both of which can result in significant biases.Other contracts that have been considered include fixed price contracts and linear incentive contracts. Fixed-price contracts offer the highest incentive for cost reduction (Brennan, 1989). However, due to the uncertainty inherent in natural gas prices, the regulator must set a relatively high fixed price in order to ensure the financial viability of the LDC. This results in a high fee to consumers (Laffont & Tirole, 1993 and Joskow, 2006). Cost of service and fixed price contracts are two extremes, one offering a maximum, and the other a minimum incentive. A linear incentive contract (or profit sharing contract), lies between the two (Schmalensee, 1989). Here, the fee to consumers, is a fixed component plus a fraction of the LDC’s realized cost. The challenge obviously being in the regulator picking the right magnitudes for the fixed and the proportional components to steer the LDC to behave in a manner that the regulator needs. Regulators have also used various other mechanisms, like yardstick regulation (Lan, Zhao, & Tang, 2013; Shleifer, 1985). Yardstick regulation uses average spot prices or the weighted average purchase cost (WAPC) of a set of LDCs, to contrast against and calculate incentives (Crew, 1997). These are criticized for the obvious fact that one cannot compare LDCs that differ in size, geographical location, pipeline connectivity, demand distribution, and various other factors.In a previous work, Muthuraman et al. (2008), we proposed a new benchmarking scheme, called policy benchmarks along with detailed and rigorous characterizations. We showed that these policy benchmarks do not suffer from the usual criticisms. Rather than use historical data or future spot prices to compute benchmarks, these simply prescribe a specific procurement policy and an incentive fraction. At the end of the valuation period, the incentive is calculated as being proportional to the cost difference between the LDC’s procurement cost and the cost incurred by the prescribed benchmark policy. Procurement policy choices are restricted to depend only on publicly available contracts. The regulator is tasked then only with the problem of picking the right policy for the benchmark and the fraction to be used. To do this the regulator has to rely upon a natural gas price model. The paper showed how to pick a benchmark procurement policy amongst a class of policies that only use a fixed fraction of various contracts and also demonstrated that the fee to consumers was minimized, provided the natural gas price model was correct. The restriction on the class of fixed-fraction portfolio based policies helped the analysis significantly while making it very restrictive in comparison to the commonly used dynamic policies and hence poses significant challenges in being implemented in the real world.If the natural gas price model used by the regulator has a modeling error, it is not clear how it will impact the fee to consumers. This problem is the central focus of this paper. Modeling errors are a fact of life in energy markets and hence this is a fundamental question to resolve, especially if we are hoping for a widespread adoption of such incentive mechanisms. Let’s say that the regulator chooses a policy benchmark and an incentive fraction using a model with error, and the LDCs react to that benchmark with their response procurement strategy. We show that policy benchmarks using fixed-fraction portfolios may backfire and provide a much higher fee to consumers. Realizing that fixed-fraction portfolio families will not suffice, we construct more sophisticated policies and show how to pick policy benchmarks under this setting. While pursuing this central objective, we also extend the previous set up in several ways. As in classical economics, we now allow the LDC to invest “effort” to reduce procurement costs. As in the classical principal-agent setting, effort includes all cost reductions actions. These include bargaining, marketing, search for suppliers, expert consulting, creating demand-side management (DSM) programs (Crew, 1997), etc. We further, unlike in Muthuraman et al. (2008), obtain closed-form solutions for incentive fractions.An ad-hoc way of mitigating the sensitivity to modeling errors would be to benchmark against a portfolio of policy benchmarks. Aouam, Rardin, and Abrache (2010) discusses this kind of diversification. They call these ad-hoc portfolios, Robust Strategies, and demonstrate through simulation that for the examples considered in the paper, these yield better performance. It is understandable that this better performance comes from diversification, that helps against modeling errors. However, guarantees of better performance, precise optimization, analysis or the characterization of these ad-hoc portfolios is not possible. In contrast, the approach adopted in this paper is to construct one robust benchmark based on Robust Optimization (RO). One robust benchmark, while better allowing to deal with modeling errors, also provides a much better and precise handle on crafting these benchmarks such that they align with the regulator’s incentives. Practically too, calibrating and implementing a portfolio of benchmarks is much harder, if not impossible, in comparison to using one policy benchmark. We will also demonstrate in the paper that this one robust benchmark can easily yield a much better fee to consumers in comparison to the hard to manage and ad-hoc portfolio of diversified benchmarks.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the model formulation. Section 3 derives the solution to the LDC’s problem, characterizes the optimal incentive fraction along with risk sharing implications, and provides insights into the policy benchmark selection. Section 4 argues why benchmarks should be used in incentive contracts for LDC regulation. Section 5 deals with the issue of modeling errors. It first shows how one can construct robust optimization strategies for policy benchmarks. It also describes two other kinds of policy benchmarks against which the proposed robust polices are contrasted. Finally, illustrations of robustness are presented here. This section also demonstrates of how previously formulated policy benchmarks can backfire in the presence of modeling errors. We make concluding remarks in Section 6.Consider the procurement of natural gas by a given LDC for a specified service period, typically a year. The state regulator oversees the pricing of natural gas to consumers. This is entirely equivalent to the regulator (the principal) delegating the procurement of natural gas to the LDC (the agent). The LDC’s cost of procurement for the service period is denoted by the random variable C0 with mean μ0 and standard deviation σ0. This cost can be considered as the cost of procurement under a cost-of-service type of regulation scheme. The LDC can invest in cost reduction actions through bargaining, marketing, search for suppliers, expert consulting, or propose demand side management (DSM) programs. By expending a cost ψ(e), the LDC can expect a reduction in the cost of gas procurement of e > 0 that is called effort. In such case, the cost C(e), after effort is,C(e)=C0−e+ϵ,whereE(ϵ)=0andVar(ϵ)=σ2. For tractability, as is common, the cost of effort function is assumed of the formψ(e)=12de2with d > 0 insuring that ψ′ > 0 and ψ′′ ≥ 0 (Laffont & Tirole, 1993 and Predergast, 1999). Let β denote a benchmark against which costs will be contrasted. Let μβand σβrepresent the mean and standard deviation of the benchmark, respectively.σβ,C0denotes the covariance, whileρ=ρβC0≥0is the correlation. These quantities are assumed to be known symmetrically to the LDC and the regulator, furthermore ϵ is assumed to be independent from C0 and β. We assume that both the regulator and the LDC have mean-variance preferences with risk aversion coefficients λp≥ 0 and λ ≥ 0, respectively.Although the regulator cannot observe the effort of the LDC for cost reduction, a performance measure that depends on the actions of the LDC can be used. In our case, we considerβ−Cas an objective measure of performance. It is called an objective measure because it can be verified at the end of the evaluation period, refer to Predergast (1999). As in Muthuraman et al. (2008), we use the compensation function (bonus)g(β,C)=a(β−C),with 0 < a ≤ 1 denoting the incentive fraction. Under the proposed bonus structure, if the LDC does not invest in cost reductions its bonus is equal toa(β−C0),that can be positive or negative. When the LDC expends a cost ψ(e), an additional expected income, ae, can be obtained. The actual fee charged to consumers is the sum of the bonus, the total cost of procurement incurred by the LDC and the base fee. The base fee is charged to consumers to meet a return on investment for the capital investment made by the LDC. Since the base fee is fixed and does not depend on procurement strategies of the LDC or the benchmark, we will ignore the base fee in our analysis and simply consider the bonus plus the cost of procurement as our fee to consumers. That is, the fee to consumers is equal toF(β,a,C)=C+a(β−C).To summarize, the time line is as follows,1.a benchmark based incentive contract, with benchmark β and incentive fraction a, is proposed by the regulator to the LDC,the LDC makes the decision to accept the contract or not,the LDC expends a cost ψ(e*) to reduce its procurement cost by an effort level e* that maximizes its own utility function,at the end of the service period, the benchmark β and the cost of the LDC C(e*) are realized and the fee to consumers F is paid to the LDC.The benchmark based incentive contract design problem faced by the regulator consists of selecting a benchmark and an incentive fraction. We deal with this design problem in two stages. First, we formulate the incentive fraction selection problem for a given benchmark. Once this problem is solved, we obtain the optimal incentive fraction as a function of the benchmark. Then, in the second stage, given the optimal incentive fraction function, we characterize a good benchmark to be used in the incentive contract.The incentive fraction selection problem, for a given benchmark, faced by the regulator, principal’s problem (PP(β)) can be written as follows:(2.1)PP(β):minaV(β,a)=E(F(β,a,C(e*)))+λpVar(F(β,a,C(e*))(2.2)s.t.e*=argmaxe>0{E(a(β−C(e)))−ψ(e)−λVar(a(β−C(e)))}(2.3)E(a(β−C(e*)))−ψ(e*)−λVar(a(β−C(e*)))≥UminThe objective function (2.1) is to minimize the regulator’s disutility, V(β, a), a weighted sum of the mean and variance of the fee to consumers. Constraint (2.2) is called the incentive compatibility constraint. This constraint states that once the contract is accepted, the LDC chooses to invest in cost reduction in order to maximize its own objective function and not the regulator’s. This is due to the fact that once the contract is signed, the regulator has no control on the choice of the level of effort, e. The constraint (2.3) is the participation constraint; if this constraint is satisfied, the LDC accepts the contract. The constant Umin> 0 is called the reservation utility and refers to the minimum utility level required by the LDC. Once this problem is solved, we obtain the optimal incentive faction as a function of the benchmark. In the next section, we analyze this problem, provide guidelines for risk sharing, and characterize good benchmarks.In this section, we begin by studying the implications of the incentive fraction on risk sharing between the LDC and its consumers. After solving the incentive fraction selection problem PP(β), we obtain a closed form solution for the optimal incentive fraction. By analyzing the effects of various parameters, we provide guidelines for the incentive fraction selection and impacts on risk sharing. Based on this solution, we show that the regulator, or the consumer, is better off when a benchmark with low mean and low variance is used in an incentive contract.Recall that the fee to consumers is equal toC+a(β−C),wherea(β−C)is the bonus function. The fee to consumers can also be written asF(β)=aβ+(1−a)C. This allows for the interpretation of the fee to consumers as a weighted average of the benchmark and the cost of the LDC. Clearly a plays the role of deciding the extent of risk sharing between the consumer and the LDC. When a → 0, the fee to consumers goes to C, that is, all risk in the procurement cost is borne by the consumer, resulting in the cost-of-service based scheme. When a → 1, the fee to consumers goes to β and all the risk associated with the procurement cost remains with the LDC. Very risk averse LDCs in this case are likely to mirror the benchmark.Let us now derive the optimal incentive fraction by solving PP(β) described in the previous section. The expected utility of the LDC can be reduced to,a(μβ−μ0+e)−12de2−λa2σβ2−λa2σC2+2λa2σβCThe first order condition with respect to e leads to:e*=adThe first order condition for the regulator’s expected disutility with respect to a leads to:a*(β)=12(1−(μβ−μ0)+λp(σβ2−σC2)1d+λpVar(β−C))Since the second derivative of the regulator’s expected disutility with respect to a is positive (1d+λpVar(β−C)>0), a*(β) is the optimal incentive fraction that leads to the minimum expected disutility of the regulator.In the following, we analyze the effect of various parameters on the optimal incentive fraction and derive practical guidelines for the regulator.•When d increases, a*(β) increases in order to give more incentive to the LDC to increase the optimal effort e*;When μβincreases, a*(β) decreases. In this case, the benchmark is high compared to the cost of the LDC without effort, and can result in a higher fee to consumers unless a*(β) is reduced. This also implies that the mean of the benchmark should be low, in order for the regulator to afford choosing higher incentive fractions for higher cost reduction incentive;When σβincreases, a*(β) decreases. In fact, as a → 1 the fee to consumers goes to β and this is the case when the risk is transferred to the LDC. However, when σβtends to be high, increasing the incentive fraction can result in high variance of the fee to consumers. Therefore, the benchmark should have a low variance in order for the risk sharing mechanism to function adequately, and for the regulator to afford choosing higher incentive fractions for more incentive;WhenσC2increases, a*(β) increases. If the regulator believes that the LDC is very risk averse (σC2is low), then a smaller incentive fraction should be chosen. On the other hand, if the regulator believes that the LDC tends towards risk neutrality (σC2is high) then a larger incentive fraction needs to be chosen to transfer the risk to the LDC;When the correlation coefficient ρβ, Cincreases, a*(β) decreases. TheVar(β−C)will decrease for the same σβand σC, if ρβ, Cincreases. In this case, the LDC tries to mirror the benchmark and the regulator should reduce the incentive fraction, because this behavior does not reduce the fee to consumers. This would be the case for very risk averse LDCs.As mentioned earlier, we deal with the benchmark based incentive contract design problem in two stages. So far, we analyzed the regulator’s problem for a given benchmark. This allowed us to find the optimal incentive fraction a*(β) and derive practical guidelines for the regulator. Next, we focus on the second stage that is the benchmark selection.The regulator aims to choose an acceptable contract (benchmark as well as an incentive fraction) to ensure that the LDC acts in the best interest of consumers. Taking variance as the measure of risk, the regulator is interested in striking a balance between reduced mean and variance of the fee to consumers, that is V(β, a*(β)).Proposition 1The optimal objective value of the regulator (the expected disutility of the fee to consumers)V*=V(β,a*(β))is increasing in the benchmark mean and variance, i.e.,∂V*∂μβ>0and,∂V*∂σβ2>0We can write the optimal objective value of the regulator (the expected disutility of the fee to consumers) given a benchmark contract corresponding to a benchmark β and its optimal incentive fraction as:V*=E(F(β,a*(β),C(e*)))+λpVar(F(β,a*(β),C(e*))=μ0+λpσC2+12(μβ−μ0−1d−2λpσC2+2λpσβC)a*(β)then one can derive the following,∂V*∂μβ=a*(β)>0and,∂V*∂σβ2=12λpa*(β)2+12(λpρσCσβ)(32−a*(β))>0□This proposition states that the disutility of the fee to consumers under a benchmark based incentive contract decreases with a decrease in the mean and variance of the benchmark. Therefore, to benefit consumers, the regulator should use a benchmark with low mean and variance.The optimal effort, or expected cost reduction, chosen by the LDC ise*=ad,which maximizes its expected utility. The parameter d reflects the ability of the LDC to reduce cost. When an LDC has a high ability it has access to low cost opportunities, d is low; on the other hand, when the LDC does not have access to such opportunities, d is high. Let us assume that this parameter takes the valuesd=0.2,0.5,0.8corresponding to high (H), medium (M), and low (L) ability LDCs, respectively, andμ0=6.5(dollar/MMBTU) andμβ=7(dollor/MMBTU). To each ability level, H, M, or L, correspond an LDC cost function and a fee to consumers (per unit), plotted in Figs. 1and 2. Whena=0,the LDC’s cost and fee to consumers correspond to the case of cost-of-service regulation (CoS).From the LDC cost graph on the left, as a increases the LDC has more incentive to reduce the cost and the extent of reduction depends on its ability to reduce this cost. From the right part of the figure, one can see that the fee to consumers under benchmark incentive contracts can be much lower than the fee to consumers under cost-of-service, depending on the choice of a and the LDC’s ability, reflected by d. Furthermore, the optimal incentive fraction, corresponding to the lowest expected fee to consumers, the regulator can choose areaL=0.3,aM=0.4,andaH=0.5. This verifies the guideline derived from our model analysis, which states that: when d increases, a*(β) increases in order to give more incentive to the LDC.For a target expected fee to consumers of about 6.4 (dollar/MMBTU), for example, the regulator can choose an incentive fraction ofaM=0.1or 0.7, for the case of the medium ability LDC. Recall that a plays the role of deciding the extent of risk sharing between consumers and the LDC. Therefore, in our example, if the LDC is very risk averse the regulator should chooseaM=0.1and if the LDC would take risky decisions, the regulator is better-off selectingaM=0.7.Fig. 3plots the different fee to consumers, as a function of the incentive fraction, corresponding to different values of the benchmark mean: 6.5, 7, and 7.5 (dollar/MMBTU). It can be seen that the optimal incentive fraction decreases when the benchmark mean increases, this fact is in line with our earlier finding in the model analysis section.In addition to the guidelines derived from the problem analysis in Section 3, this example shows that the choice of the incentive fraction is very much linked to the ability of the LDC to reduce its cost and to the benchmark selection.Should a benchmark be used in an incentive contract? In order to answer this question, linear incentive contracts are compared to benchmark based contracts, in this section. We assume that both contracts are acceptable to the LDC and that, without loss of generality,Umin=0in the participation constraint 2.3.In a linear incentive contract, the fee to consumers is based solely on the cost of the agent C and is given by,F1(γ,α,C)=γ+αC,with γ ≥ 0 and 0 ≤ α < 1.The bonus of the LDC in this case isγ+αC−C=γ−(1−α)Cand the regulator’s problem can be written as:minα,γE(F1(γ,α,C))+λpVar(F1(γ,α,C))s.t.x*=argmaxx>0{E(γ−(1−α)C(x))−ψ(x)−λVar((1−α)C(x))}E(γ−(1−α)C(x*))−ψ(x)−λVar((1−α)C(x*))≥0The first and second order conditions on the LDC’s problem lead tox*=1−αdSince the expected disutility of the regulator is decreasing in γ, and the expected utility of the agent is increasing in γ, the participation constraint is binding at optimality. This is true for any α. This fact implies that:γ*=(1−α)μ0−12(1−α)2d+λ(1−α)2σC2From the first and second order conditions on the regulator’s objective we get:α*=λσC212d+(λ+λp)σC2Notice that 0 ≤ α* < 1 and that when λ → 0 then α* → 0, i.e., when an LDC tends to be risk neutral the regulator should transfer most of the risk to the LDC. This result is similar to the one obtained for the benchmark case.Under the two contracts, the LDC chooses a cost reduction level (effort) that maximizes its expected utility. Recall that this optimal level ise*=adin a benchmark contract, andx*=1−αdin a linear incentive contract. Hence a and1−αplay the same role in adjusting the level of cost reduction of the LDC. In order to compare the two contracts, we consider a desired target level of cost reductione=ad=1−αd,and compare the corresponding optimal expected disutility of the regulator under the two types of incentive mechanisms.We can write the optimal expected disutility of the regulator under the linear incentive contract, for a givenα=1−aas:μ0−1−α22d+[(1−α)2λ+α2λp]Var(C)or,V1(a)=μ0+a22d−ad+[a2λ+(1−a)2λp]Var(C).Also, we can write the optimal expected disutility of the regulator under the benchmark contract for a given fraction of incentive a as:V2(a)=aμβ+(1−a)μ0+a2d−ad+λpVar[aβ+(1−a)C]Proposition 2With the assumption that μβ> μ0,•ifλp=0andλ=0,then the regulator should use a linear incentive contract;when λ → ∞, the regulator should use a benchmark with low variance;when Var(C) → ∞, the regulator should use a benchmark with low variance;in all other cases, a benchmark should be used if the regulator has the ability to construct benchmarks with low mean and low variance.Let,ΔV(a)=V1(a)−V2(a)={a(μ0−μβ)−a22d}+{[a2λ+(1−a)2λp]Var(C)−λpVar[aβ+(1−a)C]}•Letλp=λ=0thenΔV(a)=a(μ0−μβ)−a22d<0. The mechanism with no benchmark is better;We can construct a benchmark withVar(β)=0,i.e,β=μβ. Then we can write:ΔV(a)=a(μ0−μβ)−a22d+a2λVar(C)when λ → ∞ then ∀a > 0, ΔV(a) > 0. In such case, the principal should use a benchmark;Consider a benchmark withVar(β)=0. Then, we have:ΔV(a)=a(μ0−μβ)−a22d+a2λVar(C)when Var(C) → ∞ then ∀a > 0, ΔV(a) > 0. In such case, the principal should use a benchmark;For all other cases the sign of ΔV(a) depends on the choice of the benchmark with corresponding mean and variance. This is true because ∀0 < a ≤ 1,∂ΔV(a)∂μβ<0and∂ΔV(a)∂σβ2<0.□The volatility of natural gas prices have made the procurement cost very volatile. Price volatility also causes LDCs to be very risk averse, see for example Yu and Yu (2004) and EIA (2007). Using these facts and Proposition 2, it is easy to conclude that benchmarks should be used in incentive mechanisms for regulating LDCs but these benchmarks should have low mean and low variance.Our goal in this section is to construct policy benchmarks that accommodate modeling errors in the natural gas price process. To be more specific, we design a robust optimization based policy benchmark and then show that these benchmarks perform significantly better (in a mean-variance sense) than the simple benchmarking policies that have been proposed in the past. In fact, we demonstrate that these simple policies usually backfire in the presence of modeling errors. That is, they result in a significantly higher fee to consumers than what the regulators might have anticipated. We start by describing the robust optimization based benchmark. Then for the sake of comparison and completeness, we briefly describe the simple benchmarks that were proposed in Aouam et al. (2010). Finally we demonstrate the implications and benefits of such robust optimization based benchmarks that are constructed in this section to handle modeling errors.Robust optimization (RO) based policy benchmarks are associated with robust strategies that improve upon naive strategies, without assuming any specific distribution of spot prices. In each period, the spot price Stis modeled as a symmetric and bounded random variable, with unknown distribution, that takes values[E(St)−S^t,E(St)+S^t],whereS^tis the interval half-width.We start by presenting the nominal procurement problem before developing the robust counterpart. The procurement decision variables areXts,ItsandXtfrepresenting the spot purchase at time t, the inventory at the end of period t and the futures purchase at the beginning of the planning horizon for period t > T1. The nominal procurement problem can be formulated as follows,(5.4)NPP:minZs.t.∑tStXts+∑thcIts+∑t>T1f0tXtf≤Z(5.5)Its=It−1s+Xts+1{t>T1}Xtf−dt∀t(5.6)Its≤Imaxs∀t(5.7)Xtf,Xts,Its≥0∀tProblem (NPP) assumes that spot prices will take their nominal values, in this case the mean value in each period. Constraint (5.4) together with the objective function defines the total procurement cost including spot purchasing costs, inventory holding costs, and futures contracts purchasing costs. Constraint (5.14) is the inventory balance and includes the natural gas delivered after exercising futures contracts in the cold season (t > T1). Constraints (5.15) and (5.7) impose the inventory capacity limit and non-negativity of decision variables.We need a robust counterpart of this procurement problem. The first robust optimization (RO) model was developed by Soyster (1973), who proposes a linear optimization model to construct a solution that is feasible for all data that belong to a convex set. The model handles column-wise uncertainty in linear programming problems, where every uncertain parameter has to be taken equal to its worst-case value in the set. The drawback of the approach is that solutions are too conservative, i.e. the solutions are robust but too far from the optimal solution. The issue of over-conservatism was tackled by Ben-Tal and Nemirovski (2000). They propose less conservative models by considering linear programs with an ellipsoidal structure of uncertainty. The resulting robust counterpart is in the form of a conic quadratic problem. This means that the robust counterpart does not conserve the complexity of the nominal problem (original problem with nominal values). Bertsimas and Sim (2004) present a technique specifically tailored for polyhedral uncertainty that leads to linear robust counterparts while controlling the level of conservativeness of the solution.The aim of the adopted RO approach is to be able to adjust the level of conservativeness of the solution, so that a reasonable trade-off between robustness and performance is achieved. Let us define the scaled deviation of the spot prices aszt=(St−E(St))/S^t, which will always belong to[−1,1]. Bertsimas and Sim (2004) introduce the concept of budget of uncertainty, which limits the total (scaled) variation to a pre-defined threshold, Γ as follows,∑t|zt|≤ΓThe case ofΓ=Tcorresponds to the worst case, where Stis equal to the maximum value in all periods and the caseΓ=0corresponds to the nominal case. after saying that it comes from the consideration of the uncertainty of the spot prices and the intent of using the robust approachThe randomness of spot price uncertainty only affects inequality 5.4 which can be re-written under the RO approach as,(5.8)∑t(E(St)Xts+hcIts)+∑t>T1f0tXtf+∑tzt*S^tXts≤Zwhere z*’s are the optimal solution of the following problem(5.9)Primal-D:max∑tztS^tXts(5.10)∑tzt≤Γ(5.11)0≤zt≤1∀tInequality (5.8) defines the optimal procurement cost corresponding to the maximum admissible deviation of spot prices from their nominal value. The maximum admissible deviation is the optimal value of problem Primal-D,∑tzt*S^tXtsthat depends onXts. Injecting Eq. (5.8) in problem NPP would lead to a nonlinear program that we linearize next using duality. Let u and vtdenote the dual variables corresponding to Constraints (5.10) and (5.11), respectively. Now, if we consider problem Primal-D as a primal problem that is a feasible and bounded linear program, by strong duality the primal’s optimal value is equal to the optimal value of its dual. Therefore, the maximum admissible deviation∑tzt*S^tXtscan be replaced byΓu*+∑tvt*. The robust procurement problem is given by,(5.12)RPP(Γ):minZs.t.∑t(E(St)Xts+hcIts)+∑t>T1f0tXtf+Γu+∑tvt≤Z(5.13)u+vt≥S^tXts,∀t(5.14)Its=It−1s+Xts+1{t>T1}Xtf−dt,∀t(5.15)Its≤Imaxs∀t(5.16)Xtf,Xts,Its,u,vt≥0∀tConstraint (5.12) along with the objective function minimizes the total procurement cost including the deviation (Γu+∑tvt) due to the uncertainty of the spot price. Constraints (5.13) and the non-negativity of u, vtin 5.16 are the constraints of the dual of problem Primal-D. This way problem Primal-D is implicitly solved and the admissible deviation set to its optimal value (Γu*+∑tvt*) when problem RPP(Γ) is solved. The rest of the constraints are similar to those in the nominal problem NPP. Problem RPP(Γ) is solved at the beginning of the planning horizon and the optimal solution(Xts,Its,Xtf)*(Γ)represents the robust optimization strategy. The corresponding cost to this strategy is the robust optimization benchmark.Static policy benchmarks are based on strategies where procurement decisions are made in the beginning of the planning period, including hedging decisions for the high price volatility season (winter). In fact, it is typical for natural gas LDCs to inject gas into underground storage during the summer season when demand is low; and during the winter heating season that gas is withdrawn from storage to meet demand along with other sources of supply (Bopp, Kannan, Palocsay, & Stevens, 1996 and Guldmann & Wang, 1999). Naive policy benchmarks are costs associated with strategies that hedge a fixed fraction of the winter season’s demand at the beginning of the procurement period. The hedge is allocated equally between the different types of instruments available including storage and futures contracts. The fraction of demand to be hedged and the constitution of the portfolio are decided in the beginning of the procurement period. Let T1 represent the first period in the cold season anddcold=∑t>T1dtbe the total demand for the cold season. Let α be the fraction of cold season demand to be hedged at time 0 andωs=0.5andωf=0.5be the fractions of hedge using storage and futures contracts, respectively. A naive strategy is defined as:•Ift=0then buy from spot required quantity of hedge through storage αωsdcold. Buy required quantity of hedge through futures contracts for each time point τ in the cold season αωfdτ;If 0 < t ≤ T1 then satisfy demand dtfrom spot;If t > T1 then consume the quantity already hedged and buy the rest from spot market,(1−α)dt.The cost associated with this is the naive policy benchmark.Dynamic strategies are based on modeling the natural gas procurement problem as a mean-risk stochastic program parameterized by a tradeoff coefficient, λ, between mean and risk. The evolution of spot prices is taken as a mean-reverting process then approximated by a scenario tree. Empirical studies justify the use of mean-reverting models to capture the dynamics of commodity prices, including natural gas (Dixit & Pindyck, 1993 and Schwartz, 1997). In addition to gas purchases from the spot market, the LDC has access to the following instruments to satisfy its demand:•Storage. Provided there is available storage (owned or contracted), an LDC can potentially buy natural gas at time t and store it for delivery to consumers at a future time;Futures contracts. Natural gas futures are available at the NYMEX, are purchased for a fixed price at time t and at a future time τ provide the holder the spot price of natural gas at the Henry Hub in Louisiana. Futures contracts for natural gas delivery for time τ ≤ T can be bought at any time t < τ.At each time index t, given the spot price information up to time t, a scenario tree is constructed, a mean-risk stochastic program is solved, and the optimal decision for the time index t (i.e., first period) is implemented. By doing so for each time t in [1, T], a dynamic strategy is constructed and the corresponding cost of this strategy is the dynamic policy benchmark. The upper partial variance (UPV) is considered as a measure of risk, since it is convexity preserving and has the advantage of penalizing only undesirable deviations, i.e. deviations above the mean.In this section, we compare RO policy benchmarks introduced in Section 5.1 with static and dynamic policy benchmarks described in Section 5.2. The three policy benchmarks are compared based on the optimal expected disutility of the fee to consumers V(β, a*) computed for each benchmark by solving the principal’s problem PP(β). For a given policy benchmark β, we have obtained earlier in closed form for the optimal LDC effort and optimal incentive fraction, i.e., optimal solution to PP(β).In order for the optimal solution to be computed, the mean and variance of the benchmark are estimated by means of Monte Carlo simulations. We assume that all other parameters are constant for all policy benchmarks. Specifically, the mean and variance of the cost of the LDC with no effort (μ0 andσ02), the correlation coefficient between the benchmark and the cost of the LDC ρβC, and the factor of cost of effort d. The effects of these factors have been analyzed earlier. We then vary the risk aversion coefficient of the regulator λpas it represents a trade-off between mean and variance of the fee to consumers. We evaluate the policy benchmarks when the spot price model is accurate (no modeling error) and when there is a modeling error inherent in the spot price model.In order to evaluate the mean and variance of each benchmark, we use a simulation procedure that we describe below. Using monthly wellhead natural gas spot price data from January 2003 to May 2008, we fit log-prices to the arithmetic Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process as introduced by Eq. (5.17) that becomes a first-order autoregressive model when discrete time steps are considered. We decompose the year into two seasons: season 1 (warm, from April to September) and season 2 (cold, October to March). The parameter estimation yields for season 1,ν1=0.2930,η1=1.8283andσ1=0.13. For season 2 the estimation yieldsν2=0.1362,η2=1.8865andσ2=0.2. Taking price in April 2007 asS0=6.64(dollar/MMBTU), we consider satisfying monthly demand faced by a utility company that operates in the midwest region from April to March as reported in Table 1. We assume that the storage capacity constraints faced by this LDC,Imaxs=42213550(MMBTU), which represents more than half of the cold season demand. Storage costs are set tohc=0.25per month per MMBTU. The risk premium factor is set toκ=0.5percent.A policy benchmark is the cost associated with a procurement strategy. In our simulation procedure, a simulation scenario corresponds to a realizationy1,…,yTof the log-price process{Yt}=ln(St)defined by the arithmetic Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process as follows,(5.17)dYt=ν(η−Yt)dt+σdWt,where Wtis the standard Wiener process, σ denotes the volatility, η represents the long-run equilibrium level (or the long-run mean log-price to which the log-prices tend to revert), and ν is the speed of reversion. Corresponding to each scenario, at the end of the planning horizon, the cost of each strategy results in a realization of a policy benchmark. A large number of simulation scenarios can be generated, 500 scenarios in our example. In order to compute the cost of a strategy, it has to be implemented and to do so, we proceed as follows: At the beginning of the first period y1 is realized, based on which a scenario tree is constructed. The first period decisions of a procurement strategy are implemented and as a consequence costs are calculated. Given this and the realization of y2, a new scenario tree is constructed, procurement problems are solved, second period decisions are implemented and corresponding costs are calculated. The process continues for the third period until the end of the planning horizon T. The mean and variance of the policy benchmarks can be estimated based on the benchmark realizations, each corresponding to a simulation scenario.However, modeling errors are certainly inherent in natural gas pricing models. In order to generate scenarios that reflect such modeling errors, let us define{Y˜t}as the process of spot log-prices with an underlying distribution from which the true spot prices are realized. We introduce the modeling error as follows:Et=Y˜t−Yt,∀t∈{1,…,T}.where, Etrepresents the modeling error. This error can be estimated based on historical data and can be of any distribution. Here we assume thatEt∼U[−0.3,0.3]. Then, the same previous procedure for estimating mean and variance of policy benchmarks can be followed.The procurement strategies corresponding to policy benchmarks have been implemented using the general algebraic modeling system (GAMS) and CPLEX 11.0 has been used to solve the underlying mathematical programs.Each policy benchmark type is parametrized by a particular parameter, λ, α, or Γ, respectively, representing a level of conservatism. As these parameters increase the corresponding strategies would include more hedging resulting in higher expected cost and lower variance. The mean-risk tradeoff coefficientλ=0,0.1,0.2,⋯,1.0representing risk aversion from low to high. The values of the fixed fraction of the cold season to be hedged areα=0,0.1,0.2,⋯,1and the mix is equal between all hedging instruments, i.e.,ωs=ωf=0.5. The uncertainty budgetΓ=γT,where the budget factorγ=0.1,0.2,…,1.0. Once the mean and variance for all these policy benchmarks have been evaluated, the optimal efforts and incentive fraction are computed and the corresponding optimal disutility of the fee to consumers is evaluated for each λp. Optimal disutility of the fee to consumers (regulator’s optimal objective function) for various values of λp, averaged over the range of λc∈ (0, 1) is shown in Figs. 4and 5.It can be noted that RO policy benchmarks dominate static policy benchmarks, for both cases. In the case of no error, as expected dynamic strategies outperform RO policy benchmarks since they dynamically adjust the procurement decisions as the price process is realized over time. However, for the case of modeling error, for medium and high values of λp, representing the regulator’s tradeoff between mean cost and risk, the disutility of the fee to consumers is much lower when RO policy benchmarks are used in the incentive contract. In summary, the RO policy benchmarks introduced in this paper outperform static policy benchmarks in all cases and dynamic policy benchmarks when modeling errors are inherent in the spot pricing model and when the regulator (representing consumers) is sensitive to the variance of the natural gas procurement fee.Policy benchmarks have been shown to be beneficial in several ways in comparison to existing regulation methods (Muthuraman et al., 2008) like fixed price and linear incentive contracts. However these benefits were demonstrated using natural gas models that did not have any errors (in their parameter estimates). We show in this paper that these policy benchmarks, as they are currently formulated, do perform terribly in the face of modeling errors. They usually result in much larger fee to consumers than what the regulator was planning for. This heavily hinders the adoption of such policy benchmarking based regulation since a fundamental characterization of a regulatory process is its robustness. We have have extended our previous work in Muthuraman et al. (2008) to accommodate modeling errors. We do this by first allowing the regulator to choose policy benchmarks from a much more complex set of strategies. Then we construct a family of Robust optimization based strategies and demonstrate that these are very robust against modeling errors, as one would expect from their formulation. While pursuing this central objective, we have also extended our previous work in several other ways. Instead of a known and fixed cost-structure, we now allow the LDC to control costs by cost reduction efforts, as in classical economics. We also obtain closed-form solutions for incentive fractions. These robust strategies for policy benchmarks and closed form incentive fractions, that make it much easier for the regulator to pick and trust their policy benchmark choices, making the implementation of these policy benchmarks closer than they have ever been.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
