@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adjustable robustness for multi-attribute project portfolio selection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider a linear-additive portfolio value function with uncertain parameters.Our approach identifies robust portfolios with adjustable level of conservatism.Our approach accounts for dependencies among project scores and uncertainty in portfolio constraints.We apply our approach to supply chain management in the semiconductor industry.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple criteria analysis,Project portfolio selection,Resource allocation,Robustness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Robust Portfolio Modeling (RPM) supports multi-attribute project portfolio selection with uncertain project scores and decision maker preferences. By determining non-dominated portfolios for all possible realizations of uncertain parameters, decision recommendations produced by RPM may prove too conservative for real-life decision problems. We develop a methodology to reduce the set of possible realizations by limiting the number of project scores that may simultaneously deviate from their most likely value. By adjusting this limit, decision makers can choose desired levels of conservatism. Our approach also allows to capture dependencies among project scores as well as uncertainty in portfolio constraints.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Socio-economic decision problems often involve decision makers facing alternative courses of action, which if chosen consume resources and have multi-dimensional consequences. Research in the area of “Portfolio Decision Analysis” strives to bring greater rationality and transparency to such resource allocation decisions (Kleinmuntz, 2007; Salo, Keisler, & Morton, 2011). Particularly, linear-additive portfolio selection models have frequently found high impact applications (Ewing, Tarantino, & Parnell, 2006; Grushka-Cockayne, Reyck, & Degraeve, 2008). Due to the strategic nature of typical portfolio decisions (Lourenço, Morton, & Bana e Costa, 2012; Salo et al., 2011), consequences, selection constraints, and decision maker preferences are subject to significant uncertainty. In uncertain environments any optimal portfolio determined for some point estimate parameter values might prove unsatisfactory for other possible realizations of uncertain parameter values.Robust Portfolio Modeling (RPM) (Liesiö, Mild, & Salo, 2007; 2008) is a Portfolio Decision Analysis approach designed for decision environments in the context of project portfolio selection where project consequences given as scores in multiple attributes and decision maker preferences are subject to considerable uncertainty. RPM identifies non-dominated portfolios, i.e., portfolios (i) which are feasible in the sense that they satisfy relevant budgetary and other constraints and (ii) for which no other feasible portfolio yields greater value for all possible realizations of the uncertain project scores and attribute weights. Decision makers are provided with a set of non-dominated portfolios to choose from and receive decisional guidance on which projects’ uncertainty has the greatest impact on the decision problem. RPM has found practical applications in a variety of contexts ranging from the development of research agendas (Könnölä, Brummer, & Salo, 2007) to infrastructure asset management (Mild, Liesiö, & Salo, 2015).By requiring dominance for all possible realizations of uncertain parameters, decision recommendations provided by RPM are by design explicitly conservative. Thus with extremely uncertain parameters, dominance relations fail to rule out a significant share of feasible portfolios, the number of which may grow exponentially with the number of project proposals. In such a situation detailed information on the decision makers’ preferences concerning the trade-offs among the attributes can be elicited using standard preference programming approaches (Salo & Punkka, 2005). However, if the projects’ score intervals are wide enough such information may not substantially reduce the number of non-dominated portfolios. Since the standard RPM framework offers no support for adjusting the level of conservatism of the dominance relations the only viable approach to more conclusive decision recommendations is to obtain more accurate information on these scores. Yet, in applications such information might not be available or it may be impossible to acquire with the available resources and time before a decision has to be made.In this paper we combine RPM with the robust optimization concept by Bertsimas and Sim (2004) to allow adjustments to the level of conservatism used by the pairwise dominance relations. Specifically, we assume a limit for the number of project scores that can deviate from their most likely value when determining dominance relations between portfolios. By adjusting this deviation limit, decision makers are able to choose a desired level of conservatism. When no limits are imposed, our approach coincides with standard RPM, while strict limits cause our approach to omit deviations and compare portfolios based on their most likely scores.As a result of this combination, this study offers several contributions to the existing methods for multi-attribute project portfolio selection under uncertainty. First, the paper extends the standard dominance relation of RPM to a model where score uncertainty is captured by a set of feasible score matrices that is not a Cartesian product of unidimensional intervals. Second, the paper develops approaches for establishing dominance between two portfolios as well as an exact algorithm based on dynamic programming for identifying non-dominated portfolios under this more general score uncertainty model. Third, the paper shows how these sets of feasible scores can be used to capture uncertain interdependencies among projects. Finally, the paper offers approaches to consider adjustable robustness not only with regards to project and portfolio scores but also with regards to constraint satisfaction.After presenting the theoretical background in the following section, we introduce the proposed decision making framework in Section 3. Section 4 describes how RPM with adjustable robustness can be applied to support project portfolio selection and how decision makers can determine desired levels of robustness. Section 5 applies the developed framework to supply chain management in the semiconductor industry. Section 6 extends the framework and practical application to account for interdependencies among project scores and for modeling uncertain coefficients in portfolio feasibility constraints.Robust modeling approaches aid decision makers in accounting for ambiguity and stochastic uncertainty of parameters to decision problems when detailed information on the nature of uncertainty, e.g., probability distributions, is not readily available (Bertsimas, Brown, & Caramanis, 2011). Both theoretical and practical contributions to the field are covered by the surveys of Bertsimas et al. (2011); Roy (2010), and Gabrel, Murat, and Thiele (2014). Bertsimas et al. (2011) particularly emphasize the issue of conservatism when dealing with robust modeling techniques. Kouvelis and Yu (1997) seek to find solutions that minimize the worst case performance within a set of all possible realizations of uncertain parameters. Such a realization where “everything is assumed to go wrong” is bound to be very unlikely in practice.The robust modeling approach by Bertsimas and Sim (2003); 2004) explicitly addresses the problem of conservatism. The authors model uncertainty in linear and integer programming problems by allowing uncertain coefficients of constraints or the objective function to realize within an interval, symmetrically extending around the most likely value of the coefficient. By limiting the number of coefficients that may deviate from their most likely value, the authors allow decision makers to choose their desired level of robustness. Bertsimas and Sim (2004) investigate the trade-off between the probability of constraint violations and the most likely objective function value, termed the price of robustness. The authors furthermore consider “correlated” constraint coefficients, whose deviation from their most likely values is determined by the linear combination of a common set of factors subject to uncertainty. Perfectly correlated constraint coefficients depend on one common factor only, while uncorrelated coefficients are each determined by independent factors. In this modeling approach parameter Γ controls the number of factors permitted to take on their worst-case value rather than the constraint coefficients themselves.Several studies apply the robust modeling technique by Bertsimas and Sim (2003, 2004) to portfolio selection problems. Kachani and Langella (2005) develop integer programming models for multi-period capital rationing and budgeting problems that are robust with regards to uncertain net present values of projects. Robustness with regards to objective function and constraint coefficients is considered. Düzgün and Thiele (2010) propose an integer programming model for the selection of research projects. Uncertain project cash-flows are allowed to fall into one of several value intervals. The number of parameters that may fall into each interval is chosen by the decision makers. The authors propose a robust heuristic procedure where projects are selected in order of decreasing cash-flows or cash-flow to cost ratios. Düzgün and Thiele (2012) compare the robust optimization approach to a stochastic programming model. Gregory, Darby-Dowman, and Mitra (2011) review robust optimization methods in financial portfolio selection and evaluate linear programming models for the robust selection of financial assets. The authors discuss model formulations that support uncorrelated as well as correlated uncertain returns. Different ways of deriving uncertainty sets from real life data, portfolio diversity, and tradeoffs between robustness and portfolio performance are evaluated using data on equity returns from the London stock exchange. Hassanzadeh, Nemati, and Sun (2014) consider project portfolio selection under multiple objectives and subject to constraints. Feasible portfolios Pareto optimal with regards to all objectives are generated by solving an augmented weighted Tchebycheff program (Steuer, 1986). The authors propose a robust mixed integer programming model that protects against uncertainty in objective function coefficients, i.e., project scores, as well as coefficients of selection constraints. The authors do not assume a priori information on decision maker preferences with regards to objectives but implicitly elicit these in an interactive procedure. A set of candidate portfolios is generated by solving the mixed integer programming model several times while randomly weighting different objective functions. Based on the decision makers’ selection from this set a new set of candidates is generated with random weights being more focused based on the decision makers’ choice. The procedure ends when decision makers are content with their portfolio choice or a fixed number of iterations have been performed.Liesiö et al. (2007) develop Robust Portfolio Modeling to address project portfolio selection under uncertainty. Portfolio values are given by a linear-additive model (Golabi, Kirkwood, & Sicherman, 1981; Liesiö & Punkka, 2014) where projects are evaluated in terms of multiple attributes. Preference Programming techniques (Salo & Hämäläinen, 1995) account for uncertain project scores, bounded by value intervals, as well as uncertain attribute weights, bounded by decision makers’ preference statements. Parameters of selection constraints, e.g., budgetary restrictions or logical selection constraints, are assumed to be known with certainty. It is unlikely that there exists a portfolio that provides the highest overall value for all considered score realizations and attribute weights. RPM provides decision makers with a set of non-dominated portfolios, which each are not strictly inferior for all possible realizations to any other portfolio. The authors develop a dynamic programming algorithm to compute the set of non-dominated portfolios and propose an iterative process to reduce this set by acquiring additional preference and score information. They employ a metric termed core index to determine projects whose score information impacts dominances between portfolios. Liesiö, Mild, and Salo (2008) extend RPM to account for project interdependencies and uncertainty with regards to selection constraints. They consider interval-valued coefficients of a constraint that limits aggregate portfolio cost to a (variable) budget. Budgetary restrictions are required to hold for all possible cost realizations. The authors ensure portfolio cost-efficiency by including project cost as a weighted score attribute.In this paper we relax the strictly conservative robustness paradigm of Liesiö et al. (2007); 2008) by employing the adjustable robustness model by Bertsimas and Sim (2003, 2004). Decision makers control the level of conservatism with regards to uncertain project scores and coefficients of selection constraints by choosing a suitable parameter Γ. While the related project portfolio selection approach by Hassanzadeh et al. (2014) implicitly elicits decision makers’ preferences through an interactive procedure, our approach, based on Robust Portfolio Modeling, separates preference elicitation from portfolio selection. Uncertain preference information, which may be elicited by different methods from preference programming (Salo & Hämäläinen, 1995), is taken into account when determining the complete set of non-dominated portfolios. The interactive RPM procedure furthermore provides decision makers with guidance in refining uncertain project scores.Project proposalsj=1,…,mare evaluated with regards to attributesi=1,…,ngiving a score matrixv∈Rm×n,where vjiindicates the matrix element in the jth row and ith column. The additive overall value of project j is∑i=1nwivji,where the vector of attribute weightsw∈Rnis scaled so that(1)w∈Sw∞={w∈Rn|wi≥0,∑i=1nwi=1}.The weight withus relates a unit increase in the attribute-specific score to an increase in the overall value.Sw∞is termed the information set of attribute weights.A project portfolio is a subset of the available proposals and is modeled as a binary vector z ∈ {0, 1}m, such thatzj=1if and only if project j is included in portfolio z. We assume a linear-additive portfolio model (Golabi et al., 1981; Liesiö & Punkka, 2014), where the overall portfolio value is given by the sum of its constituent projects’ overall value(2)V(v,w,z)=∑i=1n∑j=1mvjiwizj=zTvw.Projects are selected subject to linear constraintsl=1,…,q,whose coefficients form matrixA∈Rq×mand whose respective limits are given by vectorb∈Rq. Constraints typically considered in portfolio selection problems are budgetary restrictions, which limit the execution of costly projects, or logical constraints, which impose restrictions on the combined execution of multiple projects (Ghasemzadeh, Archer, & Iyogun, 1999; Stummer & Heidenberger, 2003). The set of project portfolios feasible in terms of all considered constraints is given by(3)ZF={z∈{0,1}m|Az≤b},where ≤ holds componentwise.If complete information on the weights and scores is available, the most preferred feasible portfolio maximizes the overall value (2). This optimal portfolio can be obtained as the solution to the integer programming problem(4)maxz∈ZFV(v,w,z)=maxz∈{0,1}m{zTvw|Az≤b}.Our model uses the Preference Programming approach to capture incomplete information on the importance of attributes (Danielson, Ekenberg, Idefeldt, & Larsson, 2007; Salo & Hämäläinen, 1992; Salo & Punkka, 2005; Sarabando & Dias, 2010; Weber, 1987). Preference statements are modeled as a set of feasible weightsSw⊆Sw∞satisfying linear constraints. For instance, ranking three attributes in terms of their importance could result in the weight set{w∈Sw∞|w2≥w3≥w1}. Thus, the set of feasible weightsSw=Sw∞corresponds to lack of any preference information, while a single weight vectorSw={w}corresponds to complete information.Uncertainty with regards to project scores is modeled by allowing each score vjito deviate from the most likely scorev^jiin both directions by at mostv→ji,which results in a range of feasible scores[v^ji−v→ji,v^ji+v→ji]. The information set of all possible project score matrices is thus(5)Sv∞={v∈Rm×n|vji=v^ji+v→jiyji,y∈[−1,1]m×n}.Comparing different portfolios based on their overall values over the full range ofSv∞(Liesiö et al., 2007, 2008) leads to strictly conservative judgments. Extreme realizations may be very unlikely as they require multiple scores to take on values at the border of their ranges but are equally considered in comparing alternatives.Following the approach of budgeted robustness by Bertsimas and Sim (2003, 2004), we base portfolio decision making on a subset of the polytopeSv∞.Definition 3.1An adjustable uncertainty set for project scores is given bySvΓ={v∈Rm×n|vji=v^ji+v→jiyji,y∈[−1,1]m×n,∑i=1n∑j=1m|yji|≤Γ}with deviation limit Γ ∈ [0, mn].The degree by which scores may deviate from their most likely values is limited by parameter Γ. ForΓ=mnthe largest possible score information setSvΓ=Sv∞is considered, whileΓ=0indicates that no deviation of scores from their most likely values is taken into account. Under the aspect of communicating the robustness concept to decision makers using statements as “up to Γ scores may deviate from their most likely value”, it makes sense to restrict Γ to integer values.SvΓconstitutes a convex set. When considering integer Γ the extreme points of this set, essential to portfolio dominance in both the basic RPM setting and the adjustable approach proposed in this study, correspond to integer yjivalues. However, extensions presented later will lead to score uncertainty sets whose extreme points do not necessarily correspond to integer valued yji.When considering uncertain preferences and scores, the overall value V(v, w, z) of a portfolio is uncertain as well. It is typically not possible to determine one portfolio z optimal for all combinations of w and v. However, it is often possible to use dominance relationships between portfolios to rule out strictly inferior solutions.Definition 3.2Portfolio z dominates z′ with regard to the information setS=(SvΓ×Sw),denoted z ≻Sz′, if and only if V(v, w, z) ≥ V(v, w, z′) for all (v, w) ∈ S and V(v, w, z) > V(v, w, z′) for some (v, w) ∈ S.Theorem 3.1 shows that determining whether z dominates z′ or not can be established by solving a continuous knapsack problem (solvable in linear time, see e.g., Martello & Toth, 1990) in each extreme point of the convex hull of Sw, denoted ext(conv(Sw)). Standard methods for eliciting incomplete preference information lead to convex Swin which caseext(conv(Sw))=ext(Sw). However, methods that allow incomplete ordinal statements on the attributes’ importance can produce a non-convex Swwhose convex hull has a finite number of extreme points (Salo & Punkka, 2005).Theorem 3.1Let z, z′ ∈ {0, 1}mand information setS=(SvΓ×Sw)with parameter Γ. Thenz≻Sz′⇔{V(v^,w,z)≥V(v^,w,z′)+β(v→,w,z,z′,Γ)forallw∈ext(conv(Sw))V(v^,w,z)>V(v^,w,z′)forsomew∈ext(conv(Sw)),whereβ(v→,w,z,z′,Γ)=maxy∈[0,1]m×n{∑i=1n∑j∈J(z,z′)wiv→jiyji|∑i=1n∑j=1myji≤Γ}andJ(z,z′)={j∈{1,…,m}|(zj=1,zj′=0)∨(zj=0,zj′=1)}.If a project is included in both portfolios z and z′, it has an equal contribution to the overall value of both portfolios for any realization of scores. Therefore, it is not relevant for establishing dominance. All proofs are included in the appendix.The introduced notion of dominance has all analytical properties to establish theoretically sound preference orders between project portfolios as stated by the following lemma.Lemma 3.1≻ is (i) asymmetric, (ii) irreflexive, and (iii) transitive.As Γ increases the dominance relations are established more conservatively. ForΓ=mndominance exists only if a portfolio has a higher overall value for any scores in their intervals. This case coincides with the standard RPM case. At the other extreme,Γ=0implies that dominance exists whenever a portfolio has a higher overall value for most likely scores than another portfolio for all feasible weights.Corollary 3.1Let z, z′ ∈ {0, 1}m.(i)z≻(Svmn×Sw)z′if and only if V(v, w, z)≩V(v, w, z′) for all(v,w)∈(Sv∞×Sw),z≻(Sv0×Sw)z′if and only ifV(v^,w,z)⪈V(v^,w,z′)for all w ∈ Sw,where ≥ denotes that the inequality is strict for some values of v and w.If decision makers were to choose a dominated portfolio, another feasible portfolio would provide equal or higher value for all allowed realizations of weights and project scores. Decision makers should thus choose a portfolio from the set of non-dominated portfolios.Definition 3.3For information setS=(SvΓ×Sw)with parameter Γ the set of non-dominated portfolios isZN(S)={z∈ZF|∄z′∈ZFs.t.z′≻Sz}.Reducing the deviation limit Γ′ ≤ Γ causes fewer score deviations to be considered and reduces the score information set.Theorem 3.2Let information set(SvΓ×Sw)and deviation limits Γ′ ≤ Γ. ThenZN(SvΓ′×Sw)⊆ZN(SvΓ×Sw).The set of non-dominated portfolios can be identified by first applying the dynamic programming algorithm of Liesiö et al. (2008) to determine the setZN(Sv∞×Sw)and then using Theorem 3.1 to discard dominated portfolios to obtainZN(SvΓ×Sw),i.e.,(6)ZN(SvΓ×Sw)={z∈ZN(Sv∞×Sw)|∄z′∈ZN(Sv∞×Sw)s.t.z′≻(SvΓ×Sw)z}.This holds due to the fact that the setZN(SvΓ×Sw)is a subset ofZN(Sv∞×Sw)for any desired robustness level Γ by Theorem 3.2. Another possible approach is to employ the dominance check of Theorem 3.1 within the dynamic programming algorithm (for details see Appendix A). Since dominance relations are less conservative, the computation can be faster, but use of this approach requires that decision makers have fixed their desired (maximum) deviation limit Γ a priori. If on the other hand the decision makers wish to choose a deviation limit Γ ∈ [0, mn] ex post or examine how the set of non-dominated portfolios depends on the value of parameter Γ, the former approach is preferable. Independent of the level of robustness considered, the dynamic programming algorithm of Liesiö et al. (2008) has exponential runtime in the worst case.The developed framework serves as a basis for an interactive procedure that aids decision makers in choosing a project portfolio. Based on initial specifications of uncertain attribute weights and project scores(SvΓ×Sw),a set of non-dominated portfolios is determined for decision makers to choose from. If the set of candidate portfolios is too large to make proper portfolio choices, more conclusive decision recommendations can be obtained by considering an information subset(Sv′Γ×Sw′)⊆(SvΓ×Sw).A subset of uncertain attribute weightsSw′⊆Swis obtained by imposing additional or tighter preference statements (Salo & Hämäläinen, 1995). The information set of project scores is reduced by re-evaluating most likely scoresv^ji′and possible score deviationsv→ji′. From Liesiö et al. (2008) it follows that if scores are re-evaluated so thatSv′∞is a subset ofSv∞then this also holds for the sets of non-dominated portfolios resulting from these information sets. By Theorem 3.2 the set of non-dominated portfolios forSv′Γwith arbitrary deviation limit Γ is a subset of non-dominated portfolios forSv∞. Finally, if most likely scores remain unchanged and only deviation limits are reduced the resulting sets of feasible scores and non-dominated portfolios are subsets of the original sets. These results are formalized by the following Theorem.Theorem 4.1Let information setsS=(Sv∞×Sw),S′=(Sv′∞×Sw′)withS′⊆S,int(S)∩S′≠∅and an arbitrary deviation limit Γ.(i)Ifv^ji′−v→ji′≥v^ji−v→jiandv^ji′+v→ji′≤v^ji+v→ji,thenSv′Γ⊆Sv∞andZN(Sv′Γ×Sw′)⊆ZN(Sv∞×Sw).Ifv^ji′=v^jiandv→ji′≤v→ji,thenSv′Γ⊆SvΓandZN(Sv′Γ×Sw′)⊆ZN(SvΓ×Sw).We use core indexes (Liesiö et al., 2007) to identify those projects for which more accurate information can reduce the set of non-dominated portfolios. The core index of a projects measures the share of non-dominated portfolios that include the project.Definition 4.1For information setS=(SvΓ×Sw)core indexes C(S) ∈ [0, 1]mare given byCj(S)=∑z∈ZN(S)zj|ZN(S)|j=1,…,m.Projects with a core index of zero, included in none of the non-dominated portfolios, as well as projects with a core index of one, included in all non-dominated portfolios, do not aid in reducing the set of non-dominated portfolios. When reducing the information set of scores for any project j with core indexCj(SvΓ×Sw)∈]0,1[,additional dominance relations may arise causing portfolios to fall out of the set of non-dominated portfolios. The following lemma formalizes this result.Lemma 4.1Let information setsS=(SvΓ×Sw)andS′=(Sv′Γ×Sw),whereSv′Γ⊂SvΓsuch thatv^ji′=v^jiandv→ji′=v→jifori=1,…,nand all j with Cj(S) ∈ ]0, 1[. ThenZN(S′)=ZN(S)By Theorem 3.2 the set of non-dominated portfolios can also be reduced by lowering deviation limit Γ causing dominance relations to be determined less conservatively. A tradeoff arises between precise coverage of the information set and the size of the set of non-dominated portfolios. In order to aid decision makers in interpreting the robustness parameter Γ, we provide information on the fraction of the information setSv∞taken into account when determining dominance relations between project portfolios for different deviation limits. To this end, we consider uncertain scores as a matrix valued random variablev˜. We assume the elements of matrixv˜are given byv˜ji=v^ji+ηjiv→ji,where random variables ηjiare symmetrically distributed with support[−1,1]and the probability density function (PDF)fηji. The probability that random scores realize withinSvΓis thus given by(7)P(v˜∈SvΓ)=P(∑i=1n∑j=1m|ηji|≤Γ).This probability can be approximated by using Markov’s inequality even without exact specification of the probability distributions of ηji. Specifically, fixing the expected absolute values of the random variables |ηji| results in the lower bound(8)P(v˜∈SvΓ)=P(∑i=1n∑j=1m|ηji|≤Γ)≥1−∑i=1n∑j=1mE[|ηji|]Γ.This bound informs the decision maker about the minimum probabilityP(v˜∈SvΓ)implied by a particular value of parameter Γ.Probability bounds based on Markov’s inequality are not necessarily tight in which case more specific distributional assumptions may be required. Monte Carlo techniques can be used to estimateP(v˜∈SvΓ)under virtually any distributional assumption. However, if the random variables |ηji| are independently distributed then the exact probability ofv˜falling insideSvΓcan be obtained from(9)P(v˜∈SvΓ)=P(∑i=1n∑j=1m|ηji|≤Γ)=∫0Γ(f|η11|*…*f|ηmn|)(t)dt,wheref|η11|*…*f|ηmn|is the convolution of the PDFs of random variables |ηji|, j ∈ {1,…, m}, i ∈ {1,…, n}. One possible choice is the uniform distribution, i.e.,ηji∼U(−1,1). Uniform distributions have been employed in multi-attribute decision making under uncertainty by e.g., Rietveld and Ouwersloot (1992) and Shakhsi-Niaei, Torabi, and Iranmanesh (2011), and find frequent application as uninformative priors of maximum entropy in Bayesian analysis. For uniformly distributed η, the compound random variable∑i=1n∑j=1m|ηji|then follows an Irwin–Hall probability distribution (Hall, 1927; Irwin, 1927), and a precise probability ofv˜falling in the considered information set is given by(10)P(v˜∈SvΓ)=P(∑i=1n∑j=1m|ηji|≤Γ)=1(mn)!∑g=0⌊Γ⌋(−1)g(mng)(Γ−g)mn.Despite its theoretical appeal, the uniform distribution may not always be the best distribution class to capture uncertain deviation of project scores. In general one would expect that the probability distribution is concentrated close to the most likely score (ηji=0) and that small deviations are more likely than larger ones. Possibly the simplest distribution to have this property is the triangular distribution with a zero mean and support[−1,1]. Indeed, the triangular distribution has been employed to capture uncertainty about project completion times in the well established project evaluation and review technique (PERT, see, e.g., Hahn, 2008).Yet, both the the uniform and triangular distribution are inflexible in the sense that specifying the support and the expectation lead to an exact specification of the whole distribution which does not leave any parameters free to adjust for instance the magnitude of the deviations. A normal distribution with a zero mean would be supported by arguments related to the law of large numbers. For instance, the estimate of a project’s financial performance can be considered to be effected by several independently distributed random errors which would give rise to an approximately normally distributed financial value. However, the[−1,1]domain of each ηjirequires the use of truncated normal distribution, i.e., a normal distribution scaled so that the entire probability mass lies on the interval[−1,1](Mo, Xie, & Levitin, 2015). The Beta distribution, on the other hand, has a built-in finite support and specifying the expectation still leaves one parameter free to adjust the deviation. Beta distributions too have been applied in multi-attribute decision making (Hinloopen, Nijkamp, & Rietveld, 2004).Choosing the appropriate probability distributions for ηjiis not a trivial task and the appropriate distribution can depend on the specific application or even the types of attributes used within the application. As a general guideline one could propose the truncated normal distribution whose use can be based on arguments that build on the law of large numbers as discussed above. However, some applications of Portfolio Decision Analysis deal with supporting repeated project selection in which large parts of the model remain intact over several decision points although the project candidates change (Mild et al., 2015). In such an application inspection of historical data on project scores can give some insight into appropriate distributional assumptions. In case distribution assumptions cannot be based on historical data it is possible to to harness techniques for assessing subjective probability distributions (Clemen, 1996) although such an approach could be quite time-consuming. Yet, it is important to highlight that the goal of specifying any distributions is to give the decision maker additional insights to the interpretation of the robustness parameter Γ. This goal can perhaps be better achieved by presenting multiple values ofP(v˜∈SvΓ)implied by different distributional assumptions, rather than requiring the decision maker to invest extensive effort in assessing a single distribution.We illustrate the developed framework with an example based on a real life project portfolio selection problem at an international semiconductor manufacturer, where initiatives are chosen to improve supply chain performance (Kolisch, Brunner, & Fliedner, 2012). While the project and portfolio value model as well as the decision making constraints are derived from practice, the specific project scores and constraints have been adapted to illustrate the concept of RPM with adjustable robustness.Table 1summarizes all relevant project information used in the case study. The 58 project proposals (named P1–P58) are evaluated in terms of their impact on supply chain competitiveness, which is measured withn=3attributes. Projects may impact the speed of order processing, termed “Speed” (i=1), as well as the accuracy of forecasting future customer demands, termed “Forecast Accuracy” (i=2). These strategic contributions to critical success factors of the semiconductor supply chain are measured in “natural units”, i.e., days (i=1) and percentage points (i=2). The immediate financial impact of a project (i=3), capturing anticipated increases in turnover or cost reductions, is measured in monetary units. In the long run, greater supply chain competitiveness captured by the strategic attributes (i=1,2) will positively affect the company top- and bottom-line as well. Therefore, attributes are aggregated using monetization rates, which capture decision makers’ incomplete preferences regarding immediate or future cash-flows. These rates are modeled by the set of feasible weightsSw={w∈[0,1]3|∑i=13wi=1,2.6≤w1w3≤3.0,3.0≤w2w3≤6.4}.The score information setSv∞is given by most likely project scoresv^as well as possible score deviationsv→.Portfolio value is additive across projects up to synergies, which account for beneficial effects resulting from the joint execution of related projects (Santhanam & Kyparisis, 1996). When choosing both projects P9 and P27, their overall value increases by 20 percent as synergy S1. When choosing projects P20 and P27, synergy S2 amounts to 30 percent. For projects P11 and P31, synergy S3 is 25 percent. Synergies are modeled through additional, artificial projects S1, S2, and S3, whose values amount to the proposed synergetic effects. Logical constraints ensure that these artificial projects can be selected only if the projects producing the synergy effect are also selected (Liesiö et al., 2008). Furthermore, there are 13 projects whose selection requires that some other specific projects have been included in the portfolio (cf. last column in Table 1), which results in 13 additional logical constraints. Finally, the aggregate cost of executed projects may not exceed a given budget level of 50 monetary units (∑j=1mcjxj≤50).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
