@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Buyback contracts with price-dependent demands: Effects of demand uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explore buyback practice in supply chains with stochastic price-dependent demand.We explore how demand uncertainty level (DUL) affects the optimal contracting strategies.We explore how DUL affects the value of buyback practice in supply chain management.We explore how DUL affects the efficiency of buyback practice.We explore how DUL affects the applicability of buyback practice in supply chain management.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Buyback contract,Structural property,Stochastic price-dependent demand,Demand uncertainty level,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We explore buyback contracts in a supplier–retailer supply chain where the retailer faces a price-dependent downward-sloping demand curve subject to uncertainty. Differentiated from the existing literature, this work focuses on analytically examining how the uncertainty level embedded in market demand affects the applicability of buyback contracts in supply chain management. To this end, we seek to characterize the buyback model in terms of only the demand uncertainty level (DUL). With this new research perspective, we have obtained some interesting new findings for buyback. For example, we find that (1) even though the supply chain’s efficiency will change over the DUL with a wholesale price-only contract, it will be maintained constantly at that of the corresponding deterministic demand setting with buyback, regardless of the DUL; (2) in the practice of buyback, the buyback issuer should adjust only the buyback price in reaction to different DULs while leave the wholesale price unchanged as that in the corresponding deterministic demand setting; (3) only in the demand setting with an intermediate level of the uncertainty (which is identified quantitatively in Theorem 5), buyback provision is beneficial simultaneously for the supplier, the retailer, and the supply chain system, while this is not the case in the other demand settings. This work reveals that DUL can be a critical factor affecting the applicability of supply chain contracts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is well-known that because of the effect of double marginalization, the wholesale price-only contracts often lead to some impairment in the efficiency of the supply chain facing uncertain end market demand. In order to mitigate this loss of efficiency, numerous other contracting mechanisms have been developed in supply chain management. Typical among these is the buyback mechanism, by which the retailer still pays a wholesale price for each unit ordered, but is allowed to return at the end of the selling season all or part of the unsold items to the supplier with a predetermined full or partial refund per unit. Buyback contracts have been exploited extensively in various retail sectors such as publishing, fashion apparels, computers, and cosmetics (Kandel, 1996; Padmanabhan & Png, 1995, 1997; Emmons & Gilbert, 1998).It is frequently observed in the retail industry that the retailer only has some knowledge (such as probabilistic knowledge) about the demand but not accurate and full information of the exact demand trend/curve. This situation arises when, e.g., the future (macro) market environment is uncertain (see Vaagen and Wallace (2008) for an illustration). Furthermore, the demand uncertainty level (DUL) often varies across different business settings, as reported by Nahmias and Smith (1994), it is common for the retail industry to observe a variability from 3 to 300 in the variance-to-mean ratio of demand. Motivated by these observations in industry, in this paper we take such demand uncertainty into account and explore its effects on the buyback contracts, with a supplier–retailer supply chain where for future demand, the retailer only knows the respective probabilistic price-dependent demand curve.To existing research, a fundamental contribution of this work is to analytically examine how the uncertainty level inherent in market demand affects the applicability of buyback contracts in supply chain management. To this end, we seek to characterize the buyback model in terms of only the DUL. As shown by this work, taking such a research perspective does allow us to analytically develop some new results and obtain some interesting and profound findings for the buyback contracts. For instance, but not limited to, we have identified how the DUL relates to the buyback’s efficiency and the analytical circumstances under which buyback increases the profit of the supplier, the retailer, or both and subsequently achieve Pareto-improvement in a decentralized supply chain setting. With these explorations, we obtain some interesting new findings for buyback. For example, we find that (1) even though the supply chain’s efficiency will change over the DUL with a wholesale price-only contract, it will be maintained constantly at that of the corresponding deterministic demand setting with buyback, regardless of the DUL; (2) in the practice of buyback, the buyback issuer should adjust only the buyback price in reaction to different DULs, while leave the wholesale price unchanged as that in the corresponding deterministic demand setting; (3) only in the demand setting with an intermediate level of the uncertainty (which is identified quantitatively in Theorem 5 of the paper), buyback provision is beneficial simultaneously for the supplier, the retailer, and the supply chain system, while this is not the case in the other demand settings; and vice versa.In industry we can observe that in the same business setting, some forms of contracts are exploited more often than another, or the same form of contract is utilized more often in one specific business setting than in another business setting. Why is this the case? Even though we have never seen a systematical investigation on this issue, we note that some factors have been found to have significant effects on the applicability of supply chain contracts. For example, Marvel and Peck (1995) showed that the uncertainty type (they considered the valuation uncertainty and the consumer arrival number uncertainty) is one crucial factor. Cachon (2003, chap. 6) pointed out contract’s administrative cost may also be one. With this study, we believe that DUL is another important dimension affecting the applicability of supply chain contracts. Of course, similar to other modeling research’s limitation, our results and findings are derived based on the model setup and we cannot generalize them to all business settings. Despite the acknowledged limitations, we believe that our paper has revealed some important analytical closed-form properties of buyback contracts and made a good contribution to the related literature.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the relevant literature. Section 3 formulates the model. Section 4 characterizes the supply chain with wholesale price-only contract. Section 5 characterizes the supply chain with buyback provision. Section 6 discusses the value of buyback for the respective supply chain members and the system. Section 7 examines the efficiency of buyback in coordinating the supply chain. Section 8 explores the effects of buyback on the retail price. Section 9 concludes the paper. All the proofs are put in Online Supplementary Appendix.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have studied buyback contracts in terms of DUL in a two-echelon supply chain facing the end market demand characterized by a price-dependent downward-sloping demand curve subject to uncertainty. To be specific, we have characterized the buyback contract, the order quantity, and the respective supply chain members’ expected profits at equilibrium. We have also examined the value of buyback, its efficiency in coordinating the supply chain, and the expectation and standard deviation of the retail price with buyback. We derive all the results explicitly in terms of the DUL, which is measured by the SD. In addition, we have made detailed comparisons between the scenarios with buyback and no buyback over different DULs, which allow us to see more clearly the effects of buyback and how DUL influences these effects. We summarize the relevant results in Table 1.As a conclusion, we would like to conduct a comparison between our studies and those by Granot and Yin (2005). First, some results in our studies, to some extent, can be viewed as the extensions of the corresponding results in Granot and Yin (2005) to the additive form of demand. For example, our studies, with a special additive form of demand, demonstrate that the wholesale price and the system efficiency with buyback coincide with those in the corresponding deterministic demand case. These results are very consistent with those found by Granot and Yin (2005). Furthermore, it should be noted that we have shown these results over different DULs. By contrast, Granot and Yin (2005) derived them with a uniform distribution over [0,2], i.e., a singly given DUL determined by the uniform distribution over [0,2]. In terms of such a sense, our studies, even though with a special form, have extended these core results in Granot and Yin (2005) to the case of additive form of demand, and thereby substantiated the first conjecture proposed by Granot and Yin (2005) to a good extent by a consideration of the additive form of demand (see Theorem 5.1 and Conjecture 5.3 (i) in Granot and Yin (2005)).In addition to the extended resemblances, our studies also demonstrate that some results developed in Granot and Yin (2005) cannot be extended with an additive form of demand. For example, Granot and Yin (2005) have found that for the linear expected demand, at equilibrium buyback will benefit all the supply chain members and the system with a multiplicative form of demand as in their studies. However, they have actually derived this result with a given DUL determined by the uniform distribution over [0,2]. Hence, readers may not help wondering whether this result still holds as the DUL changes (or the PDF for the stochastic part of the demand changes). Different answers are possible for this issue. At least this is the case with the additive form of demand, as shown in our studies with a special additive form of demand, buyback is beneficial simultaneously for the supplier, the retailer, and the system only in a range of the intermediate DULs, and with the other cases this is not the case. For another example, Granot and Yin (2005) have found that for the linear expected demand, the system efficiency with the wholesale price-only contracts cannot exceed 75% (see Proposition 3.6 in Granot and Yin (2005)). However, is it also so with different DULs or PDFs for the stochastic demand? The answer may be yes or no. Actually, our studies have found that for the additive form of demand, depending on different DULs, the system efficiency with the wholesale price-only contracts can be higher or lower than 75%. In addition, Theorem 3 in our studies has exhibited a direct deny to Conjecture 5.3 (ii) in Granot and Yin (2005) for the additive form of demand.The above comparison raises some research directions that are worth pursuing in the future. First, whether the results obtained in Granot and Yin (2005) and our paper still hold for more general cases. Second, whether the extensions discussed in the above comparison still hold for more general additive form of demand, such as an extension of our model that the parameter m follows a general distribution. Third, in addition to the formal difference, what are the essences that are driving the resemblances and differences between the results with the two forms of demand model. We leave these as interesting topics for future research.