@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Accounting for slacks to measure and decompose revenue efficiency in the Spanish Designation of Origin wines with DEA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We measure revenue inefficiency through an output-oriented Weighted Additive model.We decompose revenue inefficiency into technical and allocative inefficiency.Our technical component takes into consideration output slacks.We base our analysis on a recent approach introduced in Cooper et al. (2011a, EJOR).We apply the new approach to the Spanish quality wine sector.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis,Spanish wine sector,Revenue inefficiency,Slacks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we show how Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) may be used to measure and decompose revenue inefficiency, taking into account all sources of technical waste in the context of an application to assess the Spanish quality wine sector, in particular Designation of Origin (DO) wines. We try to go beyond the standard approaches, which use Shephard distance functions or directional distance functions, to provide decomposition that incorporates slacks as a source of technical inefficiency. To accomplish this, we will base our analysis on a recent approach introduced in Cooper et al. (2011a). In particular, we show how an output-oriented version of the Weighted Additive model can be used to properly identify revenue, technical, and allocative inefficiencies in Spanish DOs. In the application, we conclude that the main source of revenue inefficiency in this sector is technical waste, and that Cava can be highlighted as the DO that performs as a benchmark for more numbers of units.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) is a methodology for the assessment of technical efficiency of a set of decision making units (DMUs) that use several inputs to produce several outputs. Technical efficiency refers to all sources of waste, which can be eliminated without worsening any other input and/or output, and can be distinguished from that generally referred to in the literature as economic efficiency, which involves knowledge of market price information.As for the concept of economic efficiency, in standard microeconomic theory the economic behavior of a DMU is usually characterized by cost minimization, revenue maximization, or profit maximization. Obviously, the choice of an economic approach for the assessed unit depends, in part, on what assumptions one is willing to make. In particular, if revenue maximization is assumed, the DMU faces exogenously determined market output prices. Following this line, we can assume that the objective of the DMU is to choose the outputs combination that results in the maximum revenue at the applicable prices. In this sense, revenue inefficiency measures how close the actual revenue of the evaluated DMU is to the maximum feasible revenue. On the other hand, since Farrell (1957), revenue inefficiency has been decomposed into two components, technical and allocative inefficiency, as a way to understand what needs to be done to enhance the performance of the assessed unit. In particular, technical inefficiency measures how close the unit is to the frontier of the technology, while allocative inefficiency measures the gains in moving from technically efficient units to the outputs combination that maximizes revenue. Thus, both sources of inefficiency can play an important role in practice, since they may indicate keys for economically inefficient DMUs to improve their performance (Bogetoft et al., 2006).This paper is concerned with the use of DEA to estimate revenue inefficiency and its decomposition into technical and allocative efficiencies. We are particularly interested in ensuring that the technical efficiency component we propose accounts for all sources of inefficiency (radial and non-radial) in the output space. The analysis is operationalized in a DEA framework through a particular output-oriented version of the Weighted Additive model (Lovell and Pastor, 1995) and is based on a new approach described in Cooper et al. (2011a). In this respect, we want to point out that the main contributions of this manuscript are not theoretical but practical. Nevertheless, from a theoretical perspective, we develop the output-oriented version of the general model introduced by Cooper et al. (2011a) and, additionally, we show that a specific weighted additive model introduced by Lovell and Pastor (1995) can be used to decomposed revenue inefficiency. This point is relevant because so far such model had been utilized for estimating technical inefficiency and even for determining productivity change over time (see Grifell-Tatje et al., 1998) but, however, the way to decompose revenue inefficiency through this model was unknown for DEA researchers. In this regard, in this paper we show the bases to do that. On the other hand, from a practical view, our contribution is twofold. On the one hand, this manuscript is the first real application of the recent methodology introduced by Cooper et al. (2011a) since this methodology was originally applied to a simulated database. On the other hand, we have applied the methodology to a specific sector where revenue efficiency has never before been estimated and decomposed (Designation of Origin wines). Additionally, in this paper we show that if the traditional approaches are used to measure and decompose revenue inefficiency, then the allocative inefficiency component may be falsely increased, estimating a smaller value for the technical inefficiency component.As aforementioned, the revenue efficiency of a unit has been usually decomposed into technical and allocative efficiency. However, one issue that has received little attention in DEA literature is the decomposition of the gap between the optimal and actual revenue through a technical efficiency measure that takes into account radial and, at the same time, non-radial (slacks) inefficiencies. As we will show later in the text, the usual approaches to measure revenue efficiency resort to radial measures and directional distance functions in order to estimate the corresponding technical efficiency component, ignoring the possible existence of output slacks associated with the projected points on the production frontier (see Ray, 2004, p. 95). As a direct consequence, the corresponding allocative component will be incorrectly estimated since this component is measured as a residual related to the difference between the revenue efficiency and the output-oriented technical efficiency measure. Indeed, the allocative component will reflect not only the gains in revenue that can be accomplished by substitutions along the efficient frontier, but it will also be accounting for some type of technical inefficiency (the output slacks).In this paper, we will use a recent approach described in Cooper et al. (2011a), which provides a way to measure and decompose overall inefficiency accounting for slacks. In particular, these authors have introduced a new manner of decomposing profit inefficiency through Weighted Additive (WA) models in DEA. All their results are derived from a new Fenchel–Mahler inequality using duality theory and, therefore, they have proved the existence of a dual correspondence between the profit function and WA models. An advantage of this approach in contrast to others is that it resorts to WA models to measure the technical inefficiency component. This fact guarantees that all sources of technical inefficiency will be taken into account since these models are associated with the Pareto–Koopmans definition of technical efficiency and, therefore, can play an important role if non-zero slacks are detected.The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the literature related to the wine sector and efficiency measurement is revised. In Section 3, existing approaches for calculating and decomposing revenue inefficiency are outlined. We briefly describe the procedure proposed in Cooper et al. (2011a) for decomposing overall inefficiency in Section 4. We use Section 5 to show how revenue inefficiency can be estimated and decomposed using an output-oriented Weighted Additive model. In Section 6, we apply this procedure to the assessment of the Spanish quality wine sector, in particular DO wines. Any other previous work has addressed either the technical or allocative efficiency analysis for different Spanish DOs. We think this contribution may help both the Supervisory Council members of these DOs and the very winegrowers, as well as the distinct Spanish, regional, and local institutions and authorities that work side by side with them. Section 7 concludes.In this paper, we provide a real example of the use of the approach by Cooper et al. (2011a) in the form of an application to the assessment of the Spanish quality wine sector. Spain is the country with the largest vineyard area under cultivation (1,082,000 hectares (ha)), 14.3% of the total worldwide area in 2010, followed by France and Italy. In terms of global wine consumption (238 million hectoliters (Mhl) in 2010), Spain ranks sixth as a global consumer (13.2million hectoliters). France is the largest consumer (29.4million hectoliters), followed by the USA, Italy, Germany, China, and the UK. Global wine exports in 2010 amounted to 93.5million hectoliters, with Italy leading with 22% of worldwide exports, and followed by Spain (18.3%). The world’s largest importers (with global imports of 86.6million hectoliters) are led by Germany (16.4%), the UK (14.4%), USA (10.7%), and the Russian Federation (6.35%) (OIV, 2012).DEA, as well as parametric techniques, has been previously used in the wine sector for efficiency measurement. For example, Townsend et al. (1998) analyze wine producing areas of the Western Cape of South Africa, distinguishing between partial and total productivity measures. Bojnec and Latruffe (2008) and Bojnec and Latruffe (2009), using panel data, measure farm business efficiency and the determinants of technical efficiency at Slovenian farms (among them, grape and wine producers). Fekete et al. (2009) use the Malmquist index to examine productivity and its elements in the agriculture of new EU member states. Henriques et al. (2009) analyze technical efficiency levels of a panel of Portuguese wine farms for the period 2000–2005. Liu (2010) analyzes productive efficiency, its influencing factors, and the efficiency change of the 22 listed winemaking firms in China from 2004 to 2007. Bonfiglio (2007) analyzes efficiency and productivity changes in a sample of Italian agrifood cooperatives from 2000–2002. Maietta and Sena (2008a) analyze the mechanisms through which increasing market competition may help cooperatives improve technical efficiency to guarantee positive profits. Brandano et al. (2012) investigate the comparative technical efficiency of producer co-ops versus conventional firms for a sample of Sardinian wine producing companies over the period 2004–2009. Finally, regarding the Spanish wine sector, producers have been studied by Guzman (2004), who uses a test based on canonical correlation and technical efficiency indexes based on accounting information. Arandia and Aldanondo (2007) analyze technical and environmental efficiency of organic wine farms versus conventional ones. Pastor et al. (2012) analyze the Spanish wine sector using both the Variable Returns to Scale and the Constant Returns to Scale version of the Bounded Adjusted Measure (Cooper et al., 2011b).Applications can also be found where efficiency is analyzed from the perspective of economic efficiency: Echeverria and Gopinath (2008) analyze the export-behavior of Chilean agribusiness and food processing firms and the relative importance of firm-specific and geographic characteristics within this behavior. In another study, Barros and Santos (2007) compare the productive efficiency of cooperatives and private enterprises in the Portuguese wine industry. Maietta and Sena (2008b) test the underinvestment hypothesis from the specialized literature on co-ops by comparing the shadow price of capital and the dual capacity utilization index for a panel of Italian cooperatives and conventional firms from 1996–2003. On the other hand, Tasevska and Hansson (2010) provide an empirical analysis of the performance of Macedonian grape-growing family farms assessed in terms of technical, allocative, and economic efficiency, and they relate aspects targeted in the Rural Development Program to the efficiency scores. Bayramoglu and Gundogmus (2008) study the overall technical and input-specific technical efficiency measures of conventional and organic raisin-producing households in Turkey. According to the coefficients calculated for individual and different returns to scale, it can be stated that conventional households are on average more efficient relative to their own technology. Moreover, Zago (2009) proposes a methodology to measure the characteristics of intermediate products when quality is multidimensional. It uses a general representation of the multi-output technology via directional distance functions, and constructs quality indicators based on differences rather than ratios. On the other hand, in Spain, Fernandez and Morala (2009) study the cost efficiency of wine firms in Castilla and Leon, verifying improvements in global efficiency as well as pure technical efficiency of the analyzed firms. Sellers-Rubio (2010) simultaneously apply traditional profitability and productivity measures and a non-parametric technique to estimate efficiency, and compare the results obtained for a sample of 1222 Spanish wineries in 2007.In contrast to existing applications, the research we want to carry out in this paper is directed at examining the Cooper et al. (2011a) approach as a possible alternative to the ways used currently for estimating and decomposing revenue efficiency. To be more specific, in this paper we exploit the ability of this approach to account for slacks as a source of technical inefficiency by resorting to measures related to the concept of Pareto–Koopmans optimality. In particular, we are interested in using a technical efficiency measure that considers output slacks, since we will focus our analysis on measuring the efficiency on the output side. So, in this paper we will particularly resort to the use of an output-oriented version of the Weighted Additive models (Lovell and Pastor, 1995; Cooper et al., 1999), showing that a dual relationship exists between the revenue inefficiency and this type of technical inefficiency measure.As mentioned in the introduction, in this paper we assume that the evaluated units face exogenously determined output prices and try to maximize their revenue. Obviously, in the same manner, we could assume input orientation and, consequently, decompose cost efficiency. However, the empirical application we carry out in this paper justifies the assumption of output orientation.Before briefly reviewing the existing literature, let us introduce some notation of interest. Let us denote hereafter as R(P,X0) the maximum feasible revenue given the output price vectorP=(p1,…,ps)∈R++s, and the input vectorX0=(x10,…,xm0)∈R+m⧹{0m}. In this manner, we can define the actual revenue for the assessed DMU0, characterized by the input and output vector (X0,Y0), asR0=∑r=1spryr0, whereY0=(y10,…,ys0)∈R+s⧹{0s}denotes the output vector corresponding to DMU0.In the literature, two different ways exist to assess economic loss due to revenue inefficiency. The first one is based on the seminal ideas of Farrell (1957). In particular, this author proposed to use a ratio-form as R(P,X0)/R0 in order to measure revenue efficiency. Specifically, this ratio is greater than or equal to one, being one if and only if the unit being assessed achieves maximum revenue, a property the literature calls indication (Portela and Thanassoulis, 2007). Also, R(P,X0)/R0 can be decomposed into a component of technical efficiency and a component corresponding to allocative efficiency as follows:(1)R(P,X0)R0︸Revenue Efficiency=1Do(X0,Y0)︸Technical fficiency·AE,where Do(X0,Y0) is the output distance function, familiar to Shephard (1953). The reciprocal of Shephard’s output distance function is equivalent to the Farrell output-based technical efficiency measure, which is greater than or equal to one with a value of one signaling nil technical inefficiency. Finally, the allocative efficiency is retrieved as a residual between revenue and technical efficiency.The Farrell output-based technical efficiency measure can be calculated in a DEA framework by means of the output-oriented CCR model (Charnes et al., 1978) or the output-oriented BCC model (Banker et al., 1984), depending on the returns to scale that we assume for the technology. Both models are known as radial measures in the literature as a consequence of the path followed by the evaluated DMU in order to achieve the efficient frontier of the technology. Regarding radial measures, a well-known drawback of these types of measures is the arbitrariness of imposing targets on the efficient frontier, preserving the mix within inputs or within outputs, when really the firm’s very reason for changing its input and output levels is often the desire to change the mix due to their differing opportunity costs (see Chambers and Mitchell, 2001).In contrast to radial measures, directional distance functions (DDF) (Chambers et al., 1996, 1998) are more flexible in the sense that they do not try to preserve the mix within inputs or within outputs. In particular, if we focus our discussion on the directional output distance functions, they measure the distance in a preassigned directionG=(g1,…,gs)∈R+s⧹{0s}from the evaluated unit to the boundary of the technology in the output space. Obviously, when G=Y0, then the Farrell output-based technical efficiency measure and the directional output distance function yield the same targets on the frontier, and the values of both measures are closely related (Chambers et al., 1998). However, the reference vector G can take other values different from Y0 and, consequently, the directional output distance function can be seen as a generalization of the Farrell output-based technical efficiency (and Shephard’s output distance function).Additionally, Färe and Primont (2006) proved that the directional output distance function and the revenue function have the following relationship:(2)D→o(X0,Y0;G)=infWR(W,X0)-∑r=1swryr0∑r=1swrgr.From (2), it is not hard to derive the following inequality that incorporates the market output price vector:(3)R(P,X0)-R0∑r=1sprgr⩾D→o(X0,Y0;G).From (3), it is possible to measure and decompose revenue inefficiency. First, let us consider the left-hand side in the inequality as a measure of revenue inefficiency, comparing observed revenue to maximum revenue. This ratio is a normalized loss based on differences of revenue, which is also invariant to changes in units of measurement for prices (Nerlove, 1965). Finally, taking into account the technical inefficiency interpretation of the directional output distance function, the inequality can be rendered equal by introducing a residual allocative inefficiency term, AI:(4)R(P,X0)-R0∑r=1sprgr︸Revenue nefficiency=D→o(X0,Y0;G)︸Technical Inefficiency+AI.However, both the Farrell (1957) and Chambers et al. (1996, 1998) approaches are based on measures that ignore the possible existence of slacks associated with the projected points on the production frontier in order to estimate technical efficiency (see Ray, 2004, p. 95). As a direct consequence, the corresponding allocative efficiency will be incorrectly estimated since this component is measured as a residual related to the difference between the revenue efficiency and the technical efficiency measures. In fact, the allocative component will reflect not only the gains in revenue that can be accomplished by substitutions along the efficient frontier in the output space, but also it will be accounting for some type of technical inefficiency (the output slacks). This idea is graphically illustrated through Fig. 1. Let us assume that we are interested in evaluating the efficiency of unit D. This unit is technically efficient under both the radial model and the DDF. Therefore, following (1) and (4), allocative inefficiency is estimated by moving from D to A (the point in this example where we assume that optimal revenue is achieved). However, these approaches would inaccurately assess as allocative inefficiency the output slack corresponding to the movement from D to C, something that has been interpreted as part of the technical inefficiency in the Operations Research literature since Koopmans (1951). In contrast, the approach that we use in this paper, which is based on a weighted additive measure, evaluates unit D as technically inefficient and the corresponding technical efficiency component will coincide with the output slack, while allocative inefficiency will be associated with the movement from C to A.Consequently, as we are aware, the existing approaches to measure and decompose revenue efficiency do not guarantee the achievement of the technical efficiency in Pareto’s sense in the output space, i.e., accounting for output slacks, which should be a previous requirement for measuring the allocative efficiency as a residual. In this paper, we will try to overcome this drawback and show how it can be used in a real application.In this section, we concentrate on describing the method recently developed in Cooper et al. (2011a) to decompose overall inefficiency, considering all technical inefficiency sources. Particularly, these authors focus their analysis on measuring and decomposing profit inefficiency. In order to explain how this approach works, let us denote as Π(Q,P) the maximum feasible profit given the output price vectorP=(p1,…,ps)∈R++s, the input price vectorQ=(q1,…,qm)∈R++m, and asΠ0=∑r=1spryr0-∑i=1mqixi0the actual profit corresponding to the evaluated DMU0. Let us also consider that we have observed n DMUs that use m inputs to produce s outputs. These are denoted by (Xj,Yj), j=1,…,n. It is assumed Xj=(x1j,…,xmj)>0m, j=1,…,n, and Yj=(y1j,…,ysj)>0s, j=1,…,n. The relative efficiency of each DMU0 in the sample is assessed with reference to the so-called production possibility set T={(X,Y)/X can produce Y}, which can be empirically constructed from n observations by assuming several postulates (see Banker et al., 1984). If, in particular, Variable Returns to Scale is assumed, then T can be characterized as follows:(5)T=(X,Y)∈R+m+sX⩾∑j=1nλjXj,Y⩽∑j=1nλjYj,∑j=1nλj=1,λj⩾0,j=1,…,n.Cooper et al. (2011a) pointed out the need for addressing the problem of decomposing profit inefficiency through an allocative component free of slacks. They showed that the existing approaches to decompose profit inefficiency in the input–output space usually neglects slacks, a source of technical inefficiency, and consequently this creates trouble when interpreting allocative inefficiency as a residual of overall and technical inefficiencies. In order to overcome this drawback, in Cooper et al. (2011a), a new normalized measure of profit inefficiency and its decomposition by means of Weighted Additive models in DEA are proposed. Here, we briefly describe this approach next.Given market prices for outputs and inputs and exploiting duality theory, it can be proved that the following inequality always holds.(6)Π(Q,P)-Π0minq1w1-,…,qmwm-,p1w1+,…,psws+⩾WA(X0,Y0;W-,W+),whereW-=(w1-,…,wm-)∈R++mandW+=(w1+,…,ws+)∈R++sare weights representing the relative importance of unit inputs and unit outputs, and WA(X0,Y0;W−,W+) is the optimal value of the following model.(7)WA(X0,Y0,W-,W+)≔Max∑i=1mwi-si0-+∑r=1swr+sr0+s.t.∑j=1nλj0xij+si0-⩽xio,i=1,…,m-∑j=1nλj0yrj+sr0+⩽-yro,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj0=1,si0-⩾0,i=1,…,msr0+⩾0,r=1,…,sλj0⩾0,j=1,…,nIn order to evaluate the technical inefficiency of DMU0, one can solve model (7), which corresponds to the Weighted Additive (WA) model introduced by Lovell and Pastor (1995). Different paths can be followed in choosing the vector of input and output weights. One possibility in the literature selects them based on data and information. In this way, for example, it is possible to achieve a dimensionless optimal value in (7), in the terminology followed by Lovell and Pastor (1995).Overall, the WA model maximizes a weighted ℓ1-distance from DMU0 to the efficient frontier and, therefore, simultaneously increases outputs and reduces inputs. In addition, the WA model measures Pareto–Koopmans efficiency, i.e., it accounts for slacks. In particular,WA(X0,Y0;W-,W+)⩾0and (X0,Y0) is Pareto–Koopmans efficient if and only if WA(X0,Y0;W−,W+)=0. On the other hand, it is worth noting that an important feature of the WA model is that it encompasses a wide class of different DEA technical inefficiency measures depending on the selected vectors of weights: the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions (see Cooper et al., 1999), the Range Adjusted Measure of Inefficiency (see Cooper et al., 1999), and the Bounded Adjusted Measure of inefficiency (see Cooper et al., 2011b), to name but a few. In addition, input and output oriented versions of the WA model can be found in the literature: Lovell et al. (1995), Cooper and Pastor (1996), Grifell-Tatje et al. (1998), Prieto and Zofio (2001), and Cook and Hababou (2001). In all these cases, the objective function in (7) is restricted in a way that only input or output slacks are maximized, yielding the input-oriented version and the output-oriented version of the WA model, respectively.We now turn to expression (6). The ratio on the left of (6) provides a measure of the profit lost by not operating in a fully efficient manner. Actually, this measure is a normalized deviation between optimal profit and observed profit for DMU0 at market prices. In particular, the normalization represents the minimum among the ratios of market prices to weights. Thanks to the normalization, the profit inefficiency measure satisfies several interesting index number properties. Specifically, it is homogeneous of degree zero in prices and quantities, and it is well defined for non-positive profits (see Cooper et al., 2011a, p. 414). Finally, in the Farrell (1957) tradition, (6) can be turned into equality by including a residual component measuring allocative inefficiency:(8)Π(Q,P)-Π0minq1w1-,…,qmwm-,p1w1+,…,psws+︸Profit Inefficiency=WA(X0,Y0;W-,W+)︸Technical Inefficiency+AI.We highlight that one advantage of the Cooper et al. (2011a) approach is that it can assure that the residual component in the decomposition is free of slacks and, consequently, it does not overestimate the allocative inefficiency of the assessed DMU. This is a property we want to use with the aim of decomposing revenue efficiency in the output space into the usual technical and allocative components, thus improving the existing approaches for this particular case where the unit is interested in changing exclusively its output production.In this section, we introduce a new way of measuring and decomposing revenue efficiency. Our approach will be based on a particular output-oriented WA model. This fact will allow us to assure that the technical efficiency component accounts for all the sources of inefficiency on the output side, including the slacks.Technical efficiency measurement started with the works of Debreu (1951) and Koopmans (1951). Following them, Farrell (1957) implemented the first measure of technical efficiency. Later, Färe and Lovell (1978) pointed out some limitations with this measure (e.g., it neglects slacks) that motivated the development of new measures of technical efficiency. Following this line, Lovell and Pastor (1995) introduced WA models in DEA, avoiding the problems associated with neglecting slacks in the input–output space. Later, other authors (see, for example, Grifell-Tatje et al., 1998, or Prieto and Zofio, 2001) introduced input and output oriented versions of the WA model. Next, we show the formulation and main characteristics of a particular output-oriented version of the WA model. Nevertheless, we first need to introduce some notation.Hereafter, we assume that each observed DMU is interested in maximizing outputs while using no more than the observed amount of any input. This type of approach is called output-oriented in the literature. In order to implement this approach, it is useful to introduce the output production set. In this sense, for each input vector X, let P(X) be the set of feasible (producible) outputs. Formally, using expression (5), P(X)={Y:(X,Y)∊T}. On the other hand, given X, the efficient frontier of P(X), also called the weak efficient frontier, is defined as∂(P(X)):={Y∈P(X):Y^>Y⇒Y^∉P(X)}(see Briec, 1998). Following Koopmans (1951), in order to measure technical efficiency in the Pareto sense, it is necessary to isolate a certain subset of ∂(P(X)). We are referring to the strong efficient frontier, as defined in what follows:(9)∂s(P(X))≔{Y∈P(X):Y^⩾Y,Y^≠Y⇒Y^∉P(X)}.In words, ∂s(P(X)) is the set of all the Pareto–Koopmans efficient points of P(X). In Fig. 1, we graphically illustrate both the usual geometry of the output production set and the subsets of its frontier. The bold solid line corresponds to the strong efficient frontier, consisting of two segments, AB and BC. The weak efficient frontier corresponds to the union between the strong efficient frontier and the dashed lines that appear in the figure.We now propose an alternative approach to measure and decompose revenue efficiency that does incorporate the output slacks into the technical efficiency component. In order to do that, we next show the definition of the output-oriented WA model that we will use in this paper. Specifically, if we considerW+=1sy10,…,1sys0,1syr0 denotes the multiplication of s, the number of outputs, and yr0, r=1,…,s.1then the corresponding WA model to evaluate DMU0 can be implemented in DEA through the following linear programming program2A similar Weighted Additive model was suggested in Lovell et al. (1995), Cooper and Pastor (1996), and Grifell-Tatje et al. (1998).2:(10)WAo(X0,Y0)=Max∑r=1ssr0+syr0s.t.∑j=1nλj0xij⩽xi0,i=1,…,m∑j=1nλj0yrj=yr0+sr0+,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj0=1,sr0+⩾0,r=1,…,sλj0⩾0,j=1,…,n.Before continuing, we think it is interesting to show the properties that the particular output-oriented WA model we propose using in this paper satisfies. It will justify the selection of the specific vector of output weightsW+=1sy10,…,1sys0. With respect to the satisfaction of properties, Färe and Lovell (1978) were the first to propose a set of desirable properties that an ideal technical efficiency measure should meet. Later, Pastor et al. (1999) listed similar requirements for the DEA context and suggested some others. In particular, the main properties that WAo(X0,Y0) satisfies are (P1), the measure is greater than or equal to one, with one meaning full-efficiency (the assessed DMU0 is Pareto–Koopmans efficient in the output space); (P2), units invariant; and finally, (P3), strong monotonicity. Regarding (P3), for the output-oriented case, strong monotonicity means that holding all other inputs and outputs constant, an increase in any of its outputs will increase the efficiency score for an inefficient DMU0 (see Grifell-Tatje et al., 1998, p. 12).Next, we show that as a consequence of accounting for slacks, (10) identifies, in general, more technical inefficiency than the traditional Farrell output-based technical efficiency measures. Before showing that result, we want to point out that the Farrell approach specifically measures technical efficiency with a value of ϕ∗(X0,Y0)=1 for efficient units and a value greater than one for inefficient units. In this way, through the quantity ϕ∗(X0,Y0)−1, we measure technical inefficiency. This fact will allow us to compare WAo(X0,Y0) and ϕ∗(X0,Y0)−1 for the same evaluated DMU0.Proposition 1Let ϕ∗(X0,Y0) be the Farrell output-based technical efficiency measure corresponding to DMU0. Then,WAo(X0,Y0)⩾ϕ∗(X0,Y0)-1.The Farrell output-based technical efficiency measure can be calculated through the output-oriented BCC model (Banker et al., 1984). From this model, it is easy to see that there existsλ̃10,…,λ̃n0⩾0with∑j=1nλ̃j0=1such thats̃r0+:=yr0(ϕ∗(X0,Y0)-1), r=1,…,s, is a feasible solution for (10). Consequently,WAo(X0,Y0)⩾∑r=1ss̃r0+syr0=ϕ∗(X0,Y0)-1.□We now turn to the application of the approach by Cooper et al. (2011a) in order to measure and decompose revenue inefficiency through WAo(X0,Y0). Thus, by analogy with the inequality (6), taking into account (10) and following the same steps as in Cooper et al. (2011a), it is possible to derive the next relationship:(11)R(P,X0)-R0minp11/sy10,…,p11/sys0⩾∑r=1ssr0+∗syr0,where(s10+∗,…,ss0+∗)denotes an optimal solution of the linear program that appears in (10). In this way, we obtain an inequality that relates the revenue inefficiency to the technical inefficiency in the output space.(12)R(P,X0)-R0min{p1sy10,…,pssys0}︸Revenue Inefficiency⩾WAo(X0,Y0)︸Technical Inefficiency.As usual, (12) can be rendered equal by introducing a residual term associated with the allocative inefficiency of the assessed DMU0.(13)AI=R(P,X0)-R0min{p1sy10,…,pssys0}-WAo(X0,Y0).The expression on the left of (12) provides a measure of the revenue lost by not operating in a fully efficient manner. Moreover, this measure can be decomposed into technical and allocative components. We also note that the revenue efficiency measure is greater than or equal to zero and it satisfies the condition that it is zero if and only if the unit being assessed achieves maximum revenue, i.e., R0=R(P,X0). Similar interpretations can be given to the technical and allocative components. Also, regarding additional properties that the revenue efficiency measure satisfies, it is not hard to see that it is homogenous of degree zero in prices and quantities (see Kuosmanen et al., 2010).Finally, we illustrate how our approach performs by means of a real application in the next section.In this section, a sample of the Spanish Designation of Origin (DO) is analyzed from the perspective of revenue, technical and allocative inefficiency. One point to be highlighted in this analysis is that, as we are aware, no similar study exists examining Spanish DOs using the economic efficiency and its causes as a criterion (see Section 2). Another advantage of the analysis we carry out, in contrast to the well-known existing approaches, is that the allocative component we will estimate reflects the gains in revenue exclusively that can be accomplished by substitutions along the efficient frontier. This is accomplished by resorting to a technical inefficiency measure that takes into account all sources of technical inefficiency in the output space. We also compare the results using the new approach with the results obtained resorting to the traditional approaches. In this respect, we will specifically use the output-oriented version of the DDF with G=Y0 since this is the usual selection for the reference direction in practice and, also, in this case, the DDF is closely related to the Farrell output-based technical efficiency measure.In relation to quality wines, the European Union (EU) distinguishes between wines with Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) and Protected Geographical Indication (PGI). The first group includes the subset of Spanish DOs, which were recognized as quality wines by Spanish authorities starting in 1932. It is the biggest subset within the set of Spanish PDOs. Moreover, to be classified as a DO, a PDO additionally needs to have recognition as a quality wine with geographical indication for at least 5years. According to Regulation (EC) No. 1234/2008, which the single Common Market Organization (CMO) provided, a PDO is characterized by Pastor et al. (2012) as follows: the quality and characteristics are essentially or exclusively due to their geographical origin, with the inherent human and cultural factors; it possesses a certain quality, reputation, or other specific characteristics attributable to its geographical origin; 100% of the grapes come exclusively from the geographical production area; its production takes place within the geographical area; and, finally, distillation is obtained from grape varieties belonging to Vitis vinifera. Table 1shows the main figures for Spanish PDOs in 2010, the most recent year with data available (Pastor et al., 2012).Spain accounts for 67 DOs. We have selected all the Spanish DOs with available data for the 2010 season. Not all units had the information or it was incomplete. This leads us to a subset of 24 DOs. Moreover, data has been collected concerning surface area (ha), number of wine growers, domestic sales (hl), and the sales volume in foreign markets (hl). The first two are the inputs while the last two are the outputs for our analysis (MAGRAMA, 2012). Tables 2 and 3show a summary of the variables (quantities and prices) associated to the sample’s 24 DOs. Prices have been obtained from the value of sales in the domestic and foreign markets (in Euros) and the physical data (hl) (MAGRAMA, 2012).Table 4records, for all the DOs, the results obtained when we apply both the approach presented in this paper and the approach based on the DDF. We first discuss the results obtained using the weighted additive model. The analysis revealed four DOs as revenue efficient: Alella, Cava, Chacoli de Alava, and Somontano. Among them, we have the one that presents the greatest volume in sales, for both the domestic and foreign markets, Cava, as well as the one with the lowest input values, Chacoli de Alava. Regarding their output prices, both Alella and Cava present high values for wine sold within Spain, Chacoli de Alava has prices above the average price for domestic and foreign markets, while Somontano is the only exception without high output prices. In contrast, we highlight the Almansa (30.85), Valdeorras (22.21), and Utiel-Requena (20.56) DOs as those with the worst revenue efficiency. As for the benchmarks (peers) to be used when each DO is evaluated, the analysis revealed that Almansa, Binissalem, Calatayud, Chacoli de Bizcaia, Chacoli de Getaria, Malaga y Sierra de Malaga, Monterrei, Pla de Bages, Pla i Llevant, Priorat, Rias Baixas, Toro and Valdeorras have Cava and Chacoli de Alava as benchmarks, Cataluña and La Mancha have Cava as the only peer, while Campo de Borja, Costers del Segre, Jumilla and Utiel-Requena have Cava and Somontano as peers. In fact, Cava can be distinguished as the DO that appears more times as a benchmark for the assessed units.As for the technical inefficiency component, six DOs appear as technically efficient. Apart from the four revenue efficient DOs, which are obviously also technically and allocatively efficient, we find that Chacoli de Getaria and Rias Baixas present a value of zero for the WA model, signaling nil technical inefficiency on the output side for both DOs. On the opposite site, we again encounter Almansa (22.39), Valdeorras (20.05), and Utiel-Requena (15.09). Moreover, in this respect, we could also draw attention to the case of Tarragona, with an optimal value of the Weighted Additive model of 14.80.Overall, from the results, we observe large differences between the obtained values with respect to the two components of the revenue inefficiency. In particular, the technical inefficiency is clearly greater than the allocative inefficiency in the sample of DOs. In order to justify this result, we have also calculated the arithmetic average, the weighted average using as weights the surface area and, finally, the weighted average using as weights the number of winegrowers for each column of Table 4; these values have been reported in this table’s last rows. Also, we have reported within parentheses the percentages with respect to the revenue inefficiency corresponding to the technical and allocative inefficiency, which should make the comparison between components easier. Resorting to the arithmetic average, we find that 81% of the overall inefficiency corresponds to technical reasons while 19% is exclusively due to gains in revenue accomplished through substitutions along the efficient frontier. A similar pattern can be observed for each DO. The extreme cases are those of Binissalem, with 99.12% of the revenue inefficiency as a consequence of technical inefficiency, Tarragona with 97.78%, and Pla de Bages with 95.15%. In contrast, Calatayud is the inefficient DO with the lowest percentage corresponding to technical inefficiency causes (51.61%). As for the results obtained for the other alternative averages, we find that the absolute value for each estimation decreases. However, the percentages with respect to the corresponding revenue inefficiency are very similar to the figures derived from the arithmetic mean. Our explanation for these results is the following: Many DOs in Spain limit themselves not only on a productive level but also in their productive area and the varieties used. In particular, this issue is closely related to the regulation of DOs in Spain. This makes that the performance of most DOs in the sample is far from the estimated technically efficient frontier. Those DOs that are part of the technically efficient frontier are those units dedicated to wines with special features, for example: Cava, Albariño, Chacolí, etc., wines with specific market niches and without clear competition. Nevertheless, the majority of DOs have traditional competition in their wines, which in the Spanish case has led to the legal restriction of DO production levels, as well as the cultivation area and the varieties used, making quality more important than quantity. These self-regulations limit the technical efficiency of the DOs and therefore their performance is clearly lower. The case for the allocative efficiency is different, where prices play a key role, and as there is no self-limitation. In this case, the DOs have a better mix of their objective markets (domestic versus foreign).In both cases (technical and allocative efficiency), the efficient DOs are those that do not produce red or common white wine. Cava produces sparkling wine, with French champagne as its only competitor, and Chacolis from the Basque Region or Rias Baixas (“Alvariño” wine) from the Galicia Region are local white wines. In all cases, they have an important market niche, and these kinds of wines suppose nearly the total DO production (99%). Cava is a Spanish sparkling wine. It must be pointed out that these are wines with no domestic competition, and the presence of foreign wines is not significant. As mentioned, the more inefficient ones are those DOs that produce traditional red and white wines, and these have both domestic and foreign competition.Now, we compare the weighted additive model (WA) used with the DDF approach when G=Y0. Regarding the means, the DDF approach estimates less technical inefficiency than the WA approach, 69% versus 81% and, therefore, gives more importance to the allocative component. It is worth mentioning the case of, for example, Binissalem, where the estimation of the technical inefficiency represents 99% of the revenue inefficiency for the WA approach while it represents only 29% for the DDF approach. These differences are a consequence of the non-radial technical inefficiencies detected in the output space by WA (output slacks). Note, in particular, that in Table 4 the technical inefficiency component for the WA approach is always greater than or equal to the same term for the DDF approach. Based on the results, we believe that the new approach could be considered more realistic than the DDF approach since the technical inefficiency component neglects slacks in the case of the DDF approach. In this sense, the gap of the results between the two models could be attributed to bias of the DDF.Finally, the corresponding targets for the evaluated DOs are reported in Table 5. This information should be interesting for DOs in Spain since targets represent the ideal values of sales that would allow each unit to be revenue efficient, while keeping inputs constant. Overall, to improve efficiency in the Spanish wine sector, domestic sales should be increased by 125% and the sales volume in foreign markets by 156%, indicating that the main effort should be made on sales abroad (see Gonzalez and Alvarez, 2001, as a paper devoted to show strategies for improving efficiency through benchmarking).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have presented a DEA application to the assessment of Designation of Origin in the Spanish wine sector. The purpose of this application is twofold: on the one hand, we provide the first results corresponding to the estimation of overall efficiency of DOs in Spain. Although there are several studies in the literature about technical efficiency of wineries and even DOs in Spain, no previous applications have dealt with the measurement and decomposition of the overall efficiency for these types of units. In this sense, we understand that knowledge about revenue inefficiency and its causes, and not only the estimation of pure technical inefficiency, could be of interest for both regulators of different DOs and the corresponding ministry. On the other hand, we want to show that our approach, based on an output-oriented version of the Weighted Additive models, can be advantageously utilized to measure and decompose revenue inefficiency as an alternative to the customary approaches based on radial measures and directional distance functions. In contrast to these well-known methods, we decompose revenue inefficiency through a component that takes all sources of technical inefficiency (even slacks) in the output space into consideration. In addition, relevant information can be obtained by decomposing the revenue inefficiency measure into its usual components. In this respect, we provide a new dual relationship between the revenue function and the WA model in a DEA context, which in turns yields a new Fenchel–Mahler inequality to be taken into account with the other existing alternatives related to Shephard’s output distance function and the directional output distance function (see Färe and Primont, 2006). In conclusion, we would like to point out that the DEA methodological aspects described here can be easily extended to many other contexts different from that addressed in this paper, the Spanish wine DOs.