@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimisation models for expanding a railway's theoretical capacity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analytical models were introduced for railway capacity expansion planning.Track duplications and track sub divisions were used to expand the network and its capacity.Profiles of train speed and sectional running time were incorporated.The expansion models were successfully applied to a case study and their worth is demonstrated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Railways,Railway capacity,Railway capacity expansion,Theoretical capacity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Changing the topology of a railway network can greatly affect its capacity. Railway networks however can be altered in a multitude of different ways. As each way has significant immediate and long term financial ramifications, it is a difficult task to decide how and where to expand the network. In response some railway capacity expansion models (RCEM) have been developed to help capacity planning activities, and to remove physical bottlenecks in the current railway system. The exact purpose of these models is to decide given a fixed budget, where track duplications and track sub divisions should be made, in order to increase theoretical capacity most. These models are high level and strategic, and this is why increases to the theoretical capacity is concentrated upon. The optimisation models have been applied to a case study to demonstrate their application and their worth. The case study evidently shows how automated approaches of this nature could be a formidable alternative to current manual planning techniques and simulation. If the exact effect of track duplications and sub-divisions can be sufficiently approximated, this approach will be very applicable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Railway capacity determination and railway capacity expansion are increasingly important topics as railways become more developed, sophisticated and have greater demands placed upon them. In this article Railway Capacity Expansion Models (RCEM) have been developed to identify how a railway should be expanded. This capability has not been provided in previous analytical approaches. Although a number of assumptions and simplifications were made, the merit of these models is obvious and it is believed that additional real life factors can be incorporated at a future time. For example, more accurate mathematical functions can be obtained for the exact increase in actual capacity that occurs, for instance when a section is duplicated or sub divided.Two capacity expansion possibilities were considered. The first involves track duplications (RCEM-TRKDUP), and the second section sub divisions (RCEM-SUBDIV). A model that combines both alternatives was also formulated (RCEM-GEN). These models were applied to a case study and significant worth has been demonstrated. The models for choosing which sections to duplicate and sub divide are quite straight forward yet powerful. The model that was developed for identifying sub section positions however is more sophisticated. In summary, section sub division was found to be the best and cheapest option as the cost of track duplications is proportional to its length, whereas sub division is a static cost. It should however not be forgotten that dividing sections is not a magic bullet for all situations. An additional track is highly advantageous too and can allow trains moving in different directions to be on the same section. In contrast sub divisions can help increase capacity when there is predominantly uni-directional flow. In terms of theoretical capacity, and ignoring some additional real life factors, both methods provide similar levels of increase. This article has shown that under what circumstances it is better to duplicate or divide is context dependent and specific to the exact technical conditions of a case study.The capacity expansion methods may also be used to design a completely new railway network as opposed to expanding an existing one; this is of great practical importance. A description of how the techniques can be used to do this was provided.The analytical models for capacity expansion were solved for a specified proportional and directional mix of trains and for specified percentage flows on each corridor. These are subject to change in practice, and at different times during the day. Hence the suggested solutions are only appropriate under those circumstances. A manual approach whereby different configurations are obtained and compared can be performed. The end result of that analysis would be the identification of the most robust design. An important source of future research is hence the development of a generic automated approach to perform that analysis, and to provide the most robust and efficient solution over all possibilities.