@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transport operations in container terminals: Literature overview, trends, research directions and classification scheme

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In-depth overview of transport operations and the material handling equipment used.A new classification scheme for transport operations is proposed and used.Discusses and challenges the current operational paradigms of transport operations.New avenues for research based on current trends and developments in industry.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Container terminal,Literature overview,Transportation,Material handling equipment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Internal transport operations connect the seaside, yard side, and landside processes at container terminals. This paper presents an in-depth overview of transport operations and the material handling equipment used, highlights current industry trends and developments, and proposes a new classification scheme for transport operations and scientific journal papers published up to 2012. The paper also discusses and challenges current operational paradigms of transport operations. Lastly, the paper identifies new avenues for academic research based on current trends and developments in the container terminal industry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to economic globalization, international trade continues to grow precipitately (UNCTAD, 2011). Globalization has not only increased the complexity of today’s supply chain networks, but also has increased logistical challenges in the different nodes of supply chain networks. This paper describes the latest trends, developments, and literature on transport operations in container terminals, which have become essential nodes in today’s supply chains.Container trade is the fastest-growing freight segment with an annual average increase in volume of 8.2% between 1990 and 2010 (UNCTAD, 2011). In 2011 the world container port throughput was actually slower than previous years. However, with an increase of 5.9% the highest level ever was reached. The throughput slowdown in 2011 may be attributed to the economic crisis, conflict situations in North Africa and Western Asia, and natural disasters in Japan and Thailand (UNCTAD, 2012).Containers are large metal boxes with standardized sizes. The two main container sizes are twenty-feet-equivalent-unit (TEU) and forty-feet-equivalent-unit (FEU). The dimensions of these containers are 20′×8′×8.5′ (6.1m×2.44m×2.59m) and 40′×8′×8.5′ (12.2m×2.44m×2.59m), respectively, although the height of the containers may vary. Thus, for all practical purposes, two TEUs are equivalent to one FEU. The dimensions of the containers allow them to be loaded into a platform to be transported by train or placed on a chassis and transported by truck.Containerships are the preferred mode of transportation for containers over sea due to their economies of scale. The capacity of containerships has since 1955 continuously increased from several hundred containers to thousands of containers; the largest containerships today are capable of simultaneously transporting over 14,500 TEUs. Containerships typically operate under fixed maritime routes that include various container terminals in different countries. At every container terminal visited, import containers (i.e., those destined for that port) are unloaded and export containers (i.e., those departing from that port) are loaded.Table 1presents the 20 busiest container ports in the world in terms of TEUs handled (Worldshipping, 2012). We note that the total volume handled in 2009 decreased by 10.5% compared to 2008 and the total volume handled in 2010 increased by 14.5% compared to 2009. Container terminals are continuously challenged to adjust their throughput capacity to match demand. Consequently, many opportunities arise for new approaches in container terminal design, material handling equipment, and operations research applications.Container terminals can be divided into five main areas, namely the berth, quay, transport area, (storage) yard, and (terminal) gate. The berth and the quay areas are considered seaside, while the yard and gate areas are considered landside. The transport area (see Fig. 1), which is the main focus of this paper, is at the intersection of the seaside and landside areas. Common opinion is that transport operations should be designed so that bottlenecking in container terminals is avoided. This streamlining is important since seaside and landside operations directly depend on vehicles to pick up and load containers.The goal of this paper is to present a classification scheme for transport operations at container terminals based on examining the literature. The paper also aims to identify new avenues for academic research based on current trends and developments in the area of transport operations. Literature published in 2012 or before is classified according to the proposed scheme. However, only papers published after 2004 are discussed in detail as a partial follow up to Vis and De Koster (2003) which discussed papers published before 2004. In addition to Vis and De Koster (2003), two other overview papers on the operations of container terminals have been published so far: Steenken, Voß, and Stahlbock (2004), and Stahlbock and Voß (2008a). Stahlbock and Voß (2008b) present an overview of routing problems in container terminals related to the transportation as well to yard processes.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a description of transport operations and material handling equipment and elaborates on the industry trends and developments in transport operations. Section 3 presents an overview of the research output on transport operations up to 2012. Section 4 presents our classification scheme for transport operations literature. In Sections 5–9 we provide an in-depth overview of the literature on transport operations between 2004 and 2012, divided by the problems addressed. In Section 10 we step back to reconsider transport operations from an industrial engineering and operational excellence perspective in order to challenge current operational paradigms on transport operations. Lastly, Section 11 presents research avenues based on current trends and developments in the container terminal industry.In this section, we first describe the transportation process and relevant decision problems in relation to overall terminal processes (shown in Fig. 2) and specific types of transport vehicles. Second, we show industry trends and developments.The unloading process starts by assigning vessels to berths. Once a vessel has moored, one or more quay cranes (i.e., large, typically rail-mounted, semi-automated, gantry cranes located in the shore) unload the vessel following an unloading plan. The unloading time of a container depends on its location in the vessel and typically shows a large variance. The quay cranes retrieve export containers from the vessel’s hold or deck and deposit them on the quay area or directly onto (internal) transport vehicles which then move the containers from the quay area to the yard area. Once a container is loaded onto a vehicle, it is transported to the storage yard where it is temporarily stored until it either is transported inland (by an external truck or train) or loaded onto another vessel. Import containers leave the container terminal through the terminal gates after their paperwork is verified and they are inspected (if selected for inspection). Typically, vessel loading occurs after all import containers have been unloaded and follows a stowage plan.We distinguish between the following three main decision problems in transport operations. (1) selecting the type of vehicle to use, (2) determining the number of vehicles required, and (3) routing and dispatching of vehicles. Given the difference between the types of transfer vehicles, selecting the appropriate one requires a tradeoff between investment and operational costs, and performance. Typically, the modeling assumptions made to solve these three problems depend on the type of vehicle used. Therefore, we provide a description of the most common types of vehicles. For a detailed overview of different kinds of transport vehicles we refer to Brinkmann (2011).Transport vehicles can be classified as self-lifting or non-lifting (see Fig. 3). Self-lifting vehicles, such as straddle carriers and automated lifting vehicles (ALVs) are able to lift containers from the ground autonomously. Non-lifting vehicles, such as yard trucks and automated guided vehicles (AGVs) require external material handling equipment to load/unload a container. Straddle carriers, depicted in Fig. 3a, are self-lifting vehicles that are capable of stacking containers up to several levels high. Hence, some terminals use straddle carriers as transfer and yard vehicles. Since straddle carriers need clearance on both sides of containers in order handle them, they require a special type of storage yard layout, shown in Fig. 4a. Straddle carriers are sometimes used merely as transfer vehicles in order to preserve the traditional layout organized by blocks as shown in Fig. 4b.Unlike straddle carriers, AGVs (see Fig. 3b) do not have a stacking capability. The main characteristic of AGVs is that they are completely automated and controlled by a central computer which decides on the dispatching and movement of each vehicle. Several terminals including European Combined Terminal (ECT) in Rotterdam, Thamesport in London, HHLA Container Terminal Altenwerder (CTA) in Hamburg, use AGVs (Yang, Choi, & Ha, 2004). The main difference between ALVs and AGVs is the inability of AGVs to self-lift containers. Ranau (2011) study the difference between ALVs and AGVs from the perspective of dimensioning and layout of the transportation area. Yard trucks (Fig. 3c) are the most commonly used transfer vehicles in large container terminals given their comparatively low investment cost and large capacity. Yard trucks simply haul containers placed over a chassis. As opposed to automated vehicles, yard trucks require a human driver; the engagement of the yard truck with the chassis can be done without human intervention, but the release of the chassis requires human intervention.The most important trends with regard to transfer equipment are automation and a focus on more environmentally friendly equipment (e.g., Rijsenbrij & Wieschemann, 2011). Automated transfer vehicles present many advantages, including easier communication and control, and prediction and elimination of human error. On the other hand, these systems tend to be more expensive, require a well-established software infrastructure, and are very dependent on a central control system. However, the popularity of automated vehicles in container terminals is expected to continue since internal transportation in non-automated terminals is one of the least efficient and most costly processes (Vis, 2006). New types of more intelligent automated guided vehicles (AGVs) using GPS techniques are entering the market. Consequently, new traffic management policies have to be designed to effectively control those types of AGVs.Most Automated Guided Vehicles (AGVs) travel on a fixed path guided by markers, wires, lasers, or computer vision. A new generation of “intelligent” AGVs are free-travel (i.e., do not follow a fixed path) and are monitored by GPS. This new technology allows more movement freedom for the AGV, at the expense of more complicated traffic management. AGVs are typically controlled by dividing their travel paths into zones. AGVs must request permission before moving into another zone to avoid potential collisions, congestion, and deadlocks.Two strategies are commonly used to manage deadlocks: deadlock prevention and deadlock resolution. Deadlock prevention strategies typically limit access to zones to prevent deadlocks. Deadlock resolution does not attempt to prevent deadlocks in advance, but instead detects and resolves them as soon as possible (Lehmann, Grunow, & Günther, 2006). Deadlock prevention and resolution are commonly used together. Congestion avoidance strategies typically involve carefully assigning specific yard blocks to vessels so that adjacent blocks are not used during the same period.New types of self-lifting equipment have been introduced in container terminals as well. Autonomous Straddle Carriers (AutoStrad) or Automated Shuttle Carriers (e.g., Pirhonen, 2011) are a hybrid between straddle carriers and ALVs (Durrant-Whyte, Pagac, Rogers, Stevens, & Nelmes, 2007). Developed by Kalmar and implemented at the Patrick container terminal in Brisbane, Australia since 2005. These vehicles can be used as automated straddle carriers or as AGVs with stacking capability.The latest trend in transfer equipment is the twin-load technology used, for example, in straddle carriers. Twin-load technology allows the vehicle to simultaneously carry two containers reducing the number of trips required between the quay and yardside. However, expected cycle times might increase due to an increased complexity of operations at the yardside (e.g., potentially visiting multiple blocks). Additionally, it might require more vehicles than simply half the number of single-load straddle carriers. Good control policies are needed to address these challenges resulting from twin-load technology.Indented berths and double cycling during unloading and loading operations are trends considered from the seaside (Carlo, Vis, & Roodbergen, 2013). Those trends clearly affect transport operations. Vehicles will be forced to double-cycle if both import and export jobs are handled simultaneously in the terminal. Consequently, empty travel times will decrease significantly. Under a double-cycling policy, vehicles are not dedicated to a specific vessel in order to combine the loading and unloading operations among vessels. Similar to twin-load capabilities, we observe that longer cycle times might be needed to handle all requests. In the next sections, we will discuss and classify literature presenting solution approaches for each of the aforementioned decision problems and compare the literature to the trends noticed in this section. Each section presents a different decision problem in the order as presented in the classification scheme.An extensive search in several scientific databases including Engineering Village, Google Scholar, Pro Quest, Web of Science, and several well-known handbooks in the field, resulted in 55 scientific journal articles and 6 book chapters, published between 2004 and 2012, directly related to container terminal transport operations (see Fig. 5). As indicated, we define transport operations as all activities between ship and yard. The exhaustive search for journal papers was complemented by carefully inspecting the cited work on the papers as they were found. For a survey of papers before this period, the reader is referred to Vis and De Koster (2003) or Steenken et al. (2004). The keywords used for our search were container, container terminal, and port(s), from which we only selected the articles that pertain to transport operation decisions. Other referenced work that does not meet the abovementioned requirements is not included.Fig. 5 shows that the number of journal papers published per year on transport operations has not changed much in the period under consideration (2004–2012). Table 2presents the distribution of the 55 publications according to the continent associated with the first author of each paper. Table 3presents a ranking of the countries from which the first authors’ originate, measured by the number of publications (shown in parenthesis). In total, 14 different countries have been counted. As Tables 2 and 3 show, most papers have their origin in Asia and Europe.A total of 132 authors contributed to the papers considered in our analyses. The average number of authors per publication equals 3.04 with a standard deviation of 1.19. The maximum number of authors in a single paper was 7. Only four (7.3%) of the papers were written by a single author. The papers have been published in 30 different journals. On average, each journal published 1.83 papers. Several special issues on container terminal logistics appeared in journals such as OR Spectrum (3 times) and Transportation Research Part E. As a result, those two journals contain most of the papers on container logistics published during the period under study. In fact, OR Spectrum published 16 papers during this period and Transportation Research Part E published 5. All other journals contain three or fewer transport operations papers.In this section we present a new classification scheme to enable discussion of the literature on transport operations in container terminals. The proposed classification scheme for transport operations is presented in Table 4. The classification scheme includes 30 attributes that may take a value of 0 or 1. The attributes in Table 4 are grouped to describe the decisions and modeling assumptions in the publications, as well as to help us position the publications with respect to each other. The respective classification of 56 publications on transport operations according to the proposed classification scheme is presented in Table A.1 in Appendix A.We only include attributes with mutually exclusive values to allow us to explicitly describe what the papers address and do not address. We can easily update the scheme as the area evolves by adding new attributes, such as single or multiple-load vehicles. In encoding the scheme we can either opt to use separation by vertical bars, i.e., tuplets as in Bierwirth and Meisel (2010), or to use tables. In this paper we selected the latter option to classify the papers. The attributes and values used in our classification scheme presented in Table 4 are described below.The Decision Variables Attribute Group specifies the decision problems considered. The specific attributes in this group include compare, number, route, dispatch, deadlock, and collision to specify the type of vehicle, the number of vehicles, the routing or the dispatching of vehicles, deadlocks, or collision aspects that are, respectively, considered as decision variables. The Operations Attribute Group specifies if the papers consider vessel loading (load), unloading (unload), double-cycling of vehicles (double), and transport operations between terminals (inter). The vessel loading and unloading operations should be differentiated as vehicles are waiting respectively for yard cranes or quay cranes. The double-cycling attribute specifies if double-cycling is considered (see Section 2.2), and the inter attribute specifies if the vehicles also perform inter-terminal moves.The Vehicle Capabilities Attribute Group (see Section 2) specifies if the vehicles considered are capable of self-lifting (self-lift) or not (non-lift), and if they have the capability of stacking (self-stack). When a vehicle is classified as self-stack, it is implicit that the system is also self-lifting.The Interaction Attribute Group indicates if the paper considers congestion or collisions among vehicles. Congestion will increase the time required to finish a job. Collisions hinder traffic or even shut-down operations for a specific period. Attribute “collision” indicates that the authors consider, for example, zone control for AGVs, but do not suggest solution approaches to avoid collisions (which is denoted by attribute 6).It is common that quay cranes or yard cranes follow precedence constraints in retrieving containers to match (un-)loading plans (see Section 2). Here, we indicate if the authors require that this precedence constraint to be strictly followed by transport vehicles in the loading (prec-l) and unloading (prec-u) operations.The Temporal Attribute Group indicates whether the containers’ ready times are deterministic (readyd) or stochastic (readys), whether due times are deterministic (dued) or stochastic (dues), and whether the planning horizon is dynamic or rolling (horiz). The Uncertainty Environment Attribute Group only contains one attribute to indicate if stochastic optimization is used (stochop).The Performance Metric Attribute Group specifies the most commonly used terms in the objective function by relating it to some weighted linear function of the number of vehicles (num), to the task completion time of transfer vehicles (compl), to the distance traveled by transfer vehicles (dist), to transfer vehicles’ due times (lateness), average quay crane work rate (QC), average vessel completion time (vessel), financial cost (cost), or to other metrics (other). Cost could be measured as a weighted linear function of the number of vehicles. The attribute other is used to describe papers whose the objective function does not fall into any of the other attributes identified, or is simply not specified or enforced. If collision and deadlock prevention are the objective of the paper, no attribute was selected in the Performance Metric Attribute Group. These papers can be identified by looking at the collision and deadlock attributes. Although the QC and vessel attributes are related, the former is used to highlight that the paper focuses on individual QCs, whereas the latter focuses on all quay cranes serving a vessel.Sections 5–9 include an in-depth overview of literature dealing with each of the decision problems and classify the relevant papers published in scientific journals between 2004 and 2012. For an overview of the six papers in Table A.1 that are published before 2004 the reader is referred to Vis and De Koster (2003).This section presents the papers whose main focus is to compare multiple types of vehicles (i.e., the compare attribute). All papers use simulation as the main methodology. We note that most papers compare automated guided vehicles (AGVs) and automated lifting vehicles (ALVs).Vis and Harika (2004) show that on average 38% more AGVs than ALVs are needed for the vessel unloading operations at a terminal including four quay cranes and 16 automated stacking cranes. The authors use data from the Port of Rotterdam. Given actual investment costs, it is concluded that using ALVs will reduce the total investment cost. A sensitivity analysis shows that both the size of the buffer area at the single-load quay cranes and the twin-load capability of AGVs influences the average number of vehicles required. Yang et al. (2004) show that the number of AGVs required is at least 50% more than the number of ALVs. The authors study a hypothetical automated container terminal with three quay cranes and 12 stacking cranes. State transition and traffic models were used to control the automated vehicles. The authors conclude that the number of vehicles is inversely proportional to the speed of the vehicles, until a point where the minimum number of vehicles remains constant. Thus, ALVs are superior to AGVs in terms of productivity as they reduce the waiting time in the buffer areas at the quay cranes.Duinkerken, Dekker, Kurstjens, Ottjes, and Dellaert (2006) compare multi-container yard trucks with AGVs and ALVs for inter-terminal transports using data of the Europe Container Terminals in Rotterdam. The authors consider four terminals, an empty depot, and various transportation modalities (rail, road, barge, and sea). The objective of the paper is to determine if the current yard truck-based inter-terminal transport system is cost effective to handle the predicted future container handling requirements at pre-defined acceptable service levels. The authors show that many yard trucks are required with an average utilization of 50%. The number of AGVs is heavily dependent on the buffer size, while the average number of ALVs is 55% less than for AGVs. Bae, Choe, Park, and Ryu (2011) compare single-load AGVs and ALVs that can travel freely through the terminal. It is found that under the dispatching policy from Briskorn, Drexl, and Hartmann (2006) the cycle times for ALVs were much shorter than for AGVs. On average, approximately twice as many AGVs as ALVs are needed to get a similar performance despite traffic congestion. The paper concludes that the choice of equipment depends on the investment and operating costs of the equipment. The paper also concludes that for dual-trolley quay cranes ALVs outperform AGVs.In summary, research indicates that roughly twice as many single load AGVs than single-load ALVs would be required to perform the same transport operations at a similar service level. The large difference in number of vehicles is related to the AGVs dependence on an external crane for loading and unloading. This result seems to be sufficiently robust regardless of the particular characteristics of the terminal. The literature also shows that the size of the buffer area affects the number of AGVs required. This result is particularly significant for twin-load AGVs and multiple-load yard trucks.This section presents the papers whose main focus is to optimize the number of vehicles required (i.e., the number attribute). We note that deterministic, stochastic, and simulation approaches (or a combination) have been used in the literature.Murty, Liu, Wan, and Linn (2005), Murty, Wan et al. (2005) design a decision support system (DSS) for overall decision making (e.g., internal transportation, allocating storage yard space, deploying yard cranes to blocks, and setting appointment times for external trucks) at the container terminals in the Port of Hong Kong. The authors determine the minimum number of yard trucks required by integer programming such that the idle time of quay cranes and the total number of hours used to unload and load a vessel are minimized. Linear regression is used to estimate the mean and standard deviation of the total quay crane time to process a vessel hatch in order to determine the number of vehicles assigned to a specific quay crane. Murty, Wan et al. (2005) report that the economic impact of reducing the number of trucks used in the Hong Kong International terminals was approximately US$6 million per year.Several authors propose mathematical models to define vehicle requirements. Vis, De Koster, and Savelsbergh (2005) propose a linear integer program to determine the minimum required number of automated lifting vehicles (ALVs) in order to transport containers within strict time windows. The paper assumes that all operational times are deterministic and uses worst case travel times. The solution from the analytical model underestimates the required number of ALVs obtained via simulation by an average of 10%. In practice, 10% less vehicles would have resulted in an average increase in total unloading times of 8.7%.Stochastic models, mainly queuing based, are proposed by several authors. Kang, Medina, and Ouyang (2008) uses a cyclic queuing model to predict the steady-state port throughput. The model is used in combination with a Markovian Decision Process (MDP) that allows for dynamic fleet allocations and general service time distributions. Goodchild and Daganzo (2007) study the effects of quay crane double cycling on transport operations. Queuing theory was used to estimate the number of vehicles required per crane under single- and double-cycling. The quay crane is modeled as a single server with deterministic service times, the storage area is modeled as a D/G/∞ queue, and travel times are assumed deterministic. Alessandri, Sacone, and Siri (2007) use a system of queues to represent the movement of containers in an intermodal container terminal. A discrete-time linear dynamic model is presented that can be used to determine the number of material handling resources required or the best control strategy using a receding horizon in the different areas of the terminal. Their objective is to minimize the total time a container is waiting to be moved within the terminal. Sacone and Siri (2009) propose a framework to combine a generalized version of the model in Alessandri et al. (2007) with a discrete-event simulation. The simulation stops when critical events occur and subsequently the optimization module is solved and its solution integrated to the simulation upon resume.The number of vehicles required also affects the number of drivers required for non-automated vehicles. The manpower scheduling problem in container terminals (not included in the classification scheme) typically include many union- and regulation-related constraints on schedules and workforce utilization. Also, the tasks assigned to the employees may vary during the day and require different (cross-)training levels. Kim, Kim, Hwang, and Ko (2004) focus on scheduling manpower in container terminals. The paper focuses on finding feasible scheduling solutions to the complex issue of assigning operators to equipment for different time slots (typically a shift). A search procedure is used to solve various practically sized problems arising in a container terminal in Pusan, South Korea. Legato and Monaco (2004) study the problem of determining the number of workers required (e.g., crane operators and drivers), their schedule, and their assigned tasks. The problem is broken down into two phases, long-term and daily planning, and solved hierarchically. Workdays are divided into four shifts and a rotation-based assignment policy is used due to the unattractiveness of the shifts. The long-term planning phase seeks to create feasible working schedules without considering costs, while the daily planning phase seeks to find the feasible schedule that minimizes the total costs. Mathematical formulations for both phases are presented. The first phase is solved using a previously published heuristic, while the second phase is solved using branch-and-bound.In order to properly determine the number of transfer vehicles required for transport operations, one could simulate the system in order to take into consideration its stochasticity. Hartmann (2004b, also not included in the classification scheme) describes the key parameters to produce realistic simulation scenarios and provides an approach for generating these scenarios based on insights from a container terminal in Hamburg, Germany. Liu, Jula, Vukadinovic, and Ioannou (2004) uses simulation to quantify the impact of automation and yard layout on the terminal performance. For each scenario the number of vehicles is determined. It is concluded that the yard layout has a strong effect on terminal performance and the number of AGVs used.Bielli, Boulmakoul, and Rida (2006), Ottjes, Veeke, Duinkerken, Rijsenbrij, and Lodewijks (2006), and Evers and De Feijter (2004) all use simulation models for the entire operation of container terminals. We opted to not classify those papers where the main focus of the authors is to show how simulation can be used to study existing operational policies. With discrete-event simulations one can determine the number of transfer vehicles required and their expected utilization for different realistic scenarios. To compute the number of vehicles, the routing and dispatching policies must be embedded in the simulation. An alternative is to start by evaluating a system with a very small number of vehicles, and continue increasing the number of vehicles in the simulation until the desired service level (or minimum cost) is found. Sufficient simulation runs must be made for each number of vehicles considered. Alternatively, one can use one of the mentioned deterministic analytical models as a first-pass estimate of the number of vehicles. In that case, the number of simulation scenarios will be reduced by narrowing the range of the number of vehicles in the simulation according to the results of the analytical model.This section presents the papers whose main focus is to determine the routing and dispatching of vehicles (i.e., the route and dispatch attributes). Routing vehicles (see Section 7.1) refers to specifying the number of trips, the paths to be taken, and the related schedules to handle requests in different areas of the container terminal. We notice that papers typically study the static version of the problem. Dispatching rules (see Section 7.2) determine which vehicle will perform each movement and is typically associated with the dynamic (i.e., real-time) version of the problem. We distinguish between two main types of dispatching: vehicle initiated and move request initiated (Egbelu & Tanchoco, 1984). In vehicle initiated dispatching an idle vehicle is assigned to a request, whereas in move request initiated dispatching an available container is assigned to a vehicle. We note that in container terminals dispatching is mainly vehicle initiated as there are far more requests than vehicles.In this section we discuss literature on approaches for routing vehicles. We observe that all authors consider a deterministic setting and use experiments to test the robustness of the outcomes in a stochastic environment. Most authors formulate an integer programming model in combination with heuristic-based solution approaches. Koo, Lee, and Jang (2004) seek to find a feasible vehicle routing in which all required requests are served within the pre-defined planning horizon by proposing an iterative two-step procedure. First, a lower bound on the minimum number of vehicles required is obtained by solving a simple integer programming model. Secondly, a tabu search-based heuristic is used to determine the routing for each vehicle. The heuristic terminates if the resulting makespan is less than the planning horizon. Otherwise, the number of vehicles is increased and the heuristic is called again.Several authors discuss routing under double-cycling policies (see Section 2.2). Nishimura, Imai, and Papadimitriou (2005) formulate an integer programming model and genetic algorithms (GA) for the single- and multi-trailer problem. The GA is found to yield solutions 10% higher than optimal on average for single-trailer problems. The GA solutions for the multi-trailer problem were not verified. It is concluded that double cycling translated to a 15% overall cost reduction. Ng, Mak, and Zhang (2007) also formulate an integer programming model and a GA-based heuristic that uses a greedy crossover scheme. The proposed GA outperforms six other GAs with different crossover schemes. Zeng, Yang, and Lai (2009) consider integer program formulations for double-cycling operations for single and multiple vessels. The former is solved with a Q-learning algorithm and the latter with a tabu search based heuristic. The authors do not consider any interference between quay cranes and vehicles. Experimental results show that the multi-vessel oriented dispatching policies outperform single-vessel policies in terms of travel distance and efficiency. Lastly, Rashidi and Tsang (2011) formulate the static and dynamic AGV routing problem as a Minimum Cost Flow problem considering different objectives: minimizing the total AGV earliness at the quay side, the total lateness, and the total AGV travel time.Both static and dynamic dispatching is being studied for both lifting and non-lifting vehicles. Several authors study the dispatching problem for twin load vehicles. Simulation studies are typically used to compare the performance of various rules.We will discuss dispatching literature by starting off with unit-load non-lifting vehicle dispatching in a static and dynamic setting. Li and Vairaktarakis (2004) address this problem for a single quay crane given deterministic loading and unloading times. The authors develop an optimal algorithm to minimize the makespan, which is shown efficient for small instances of the problem. Three heuristics, one from Bish, Leong, Li, Ng, and Simchi-Levi (2001) and two new ones, are compared to a proposed lower bound. It is concluded that one of the heuristics (H3) outperforms the other heuristics and yields solutions that are very close to optimal. Zhang, Ye, Huang, and Hsu (2005) presents three mixed integer programming formulations for dispatching during the unloading operations assuming one berth and deterministic operational times. Their objective is to minimize the overall waiting time of the crane. A greedy heuristic based on one of the models is shown to be useful for large instances of the problem. Bish et al. (2005) show that for a single quay crane, a (reversed) greedy algorithm is optimal for dispatching AGVs during the unloading and loading operations. If double-cycling is allowed, an enhanced greedy algorithm performs 1.55% worse than the optimal solution in 200 small-sized problems with four vehicles, two quay cranes, and 12 jobs.Kim and Bae (2004) present a vehicle initiated look-ahead dispatching method for unit-load AGVs for both a static and dynamic setting. The proposed look-ahead dispatching outperforms three benchmark dispatching rules (shortest travel time/distance, earliest due date, and revised shortest imminent operation) in terms of quay crane delays and travel distances. Briskorn et al. (2006) propose an inventory-based dispatching policy. The inventory-based policy gives priority to jobs for that quay crane whose buffer has the fewest AGVs in it when the AGV arrives. The authors goal is to provide a dispatching method that is more robust to stochastic parameters such as travel time estimates, while leading to a higher quay crane and AGV productivity. Simulation results show that the proposed method leads to better terminal productivity and that it is more robust than due time-based-policies. Angeloudis and Bell (2010) propose a unit load AGV dispatching method that considers uncertainty. Their objective is to maximize the net benefit of the AGV-to-job assignment. However, the net benefit of the first tasks assigned, which have less uncertainty, are given a higher relative weight. The model uses task duration time estimates in the form of intervals to quantify the uncertainty. These estimates may be updated in a dynamic environment. Collisions are not considered in the optimization model, but they are prevented in real-time. The proposed dispatching method was shown to outperform four benchmark dispatching heuristics. Xing, Yin, Quadrifoglio, and Wang (2012) propose a mixed integer linear program and two heuristics to dispatch AGVs to tandem-lift QCs. The additional challenge in this problem is to have two AGVs present at the right time with the right container. The objective is to minimize overall lateness of all QCs. Two heuristics are proposed of which the neighborhood search procedures seem to be the most efficient in a set of numerical experiments.Dispatching rules for lifting vehicles are studied as well. Hartmann (2004a) presents a general scheduling framework to minimize the average lateness of jobs and the average setup time for straddle carriers and AGVs. A deterministic single-pass dispatching method, a multi-pass biased random sampling dispatching method, and a GA-based heuristic are proposed. Experimental results show that the GA outperforms the priority-based rule methods. Nguyen and Kim (2009) focus on dispatching loads in buffers to unit-load automated lifting vehicles (ALVs) with the objective of minimizing the weighted total quay crane delays and total travel time. All operational times are assumed deterministic. A mixed-integer programming model and a heuristic that converts buffer constraints into time window constraints are presented.Twin-load vehicle dispatching rules were introduced by Grunow, Günther, and Lehmann (2004). The authors propose a pattern-based priority rule for dispatching single and twin-load AGVs to minimize the total lateness. In the dispatching strategy, jobs are considered one by one as they are released by solving an assignment problem. All operational times are assumed deterministic. A linear mixed integer programming formulation of the problem is proposed and used as a comparison basis for the proposed priority rule. Experimental results show that the model clearly outperforms the priority rule in terms of solution quality, yet the runtimes are too long for practical purposes. Grunow, Günther, and Lehmann (2006) propose a modified priority rule and show, by simulation, that it outperforms an on-line dispatching strategy. The authors show that for the dual-load AGVs, the solution found was within 5% of a lower bound. Klerides and Hadjiconstantinou (2011) simplify the formulation in Grunow et al. (2004) by removing an index in precedence-decision variables and in load-decision variables, which results in less total variables and constraints. The simplified model is solved using a rolling-horizon approach which yields solutions inferior to the solution with the complete horizon by an average lateness of 0.4 time units per job.Several papers use simulation to study the performance of specific dispatching rules. We note that many authors use data of real-life terminals. Among these, Soriguera, Espinet, and Robuste (2006) describe a simulation model that could be used to compare different dispatching strategies using straddle carriers. Heuristics for job-to-SC assignment, SC routing, as well as storage yard assignment are proposed. Soriguera, Robuste, Juanola, and Lopez-Pita (2006) uses simulation with data from the terminal in the port of Barcelona, Spain, to show that, from a cost perspective, vehicles could be better assigned to entire berths instead of to specific quay cranes. Hadjiconstantinou and Ma (2009) study dispatching policies for straddle carriers by using data of the Port of Piraeus in Greece. Petering (2010) studies the impact of real-time dual-load yard truck control systems on the long-run average quay crane throughput using a discrete event simulation model which uses data of a pure vessel-to-vessel transshipment terminal. A small and large container terminal and fleet size were considered. It is found that the long-run average quay crane throughput increased using the inventory-based dispatching strategy from Briskorn et al. (2006) under several conditions, namely when all vehicles were combined into a single dispatching pool for which loading jobs have priority over unloading jobs; vehicles are allowed to simultaneously transport two loads; and vehicles are dispatched in batches (although this result was sensitive to the terminal size).In general terms, we conclude that, based on findings in literature, pooling of vehicles in dispatching outperforms dedicated vehicle dispatching. The former will allow for double-cycling operations that effectively combine requests for different vessels. It is good to note that double-cycling might result in longer cycle times. We observe that the inventory-based dispatching policy from Briskorn et al. (2006) can be an excellent benchmark policy. The policy is simple to implement yet robust, and has been shown to outperform existing policies in terms of the bottom-line container terminal objectives. It is important to reiterate that the effectiveness of a combination of pooling and inventory-vehicle-dispatching for lifting vehicles is highly dependent on the designed size of the buffers at QCs and the yard where containers are ready for drop-off or pick-up by the lifting vehicle.In this section we present the papers that focus on preventing collision and deadlocks for transport operations (i.e., the collision and deadlock attributes). Kim, Jeon, and Ryu (2006) study the deadlock detection and prevention problem for AGVs. The travel area for AGVs is partitioned into grid-blocks, and it is assumed that AGVs may occupy more than one grid-block. A reservation method for deadlock detection and prevention was developed and validated based on reservation graphs. Lehmann et al. (2006) proposes two deadlock detection methods: matrix-based and graph-oriented. Three methods are presented to resolve deadlocks that occur. The methods are compared using simulation. Park, Kim, and Lee (2009) use a graph-based representation to visualize when deadlocks occur and to facilitate their prevention. A deadlock prevention scheme is proposed by imposing constraints in the AGV movements.Kezić, Vujović, and Gudelj (2007) consider a terminal in which both automated and non-automated vehicles are used in the transport operations. Their paper uses discrete dynamic theory and Petri nets for the design of a collision prevention supervisor between automated and non-automated vehicles. The system uses video surveillance that detects movements to prevent dangerous movements from the AGV that could lead to collisions.Zeng and Hsu (2008) proposed a discrete-time approach to route transfer vehicles to prevent conflicts given that the storage yard is organized into blocks, creating fixed paths in a grid-like configuration. A conflict can be defined as any interaction that forces the vehicle to change its velocity to prevent collisions. The proposed routing algorithm is compared to a greedy routing scheme and a fixed speed sorting scheme previously published by the authors. It is concluded that the greedy scheme results in the least total time to transfer all containers, at the expense of requiring deadlock and collision mechanisms at intersections. The proposed routing scheme outperformed the sorting scheme. One of the benefits of the proposed conflict-free scheme is that the velocity of the transfer vehicle changes at most once, which minimizes the energy requirement for accelerations and decelerations.Gawrilow, Köhler, Möhring, and Stenzel (2008) propose a conflict-free dynamic online routing algorithm by modeling time-dependent behavior of AGVs to avoid collisions and deadlocks. Actual results of the evaluation with data of the terminal Altenwerder, Hamburg, Germany have not been reported due to confidentiality reasons. Gawrilow, Klimm, Möhring, and Stenzel (2012) study the performance of a static conflict-free routing algorithm compared to a dynamic approach with data of the terminal Altenwerder. It is concluded that for low and medium traffic scenarios, the static version performs slightly better.Given the newest trend of free-traveling AGVs, policies that do not assume fixed travel paths will be at the forefront of the research in this area. In general, the research on collision and deadlock prevention is mainly of significance for the traffic control software developers as it is embedded in their software.So far, we have discussed decision problems in isolation; integrative decision making might result in processes that are better tuned. However, only a few papers address transport operations and other processes in an integrative way. Thus, first we discuss integration of transport operations and yard operations. Second, we study papers that integrated seaside, transport, and landside operations.Cao, Shi, and Lee (2008) integrate the vehicle and storage yard allocation problem to minimize the maximum completion time of the unloading operation. It is assumed that the quay crane schedule is known and as a result, ready times for vehicles are known as well. Further, the travel time and yard crane storage time are assumed deterministic. A mixed integer programming formulation, a genetic algorithm- based heuristic (GA), and a greedy heuristic are proposed. It is concluded that the greedy heuristic outperformed the GA. Kozan and Preston (2006) simultaneously solve the storage yard allocation and the transfer vehicle scheduling problem by proposing an iterative search algorithm. The objective is to minimize the sum of the maximum YC repositioning time and the transfer vehicle travel time. Travel times are assumed deterministic. Seven heuristics are proposed by combining or decomposing the problems and by using GA, TS, or both to solve the problems. Experimental results based on data from the Port of Brisbane, Australia found that the iterative heuristic that uses GA to solve both problems outperformed the others. The solution quality of the proposed heuristics was not compared to an optimal solution for the problem.Soriguera, Espinet, and Robuste (2007) study the container storage assignment and dispatching strategies for straddle carriers. Simulation experiments indicate that dividing the storage yard into import and export areas can increase the productivity for particular operations. The preferred storage strategy when operating the straddle carrier in single-cycle was to store import container in the yard spaces closest to the quay area, and the export containers in the spaces closest to the landside. If the straddle carriers are assigned to more than one vessel then a scattered location strategy is preferred. It is claimed that the number of reshuffles can be reduced by 50% and the number of required straddle carriers by 25% compared to a random selection method.Lee, Cao, and Shi (2009) integrate the yard-block assignment problem and the transfer vehicle scheduling problem for import containers. The paper presents an MIP formulation for the integrated problem assuming deterministic handling times that minimizes the makespan to transport all containers from the quay area to the storage yard. Due to the complexity of the integrated problem a GA and greedy heuristic are proposed. Based on computational experiments on small-size problem instances, it is concluded that the GA outperforms the greedy heuristic. Given enough GA-generations, the GA was able to find the optimal solution in 9 of the 10 small instances. In larger instances the GA outperformed the greedy heuristic at the expense of much larger runtimes. Lee, Cao, Shi, and Chen (2009) propose an MIP to integrate the storage yard allocation problem and the transfer vehicle scheduling problem considering vessel loading and unloading. The objective is to minimize the weighted total penalty due to delay and travel time cost. A Hybrid Insertion Algorithm-based heuristic (HIA) iteratively solves a storage allocation problem as a sub-problem using an auction algorithm. The heuristic found solutions between 3% and 17.35% from optimal in small problem instances (average 10.27% error).Cao, Lee, Chen, and Shi (2010) integrate the vehicle and yard crane scheduling problems for the loading operation as a two-stage flexible flow shop problem with the objective to minimize the makespan. All operational times are assumed deterministic and there are no precedence constraints. The authors formulate a mixed integer program and two solution methods based on Benders’ decomposition. Petering (2011) presents a simulation study is used to understand how specific strategic and tactical decisions in non-automated container terminals (e.g., setting the number of vehicles and yard cranes) affect the long-run average quay crane rate. It is concluded that the long-run average quay crane rate depends on: storage yard capacity, number and operating characteristics of yard cranes and trucks, the capacity to accommodate for truck substitutability, and the overall size of the terminal.Other papers integrate seaside, transport, and yardside operations. Chen, Bostel, Dejax, Cai, and Xi (2007) simultaneously addresses the quay crane, vehicles, and yard crane scheduling problems in order to minimize the turnaround time of the vessel. The problem is formulated as a hybrid flow shop scheduling problem with three stages depicting the various types of (parallel) material handling equipment. Only precedence constraints based on vessel decks and holds are considered. All operational times are assumed deterministic. A mixed integer program formulation and a lower bound for the problem are proposed. In addition, two tabu-search-based heuristics are compared. Lee, Chew, Tan, and Wang (2010) solve the same problem as Chen et al. (2007) by presenting a model and two heuristics for the problem. Experimental results show that the GA-based heuristic is found to outperform the neighborhood search heuristic. Yin, Khoo, and Chen (2011) propose a distributed agent system for port planning and scheduling. In their model four agents negotiate to obtain a berth allocation schedule, vehicle requirements, a storage allocation schedule, and a truck/train schedule for intermodal moves. Exact details on the optimization strategy for yard storage and intermodal scheduling are not provided in the paper.In general, we note that the integrated problems are modeled as a three-stage flow shop by considering loading and unloading separately and assuming deterministic settings. On one hand, the assumption of deterministic operational times could jeopardize the practicality of the solutions. On the other hand, the assumption allows researchers to solve larger instances of the problem. We suggest a compromise by assuming that the operational times are deterministic, but different for each container. For example, unloading and loading times at vessels and ships will depend on the exact storage location and vehicle travel times might be estimated with worst-case route lengths.Up to this point, this paper has focused on understanding the current transport operations, including the latest trends and developments. This information is invaluable for narrowing the gap between theory and practice. However, this approach assumes that the current transport operations paradigm (infrastructure, equipment, etc.) will continue to hold in the future. In this section we take a different approach by envisioning possibilities for the container terminal of the future from an industrial engineering and operational excellence perspective.In our approach, we intend to challenge the current container terminal operations paradigms by identifying opportunities for improvement and borrowing best practices from manufacturing, material handling, and warehousing. In general, we will identify opportunities and propose realistic solutions that consider, but are not limited by, the cost of implementation. The ideas proposed in this section are not claimed to be unique, but are intended to challenge container terminals and material handling equipment designers. By examining today’s transport operations one can quickly identify the following four paradigms:P1. Transport operations are necessary to connect the seaside and landside;P2. Transport operations are performed by internal transport vehicles;P3. The quayside and yardside are located at the same height;P4. All storage yards are accessible from each berth, and vice versa.An alternative to the first paradigm is to directly feed the storage yard from the quay area. This concept can be implemented using an Automated Storage/Retrieval System (AS/RS, see Roodbergen & Vis, 2009) to store containers. Some companies have already designed these systems, which could be particularly attractive to container terminals that need to increase their storage space without using additional land.In order to maximize efficiency and cost, alternatives could be considered for using transport vehicles. Consider a system where the quay crane places a container in a mid-level-platform. From the platform, an inclined conveyor simultaneously lowers the container and transports it to the yardside. In the yardside, a conveyor loop is used to feed the storage yards. Alternatively, a vertical lift conveyor lowers the container from the mid-level platform onto a conveyor that transports the containers. As an alternative, transport operations between seaside and yardside could be split by introducing a staging area, as commonly used in cross docking facilities. A group of vehicles is assigned to each area and consequently transport times between the seaside and the temporary storage area will decrease.The third and fourth paradigm relate to the seaside design. The quayside height is an important container terminal design parameter that directly affects vessel turnaround times. Two options are suggested to adjust the vessel-quayside levels; using water-locks to lower or raise the vessel or to raise the level of the quayside. Unless the yardside level is raised according to the quayside, which would be very expensive to do, there will be a slope between seaside and yardside, which disagrees with the third paradigm presented. This slope would have the effect of lower travel speeds when going uphill and faster travel speeds when going downhill. It is also expected that this setting will result in higher operational costs for the vehicles. The effect of having vehicles operating in slopes needs to be further investigated and compared to having a fixed-path conveyor instead.The fourth paradigm states that all storage yards are accessible from each berth, and vice versa. Container terminals can consider alternative berth configurations such as a new type of berth termed Canal Berth. In this berth arrangement, vessels would be unloaded and loaded simultaneously from both sides while slowly moving through a canal. Before actual implementation can be considered new technological advances need to be made. Similar to the indented berth concept, the containers will be stacked in opposite sides of the canal. In this configuration there will be an additional decision in the container terminal operations; which side will handle the container and how to balance the transfer vehicles between both sides.Based on all information presented so far, we identify the following new research avenues (RA) based on the gap between the literature review in Sections 5–9 and the current and future industry trends and developments.Vehicle designRA1. Considering how the capacity can be made reconfigurable (e.g., by adding/removing trailers)?RA2. Designing models to manage a fleet of reconfigurable transport vehicles;Traffic management of vehiclesRA3. Developing models for estimating traffic congestion to tackle the typical deterministic travel time assumption;RA4. Developing models that consider traffic congestion as a modeling decision instead of an implementation constraint (e.g., planned or designed congestion);RA5. Developing models to manage automated vehicle recharging operations;RA6. Developing analytical models to optimize the dwell point strategy for vehicles;RA7. Developing models to explore efficient vehicle management strategies for terminals utilizing multi-spreader quay cranes;RA8. Designing models to estimate the number, routing, and dispatching of vehicles in non-traditional berth layouts;RA9. Designing models to route and dispatch vehicles for non-stationary berths;RA10. Designing models for transport operations for container terminals where the bottleneck changes between seaside and yardside would also be of interest.Layout and management of the terminalRA11. Developing models to optimize the size of the quayside buffer for lifting vehicles;RA12. Designing yard layout models to enable efficient operation of AutoStrads with free-travel that are able to store containers anywhere;RA13. Designing models for the design and analysis of container staging systems to improve transport operations;RA14. Investigating the effects of transport vehicles operating in a slope in terms of transport vehicle efficiency;RA15. Designing transport operations including material handling equipment that takes advantage of gravity;RA16. Studying the impact of security policies and sustainability efforts on the number of vehicles required.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we discuss the current trends and developments for transport operations at container terminals, describe and classify the scientific literature, and challenge the current operational paradigm for transport operations by proposing innovative ideas that may be implemented in the future.We describe the various types of vehicles that can be used in the transportation process and typical trends in industry. We show that, next to automation, double cycling operations, and twin load capabilities of vehicles are important to address. Most papers, however, focus on unit-load automated guided vehicles. Twin-load vehicles, automated lifting vehicles, and straddle carriers are studied less. Hardly any papers focus on straddle carriers that both perform the transport and stacking operations. We presented a new classification scheme to distinguish between the following decision problems: (1) comparing vehicle types; (2) determining the number of vehicles; (3) routing; (4) dispatching; and (5) collision and deadlock avoidance. Most papers focus on deriving and comparing dispatching policies. Mainly heuristic solution approaches based on tabu-search or genetic algorithms have been designed. Simulation is both used in solving decision problems and in comparing solution approaches. We conclude that the design of a library of benchmark problems specifically for container terminal transportation operations would be helpful for further research in this area.