@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The relevance of the “alphorn of uncertainty” to the financial management of projects under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Both durations and costs of activities are taken as random variables.The stochastic cumulative cost over time is tracked as a project progresses.First present the new concept of an “alphorn of uncertainty” (AoU).Apply the AoU to assess the financial status during a project execution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Alphorn of uncertainty,Project cumulative cost,Project financial status,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, both the duration and the cost of an activity are modeled as random variables, and accordingly, the cumulative cost at each time point also becomes a random variable along a project’s progress. We first present the new concept of an “alphorn of uncertainty” (AoU) to describe the domain of cumulative cost variation throughout the life of a project and subsequently apply it to assess the project’s financial status over time. The shape of the alphorn was obtained by mixing Monte Carlo sampling with Gantt chart analysis, which enabled us to determine a project’s financial status related to specific payment modes. To validate the AoU, we designed and conducted an extensive numerical experiment using a randomly generated data set of activity networks. The results indicate that the AoU may be a promising method for the financial management of projects under uncertainty. Furthermore, financial status under uncertain conditions is not sensitive to an activity’s choice of duration distributions or to the form of cost functions. However, payment rules can greatly affect financial status over the duration of a project.alphorn of uncertaintyactivity networkcumulative net valueearned value methodlower boundupper boundMonte Carlo samplingrandom variable

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Projects are often subject to considerable uncertainty during their execution, which explains why activity durations are treated as random variables (r.v.s) in project scheduling problems. While much has been published regarding uncertainty in activity durations (Ballestin & Leus, 2009; Klerides & Hadjiconstantinou, 2010; Sobel, Szmerekovsky, & Tilson, 2009; Zhang, Tam, & Li, 2005; Zhu, Bard, & Yu, 2007), little has been conducted regarding other important parameters involved in a project’s progress that are greatly impacted by stochastic activity durations—in particular, activity costs, cumulative costs over time and profitability—and it is therefore reasonable to conclude that these parameters are also r.v.s. Unfortunately, discussions of cost or gain are usually conducted in a deterministic setting and the objective aims at minimizing total cost or at maximizing net present value (NPV). Clearly, total cost or NPV is only a performance indicator at the completion of a project, but financial status cannot be monitored while a project is in progress. That notwithstanding, project managers are often concerned with the financial status of pending projects, especially large-scale projects that continue over a long period of time (so-called ‘mega-projects’, see Flyvbjerg, Bruzellius, & Rothengatter, 2003). At different stages of project execution, contractors’ decisions are largely influenced by financial status. In reality, even some high-profit projects that are evaluated in the planning phase may turn out to be financial disasters due to sudden events occurring during the course of their implementations, such as cash shortages, equipment failures, and under- or over-estimation of task contents. Projects in uncertain environments may experience similar conditions more frequently. This embarrassing situation motivated us to investigate the effect of cost progress on financial risks during the execution of a project under uncertainty.In this paper, we address the assessment of a project’s profits or losses over its life cycle under uncertainties involving both activity duration and cost. We submit that although the issue of time schedules has been extensively investigated in project scheduling literature, the cost progress on accompanying such schedules has largely been neglected. To the best of our knowledge, research on this topic has been scant. There are two research streams about project scheduling problems in deterministic settings that relate to this issue: the max-NPV and the earned value method (EV/EVM). Therefore, we briefly review these two streams from the perspective of cost progress.In max-NPV and payment scheduling studies, a series of cash flows occurs as a project progresses. As contractors are induced to make expenditures through the use of various resources while activities are being executed, cost progress is involved, to a slight degree, in max-NPV. Because the time value of capital is considered when taking NPV as the performance measure, the time at which activity costs are disbursed will influence a project’s NPV. In the context of the max-NPV, activity expenses are differentiated into two types of cases. The first type of case is one in which the total cost is proportionally allocated to an activity’s beginning and ending events (Dayanand & Padman, 2001; He, Wang, Jia, & Xu, 2009), which can be easily understood by an activity-on-arc (AoA) representation. Alternatively, the total cost of an activity is assumed to have been incurred at either its beginning (Padman & Zhu, 2006; Szmerekovsky, 2005; Ulusory, Sivrikaya-Serifoglu, & Sahin, 2001) or its completion (Seifi & Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, 2008; Vanhoucke, Demeulemeester, & Herroelen, 2003; Varma, Uzsoy, Pekny, et al., 2007). The second type of case is one in which an activity’s total cost is uniformly (or unevenly) distributed as it progresses (Erenguc, Tufekci, & Zappe, 1993; Kavlak, Ulusoy, Sivrikaya-Serifoglu, & Birbil, 2009). Additionally, Chen, Zhang, Chung, et al. (2010) have stated that the constant cost for an activity arises at the beginning and that resource costs are incurred as resources are either occupied or consumed. Herroelen, Van Dommelen, and Demeulemeester (1997) gave an earlier review of the max-NPV with discounted cash flow. For recent comments on the max-NPV, we refer readers to Drezet (2008), Hartmann and Briskorn (2010), Weglarz, Jozefowska, Mika, et al. (2011), and He, Liu, and Jia (2012). As the max-NPV and payment scheduling problems involve payment behaviors between contractors and owners, methods of disbursing activity costs are of little concern.The issues discussed in this paper are related to the concept of the EVM. In the past decade, the EVM in deterministic settings has received extensive coverage (Goodpasture, 2004; Marshall, 2007; Solomon & Young, 2006; Philipson & Antvik, 2009), but the uncertain nature of an activity’s progress is neglected in the traditional EVM. Additionally, probabilistic forecasting of project performances at completion is based on the concept of an S-curve in the EVM (Barraza, Edward Back, & Meta, 2004; Kim & Reinschmidt, 2009), while Naeni, Shadrokh, and Salehipour (2011) have discussed the EVM based on the fuzzy theory. However, the several researchers cited above have addressed predictions of project performance at completion, which do not involve either stochastic cumulative cost or financial status while a project is in progress. We share the basic tenet of the EVM, but note that we differ from the EVM in that we focus on at least two important issues. First, we take into account the inherent uncertainty of conducting activities; and second, we introduce multiple methods of expenditure among activities.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains a description of the problem, assumptions and notations. In Section 3, we establish the rationale for the “alphorn of uncertainty” (AoU) and argue for the use of Monte Carlo sampling (MCS) to secure the AoU. This section also presents the application of the AoU to financial assessments associated with two payment modes during the execution of a project. Section 4 designs a full numerical experiment to gain new insights for projects’ financial statuses related to stochastic activity durations and costs. Conclusions and future extensions are presented in Section 5.A project’s activity network (AN) is represented by a directed acyclic graph. V represents the set of non-dummy activities in an AN, and|V|=J. Zero-lag finish-start precedence constraints between activities are present. Some labels and notations are listed below to set up our problem,j: index of activities in an AN, j=1,2,…,J;P(j) {S(j)}: the set of immediate predecessors {successors} of activity j;d̃j: the duration of activity j (j=1,2,…,J), which is assumed to be a r.v., andd̃j∈[aj,bj], ajand bjare the largest and the smallest values ofd̃j, respectively;f(d̃j): the probability distribution ford̃j;C∼j: the total cost incurred to complete activity j, which depends on its stochasticd̃j;s̃j{f̃j}: the beginning {ending} time of activity j in the critical path method (CPM), withs̃i+d̃i=f̃i⩽s̃j,i∈P(j);T∼: the project duration under stochastic durations of activities is composed of r.v.s, andTmin⩽T∼⩽Tmax, where Tmaxand Tminare the longest and the shortest project durations, respectively.t: the time variable over the progress of a project, thus0⩽t⩽T∼;C∼j(t)=y(C∼j,d̃j,t);s̃j⩽t⩽f̃jand0⩽C∼j(t)⩽C∼j: the function of cost disbursement for activity j, assuming thatC∼jis gradually disbursed as activity j progresses. The expenditure for an activity is incurred only after it is started, and the overall cost has just been expended at its end.c̃j(t)is the disbursed cost when activity j has been executed for(t-s̃j)time units, namely ift<s̃j, thenc̃j(t)=0; ift⩾f̃j, thenc̃j(t)=C∼j.Naturally, the cumulative cost at timetfcertainly is a r.v., which is expressed byUC(tf)∼in expression (1):(1)UC(tf)∼=∑i∈V∩tf⩾f̃iCi∼+∑j∈V∩sj∼<tf<f̃jcj∼(tf-sj∼)tf⩾f̃jmeans that activity i has been completed att=tf, ands̃j<tf<f̃jindicates that activity j is in process att=tf.UC(tf)∼at each timetfconsists of two parts, one that is the sum of the costs resulting from completed activities attfand another that is the sum of the costs incurred by executing activities attf.Under one realized scenario of a project, the cumulative cost curve over time t is generally shown by expression (2):(2)UC(t)=∑i∈Vandt⩾fiCi+∑j∈Vandsj<t<fjcj(t-sj)There are many realized scenarios for cumulative cost curves over the duration of a project due to stochastic durations and costs of activities, which accordingly form a cluster of cumulative cost curves. The upper bound (u.b.) and the lower bound (l.b.) on the cumulative cost curves at each time tfduring project execution can be described mathematically as follows:(3)u.b.:Ub(t)=Max{UC∼(t=tf),whentfis a certain time},tf∈[0,Tmax](4)l.b.:Lb(t)=Min{UC∼(t=tf),whentfis a cetain time},tf∈[0,Tmax]The specific shape of an alphorn is formed between the u.b. and the l.b. over the progress of a project. This shape is very similar to the one developed by weather forecasters to forecast bounds on of all possible paths of a hurricane. Such an alphorn contains all possible paths of a project’s cumulative cost curves over its life, which supplies the new concept of the “alphorn of uncertainty” (AoU) that is defined and treated by this paper and that assesses a project’s financial status during its implementation. In theory, the AoU is the exact confidence interval in the form of two-dimension along a project’s progress, namely,(5)P{l.b.(tf)⩽UC(tf)∼⩽u.b.(tf)}=100%;tf∈[0,Tmax]During project execution, contractors are extremely concerned about the financial status of a project under the stochastic cumulative cost. Contractors are subject to two types of cash flows: an outflow of funds to use when executing activities and an inflow of funds in the form of payments from owners. An owner’s payments can be organized in many ways, as discussed in the earlier-cited paper of Herroelen et al. (1997). In general, two modes of remuneration represent income to a contractor: either (i) payments are made according to a fixed time schedule (for example, once per quarter), which this paper denotes as ‘scheduled payments’, or (ii) payments are tied to the achievement of certain milestone events. In either mode, the cumulative net value (CNV) of a project at any time is a r.v. due to stochastic cumulative cost, which represents the difference between cumulative remuneration earned and cumulative costs incurred to date. Moreover, time points of remuneration earned are also r.v.s if they are tied to achieving milestones. The CNV may be positive, indicating income that exceeds expenses, or negative, indicating the opposite, which has serious implications for the profitability of a project and/or the process of making a bid.Following the above description and definitions, we first find the u.b. and the l.b. on cumulative cost curves with the progress of a project (AoU). Then, combined with payment modes, we propose to analyze a project’s financial status over its duration based on its AoU.The stochastic cumulative cost{UC(tf)∼}at any specifictfis closely related to the timetfto date. The state of an activity at time t cannot be judged on the basis of its stochastic duration. Even if we could know the state of each activity at time t, although the first part∑i∈V∩tf⩾f̃iC∼iofUC(tf)∼could be determined through a series of complicated convolution, it is still exceptionally difficult to obtain the second part, namely∑j∈V∩sj<tf<f̃jcj∼(tf), which represents the result of activities in progress. Due to the impact of random duration and cost, neither the amount of work contents that has been accomplished by an activity in progress nor the calculation of its disbursed costsc̃j(t)at time t can be solved. Therefore, theUC(tf)∼at time tfcannot be secured using elementary calculations, let alone find the analytic expression of the u.b. and the l.b. ofUC(t)∼over the life of a project, especially for ANs with large sizes and complex structures. This dilemma stems from an activity’s random duration and its resulting stochastic cost.Theoretically, we can analyze the complexity of finding the AoU when taking all activity durations as discrete r.v.s. Assuming that there are Djdiscrete values ford̃j, the realized scenarios of project schedules amount toΠJ∈VDj; thus, the number of cumulative cost values (r.v.s forUC(t)∼) at each time t is alsoΠJ∈VDj. IfDmin=Min{Dj,j∈V}, thenΠJ∈VDjcan be underestimated asDminJ(|V|=J). Obviously, the amount of r.v.s forUC(t)∼at each t will exponentially increase with the size of an AN. To determine the AoU, we find the largest and the smallest cumulative costs, respectively, fromΠJ∈VDjvalues at each t over the life of a project. Recalling that DTCTP_C|T in discrete time–cost trade-off problems (De, Dunne, Ghosh, & Wells, 1995) identifies a realization of project schedules that minimizes the total cost subject to a given deadline, which is the same as searching the minimal cumulative cost at completion fromΠJ∈VDjproject schedules, but more difficulty, we need to find the minimal and the largest ones at each t simultaneously. In other words, we solve a DTCTP_C|T (the given deadline is up to date tf) at each t over the life of a project, so we can conclude that DTCTP_C|T is a special case of finding the AoU where the random duration and cost of an activity are de-randomized as discrete values. Likewise, the problem of finding the AoU can be regarded as a generalization of DTCTP_C|T with the consideration of randomness in multiple discrete activity modes (duration, cost) at each t over the life of a project. Because DTCTP_C|T has been proven to be strongly NP-hard for general ANs (De, Dunne, Ghosh, & Wells, 1997), the calculation of the AoU must be strongly NP-hard as well when the random duration and cost of an activity are discretized. Additionally, the computational complexity is extensively discussed in deterministic project scheduling problems, but finding the AoU is a special stochastic project scheduling problem and we can adopt DTCTP_C|T to objectively illustrate the complexity of finding the AoU. Furthermore, with respect to our problems, because the distribution of an activity’s duration is continuous, the number of realized scenarios of project schedules is enormous even for a small AN. Therefore, in view of its possible use in real projects, we resort to a mixture of Monte Carlo sampling (MCS) with Gantt chart analysis to find the AoU.To avoid obscuring the essential thesis of this paper, we begin by assuming the simplest possible forms, as doing so allows us to focus on the stochastic behavior of cumulative cost over time. Accordingly, the central theme of this paper is not clouded by complicated formulas. Later (see Section 4.1), we deviate from this simplicity and address different duration distributions of, and various time–cost functions for, activities.Uncertainty often rises along a project’s progress because increasingly more activities come into play, and the situations studied are characterized by increased parallelism near the end of the project, in which more overlapping activities occur. Nevertheless, activity costs, which are r.v.s, are piled on top of both previously undertaken (unfinished) and currently ongoing activities. The critical question is how this accumulation proceeds. To illustrate the issue and the approach proposed for its resolution, we carried out a miniscule project of five activities, as shown in Fig. 1. The durations of all activities were assumed to be uniform distributions, written as dj∼U[aj,bj]. Additionally, the function of cost disbursement over time was assumed to be linear for all activities, namely Cj(t)=κj∗(t−sj), and the marginal coefficient κjof activity j (j=1, 2, 3, 4 and 5) is supposed to be 1. The project in Fig. 1 is small enough to enable us to achieve certain analytical results such as the exact distribution of the realization time of node 3.During the course of project execution, the cost accumulation at time t depends on the activities being executed (labeled “a”), but the activities in progress are not determined because of their random durations. For the AN in Fig. 1, Yidenotes the realization time of event i (i=2, 3 and 4). It is clear that each Yiis a random variable. For time t belonging to the interval (Y2,Y3), the cost is accumulated by one of the following six scenarios: (1) at the rate of (κ2+κ3+κ4) if activity #2, #3 and #4 are “a”; (2) at the rate of (κ2+κ4) if activity #2 and #4 are “a” but #3 has been completed; (3) at the rate of (κ3+κ4); (4) at the rate of (κ2+κ3); (5) only at the rate of κ2; and (6) only at the rate of κ3. Similarly, the cost accumulations at other times are similar to t{t∈(Y2,Y3)}. Therefore, the cost accumulation at each t is random during the life of a project. For the cumulative cost up to the current t, the number of its realized scenarios is equal to that of the realized scenarios for the project duration. The following discussion explains the approach adopted to answer the question raised and the methodology used for resolving it. First, however, we address a naive approach to expose its pitfalls.Intuitively speaking, two extreme scenarios on cumulative cost curves can be defined as follows.The optimistic scenario:UCopt(t)=∑i∈Vandt⩾fiκiai+∑j∈Vandsj<t<fjκj(t-sj)t∈[0,Tmin]The pessimistic scenario:UCpes(t)=∑i∈Vandt⩾fiκibi+∑j∈Vandsj<t<fjκj(t-sj)t∈[0,Tmax].Using the Gantt chart, cost accumulations over time in the two extreme scenarios can be easily constructed and are shown in Fig. 2. We label the two scenarios as ‘Optimistic Realization’ for UCopt(t) and ‘Pessimistic Realization’ for UCpes(t), respectively. In the same way, we also plot the middle scenario at each activity’s mean duration {(aj+bj)/2} in Fig. 2, which is marked by ‘Mean Realization’ with a project duration of 12.5 weeks and a total expense of $17.5.Based on this analysis, one could conclude that any realization of activities, such as their average values, should result in a cost accumulation that lies between the two extreme scenarios. Thus, one might think that the two extreme scenarios define the l.b. and u.b., respectively, on the cumulative cost curves. Unfortunately, this is not true, as illustrated by the following counterexample (shown in Table 1), but note that the durations of some activities are not uniformly distributed within their limits. Similarly, Cj(t)=κj∗(t−sj) and κj=1 (j=1, 2, 3, 4 and 5) are supposed.It is easy to construct the cumulative cost curves for three scenarios: the optimistic, the pessimistic, and the average. To conserve space, the diagrams are not included in this paper; however, the results are presented in Table 2:(1)The average cumulative cost exceeds the pessimistic cost (the presumed u.b.) in periods 6, 7 and 8 (underlined values).The average cumulative cost falls below the optimistic cost (the presumed l.b.) in periods 3, 4, 5 and 6 (values with a ‘†’).The pessimistic cumulative cost (the presumed u.b.) falls below the optimistic cost (the presumed (l.b.) in periods 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 (values with a ‘†’).Therefore, the two cumulative cost curves under the optimistic and the pessimistic scenarios are not the l.b. and the u.b., respectively, the cumulative cost over time, as was heuristically reasoned. The method of obtaining the correct values is an open issue to address at another time. For now, we first analyze general properties under two extreme scenarios. The shortest duration (Tmin) and lowest cost (Cmin) to complete a project are incurred under the optimistic scenario, whereas the longest duration (Tmax) and highest cost (Cmax) are incurred under the pessimistic scenario. A project’s durationT∼and accordingly its incurred total costC∼are both r.v.s, andTmin⩽T∼⩽TmaxandCmin⩽C∼⩽Cmaxfor any project realization scenario. Additionally, the cumulative cost at t=Tmaxunder the pessimistic scenario is the exact u.b. on the AoU, but the cumulative cost at t=Tminunder the optimistic scenario is not the accurate l.b.. Also, note that the pessimistic project duration does not necessarily correspond to the highest intermediate cost scenario (the l.b.) because more expensive activities may begin later in the life of a project.With respect to the mode of payment for milestone events, the realization time of an event may be derived by some complicated convolution calculations for very small ANs. In the small project in Fig. 1, recall that Yidenotes the realization time of event i (i=2, 3 and 4), now Ci(i=2, 3 and 4) denotes the cumulative cost at time Yi. All {Yi} and {Ci} are also r.v.s, so Y3 then can be determined as follows:Y3=Max{d̃2,d̃1+d̃3}Given thatd̃1∼U[2,6],d̃2∼U[1,5]andd̃3∼U[2,4], by convolution and calculus operations, we secure the distribution of Y3 to be(6)F3(t)=116×(t-4)2×34+t-44,4⩽t⩽5116×(t-4)2,5⩽t⩽614+14(t-6),6⩽t⩽8116(t-6)(14-t),8⩽t⩽10and the density function to be(7)f3(t)=ddt(F3(t))=364(t-2)(t-4),4⩽t⩽5(t-4)8,5⩽t⩽614,6⩽t⩽818(10-t),8⩽t⩽10The mean and the variance for the realization time of node 3 are evaluated as follows:ε[Y3]=∫t=410t·f3(t)dt=7.0013;Var[Y3]=∫t=410t2·f3(t)dt-(ε[Y3])2=1.6604Similarly, the mean and the variance of Y4 can also be secured, but to do so requires more cumbersome calculations than those required for Y3. The above expressions for Y3 indicate that the analytic method is tedious even for very small ANs, such as the project in Fig. 1, let alone for general ANs. Unfortunately, it would be more onerous to calculate C3 analytically because of a subtle point that must be taken into consideration. That is, C3 consists of two parts. The first is the sum of the cost of the three finished activities #1, #2 and #3, and the second is the cost of the portion of activity #4 that has been accomplished at Y3. This latter, however, may be significant and very difficult to obtain because Y3 is a r.v.. Moreover, we wish to obtain the cumulative cost at each t during project execution. Therefore, to gain the l.b. and the u.b. on cumulative cost curves, we propose to use the MCS approach in which a ‘sample’ is a single realization of a project.We randomly generated the duration of each activity according to its distribution to realize a single scenario. For each such scenario, we constructed the Gantt chart and determined, for each time point of interest to us, the subset of active activities and thus secured the cumulative cost at that time, as shown in Fig. 2. Repeated sampling provides different scenarios of project realizations that, collectively, yield the desired bounds. This approach was implemented for the project in Fig. 1, with the result plotted in Fig. 3. Observe that the maximal project duration, which we know to be 17, was not realized in 1000 samples. It is probable that running enough samples will result in the realization of the maximal project duration. Furthermore, both bounds on the cumulative cost curves could be “smoothed out” to give a better picture. However, we refrained from doing so because our objectives are to emphasize their existence, to establish the methodology of securing them, and to conduct the requisite analysis of them related to the financial aspects of a project rather than its cosmetic appearance. Clearly, an alphorn shape is formed between the lower and the upper bounds of the cumulative cost curves over time, which allows for the assessment of the financial status during project implementation.To fully comprehend the effect of uncertainty on, and the role of the AoU in, the bidding/budgeting/financial processes, the detailed discussion that follows compares a primary method based on averages, which unfortunately is commonly used, with our proposed approach based on the AoU. For the small project in Fig. 1, the total project cost at all average activity durations is $17.5 at 12.5months, as shown in Fig. 2. Assuming a markup of approximately 40%, the bid on the project would be $24.5. The two payment modes are mentioned in Section 2 and are detailed in Table 3for the small project. The financial status is analyzed under the two different payment modes.Despite the fact that both durations and costs of activities are r.v.s, most project managers are still willing to resort to ‘averages’ that in their view, move the problem from the stochastic domain to the deterministic domain, with which it is much easier to cope. We illustrate this behavior with the small project depicted in Fig. 1. The cumulative cost based on all average durations is shown in Fig. 2. The following treatment highlights the pitfalls of such an approach (Elmaghraby, 2005).(1)Mode 1: scheduled paymentsThe financial status of the project is depicted in Fig. 4, from which it can be observed that the project appears to enjoy excess income over expenditures for the first 2.5 months, whereas the picture is quite different from 2.5 to 12.5 months, when the project must borrow money (most of the time) to meet expenses. The cross-hatched area below the cumulative cost curve amounts to approximately 17.5 dollar-months. Assuming a commercial rate of interest equal to 8% per month, the cost of borrowing would amount to $1.56.1This value is evaluated using the following logic: the areas of excess receipts over expenditure (the yellow triangle) are approximately balanced by the areas of deficit between t=3 and t=5 and between t≈5.5 and t=6. This leaves the trapezoid between t=6 and t=10 plus the triangle between t=10 and t=12.5.1This, in turn reduces the final ‘value gained’ from 24.5 to 22.94, which in turn reduces the ‘markup’ from ≈40% to ≈31% (22.94−17.5)/17.5).(2)Mode 2: payments based on realizations of milestone eventsThe cumulative cost curve remains unchanged, but the payments are carried out at the realizations of nodes 3 and 4. Node 3 is realized at t=7 and node 4 at t=12.5. The financial status of the project is depicted in Fig. 5, from which it is observed that the cost of borrowing is ≈$0.85,2Evaluated using the following reasoning: the excess income between t=0 and t=2.75 is approximately equal to the deficit between t=2.75 and t=5.25, and the excess income between t=7 and t=10 is approximately equal to the deficit between t=10 and t=12.5, leaving the trapezoid between t=5.25 and t=7 as the net deficit.2resulting in a net profit of ≈$23.65 or a net ‘markup’ of approximately 35%. This is still below the targeted ‘markup’ of 40% but is well above the 31% markup secured by the previous modes of payment.No matter which payment mode is adopted, the CNV at each time is a r.v., which depends on the cumulative cost incurred at a specified time. To illustrate this concept, consider again the small project in Fig. 1 based on Payment Mode 1, and the financial status at time t=7 is depicted in Fig. 6. Consider that for t=7, the cumulative receipts amount to only $10, but the cumulative cost (secured using MCS with a sample size of 5000) has a mean ≈11.86 and a variance ≈1.652, which implies that, with a probability≈0.95, the cumulative cost is in the interval of [8.56,15.16]. The combination of the mean and the variance also implies that the cost shall not exceed the income, with a probability given byPt=7=ϕ10-11.861.65≈13%. Put differently, as shown in Fig. 6, the probability of being over budget (i.e., in the red3For interpretation of color in Figs. 4 and 6, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.3) is approximately 87%. Furthermore, the pessimistic cumulative cost is $13 and the optimistic cumulative cost is $9 at t=7, so the probability of a cumulative cost over $13 is 24.51% and the probability of a cumulative cost below $9 is 4.18%, which again shows that the two extreme scenarios are not the u.b. and the l.b. of the AoU. Moreover, the probability of a cumulative receipt of $10 over $9 (the optimistic scenario at t=7) is only 8.74%, while the probability of a cumulative receipt of $10 over $13 (the pessimistic scenario t=7) is zero because the probability of a cumulative cost of $13 over a cumulative receipt of $10 amounts to 62.57%. From the perspective of managers using the AoU versus the pessimistic/optimistic scenarios, there is no reason to panic when the cumulative cost exceeds the value under the pessimistic scenario at a time t because it does not mean that cumulative cost will exceed the upper bounds at time t. Likewise, project managers cannot be excessively optimistic when the cumulative cost is less than that under the optimistic scenario at time t.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Both the duration and the cost of an activity are modeled as r.v.s, and the cost incurred to complete it depends on its random duration. Accordingly, we first present the concept of the AoU to describe the variation domain of the cumulative cost over the life of a project. We then apply the AoU to assess the financial status along a project progresses under two payment modes. Furthermore, we designed and conducted a full numerical experiment to validate the AoU. Finally, we conclude that the AoU may be a promising method of financial management for projects under uncertainty, and that financial risk levels over a project’s lifespan can be gained based on the AoU. Moreover, financial status is not sensitive to the choice of duration distributions or to the form of cost functions for activities under uncertain conditions, but payment rules can greatly affect financial status over the duration of a project.Our study leaves several issues unaddressed, two of which we consider to be interesting extensions. Perhaps it is most important to decide what to do if the AoU indicates an unacceptable project cost at future moments in time. This question calls for the study of optimal project compression in a stochastic environment. Additionally, we determine the AoU using a numerical calculating method for the reason of practicality, but we must emphasize that an exact algorithm, rather than the analytical method, may exist because distributions of stochastic activity durations are known. Therefore, exploring an exact efficient procedure to find the AoU is a challenging open question.