@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Strategic analysis of manufacturer-supplier partnerships: An ANP model for collaborative CO2 reduction management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ANP has been applied for the first time to CO2 management in collaborative contexts.Construction of the model is based on 20 interviews with different managers.Application of the decision network to a leading manufacturer in the FMCG sector.Sensitivity analyses show that the final solution is robust to changes of weights.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Analytic network process,Decision support systems,Environment,Multiple criteria analysis,Supply chain management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this manuscript is to introduce a decision methodology that allows manufacturing firms to evaluate which supplier is the most suitable partner for the implementation of a collaborative CO2 reduction management approach. The decision problem is developed for the fast-moving consumer goods (FMCGs) industry, which currently ranks among the ten largest CO2 emitting industries worldwide. In this paper, the evaluation and selection of the most suitable supplier is performed using the analytic network process (ANP), a decision-making technique that allows practitioners to solve complex decision structures. The key contributions of the present paper reside in the combination of literature and case-based derived decision criteria, aimed at enhancing judgment validity, with particular emphasis on a collaborative setting, which is highly relevant in the present context as the focal firms often lack the necessary skills for sustainability and, at the same time, are responsible for sustainability in the supply chain. The practical application of the ANP model at a major FMCG company yields robust results corroborated through a sensitivity analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Companies are well aware of the positive effects of CO2 reduction management on operational performance in terms of cost savings, reputation building, and risk mitigation (e.g., Hart & Gautam, 1996; Klassen & McLaughlin, 1996). To exploit further emissions reduction potentials, to remain competitive, to meet increasing customer expectations, and in response to pressures from government and stakeholder groups, companies are now increasingly shifting the focus of their environmental strategy from the firm to the supply chain level (Benjaafar, Li, & Daskin, 2010; Carbon Trust, 2011; Foerstl, Reuter, Hartmann, & Blome, 2010; Gold, Seuring, & Beske, 2010; González-Benito & Gonzáles-Benito, 2006; Lozano, 2007; Seuring & Müller, 2008; Sharfman, Shaft, & Annex, 2009; Sundarakani, de Souza, Goh, Wagner, & Manikandan, 2010).Companies operating in the fast-moving consumer goods (FMCGs) sector are particularly affected by this trend, as this sector belongs to the ten largest emitters of carbon dioxide emissions in the world (Carbon Trust, 2011). Current examples of companies extending their environmental management strategies to include the supply chain are PepsiCO (2011) and Procter (2010); both recently began encouraging suppliers to measure emissions and improve environmental performance. The overall goal in this context is to collaborate closely with the suppliers. Firms may engage in joint CO2 management strategies for manifold reasons, including to lower supply chains emissions by providing a less-skilled partner with assistance, to gain access to a partner’s critical resources such as CO2 management expertise, or because working closely together provides an opportunity to improve processes by investing in joint CO2 reduction measures.According to studies of partnership formation, the first steps to be taken when building effective supply chain partnerships are identification of the strategic needs, followed by the evaluation and selection of a partner (Kim & Kumar, 2010). Paying attention to critical success factors such as organizational commitment, relationship closeness, information exchange, and conflict resolution techniques is of particular importance, as most partnerships fail because they are not well organized (Kim & Kumar, 2010; Lambert & Cooper, 2000). Therefore, the introduction of a collaborative CO2 management approach with suppliers requires a comprehensive evaluation model; models exclusively considering environmental supplier characteristics are not adequate for this purpose. To provide firms with a suitable decision framework for partner selection for joint CO2 reduction management, the existing supplier selection processes (e.g., Hsu, Kuo, Chen, & Hu, 2011) need to be revised and extended by integrating partnership-related criteria that are directly influenced by the supplier’s CO2 management characteristics as well as indirectly affected by the firm’s own carbon management characteristics. This gives rise to the following two research problems addressed in this study: (i) devise a decision making framework for supplier selection for the purpose of collaborative CO2 abatement, and (ii) derive selection criteria in a process that enhances judgment validity.The development of such a comprehensive evaluation model requires a decision methodology that is able to deal with a large number of influencing factors, including various decision components, interactions among the components, trade-offs, and numerous supplier alternatives; all of these factors make supplier selection complex (Choy, Lee, & Lo, 2002; Teng & Jaramillo, 2005; Yang & Chen, 2006). To choose the most suitable decision method for the present evaluation problem, a set of Operations Research methods frequently used for supplier selection problems was examined. Examples include fuzzy sets, mathematical programming models, outranking methods, and multi-attribute utility theory (MAUT) as well as the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and analytic network process (ANP). For that purpose, prior studies were consulted such as Guitouni and Martel (1998), Belton and Stewart (2002), Sarkis and Sundarraj (2006) and most recently by Chai, Liu, and Ngai (2013) dealing with the choice of appropriate decision methods. Outranking methods, for instance, were considered to be inappropriate because they do not allow trade-offs among criteria; mathematical programming was also disqualified due to its being limited to quantitative data sets (Yang & Chen, 2006). Finally, the ANP was deemed to be the most suitable approach for the present decision problem for a number of reasons. The ANP incorporates dependence and feedback and allows for the integration of qualitative and quantitative data, which are relevant for realistic decision-making. Furthermore, with this method, judgments are elicited using an experimentally tested and validated scale that reduces errors in decision-making. Finally, the ANP technique is consistent with human thought processes, thus improving management understanding (Saaty, 2005).To address the second research problem, it is worth noting that Saaty and Tran (2007) argue that fuzzying judgments in AHP (and hence, by extension, in ANP), frequently done to account for uncertainty and ambiguity, while increasing consistency, does not enhance validity of judgments and is therefore to be discouraged. It may be argued that decision criteria derived from an explicit empirical research process, based on primary and secondary data, are indeed a means of enhancing validity of judgments. The approach selected in the present paper is furthermore in response to Singhal and Singhal (2012) who point out that the combination of multiple research methods, here case-based research and theoretical modeling, is a fruitful direction in OM and SCM research.The theoretical contributions of this paper are twofold. First, to enhance the validity of judgments in ANP, a hierarchical decision model was specifically developed, through case-based research, which enables partner selection for collaborative CO2 reduction. Hence this model is, contrary to prior research, not entirely based on criteria reported in the literature (for instance, the Green SCM literature), but rather the criteria emerged from the case studies undertaken for theory development and the ensuing hypotheses (Theißen, Spinler, & Huchzermeier, 2013). Second, a novel direction is pursued in the present paper by focusing on a collaborative mechanism for CO2 reduction, in the sense that both the focal firm and the supplier are going to benefit upon entering the partnership. Only two previous papers aiming in a similar direction could be identified. Wu, Shih, and Chan (2009) provide an ANP model for partner selection in strategic alliances. The criteria derived therein are, contrary to the present research, derived from the literature and encompass a much broader range of characteristics and capabilities. Verdecho, Alfaro-Saiz, Rodriguez-Rodriguez, and Ortiz-Bas (2012) provide an ANP model for managing inter-enterprise collaborative relationships. Again, the factors relevant for collaboration, such as strategic and cultural factors, are, necessarily, less context-specific and derived exclusively from the literature.In terms of practical contribution, the application of the model at a major fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) manufacturing company and direction setting for its supplier selection approach are illustrated. In particular, the relevancy of the criteria, based on the case studies in the FMCG industry, was commended by practitioners and thus applicability and transparency of the model welcomed.The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a comprehensive literature review of environmental supplier selection problems, whereupon a brief description of the ANP is presented. The decision network model, with the criteria derived from case-based research, is then derived and subsequently applied to a leading FMCG manufacturer that is facing a CO2-based supplier selection decision. Finally, the resulting scores of the alternatives are computed, which are shown to be robust by a limited sensitivity analysis. Managerial implications and limitations of this study as well as important future research directions close this paper.Reviewing the literature on collaborative CO2 reduction management and environmental supplier selection problems shows that a systematic decision model that incorporates both CO2-based supplier selection criteria and related partnership metrics is lacking.The growing body of literature in this field illustrates that environmental supply chains and collaborative CO2 management strategies are of increasing interest for practitioners and scholars alike (Chiou, Chan, Lettice, & Chung, 2011; Giurco & Petrie, 2007; Sundarakani et al., 2010; Weinhofer & Hoffmann, 2010). For example, Sundarakani et al. (2010) suggest taking supply chain processes into account to increase visibility and implement CO2 reduction measures. Scholtens and Kleinsmann (2011) emphasize that understanding the individual firm’s CO2 management characteristics, such as reduction goals, is relevant to initiating CO2 abatement strategies on the supply chain level. Chiou et al. (2011) suggest that firms should devote substantial efforts to addressing environmental issues by working closely with supply chain partners. According to the Carbon Disclosure Project (2010), suppliers are of particular importance in efforts to curb the amount of emissions because around fifty percent of a product’s emissions are caused by the manufacturing processes.Among the first studies in the area of environmental-based supplier selection is the study by Noci (1997), who emphasizes the importance of incorporating suppliers to manage environmental issues more efficiently. To assess environmental performance, a vendor rating system was developed to evaluate the supplier’s environmental competence, efficiency, and image as well as the net life-cycle cost. Another kind of decision-making support tool focusing on procurement management was developed by Handfield, Walton, Sroufe, and Melnyk (2002). Using the AHP, the authors introduced qualitative and quantitative environmental aspects into the supplier selection process. To develop the model only managers from Fortune 500 companies were chosen; small companies were not integrated in the construction process of the decision model. Likewise, Humphreys, Wong, and Chen (2003) proposed a knowledge-based system to evaluate the environmental performance of suppliers, thereby criticizing the fact that traditional supplier selection models are only focused on factors such as quality and flexibility. Their model includes environmental competencies, management competencies, environmental management systems, green image and design, as well as effects of pollution and improvements. Wu, Kuo, and Lu (2007) developed a decision framework that helps supply chain managers to measure suppliers’ environmental performance and efficiency. Applying the AHP technique which is, in contrast to the ANP, not capable of handling interdependencies, the entire life-cycle of a product was included in the decision structure.Hsu and Hu (2009) integrated hazardous substance management into supplier selection by applying the ANP. The categories (e.g., R&D management) and criteria (e.g., legal compliance competency) of the model were derived from existing literature; interviews with practitioners were not conducted. Lee, Kang, and Hsu (2009) proposed an AHP-based model that evaluates the most suitable green supplier for cooperation in the high-tech industry by integrating environmental criteria such as environmental competencies and non-environmental criteria (e.g., costs). The decision model of Bai and Sarkis (2010) was constructed based on a number of sustainability metrics including environmental, economic, and social issues. With special emphasis on the social dimension, the authors utilized a grey system and rough set theory approach to evaluate a supplier’s suitability. However, a primary limitation of their study is that only a conceptual illustrative example was introduced, not a real world application. A completely different approach was applied by Zhu, Dou, and Sarkis (2010). Based on the ANP and environmental factors, the researchers developed a three-step process consisting of evaluating the supplier’s environmental performance, mapping onto a portfolio grid, and defining corresponding management strategies. The study of Wittstruck and Teuteberg (2011) designed a holistic approach for the selection of recycling partners in the electronics industry. The AHP model was validated by an empirical study, and financial, social, and environmental factors were implemented into the model. Hsu, Kuo, et al. (2011) proposed an emissions management model of supplier evaluation using the decision-making trial and evaluation laboratory (DEMATEL) approach, which is a tool for building and exploring judgments. In a similar paper, Hsu, Chen, and Chiou (2011) applied jointly DEMATEL and ANP for carbon management; however, contrary to the present study, no explicit consideration of collaborative approaches was made and, secondly, the criteria were derived from literature only (similar in Hsu & Hu, 2009; Zhu et al., 2010) as opposed to the approach presented here based, in addition, on case study research. Tseng, Divinagracia, and Divinagracia (2009) applied the fuzzy method in the context of ANP to account for uncertainty and ambiguity related to qualitative data; Tseng and Chiu (2013) applied fuzzy measures with grey possible degree, where the former accommodates vagueness of language, and the latter deals with incomplete information. In a similar vein, Shaw, Shankar, Yadav, and Thakur (2012) applied fuzzy set theory and fuzzy multi-objective linear programming in a green supplier selection problem. The present study uses an ANP approach under certainty, which is, according to Chai et al. (2013), still the dominant mode and furthermore strongly supported by Saaty and Tran (2007).Originally, the ANP evolved from the analytic hierarchy process (AHP), both first introduced by Saaty (1990) and Saaty and Vargas (2006). In the literature, the ANP is considered to be a generalized form of the AHP because it provides the opportunity to evaluate problems that cannot be structured hierarchically due to multi-directional relationships among the decision elements. Correspondingly, the hierarchical network structure of the ANP is similar to the structure of the AHP with the difference that the ANP model integrates multi-directional relationships.From a technical point of view, the ANP consists of an objective at the top of the hierarchy network, clusters (collections of special criteria), the criteria, alternatives, and interdependencies between the mentioned decision components. Because dominance or relative importance of influence is the central concept of the ANP, a series of pairwise comparisons is required in which the decision maker compares two decision elements with respect to a control factor. The comparisons are then collected in a matrix. Typically, the judgments are based on the experience and knowledge of experts in the field. To express how many times a criterion dominates another criterion, the ANP methodology uses the same fundamental scale as the AHP; see Appendix B (Emshoff & Saaty, 1982; Saaty, 2005). Interdependencies among clusters and among criteria are represented by two-way arrows or arcs. The interdependences are handled by obtaining the composite weights through application of the supermatrix technique (Saaty & Vargas, 2006). A description of this technique is listed below; details are continued in Saaty (1996).Following prior research by for example Meade and Sarkis (1998), Meade and Sarkis (1999) and Zhu et al. (2010), the ANP methodology comprises (1) construction of the decision network, (2) performing pairwise comparisons and e-Vector computations, (3) formation of the supermatrix to evaluate interdependencies among network components, and (4) solution of the supermatrix, which produces the final result of the decision network. Additionally, a sensitivity analysis can be conducted in order to determine whether the final result is robust to changes in the judgments. Fig. 3.1provides an overview of the ANP process applied in this manuscript.So far, ANP has been largely applied to supplier selection problems (e.g., Bayazit, 2006; Gencer & Gürpinar, 2007; Jharkharia & Shankar, 2007); to manufacturing process decisions, as by Meade and Sarkis (1999), who introduce a decision network for agility improvement; and to strategic decisions in supply chain management (Raisinghani & Meade, 2005; Sarkis & Sundarraj, 2002). These examples indicate the potential usefulness of the model, where further fields are presented by Chai et al. (2013).The development of the decision network is a crucial step in applying the ANP modeling approach. The construction follows a parallel process consisting of a literature review and, concurrently, case-based research. The latter component is novel in the ANP literature. In the first step, the most typical supplier selection criteria as well as those criteria that may be relevant to the present research were studied. Based on a review of more than 50 manuscripts presenting multi-attribute supplier selection problems (e.g., Dickson, 1966; Dou & Sarkis, 2010), detailed literature reviews within this context (e.g., Ho, Xu, & Dey, 2010), and studying collaboration literature (e.g., Fawcett, Magnan, & McCarter, 2008b; Hammervoll, 2012), a large number of significant criteria were identified and categorized. In Appendix A examples of the selection criteria and corresponding references are presented.The case-based research process was organized as follows. To select representative companies for the interviews, a theoretical sampling logic was employed consisting of sets of comparable organizations and organizations with different characteristics thereby accounting for heterogeneities such as expertise in carbon management as well as company size. Regarding the latter, Pagell, Yang, Krumwiede, and Sheu (2004) showed that the size of firms affects the environmental performance of companies. For example, to obtain a sample with a homogenous environment, the geographical location of the companies was accounted for as studies (e.g., Weinhofer & Hoffmann, 2010) have shown that carbon strategies differ in Europe, USA and Japan; because of this emphasis was put on a single country (Germany) which is a major economy in the EU. After pre-testing the interview program with experts from academia and industry and incorporating their feed-back into the final version of the questionnaire, a series of 20 face-to-face meetings2Total duration of the (recorded) meetings: 28.2hours.2was held with agents exclusively concerned with the environmental support of suppliers, sustainability managers, operations managers, supply chain managers, and purchasing managers. Within and across-case data analysis indicated that saturation had been achieved with this amount of case studies considered which is in line with recommendations for case research in general (Yin, 2009). On average, four interviews per company were carried out. To overcome possible social desirability bias within the interviews, proactive measures were employed. For example, critical issues were discussed from different perspectives within the interviews and external reports (e.g., from the Product Carbon Footprint Project) were consulted to ensure objectivity. The latter enabled data triangulation. Overall, the analysis of the interviews (cf. Theißen et al., 2013) resulted in the addition, removal, adaption, and restructuring of some criteria and clusters.For example, the criterion ‘attitude of the management towards the future’ (see Appendix A) was replaced by the ‘commitment in external environmental management activities’ criterion. Studying a potential partner’s proactivity in for example environmental initiatives and ratings, which can be easily determined (e.g., through public available reports), is indicative for awareness of climate change as well as demonstrates that environmental management structures are embedded in a company’s operations. In the end, the decision network consisted of five clusters. A rough representation of the hierarchical decision network is illustrated in Fig. 3.2; clusters are represented as dashed lines. Interdependencies that were determined in the meetings will be integrated afterwards.For reasons of clarity, the clusters were divided into two categories. Inspired by prior studies by Klassen and Whybark (1999) and Sarkis and Talluri (2002), one category was named ‘strategic CO2 metrics in supplier selection’ and described the supplier’s profile with respect to relevant CO2 management characteristics and the supplier’s competencies in dealing with CO2 management-related issues. The other category was termed ’CO2-related partnership performance metrics’ and described the factors that influence collaborative work on CO2 management including organizational factors, risk factors, and implementation management. This categorization is helpful because it shows that in-depth decision making in collaborative environmental supply chain management contexts goes beyond conventional supplier selection problems; it needs to consider both the environmental supplier selection factors and partnership as well as organizational performance metrics.The combination of literature survey and case-based research to derive decision criteria in the present context yielded two benefits: first, emerging criteria in the as yet scarcely researched domain of collaborative approaches to CO2 abatement were thus appropriately captured; second, the validity of judgments in the ensuing pairwise comparisons between criteria is arguably enhanced as the ultimate set of criteria is derived from case studies specifically designed for the present research purpose which ensures content validity. Hence, this approach is in direct response to Saaty and Tran (2007) who argue that focusing on improvements in consistency may negatively affect validity.By integrating the criterion of technological maturity, the decision model accounts for the current stage of development of a product, process, or manufacturing technique on the supplier’s side (Hesselbach & Herrmann, 2011). Products that are at the beginning of the life-cycle possess greater improvement potential and thus potential to reduce emissions. In contrast, a high maturity stage is considered risky because such products or techniques are more likely to be replaced with newer products in the near future.Geographic proximity is another influencing variable. This criterion was chosen since studies suggest that firms’ CO2 management capabilities and strategies vary depending on the location (e.g., González-Benito & Gonzáles-Benito, 2006; Weinhofer & Hoffmann, 2010). For example, Scholtens and Kleinsmann (2011) find that the motivations to engage in emissions management differ between British and Dutch subcontractors; similarly, Weinhofer and Hoffmann (2010) show that firms’ carbon strategies vary significantly in Europe, Japan, and the United States.‘Life cycle cost management’ provides firms with a valuable tool to examine CO2 management from the cost perspective (Hsu, Chen, et al., 2011; Hsu, Kuo, et al., 2011). This is important for two reasons: First, energy prices are rising, generating costs that pose a risk for energy-intensive industries. Second, carbon savings are associated with energy savings, which in turn offer cost savings (Kolk & Pinkse, 2004).The order-related CO2 volume gives information about the supplier’s emissions reduction potential. A statement of one of the executives interviewed illustrates well why this criterion is relevant for selection processes: “The lower the supplier’s emissions caused by our order, the lower the likelihood to reveal emissions reduction potentials.” Hence, a partnership is considered to be more worthwhile when a supplier’s order-related CO2 volume is high.Another criterion that was identified in the interview process is the importance of a firm’s orders for a supplier. Originally, this criterion evolved from the market share criterion, which has been applied in numerous decision-making studies (e.g., Bayazit, 2006; Simpson, Siguaw, & White, 2002). Overall, the strategic importance criterion takes into account what market power a firm has on a supplier compared to the supplier’s other customers. This is important because a supplier’s customer base - which can include rivals - may benefit from process improvements (Kannan & Tan, 2002).The spectrum of CO2 reduction practices refers to the variety of measures implemented to improve a company’s emission balance. Motivational factors for firms to engage in CO2 reduction measures in excess of the legal requirements include increasing awareness of climate change, the opportunity to enhance environmental performance, and the increasing interest of stakeholders (Bénabou & Tirole, 2010). Following prior research, reduction practices can broadly be divided into internally and externally oriented practices (Boiral, 2006; Jeswani, Wehrmeyer, & Mulugetta, 2008; Kolk & Pinkse, 2004). In contrast to external practices, internal practices directly focus on the reduction of emissions within the firm itself. An example of a company that applies a broader spectrum of emissions reduction practices is PepsiCo (2011). Besides making its own processes more environmentally efficient, the company recently began incorporating supply chain partners into their CO2 management strategy. The overall intention of this strategy is to show how important climate change is to business decision-making.The accounting and reporting of carbon data forms an essential element of effective CO2 management (PepsiCO, 2011). It is necessary to measure emissions on the corporate, process, and more complex product level to identify the major emission sources and to implement reduction practices purposefully. By reporting and analyzing data, firms can examine current operations, develop new strategies, and track improvements (Hedberg & Malmborg, 2003). Various standards are available to track emissions, such as the GHG-protocol,3www.ghgprotocol.org.3the ISO 14064,4www.iso.org.4and the PAS 2050.5www.bsigroup.com.5The ‘CO2 reduction plans and targets’ criterion was integrated because prior research suggests that setting reduction targets is an essential requirement for curbing the amount of emissions; it also significantly drives firms to actively engage in carbon management (Jeswani et al., 2008; Weinhofer & Hoffmann, 2010). Suppliers that have developed a detailed reduction plan are considered to be more interested, and possibly more knowledgeable, in the area of CO2 management. Relative and absolute indicators can be used for setting reduction goals. However, a prerequisite for the definition of plans or targets is CO2 accounting.Commitment to external environmental management activities’ was identified as another relevant criterion within the interviews. This describes a firm’s level of activity in environmental management beyond the corporate boundaries. Examples include participation in environmental initiatives such as the ‘Product Carbon Footprint Project’ and the ‘Carbon Disclosure Project’, voluntary governmental programs, and sustainability conferences - all of which are indicative of climate change awareness as well as commitment to and understanding of environmental management (Carbon Disclosure Project, 2011; Product Carbon Fottprint Project, 2009). Sharfman et al. (2009) found that the more proactive firms are with regard to environmental management, the higher the likelihood that they will be chosen as partner.Compatibility of operating systems is beneficial to collaborating more effectively with partners (Chung, Singh, & Lee, 2000; Dyer & Singh, 1998; Lorange & Roos, 1992). Compatible systems simplify communication and coordination activities, hence increasing transparency and reducing complexity, which is a major hurdle when introducing collaborative supply chain partnerships. A study by Buono and Bowditch (1989) shows that most partnerships fail due to missing analogies. Within the interviews, it was established that the compatibility of production processes and carbon accounting standards is an important factor for working together effectively.Successfully managing partnerships and improving the performance of partners requires the exchange of relevant information between parties (Barratt, 2004; Lambert & Cooper, 2000). Within the context of CO2 emissions, information exchange includes the exchange of CO2 data and CO2 knowledge. To help a partner improve its carbon balance, the partner’s CO2 data need to be analyzed to identify the major emissions sources; next, CO2 management knowledge needs to be prepared and transferred to the partner. The less information exchange necessary to help a partner, the lower the expenditure such as human capital, money, and time.The criterion ‘support for implementation of CO2 reduction practices’ comprises expenditures that accrue when firms directly support each other with CO2 reduction, i.e. when helping partners install effective structures for emissions reduction. Compatible or similar production systems between the firm and its prospective partner may be beneficial for increasing understanding. In contrast to information exchange, implementation support is of a physical nature. However, both information exchange and implementation support are important for improving the partnership’s CO2 performance.Existing literature suggests that relationship closeness exerts significant influence on the creation of effective partnerships (Hammervoll, 2011; Maloni & Benton, 1997; Sharfman et al., 2009) and suggests that a lack of relationship closeness among partners is a significant implementation barrier to successful supply chain management (Fawcett, Magnan, & McCarter, 2008a). Relationship closeness reduces transaction costs related to bargaining and monitoring and motivates firms to engage in partnerships (Barney & Hansen, 1995). In particular, relationship closeness increases the willingness of firms to jointly invest in projects such as firm-overlapping CO2 reduction practices and to increase transparency. The criterion’s relevance for the decision problem is also underlined by Sharfman et al. (2009), who found that trust between firms and their suppliers facilitates commitment to collaborative environmental management activities.The ‘response to changes’ criterion describes a supplier’s readiness and ability to support changes in production processes in response to the firm’s carbon reduction strategy. Numerous studies focusing on supplier selection models integrated this criterion (e.g., Chen & Huang, 2007; Choy, Lee, & Lo, 2005; Mendoza & Ventura, 2008); within such studies, this criterion is sometimes also called flexibility or customer responsiveness. However, the response to changes criterion is based on the supplier’s ability to modify its own process structures according to changes in the manufacturing firm’s processes, with the aim of lowering overall supply chain emissions.Companies must prepare for the possibility of stricter governmental regulations, growing customer expectations, and the threat of physical or environmental problems (e.g., resources scarcity) caused by climate change; this makes risk management increasingly important (Carbon Disclosure Project, 2012). Transparency along the supply chain, i.e. a supplier’s CO2 management activities, can be useful to evaluate risks and to initiate appropriate measures (Carbon Disclosure Project, 2011).This criterion refers to the readiness of collaborating firms to jointly invest in carbon mitigation measures and to the combination of related resources used to mitigate CO2 emissions. Prior studies by Dyer (1996) suggest a positive relationship between relation-specific investments and performance. Similarly, Ansoff (1988) points out that synergy can result in benefits that are greater than the sum of the individual parts. By making joint investments and combining resources, the partners can exploit CO2 reduction potentials that they cannot realize alone.Congruence of the firm’s and the potential supplier’s CO2 reduction strategies is another crucial selection criterion. Ultimately, collaboration is a self-interested process; each partner seeks to increase its own benefits. Correspondingly, incentive alignment or goal congruence significantly influences the effectiveness of collaborative working; they refer to the extent to which a company achieves own goals and satisfies the requirements of the partner (Cao & Zhang, 2011; Lejeune & Yakova, 2005). Prior studies have shown that firms that pursue the reduction of supply chain emissions prefer partners that aim at reducing of company-internal emissions (Theißen et al., 2013). In such a partnership constellation both partners’ goals are satisfied: supply chain emissions are reduced by helping the partner and the partner’s own company-internal emissions are lowered.This criterion describes the risk that firms face when either the CO2 savings on a supplier’s side or the joint reduction practices are lost and, as a result, the firm’s (indirect) emissions balance deteriorates. A loss of CO2 savings can have negative effects on the firm’s position in environmental indices (e.g., Dow Jones Sustainability Index6www.sustainability-indexes.com/index.jsp.6), can result in the withdrawal of CO2 performance certificates (e.g., Carbon Performance Leadership Index7www.cdproject.net/en-us/results/pages/leadership-index.aspx.7), and can have detrimental effects on public reputation. Numerous studies in fact argue that companies primarily take action regarding environmental management in order to improve their corporate reputation (Boston Consulting Group, 2009; Carbon Disclosure Project, 2012; Rikanovic, 2005; Wittstruck & Teuteberg, 2011). Reasons for the loss of CO2 savings observed among the interviewees are, for example, modifications in the partner’s product portfolio, withdrawal of procurement contracts, and insolvency.Another relevant criterion that was identified in the interview process describes delays in the realization of CO2 reduction practices. Overall, this criterion refers to the risk that efforts made by a firm to enhance a supplier’s carbon balance will not be realized within the agreed-upon period of time. This makes carbon reduction targeting difficult for firms.The price of a supplier’s products is a frequently applied criterion in supplier selection models (Choy & Lee, 2003; Saen, 2007; Sharland, Eltantawy, & Giunipero, 2003; Talluri & Narasimhan, 2004; Ting & Cho, 2008; Weber, Current, & Benton, 1991). Within this decision model, the product price criterion was integrated in order to account for the risk of rising product prices on the supplier’s side. A supplier’s market power, a high degree of product specialization, or a single sourcing relationship may increase the firm’s dependency and thus its risk of being unwillingly exploited by increasing product prices (Blome & Henke, 2009).Another criterion that was identified in the interviews was the transfer of CO2 management knowledge to rivals. Overall, this criterion describes the danger that a partner will pass relevant CO2 knowledge on to its other customers. In the case that the other customers are rivals, and the manufacturing firm faces the risk of losing competitive advantages.In developing the above clusters, attention was paid to the closeness of the criteria to the cluster’s function (Saaty, 1990). To give an example, within the cluster ‘risk factors’ only homogenous criteria were included focusing on potential hazards (e.g., increasing product price, loss of CO2 savings). To ascertain the accuracy of judgments, the recommendation of Saaty (1990) was followed to include not more than nine criteria within one comparison process. The maximum number of criteria compared in the model was six, thereby meeting this condition. A representation of the overall ANP consisting of 5 clusters, 21 criteria, and An(n=1,2,3,…) alternatives is provided in Fig. 3.3, where capital letters refer to the submatrices illustrated in Fig. 4.1.The ANP model presented above has been applied to one of the leading FMCG manufacturers in Germany. The company, hereafter denoted by the fictitious name ‘Int.Co.’, has been operating for more than 140years. The annual turnover, generated by about 50,000 employees, amounts to nearly 20 billion euros. Because CO2 emissions reduction forms a key element of the manufacturer’s corporate strategy, the company is interested in forming intensive partnerships with some of its suppliers to curb the overall amount of emissions.The identification of a supplier alternative that best supports the firm’s objectives depends on numerous factors, such as the CO2 order-related volume or the relationship closeness (see Fig. 3.3). For that purpose, a decision model is needed that is able to consider various influences; the ANP is capable of handling such complex decision problems. Based on an initial filtering procedure conducted by Int.Co. itself, four potential supplier alternatives are identified. For reasons of confidentiality the suppliers are given fictitious names (A1, A2, A3, and A4).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
