@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The steel industry: A mathematical model under environmental regulations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We evaluate the EU-ETS impacts on steel market.We adopt a technological representation of the sector.We consider two main processes for steelmaking: integrated mills and Electric Arc Furnace in minimills.We analyze the investment in the electricity autoproduction and Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies.We model different permit price scenarios under the EU-ETS regulation with and without considering CCS technology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Generalized Nash Equilibrium Problem (GNEP),Steel sector,Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS),EU-ETS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work, a spatial equilibrium problem is formulated for analyzing the impact of the application of the EU-ETS on the steel industry that has historically seen Europe as one of its major producers. The developed model allows us to simultaneously represent the interactions of several market players, to endogenously determine output and steel prices and to analyze the investment in the Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technology. In addition, the proposed model supports the evaluation of the CO2 emission costs on the basis of Directive 2009/29/EC, the “20-20-20” targets, and the Energy Roadmap 2050. In this light, two main processes for steelmaking have to be considered: integrated mills (BOF) and Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) in minimills.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The European Emissions Trading Scheme (EU-ETS) has been up and running since 2005 by Directive 2003/87/EC (now modified by Directive 2009/29/EC). The EU-ETS is the world’s first international largest cap-and-trade system and covers half of the European’s annual carbon emissions. It has helped Europe to maintain the Kyoto Protocol targets and it is noted as one of the main tools to achieve the ambitious target of 20 percent emission reductions by 2020 below 1990 levels.The EU-ETS was initially developed in two distinct phases as indicated by Directive 2003/87/EC, but then it is being implemented in three phases trough the Directive 2009/29/EC. The first pilot phase (from 1 January 2005 to 31 December 2007) was called “learning by doing” phase, in which a great autonomy was given to member states throughout the allowance allocation process in all over the involved sectors. At the end of this period, the situation led to a decrease in emission price caused by the over-allocation of free allowances and by the inability to carry forward unused allowances to Phase II. The second phase (from 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2012) coincides with the “first commitment period” of the Kyoto Protocol, in which the involved members must observe their emission targets under the protocol. As in the first phase, we have seen over-allocation of free emission permits, even though the Commission has decided to cut them by 6.5 percent compared to the 2005 level. We are currently in the third phase (running from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2020), in which the EU-ETS will be substantially strengthened and extended.In this paper, we evaluate the economic impacts of the environmental regulation on the pig iron and steel sectors through a spatial equilibrium model. The importance of the study of these sectors started because Europe is a major producer of steel and the steel industry is dominated by large multinational companies. The European steel industry has become an industry operating across national borders, and it has obtained an important position in domestic markets, particularly in high-end segments. Moreover, the steel industry is affected by the increase of the electricity price (due to EU-ETS) for the high consumption of electricity in its process.Studies that have assessed the impact of the EU ETS in this sector (see Oberndorfer et al., 2006 and references therein) generally conclude to a modest decrease in EU production. Conversely most of these studies do not address the second aspect of competitiveness, i.e., profitability, one exception being Robin Smale et al. (2006) who find a positive impact.Various papers in the literature have studied the impact of the EU-ETS in the iron and steel sector. For example, Hidalgo et al. (2005) present a world simulation model able to analyze the evolution of the industry from 1997 to 2030, Junichiro et al. (2007) evaluate CO2 emission reduction potentials and the minimum cost of technological options in the iron and steel sector by regions across the world, while Yeonbae and Ernst (2002) analyze CO2 emissions from energy use in iron and steel industry. Differently from the previous papers, our work aims to provide a technological and economic underpinning for the development of a global roadmap for Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) in the steel sector. CCS is a key technology in the fight against dangerous climate change and will be instrumental in helping governments to deliver ambitious international action; it has a large role to play in this sector, because carbon is used in the steel market as a metallurgic reducing agent.The equilibrium model allows us to analyze the market participants’ action, to determine endogenously the price of the crude steel and to understand the investment decisions in CCS infrastructure. The spatial equilibrium problem is also formulated for analyzing how the price of CO2 can influence investment decisions in the steel sector under EU-ETS. In this light, two main processes for steelmaking have to be considered: integrated mills (BOF) and Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) in minimills.We adopt a technological representation of the European market and also a representation of the Mediterranean, the Russian and the Asian steel markets.The problem has been modeled as a nonlinear Generalized Nash Equilibrium Problem (GNEP) with jointly convex constraints. It is well known that a GNEP can have either no solution, a unique solution, multiple solutions, or infinitely many solutions (see Facchinei et al., 2007; Facchinei and Kanzow, 2007, Facchinei and Pang, 2003 for a complete review). In this paper we guarantee the existence of an equilibrium solution. Moreover, taking into account the relationship between the solution of a GNEP and a Variational Inequality (VI) we reformulate and solve our model as a Mixed Complementarity Problem (MCP), i.e. a particular instance of a VI. The MCP problem is solved in GAMS using the PATH solver.The structural outline of this paper is as follows: in Section 2 the description of the pig iron and steel sectors is introduced. In Section 3, the equilibrium model is described where the companies are Cournot competitors. In Section 4 the mathematical background is presented, while results are discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 is devoted to the conclusions.Currently there are two main routes to produce crude steel. The first one, the integrated steelmaking route or primary route, is based on the Blast Furnace (BF) ironmaking and Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF) and uses raw material including iron ore, coal and coke, limestone and dolomite. The second one, the recycling route or secondary route, produces steel in the Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) using primarily ferrous scrap as main raw material.The integrated route is based on the iron ore reduction with the addition of reducing agents and fluxes in the BF to a high carbon primary metal, called pig iron. The main reducing agent used is coke, which is produced from coal, while fluxes involved are mainly limestone and dolomite.11Precisely, the integrated route uses 1400 kilograms of iron ore, 770 kilograms of coal and 150 kilograms of limestone to produce a ton of crude steel, see for more details World Steel Association.Iron oxides, coke, coal and fluxes react with the heated blast hair injected on the bottom of the furnace to form pig iron, carbon monoxide (CO), and slag which are periodically removed from the furnace. Then, the remaining carbon in the pig iron is oxidized in the BOF by injecting a high-purity oxygen to remove carbon as CO and CO2. Finally, the obtained product is crude steel which is an alloy with a carbon content between 0.2 percent and 2 percent by wait against the carbon content of the pig iron which is between 3.5 percent and 4.5 percent.The other main route, the EAF route, uses scrap as main input and melts it with electricity. On averages, the recycled steel-EAF route uses 880 kg of ferrous scrap, 150 kg of coal and 43 kg of limestone to produce a ton of crude steel. The main energy requirement is linked to the electricity consumption for smelting the scrap.With respect to CO2 emissions, the industry has decreased its emissions to around 60 percent in the last 40 years. Most of this reduction has been correlated with the decrease of energy consumption of the integrated route and the shift towards the “recycling route.” Based on a recent assessment of CO2 emissions, direct emissions from the integrated route222.3 ton CO2/ton crude steel.are around ten times more than for the EAF route.330.21 ton CO2/ton crude steel.In any case, iron and steel production is an important source of carbon dioxide emissions due to the energy intensity of steel production, its reliance on carbon-based fuels and reductants.44See Carpenter (2012).Nowadays there are many technologies and measures available to abate direct CO2 emissions from the different iron and steelmaking processes such as minimizing energy consumption and improving the energy efficiency of the process, reducing agents with a lower CO2 emission factor or capturing the CO2 and storing it underground.Our analysis is focused on investigating the consequences of the application of energy-saving technologies, such as the auto-production of electricity combined with measures for CO2 capturing and storing.The autoproduction of electricity occurs through a system called Top Pressure Recovery Turbine (TRT) which converts the physical energy of high-pressure blast furnace top gas into electricity by using an expansion turbine.55TRT generates electric power of approximately 40–60 kilowatt hour/ton pig iron, see Chunbao and Da-qiang (2010).Although the pressure difference is low, the large gas volumes make the recovery economically feasible (see Hasanbeigi et al., 2010).Further substantial CO2 reduction can only be achieved by equipping plants with CCS (see Croezen and Korteland, 2010; EPA, 2010), that is currently being discussed as the main future technology to drastically reduce CO2 emissions. After the CO2 is captured it needs to be transported and then injected into a suitable storage site. Capturing emissions from industrial facilities also requires separating out the CO2.CO2 storage sites are not necessarily close to capture plants. CO2 captured can be transported either by pipeline or ship depending on the distance and on the geological site position. Once CO2 has been captured and transported it needs to be stored safely and permanently. Geological storage involves injecting CO2 underground at depths of around 800 m or more. At such depths the CO2 will be held at many times atmospheric pressure and temperature. In general, there are two types of storage plants: offshore and onshore plants. Offshore plants are located in the sea while onshore ones are on mainland. The difference between them is that offshore sites are more difficult to install and maintain, while onshore plants are visible and thereby reduce the recreational value of the areas they cross.Currently in Europe there is a project, called Ultra-Low CO2 Steelmaking (ULCOS), which is researching innovative ideas to slash the steel industry’s carbon emissions. It is a consortium of 48 European companies and organizations from 15 European countries that combines various emerging technologies, promising to halve carbon emissions in steelmaking.The program ULCOS66See ULCOS website, available at: http://www.ulcos.org/.carried out considerable research and it is divided into several stages to achieve the ambitious aims of the project (see Birat, 2009). During the first period (2004–2009), used to study of the feasibility of the project, many technologies have been examined. The studies have led to identify those technologies that enable a significant reduction in carbon emissions in the steelmaking. In particular, among the breakthrough technologies identified by the ULCOS that could lead to a reduction of carbon dioxide emissions by more than half compared to current best practice, we have studied the so called Top Gas Recycling Blast Furnace (TGR-BF) with CO2 capture and storage. The concept of the TGR-BF relies on separation of the off gases so that the useful components can be recycled back into the furnace and used as a reducing agent. Of course during this process the electricity is a necessary requirement for capturing CO2.We develop an equilibrium model where the steel producers are Cournot players. In this framework, each company operating in the market maximizes its profits taking into account the competitors decisions.In our quantitative analysis we estimate the interactions of several market players, we determine the crude steel price and we analyze the investment decisions in CCS technology.We first list the set of indices, the parameters and the variables used in our formulation.A.Sets of indicesA.1 General indicesCSteel companies operating in the market.Zones in which we can ideally divide the market, for the purpose of our analysis. In the following we will set I = IETS∪INETS, where IETS = {1, …, m} will be the set of all zones that are subject to the EU-ETS scheme, whileINETS={m+1,⋯,m¯}will stand for the set of those zones to which this scheme does not apply.All possible technologies for the production of steel. In the following we will set V = VINT∪VEL, where VINT = {1, …, r} is the set of technologies used in the integrated process andVEL={r+1,⋯,r¯}is the set of technologies used in the electric arc process.Plants of company c ∈ C located in the zone i ∈ I with technology v ∈ V.B.1 Pig iron related parameterstc,i,h(π)Marginal pig iron transportation cost sustained by company c ∈ C to move pig iron from zone i ∈ I to zone h ∈ I (euro/ton).Electricity consumption per tons of pig iron produced with technology v ∈ VINT (megawatt hour/ton).CO2 emissions per tons of pig iron produced with technology v ∈ VINT in region i ∈ I (kilogram/ton).Capacity of the blast furnace of technology v ∈ VINT of plant k ∈ Kc, i, v.Marginal cost for producing pig iron with technology v ∈ VINT in region i ∈ I.Marginal steel transportation cost sustained by company c ∈ C to move steel from zone i ∈ I to zone h ∈ I (euro/ton).Electricity consumption per tons of steel produced with technology v ∈ V (megawatt hour/ton).Pig iron consumption per tons of steel produced with technology v ∈ VINT (kilogram/ton).CO2 emissions per tons of steel produced with technology v ∈ V in region i ∈ I (kilogram/ton).Steel plant capacity of technology v ∈ VINT of plant k ∈ Kc, i, v.Marginal cost for producing steel with technology v ∈ V in region i ∈ I.Electricity production per tons of pig iron produced by plant k ∈ Kc, i, v(megawatt hour/ton).ξke>0if v ∈ VINT and i ∈ IETS, whileξke=0otherwise.Marginal CO2 transportation and storage cost sustained by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vwith technology v ∈ VINT and i ∈ IETS (euro/ton).Capacity of the CCS plant installed in the steel plant k ∈ Kc, i, v, with technology v ∈ VINT.Marginal investment cost for CO2 capture and storage in steel plants with technology v ∈ VINT in region i ∈ IETS.Average electricity price in zone i ∈ I.Average CO2 price.National Allocation Plan for plant k ∈ Kc, i, v, i.e. the quantity of emissions that plant k is allowed to produce (ton/year).Electricity consumption per tons of CO2 produced with technology v ∈ V (megawatt hour/ton).Free allowances coefficient imposed by regulation.Total emission cap imposed in the market considered for steel plants covered by the EU-ETS (ton/year).C.VariablesC.1 Pig iron related variablesqk(π)Pig iron produced by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vwith technology v ∈ VINT (ton/year).Pig iron produced by company c ∈ C in zone i ∈ I and sold to companyc¯∈C,c¯≠cin zone h ∈ I (ton/year).Pig iron bought by company c ∈ C to satisfy demand in zone i ∈ I from companyc¯∈C,c¯≠cin zone h ∈ I (ton/year).Electricity used by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vto produce pig iron with technology v ∈ VINT (megawatt hour/year).Steel produced by plant k ∈ Kc, i, v(ton/year).Steel produced by company c ∈ C in zone i ∈ I and sold in zone h ∈ I (ton/year).Electricity used by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vto produce steel (megawatt hour/year).Electricity produced by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vwith technology v ∈ VINT in zone i ∈ IETS (megawatt hour/year).Electricity used by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vwith technology v ∈ VINT to store CO2 in zone i ∈ IETS (megawatt hour/year).Electricity bought by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vwith technology v ∈ VINT in zone i ∈ IETS (megawatt hour/year).CO2 permits needed by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vwith technology v ∈ VINT in zone i ∈ IETS (megawatt hour/year).CO2 stored by plant k ∈ Kc, i, vwith technology v ∈ VINT in zone i ∈ IETS (megawatt hour/year).We consider a static optimization problem, based on a time-window of one year, corresponding to the frequency at which the surrender of emission allowances is due. In this context, the problem(Mc^)faced by a particular steel companyc^∈Cis to maximize its objective functionθc^subject to a setΞc^of constraints, i.e.(Mc^)maxθc^(x)s.t.x∈Ξc^Taking into account that the market structure in the steel industry is mainly oligopolistic, we provide the mathematical formulation of the producers’ problem according to the hypothesis that suppliers can exercise the market power and alter the steel price by changing the amount they sell.We then represent the model as a Cournot game among steel producers. In a Cournot game the steel price is endogenous in the model while in a perfect competition framework it is assumed to be exogenous.For each zone i ∈ I, let us define the exogenously given zonal inverse demand functionPi(σ):R→Ras a function of the total amount of steel sold in zone i. Later in Section 4.2, we will assume that this exogenous function is affine. The total amount of steel sold in zone i is given by∑c∈C,h∈Idc,h,i(σ)and the endogenous price in zone i is given byPi(σ)(∑c∈C,h∈Idc,h,i(σ)). In the same way, the endogenous zonal price function for the pig iron sector, is given byPi(π)(∑c,c¯∈C,c≠c¯,h∈Idc,h,c¯,i(π)).The objective functionθc^of a reference producerc^∈Cis defined as follows:(1)θc^(qk(π),dc^,i,c,h(π),bc^,i,c,h(π),ek(π),qk(σ),dc^,i,h(σ),ek(σ),qke,ek(CO2),bke,bk(CO2),qk(CO2))(2)[6pt]=∑h∈IPh(σ)(∑c∈C,i∈Idc,i,h(σ))·∑i∈Idc^,i,h(σ)−∑i,h∈I(dc^,i,h(σ)·tc^,i,h(σ))(3)[6pt]=+∑h∈IPh(π)(∑c,c¯∈C,c≠c¯,i∈Idc,i,c¯,h(π))·∑i∈I,c∈Cc≠c^dc^,i,c,h(π)=−∑i,h∈I,c∈C,c≠c^[(Ph(π)+tc^,h,i(π))·bc^,i,c,h(π)]+(4)[6pt]=−∑i∈IETS,v∈VINTk∈Kc^,i,vpie·bke−∑i∈INETS,v∈VINTk∈Kc^,i,vpie·(ek(π)+ek(σ))=−∑i∈I,v∈VELk∈Kc^,i,vpie·ek(σ)+(5)[6pt]=−∑i∈Ik∈Kc^,i,v,v∈V,(mi,v(σ)·qk(σ)+mi,v(π)·qk(π))=−∑i∈IETSk∈Kc^,i,v,v∈VINT,(mi,v(CO2)+tk,v(CO2))·qk(CO2)+(6)=+p(CO2)·(∑i∈IETSk∈Kc^,i,vv∈VEL(τ·NAPk−γi,v(σ)·qk(σ))=++∑i∈IETSk∈Kc^,i,vv∈VINT(τ·NAPk−bk(CO2)))under the setΞc^that corresponds to the following constraints(7)qk(π)≤Δk(π)(λkΔ(π))∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈I;∀v∈VINT(8)[10pt]∑k∈Kc^,i,v,v∈VINTi∈Iρv·qk(σ)=∑k∈Kc^,i,vv∈VINTi∈Iqk(π)−∑c∈C,c≠c^i,h∈Idc^,i,c,h(π)+∑c∈C,c≠c^i,h∈Ibc^,i,c,h(π)(λc^d(π))(9)[3pt]bc^,i,c,h(π)=dc,h,c^,i(π)(λc^,i,c,htb)∀c∈C,c^≠c;∀h,i∈I(10)[10pt]bc,h,c^,i(π)=dc^,i,c,h(π)(λc^,i,c,htd)∀c∈C,c^≠c;∀h,i∈I(11)[10pt]qk(σ)≤Δk(σ)(λkΔ(σ))∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈I;∀v∈V(12)[10pt]∑k∈Kc^,i,v,v∈Vqk(σ)=∑h∈Idc^,i,h(σ)(λc^,iq(σ))∀i∈INote that all these variables are nonnegative, hence nonnegativity constraints for each one have to be introduced. Moreover we indicate in parentheses, next to each constraint, the corresponding dual variable.The objective function is composed of five main addends. The addend (2) defines producerc^’s total revenues from selling steel at the destination pricePh(σ)net of transportation costs. The addend (3) refers to pig iron exchanges between companyc^and all other companies. Addends (4) and (5) specify production costs faced by companyc^. In particular, the term(mi,v(CO2)+tk,v(CO2))·qk(CO2)is equal to zero if no investments in CCS technologies are introduced and corresponds to total investment and storage costs when CCS is applied. Finally, the addend (6) defines the opportunity cost of emission allowances whose price isp(CO2). Considering the rules defined by Directive 2003/87/EC and the disposals of Directive 2009/29/EC reserved to sectors certified to be exposed to carbon leakage risk, we assume that CO2 allowances are partially grandfathered. The grandfathered allowances (NAPk) are thus used to cover the CO2 emissions (qk(σ)with v ∈ VEL) produced by electricity plants according to an emission factorγi,v(σ)and emissions (bk(CO2)with v ∈ VINT) produced by integrated plants net of CO2 capture when CCS technology is applied.Condition (7) imposes the capacity constraints on pig iron production with technology v ∈ VINT of plantk∈Kc^,i,v. The balance (8) specifies that the amount of pig iron needed by companyc^∈Cfor steel manufacturing according to the required proportion(∑k∈Kc^,i,v,v∈VINTi∈Iρv·qk(σ))is equal to the sum between the quantity of pig iron produced by the company(∑k∈Kc^,i,vv∈VINTi∈Iqk(π))net of sells to other companies(∑c∈C,c≠c^i,h∈Idc^,i,c,h(π))and the quantity of pig iron bought by companyc^∈C(∑c∈C,c≠c^i,h∈Ibc^,i,c,h(π)).The last balances (9) and (10) quantify the trade of pig iron between different companies and different zones. In this way import and export quantities can be measured. We suppose that all the pig iron production flows have to be consumed for producing steel from the same companies or sold to other companies operating in the market.Condition (11) imposes the capacity constraints on steel production of technology v ∈ V of plantk∈Kc^,i,v. The balance (12) specifies that the quantity of steel produced by companyc^∈Cin zone i ∈ I equals the sum of the quantity of steel that companyc^∈Cproduces in zone i ∈ I to sell in the same zone i ∈ I and the quantity that companyc^sells to zones h ∈ I with h ≠ i.The following constraints include the possibility of CCS technology introduction and electricity autoproduction in ETS countries. According to this set of constraints, a part of CO2 emissions can be captured and stored in plants where CCS applies.(13)qk(π)·αv(π)=ek(π)(λke(π))∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈I,∀v∈VINT(14)[10pt]qk(σ)·αv(σ)=ek(σ)(λke(σ))∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈I,∀v∈V(15)[10pt]qk(CO2)·αv(CO2)=ek(CO2)(λke(CO2))∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈IETS,∀v∈VINT(16)[10pt]qke=ξke·qk(π)(λkqe)∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈IETS;∀v∈VINT(17)[10pt]bke+qke=ek(σ)+ek(π)+ek(CO2)(λkbe)∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈IETS,∀v∈VINT(18)[6pt]qk(CO2)≤Δk(CO2)(λkΔ(CO2))∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈IETS;∀v∈VINT(19)[10pt]bk(CO2)+qk(CO2)=γi,v(σ)·qk(σ)+γi,v(π)·qk(π)(λkb(CO2))∀k∈Kc^,i,v;∀i∈IETS,∀v∈VINTConditions (13) and (14) specify the quantity of electricity consumed for producing both pig iron and steel. Condition (15) is referred to electricity consumption in presence of CCS technology. It is worth remarking that CCS technology can be implemented just on integrated routes. Constraints (16) indicate electricity autoproduction of technology v ∈ VINT of plantk∈Kc^,i,v. The balance (17) states that the sum between electricity bought in the market and electricity autoproduction has to be equal to electricity consumption of technology v ∈ VINT of plantk∈Kc^,i,v. Condition (18) imposes the capacity constraints on CO2 capture in plantk∈Kc^,i,v. Finally, balance (19) specifies that the quantity of CO2 to be covered with emission permits (bk(CO2)) is equal to the total amount of emissions from both pig iron and steel production processes net of the CO2 quantity captured with CCS technology.In this section we will provide a brief overview of the main literature concerning the relationship between Generalized Nash Equilibrium Problems (GNEPs) and Variational Inequalities (VI). In particular we will focus on existence conditions for solutions of the class of jointly convex GNEPs.Let X be a nonempty, closed and convex subset ofRnandF:X→Rnbe a continuous mapping. The variational inequality problem, denoted by VI(X, F), is the problem of finding a point x* ∈ X such that(20)F(x*)⊤(x−x*)≥0,∀x∈X,where F(x*)⊤ indicates the transpose of F(x*).77See Nagurney (1999) for a detailed presentation of VIs and their use in economic modeling.The solution set of VI (20) is denoted by SOL(X, F).Theorem 1see Hartmann and Stampacchia, 1966, Lemma 3.1If X is a nonempty, compact and convex set inRnand F is continuous on X, then VI(X, F) (20) admits at least one solution.Variational inequalities arise from a variety of interesting sources. In particular, a variational inequality formulation permits the solution of a large class of Nash equilibrium (NEP) and generalized Nash equilibrium (GNEP) problems.Let us consider the following problem: player ν ∈ {1, …, N}, given the other players’ strategies, has to solve the problem(21)minxνfν(xν,x−ν)s.t.xν∈Xν(x−ν)where fνis the cost function of player ν andXν(x−ν)∈Rnνis the set of strategies depending on the rival players’ strategies, x−ν. For any x−ν, the solution set of problem (21) is denoted bySν(x−ν). The GNEP can be defined as follows.Definition 1The GNEP is the problem of finding a vectorx¯such thatx¯ν∈Sν(x¯−ν),∀ν∈{1,⋯,N}.Now we consider a special class of GNEPs which arises in many interesting applications and for which a complete theory exists.Definition 2Let us define the following convexity assumption.Convexity Assumption.For every player ν and every x−ν, the objective function fν( ·, x−ν) is convex and the set Xν(x−ν) is closed and convex.Let a GNEP be given, satisfying the Convexity Assumption. We say that this GNEP is jointly convex if for some closed convexX⊆Rnand for all ν = 1, …, N, we have(22)Xν(x−ν)={xν∈Rnν:(xν,x−ν)∈X}.The following theorem (see Rosen, 1965) holds under the Convexity Assumption.Theorem 2Let a jointly convex GNEP be given and suppose further that fνis continuously differentiable in x for every player ν ∈ N with X closed and convex. Then, every solution of the VI(X, F) is a solution of the GNEP, whereF:Rn→Rnis defined as follows:F(x)=(∇x1f1(x)⊤,∇x2f2(x)⊤,⋯,∇xNfN(x)⊤)⊤.This special class of GNEPs has been studied in Rosen (1965).Definition 3Let a jointly convex GNEP be given with for every player ν ∈ N, fνis continuously differentiable in x. We call a solution of the GNEP that is also a solution of VI(X, F) a normalized equilibrium.An existence result for a GNEP complying with the set-up of Theorem 2 is stated in the following result, which combines Theorems 1 and 2.Corollary 1see Facchinei and Kanzow, 2007Assume the setting of Theorem 2 and suppose, additionally, the set X is nonempty and compact. Then a normalized equilibrium exists.Finally, we suppose that X is defined as follows:(23)X={x∈Rn:g(x)≤0},withn=∑ν=1Nnν,where nνis the dimension of the decision variables of player ν, andg:Rn→Rmis such thatgi:Rn→Ris convex and continuously differentiable for all i = 1, …, m.Suppose also that x is a solution of the GNEP. Then if for player ν a suitable constraint qualification holds, there is a vectorλν∈Rmof multipliers so that the classical KKT conditions(24)∇xνf(xν,x−ν)+∇xνg(xν,x−ν)λν=0,0≤λν⊥g(xν,x−ν)≤0,are satisfied. Consider the KKT conditions for VI(X, F). Assuming that a constraint qualification holds at a solution x, the KKT conditions (see Rosen, 1965) read as(25)F(x)+∇xg(x)λ=0,0≤λ⊥g(x)≤0.The following theorem, among the solutions of a GNEP, characterizes those that are also VI’s solutions.Theorem 3see Facchinei et al., 2007Assume the setting of Theorem 2 and suppose, additionally, that the set X given by (23) is convex.•Let x be a solution of VI(X, F) at which the KKT conditions (25) hold. Then x is a solution of the GNEP at which KKT conditions (24) hold with λ1 = … = λN= λ.Let x be a solution of the GNEP at which KKT conditions (24) hold with λ1 = … = λN. Then x is a solution of the VI(X, F).Several numerical approaches for solving a GNEP have been proposed in the literature, see e.g. Bigi et al. (2013),Facchinei and Kanzow (2007),Han et al. (2012),Von Heusinger and Kanzow (2009),Von Heusinger et al. (2012),Nabetani et al. (2011),Pang and Fukushima (2005) and Panicucci (2009). In our problem we will adopt a solution method based on the equivalence between the original problem and the mixed complementarity problem we will define in the next section.The model we proposed in Section 3 is a GNEP with jointly convex constraints as in (23). In particular, the feasible set can be divided into two blocks of constraints: constraints (7), (11)–(19) are individual constraints of steel companies, while constraints (8)–(10) are shared constraints.When implementing the model, we will assume that the zonal price functions,Pi(π)andPi(σ),are affine and decreasing. Under this additional assumption, rewriting the problem of each company as a minimization problem, it is easy to verify that the objective functions − θc, c ∈ C, are continuously differentiable and convex (quadratic or linear) in all variables that depend on company c and the set X, that includes all the companies constraints, is a nonempty polytope. In particular, X is convex and compact. As a consequence, according to Corollary 1, we can ensure that our GNEP admits at least one normalized equilibrium. In addition the set of constraints is affine, so that Abadie’s constraint qualification holds and the normalized equilibrium is a solution at which the KKT conditions hold. Notice that the KKT system (25) represents a conversion of the VI into a mixed complementarity problem (see Facchinei and Pang, 2003, Vol. 1).According to these properties, we present the mixed complementarity version of the problem, that is more suitable for computational purposes and we will solve the problem by using the solver PATH with the GAMS interface (see Dirkse and Ferris, 1995; Ferris and Munson, 2000).Note that the complementarity formulation of the pig iron and steel producers’ model lead to a mixed complementarity problem. The MiCPsteel mixed complementarity problem is composed of the following conditions:•(CC)—complementarity conditions associated to non-negative variables and inequality constraints (7), (11), (18);(EC)—equality constraints (8)–(10), (12)–(17), (19) that are combined with free variables;the following first order conditions:

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The spatial equilibrium model presented in Section 3 is used to evaluate the economic impacts of the environmental regulation on the pig iron and steel sectors. In particular, we adopt a technological representation of the international iron and steel markets that covers the main European steel producers (namely Italy, France, Germany and Spain), the Russia and Mediterranean areas and Far East countries.The model proposed allows us to analyze the market participants’ action, to determine endogenously the price of the crude steel and to understand the investment decisions in CCS infrastructure. For this reason, we consider several scenarios under the CO2 regulation with and without considering CCS technology and electricity autoproduction. The scenarios also include simulations setting the model to different CO2 prices.Under these assumptions, the analysis shows the variation in CCS technology penetration in the steel plants in the different European countries. In particular, if the CO2 price is lower than 40 euros there is no convenience in introducing CCS setting. Permit price has to reach the level of 70 euros to involve all the countries subject to EU-ETS regulation in investing in this innovative technology.Furthermore, we analyze the price of crude steel as an output of the spatial equilibrium model that depends on complex interactions between climate and energy policies and the introduction of the CCS and electricity autoproduction. As expected, we obtain that CIS country has the lower steel price followed by ASIA.Finally, we show that, comparing profits with and without CCS settlement, total profits (considering both European and non European countries) are higher without the CCS technology than with it and the difference between them increases when CO2 price rises. If we look deeper into European profits, the relationship is the opposite: profits of European countries are higher when CCS technology is introduced. This can be addicted to allowance gain obtained by the savings of emission rights.Finally, comparing steel price increment with respect to CO2 price increment, the introduction of CCS technology has a positive impact on the contraction of CO2 cost pass through.A policy of reducing emission permits given for free to industrial sectors and at the same time introduction of incentives for investing in CCS technologies, could avoid the carbon leakage effects (in particular capacity relocation in unregulated countries) and mitigate allowance gain distortion.Further developments of this work are in two different directions: considering different environmental policies and industrial incentives mechanisms, by including the possibility of investing in new plants and modeling the equilibrium problem as a cooperative game (see e.g. Ferrara, 2006; Ferrara and Stefanescu, 2006).