@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Miller–Tucker–Zemlin (MTZ) and Desrochers–Laporte (DL) SECs are studied.A systematic way of deriving MTZ and DL SECs is presented.The approach is based on analyzing the convex hull of small polyhedra and facets.A generalization of the DL SECs implying 3-node CLIQUE constraints is shown.Generalizations for larger node sets are unlikely to exist.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Asymmetric traveling salesman problem,Vehicle routing,Miller–Tucker–Zemlin constraints,Projection,Subtour elimination constraints,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Miller–Tucker–Zemlin (MTZ) Subtour Elimination Constraints (SECs) and the improved version by Desrochers and Laporte (DL) have been and are still in regular use to model a variety of routing problems. This paper presents a systematic way of deriving inequalities that are more complicated than the MTZ and DL inequalities and that, in a certain way, “generalize” the underlying idea of the original inequalities. We present a polyhedral approach that studies and analyses the convex hull of feasible sets for small dimensions. This approach allows us to generate generalizations of the MTZ and DL inequalities, which are “good” in the sense that they define facets of these small polyhedra. It is well known that DL inequalities imply a subset of Dantzig–Fulkerson–Johnson (DFJ) SECs for two-node subsets. Through the approach presented, we describe a generalization of these inequalities which imply DFJ SECs for three-node subsets and show that generalizations for larger subsets are unlikely to exist. Our study presents a similar analysis with generalizations of MTZ inequalities and their relation with the lifted circuit inequalities for three node subsets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Given a loop-free directed graphG=(V,A)whereV={1,…,n}is the set of nodes,A={(i,j):i,j∈V,i≠j}is the set of arcs and cijis the cost (e.g., distance) associated with each arc(i,j)∈A, the asymmetric traveling salesman problem (ATSP) consists of finding the least cost Hamiltonian circuit, i.e., an elementary circuit traversing all nodes contained in the graph (Lawler, Lenstra, Rinnooy Kann, & Shmoys, 1985). Several known formulations for the ATSP are based on the following general scheme (see, for instance, Langevin, Soumis, & Desrosiers, 1990):(1.1)(ATSP)minimize∑(i,j)∈Acijxij,(1.2)subjectto∑i∈V:(i,j)∈Axij=1∀j∈V,(1.3)∑j∈V:(i,j)∈Axij=1∀i∈V,(1.4){(i,j)∈A:xij=1}donotcontainsubtours,(1.5)xij∈{0,1}∀(i,j)∈A,where xijis a binary variable equal to 1 if arc (i, j) is in the tour, or equal to 0 otherwise. Node 1 is the depot where the salesman begins and ends the tour. Constraints (1.2), (1.3) and (1.5) define the usual assignment relaxation for the ATSP. Constraints (1.4) prevent the formation of subtours not containing node 1 and can be written in several different forms. We will refer to these constraints as Subtour Elimination Constraints (SECs) and elaborate on such constraints shortly. Given an integer linear programming formulationP, we shall henceforth denote byPLits linear programming (LP) relaxation and byv(P)the value of its optimal solution. The LP relaxation of any of the models discussed in this paper is defined by replacing constraints (1.5) with(1.6)0⩽xij(⩽1),∀(i,j)∈A.Different ways of modeling constraints (1.4) have been proposed in the literature. These can be divided into two families. The first family of natural formulations uses inequalities involving only the xijvariables, as they contain one and only one variable corresponding to each arc included in the underlying graph. The other family uses inequalities that involve additional variables and formulations in this class are usually referred to as extended formulations. The information attached to these additional variables may considerably reduce the number of constraints involved in the model and quite often allow for deriving compact formulations (i.e., formulations involving a polynomial number of constraints and variables). By projecting the set of feasible solutions of the LP relaxation of an extended formulation into the subspace defined by the xijvariables, one obtains a natural formulation which is equivalent to the former in the sense that both formulations produce the same LP bound. However, such natural formulations usually involve an exponential number of constraints. The reader is referred to Padberg and Sung (1991), Wong (1980), Langevin et al. (1990), Gouveia and Pires (1999), Öncan, Altinel, and Laporte (2009) and Roberti and Toth (2012), who describe and introduce several extended formulation together with the corresponding “equivalent” natural formulations. Some examples to these formulations will be given in the following sections.One of the strongest and well known representations of (1.4) is due to Dantzig, Fulkerson, and Johnson (1954), who proposed the following inequalities:(1.7)∑i∈S∑j∈Sxij⩽|S|-1∀S⊆{2,…,n},|S|⩾2.These constraints are exponential in number and are known to be facet defining for the ATSP polytope under mild conditions (see Grötschel & Padberg, 1985). These inequalities imply that the number of arcs which can be packed in the clique defined by the set of nodesScannot exceed|S|-1. We will refer to constraints (1.7) as CLIQUE constraints. A weaker version of constraints (1.7) are the CIRCUIT inequalities which are given as follows:(1.8)∑(i,j)∈Cxij⩽|C|-1∀C∈GV1,whereGV1is the complete graph induced by the set of nodesV1=2,…,nandCis any set of arcs defining an elementary circuit (i.e., no nodes are repeated in the circuit) inGV1. These constraints have been described by Grötschel and Padberg (1985) and state that the number of arcs which can be packed in a given circuitCcannot exceed|C|-1.A well-known example of an extended formulation for the ATSP is due to Miller, Tucker, and Zemlin (1960), who proposed the following Subtour Elimination Constraints (SECs):(1.9)ui-uj+(n-1)xij⩽n-2∀i≠j=2,…,n,(1.10)ui∈R∀i=2,…,n.Formulation ATSP where (1.4) is replaced by (1.9) and (1.10) will henceforth be referred to as F(MTZ) and constraints (1.9) by MTZ. The additional variables uiin these constraints are used to give an ordering to all nodes excluding the depot to prevent the formation of illegal subtours. This is ensured by having uj⩾ui+1 when xij=1. Notice also that constraints (1.10) can be replaced by(1.11)0⩽ui⩽n-2∀i=2,…,n,without altering v(F(MTZ)L). Constraints (1.11) help to give a precise meaning to each variable ui, i.e., with the inclusion of (1.11), the value given by uiindicates the position of node i in the tour, or more precisely the number of intermediate nodes in the path between node 1 and node i in the optimal tour.It is known that F(MTZ) has a weak LP relaxation (Gouveia & Pires, 1999; Langevin et al., 1990) and that the projection of the set of feasible solutions defined by F(MTZ)Linto the space defined by the x variables is given by (1.2), (1.3) and (1.6) (Padberg & Sung, 1991) and the following inequalities(1.12)∑(i,j)∈Cxij⩽|C|-|C|n-1∀C∈GV1,which are weaker versions of the CIRCUIT inequalities (since|C|⩽n-1).One ingenious way of improving MTZ constraints is due to Desrochers and Laporte (1991), who proposed the following lifted version of (1.9):(1.13)ui-uj+(n-1)xij+(n-3)xji⩽n-2∀i≠j=2,…,n.We will further refer to inequalities (1.13) as DL. These constraints are interesting for two reasons: (i) they make the relation between the uiand xijvariables stronger since when xij=1, a combined use of constraints (1.13) for pairs (i, j) and (j, i) imply uj=ui+1, and (ii) they imply the CLIQUE constraints for setsSwith two nodes. This is easy to see by adding two DL inequalities, one for a given pair (i, j) and the other for the reversed pair (j, i), which results in the CLIQUE constraint for the set {i, j}.Reformulation techniques using other sets of variables and which imply MTZ and DL constraints have been proposed in Gouveia and Pires (1999, 2001), Sherali and Driscoll (2002), Marcotte, Savard, and Semet (2004), Sarin, Sherali, and Bhootra (2005), Gouveia and Pesneau (2006), Sherali, Sarin, and Tsai (2006) and Yaman (2006).Of the one that is relevant to our discussion here is by Sherali and Driscoll (2002), who propose an integer linear programming formulation of the TSP obtained by applying a Reformulation–Linearization Technique (RLT), which we will refer to as SD. They show that formulation SD implies the Desrochers and Laporte (1991) for two-node subsets. Their formulation uses, in addition to the uivariables, new variables yijrepresenting the position of arc(i,j)∈Ain the tour. Later, Godinho, Gouveia, and Pesneau (2011, chap. 7) showed that the SD formulation is the flow-based formulation by Gavish and Graves (1978) augmented with several sets of constraints. An interesting application of the RLT presented by Sherali and Driscoll (2002) is to extend the idea to three-node subsets, similar to the aims of this paper. The application results in the following MTZ-like valid inequalities for the ATSP:(1.14)uk⩾ui+2-(n-1)(2-xij-xjk)+(n-2)(1-xij)(1-xjk)+(n-1)xik+(n-4)(xkixij+xjkxki+xkjxji)∀i≠j≠k=2,…,n.Inequalities (1.14) are interesting in that they provide information on the relationship between the uiand ukvariables, in a same way as (1.13), but for three nodes. In particular, the constraints imply uk=ui+2 when xij=xjk=1 for i≠j≠k=2,…,n. However, as it is clear from their structure, constraints (1.14) are multilinear (quadratic).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have presented a systematic way of deriving inequalities that are more complicated than the MTZ and DL inequalities and that in a certain way “generalize” the underlying idea of the original inequalities. We described a polyhedral approach that studies and analyzes the convex hull of feasible sets for small dimensions and that allowed us to generate generalizations of the MTZ and DL inequalities, and which are “good” in the sense that they define facets of these small polyhedra. Our approach produced a generalization of these inequalities which imply CLIQUE constraints for three-node subsets. We also claim that generalizations of these inequalities implying CLIQUE inequalities for larger subsets are unlikely to exist. This claim follows the assertion that, had there been generalizations of these inequalities implying CLIQUE inequalities for four-nodes, then the CLIQUE inequalities themselves would not have been facet-defining for the corresponding polyhedron. This paper provides theoretical proofs that CLIQUE inequalities in fact define facets for the polyhedron defined on four nodes, which contradicts this assertion.Some computational results indicate that only marginal improvements are obtained when using the new the MTZ-like constraints when compared with corresponding projected constraints in the xijspace. These results could be regarded as a note of “warning” in the sense that any improvements on the MTZ constraints could also be obtained by using similar constraints in the xijspace alone (if one knows which ones they are).