@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exact and heuristic linear-inflation policies for an inventory model with random yield and arbitrary lead times

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An inventory model with random yield where positive lead times are allowed.A simple approach to determine the critical stock level for a linear-inflation policy.A new Markov chain approach to determine the critical stock level.Approximations based on the skewness of the inventory level.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic inventory model,Random yield,Lead times,Heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We investigate a periodic-review inventory system for a single item with stochastic demand and random yield. Since the optimal policy for such a system is complicated, we study the class of stationary linear-inflation policies where orders are only placed if the inventory position is below a critical stock level, and where the order quantity is controlled by a yield inflation factor. We consider two different models for the uncertain supply, namely binomial and stochastically proportional yield, and we allow positive and constant lead times as well as asymmetric demand and yield distributions. In this paper we propose two novel approaches to derive optimal and near-optimal numerical values for the critical stock level, minimizing the average holding and backorder cost for a given inflation factor. First, we present a Markov chain approach which is exact in case of negligible lead time. Second, we provide a steady-state analysis to derive approximate closed-form expressions for the optimal critical stock level. We conduct an extensive numerical study to test the performance of our approaches. The numerical experiments reveal an excellent performance of both approaches. Since our derived formulas are easily implementable and highly accurate they are very valuable for practical application.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is well-known that in many industries production and inventory systems simultaneously have to cope with uncertainties from two sides, namely from the demand as well as from process side. A major risk concerning production processes stems from yield uncertainties, which is common in the agricultural sector or in chemical, electronics and mechanical manufacturing industries (see Gurnani, Akella, & Lehoczky, 2000; Jones, Lowe, Traub, & Kegler, 2001; Kazaz, 2004). In these environments different reasons such as weather conditions, unreliable processes or imperfect input material can be responsible for the occurrence of random yields. A particularly striking example is given by semiconductor manufacturing in the electronic goods industry where yield losses can be as high as 80 percent (see Nahmias, 2009, p. 392). The most recent field where yield problems have gained specific attention is the remanufacturing industry. Here, the output of disassembly operations often is highly uncertain because of limited knowledge of the condition of used products (see Ilgin & Gupta, 2010; Panagiotidou, Nenes, & Zikopoulos, 2013).In coping with the described yield problems, production and inventory control faces three main challenges. First, it has to be recognized that yield losses are often hard to predict so that their variability is too high to be ignored and randomness of production output must explicitly be taken into account. Second, it is important to be aware that different causes of yield losses exist so that different types of yield randomness have to be dealt with. Finally, many production processes in this context, e.g. in semiconductor manufacturing, are characterized by significant production lead time so that lead times of different length must be considered when control systems are developed and implemented. In this paper, we study efficient approaches for controlling periodic-review production and inventory systems with random demand and yield, which are easy to implement and address all major challenges mentioned above. We refer to an infinite-horizon problem for a single item under the criterion of average cost minimization. Concerning yield randomness, we consider two different types that are most widely addressed in literature (see Yano & Lee, 1995), namely the models of binomial and stochastically proportional yield. Binomial yield applies to cases where the generation of non-defective units within a production batch forms a Bernoulli process while the stochastically proportional yield concept is used if the stochastic process conditions affect the batch as a whole so that the probability distribution of the yield rate does not depend on the batch size.From prior research it is known (see Gerchak, Vickson, & Parlar, 1988; Henig & Gerchak, 1990) that the optimal policy in case of zero lead time and stochastically proportional yield is a rule with a critical stock such that a production order in a period is only released if the inventory does not exceed this stock level. Different from the standard base-stock rule under deterministic yield conditions, however, the order quantity is a non-linear function of the inventory position. Since this rule is computationally cumbersome to evaluate and unattractive for practical application, several approaches have been proposed to develop simple, but still near-optimal rules. Some of these approaches, like the so-called newsvendor and NLH-2 heuristic by Bollapragada and Morton (1999) and the heuristic developed by Li, Xu, and Zheng (2008), try to approximate the optimal order quantity rule by a non-linear function that is quite simple to evaluate. More convenient for practical application, however, are those policies where the order release quantity is a linear function of the deviation between critical stock and inventory position. This type of policy is often called linear-inflation rule (see Zipkin, 2000, p. 393) and has the major benefit that it possesses just the structure of the rule that is usually applied in practice when demand and yield variability in MRP-type of production control is handled by a safety stock and a yield inflation factor that accounts for yield losses (see Inderfurth, 2009; Nahmias, 2009, p. 392; Vollmann, Berry, Whybark, & Jacobs, 2005, p. 485).A linear-inflation policy is characterized by two parameters, which have to be determined before implementation, namely the critical stock S and the yield inflation factor F. Like other research contributions in this field we will focus on this policy type although we are aware that this rule is non-optimal, not only due to the linearization of the order release function but also because it is myopic and uses static policy parameters even in the non-zero lead time case (see Bollapragada & Morton, 1999 and Inderfurth & Vogelgesang, 2013, respectively). From numerical studies in Bollapragada and Morton (1999) and in Huh and Nagarajan (2010), we know that the latter aspects are of minor relevance for suboptimality and that the performance of the linear-inflation policy critically depends on the choice of the numerical values of the policy parameters S and F.Up to now, in literature we find four approaches, listed in Table 1, that aim to determine one or both of these policy parameters such that they are optimal or close to optimal. These approaches differ with respect to several problem aspects and application fields which are relevant in the context under consideration. First, these differences relate to the question which of the two policy parameters is determined and if this parameter evaluation is exact or heuristic. Further, the approaches can be divided into those which only consider zero lead time and others where non-zero lead times are also taken into account. A next criterion is if the approach only refers to a single yield model or if both yield types (binomial, BI, and stochastically proportional, SP) are considered. Finally, we find a difference in the types of probability distributions for demands and yields assumed in the approaches, namely if they are strictly symmetric or if asymmetric distributions are also allowed. Table 1 gives an overview how the four approaches refer to these aspects.The first three approaches in Table 1 address a similar limited problem area as they all are restricted to a situation with zero lead time, stochastically proportional yield, and symmetric probability distributions. Under these conditions Bollapragada and Morton (1999) propose a heuristic approach (named NLH-1) resulting in a closed-form expression for the critical stock level S while they use the reciprocal of the expected yield rate as inflation factor F. Although there is a flaw in the calculations for this approach (see Inderfurth & Transchel, 2007), a numerical study reveals that this heuristic performs very well in most of the considered cases. The approach suggested by Zipkin (2000) presents a heuristic for determining closed-form solutions for both parameters S and F. Since these parameter formulas, however, are not derived on the basis of a strict cost minimization approach it turns out that, in general, the performance of the Zipkin heuristic is not satisfactory. This is shown in a computational study carried out by Huh and Nagarajan (2010) whose main own contribution is to develop a method for computing the optimal critical stock S for a given yield inflation factor F which is computationally tractable. Nevertheless, since for this approach a simulation procedure is needed to generate the stationary inventory distribution the computational burden is still quite considerable. Huh and Nagarajan (2010) also check different simple approaches for determining the inflation factor F and suggest a combined approach that works quite well compared to the optimal choice of this parameter. The fourth contribution in this sequence, published in Inderfurth and Vogelgesang (2013), extends the approach of S determination in Bollapragada and Morton (1999) and presents closed-form expressions for the critical stock also for binomial yield problems and for environments with non-zero lead times and asymmetric binomial yield rate distributions. For the non-zero lead time case, a numerical study reveals that the performance of the linear-inflation rule with the suggested static parameters is comparable to that of a more sophisticated rule with dynamic critical stock parameters which in each period specifically considers the yield risks from the respective open orders and, in principle, has the potential to perform better under non-zero lead times.In our paper, we develop two novel approaches to derive optimal and near-optimal expressions for the critical stock S under arbitrary inflation factors F, which apply to all relevant problem instances, i.e. zero and non-zero lead times, binomial and stochastically proportional yield and arbitrary demand and yield distributions which also can incorporate considerable skewness. Both approaches aim to derive the probability distribution of the stationary inventory level under a linear-inflation policy and determine the optimal policy parameter from exploiting this distribution. The first approach uses a Markov chain modeling method and leads to a direct numerical computation of the inventory distribution which is exact for zero and unit lead time and is approximate for lead times greater than one. Thus, this Markov chain approach is able to determine the optimal critical stock level S like the Huh/Nagarajan approach, but with lower computational effort, because the cumbersome estimation of probabilities by stochastic simulation can be avoided and only a single linear equation system has to be solved. The second approach fits estimations of the moments of the stochastic stationary inventory to standard distribution types so that closed-form expressions for the critical stock parameter S can be found. For estimating the moments in this so-called steady-state approach, an approximate method is employed like it is also used in Zipkin (2000, p. 394) to get results for these moments under equilibrium conditions. This estimation also includes third moments to enable the fitting of asymmetric distributions as for example the gamma distribution, which adequately represents demand for many medium- and fast moving items (Burgin, 1975). In order to appropriately cope with heavy skewness of the inventory distribution that can be caused by asymmetric demand and/or asymmetric yield rate distributions next to a normal distribution also a mirrored gamma distribution is used to approximate the exact stationary inventory distribution. This innovative way of estimating appropriate distributions is complemented by a sophisticated automatism that decides which type of distribution function (normal or gamma) should be chosen in specific problem instances. Insofar, this study also contributes to answering the questions under which circumstances it is feasible to use a normal distribution as approximation in inventory models with asymmetries (see Axsäter, 2013). A numerical performance study in which the yield inflation factor is fixed to the reciprocal of the yield rate expectation reveals that in this sophisticated form the steady-state approach leads to close-to-optimal results under almost all problem conditions, while other approaches fail in case of non-symmetric distributions. The more elaborate Markov chain approach which is optimal for lead times of zero and one, but only approximate in other cases generally shows an even better performance for lead times larger than one. Thus, we are able to present easy-to-apply approaches for highly efficient parameter determination for linear-inflation policies, which dominate other approaches known up to now, and can be applied to a wide class of random demand, random yield problems. Finally, it should be noted that different from the approaches in Bollapragada and Morton (1999) and Inderfurth and Vogelgesang (2013) our method works under arbitrary inflation factors F so that it also can be utilized for a combined optimization of both policy parameters S and F with numerical search procedures.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we give a detailed description of the model formulation. Section 3 presents the analysis of the approaches in the zero lead time case while Section 4 extends this content to the case with lead times larger than zero. The results of an extensive numerical study are presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper with a summary and outlook to further research.We consider a single stockpoint for a single item with stochastic customer demand. In order to model the decisions and the demand processes we divide the time axis into discrete time buckets of equal length and assume that demand across the periods is independent and identically distributed. We denote with Dt≥ 0 the demand in period t and withD the generic demand. We further assume that the cumulative probability distribution of D is given. As long as there is enough stock available demand is satisfied directly from stock. Otherwise demand is backlogged.In order to replenish inventory, orders can be placed at the beginning of each period and are delivered after a deterministic replenishment lead time of λ periods. The order quantity is determined according to a stationary linear-inflation policy, which can formally be described by(1)Qt={F(S−Xt),Xt<S0,Xt≥Swhere Qtdenotes the order quantity, Xtthe inventory position at the beginning of a period t before the order is placed, and S stands for the critical stock level and F for the yield inflation factor. If discrete values for the order quantity or the yield are required, then we round the order quantity in policy (1) to the closest integer value and we use the following notation ⌊Qt= F(S − Xt)⌉.Due to uncontrollable conditions the quantity received is not necessarily equal to the quantity ordered. Let us denote with Q the order quantity (input) and with Y (Q) the uncertain yield (output) for a given order quantity Q. The yield is assumed to be independent from the demand and we use the index t if the random variables are related to period t. In this article we study the two most common random yield models mentioned above. First, we consider a binomial yield model where each unit ordered is defective with the same probability 1 − p. Thus, the yield for a given order quantity Q is binomially distributed with the parameters (Q, p) and the probability distribution is given asP(Y(Q)=k)=pk(1−p)Q−k(Qk)k=0,1,2,…,Q−1,QAdditionally, we study a proportional yield model where the delivered quantity is a random multiple of the ordered quantity (Y(Q) = Z · Q). Let Zt∈ [0, 1] denote the yield rate in period t. We assume that the sequence (Zt)t = 1, 2, …is i.i.d. and denote the mean of the yield rate by μZand the standard deviation by σZ. Thus, we find for a given order quantity Q the following moments for the total yield Y(Q) under binomial (stochastically proportional) yield conditions. As expected value we have(2)E[Y(Q)]=p·Q(E[Y(Q)]=μZ·Q)and as variance we getVAR[Y(Q)]=p·(1−p)·Q(VAR[Y(Q)]=σZ2·Q2)In addition, our approach takes into account a possible skewness of the yield rate which depends on parameter p for binomial yield and is given by a skewness measure γZfor stochastically proportional yield.After the realization of demand in period t, inventory holding costs of h ≥ 0 incur for each unit on stock. For each unit backlogged at the end of a period backorder costs b ≥ 0 are charged. We are interested in minimizing the expected long run average cost of the system that is given as a function of F and SC(F,S)=limT→∞1T∑t=1TCt(F,S)where Ct(F, S) denotes the average period cost composed of linear holding and backorder costs charged to the net inventory It(F, S) at the end of period t:(3)Ct(F,S)=hE[It(F,S)+]+bE[−It(F,S)+]A unit cost for ordering a product is not considered in the cost function (3) because this type of cost is not decision relevant in the context of an infinite planning horizon under the backordering assumption. A fixed ordering cost is assumed to be not present in the considered planning situation.If a stationary distribution of the net inventory Itat the end of a period exists in a continuous model, the average cost in (3) can be written as(4)C=h∫0∞xφI(x)dx−b∫−∞0xφI(x)dxwhere φI( · ) is the density function of I that depends on both policy parameters F and S.In this study, we focus on the determination of the optimal critical stock level S for any pre-determined yield inflation factor F. Under steady-state conditions the choice of S only affects the mean of the distribution of inventory I, but not its variance or skewness if a linear-inflation rule is applied. The variability of I just depends on the order variability. Following the order rule in (1), for a fixed level of S the order quantity in each period only depends on the most recent demand and yield realization. The choice of S merely determines the inventory level around which the order variations take place. This is also the reason why it turns out in the formulas of the later steady-state analyses in Sections 3.2 and 4.2 that variance and skewness of I do not depend on S. Thus, the cost effect of S can be considered completely by its impact on μIand by the dependency of φI( · ) on μI. In this context, it is also interesting to see that in case of a fixed order cost this cost component will not occur in every period and, thus, seems to be relevant. However, since the choice of S does not affect the probability of a zero order quantity, a fixed cost does not need to be considered in optimizing the value of S as long as a linear-inflation policy is applied.Thus, for optimizing the critical stock S it is sufficient to describe the cost in (4) as function of μIwhich can be formulated as(5)C(μI)=(h+b)∫0∞xφI(x)dx−bμIAfter normalizing the inventory variable by transforming I to IN= (I − μI)/σIand exploiting the optimality condition for minimizing C(μI) we find (see Appendix I)(6)1−ΦN(−μIσI)=bh+bwhere ΦN( · ) stands for the cumulative distribution function of the standardized inventory variable. Under a symmetric inventory distribution, condition (6) can be written as(7)ΦN(μIσI)=bh+bNoting that μIdepends on the critical stock S, conditions (6) and (7) can be exploited to determine the optimal stock level.In the sequel, we perform a Markov chain and a simplified steady-state analysis in order to determine an optimal and a near-optimal critical stock level for the linear-inflation rule. To this end, we have to analyze separately the case without replenishment lead time (λ = 0) and the situation with positive lead times (λ > 0). The Markov chain analysis yields information on the complete inventory distribution and provides exact results for λ = 0 and λ = 1 while it is only approximate for λ > 1. The steady-state analysis delivers closed-form approximations of the moments of the random inventory and generates approximations under all lead time instances. In the remainder of the article the following notations are used:μX: mean of the random variable XσX: standard deviation of the random variable XρX: coefficient of variation of the random variable X, defined as ρX= σX/μXμ3, X: third moment of random variable XγX: skewness of random variable X, given byγX=E[(X−μX)3]/σX3Our analysis applies to both types of variables, discrete and continuous ones. The discrete Markov chain approach under consideration naturally refers to discrete-type variables, but can approximate continuous ones arbitrarily close. The steady-state approach refers to each variable type according to the selected distribution type for the inventory variable. If a discrete distribution is used, discrete optimality conditions equivalent to (6) and (7) are exploited.Since a unified analysis for general lead time value is not possible, in this section we start with analyzing the system for zero lead time (λ = 0). Under this assumption the sequence of events is given as follows. At the beginning of a period the inventory level is observed and an order is placed according to the linear-inflation policy (1). After the instantaneous delivery the demand is realized and at the end of the period costs are charged based on the net inventory level.For the analysis of the system we assume a discrete demand distribution and we restrict the order quantities to discrete values as well. We model the difference Δtbetween the inventory position Xtbefore ordering (which is equal to the net inventory It − 1) and the critical stock S in period t as a Markov chain Δt= Xt− S.Note that in the case of zero lead time the inventory position equals the net-stock (equal to stock on hand – backorders). In case of a positive value of Δ an overshoot is observed and no order is placed while for negative values the order quantity is positive. The state space for the Markov chain is unlimited and given as SS = ( − ∞, + ∞). In order to obtain the transition probabilities pijfor the Markov chain, defined as pij= P(Δt + 1 = j|Δt= i), we use the following recursive relationΔt+1={Δt+Y(⌊−FΔt⌉)−Dt,Δt<0Δt−Dt,Δt≥0which enables us to derive expressions for i ≥ 0pij=P(Δt+1=j∣Δt=i)=P(Dt=i−j),j∈SSindependent from the yield distribution. The transition probabilities for i < 0 and j ∈ SS depend on the demand and yield as followspij=P(Δt+1=j∣Δt=i)=P(Dt=i+Y(⌊−iF⌉)−j)For a binomial yield we get:pij=∑k=0⌊−Fi⌉P(Dt=i+k−j)pk(1−p)⌊−Fi⌉−k(⌊−Fi⌉k)and the discretization in case of stochastically proportional yield is done as followspij=∑k=0⌊−Fi⌉P(Dt=i+k−j)(P(Z≤k+0.5⌊−Fi⌉)−P(Z≤k−0.5⌊−Fi⌉))For a given value of F the stationary distributionvk=limt→∞P(Δt=k)can be determined numerically solving the system of equations given by(8)v=PvwithP=(pij)(i,j),v=(vk)k,and∑kvk=1Due to the relation X = S + Δ and since the inventory position at the beginning of a period before ordering is equal to the inventory level at the end of a period in case of zero lead time, the following expression for the average cost per period is obtained:C(F,S)=h∑k=−S+∞(S+k)vk−b∑k=−∞−(S+1)(S+k)vkNote that for the optimization of S for a given value of F the stationary distribution of the Markov chain must only be computed once, since it is independent from the numerical value of S. The following lemma shows that the optimal critical stock level S* satisfies a news-vendor like condition.Lemma 1For any given value of F the optimal critical stock level S*(F) is the smallest value of S satisfying the following condition:∑k=−∞−1P(D−Y(F(S−k))≤S+k)vk+∑k=0+∞P(D≤S+k)vk≥bb+hThe proof is included in the proof for the general lead time case of Lemma 8, which can be found in Appendix V.□Note that a similar exact analysis can be done for a lead time equal to one period. The stationary distribution of the inventory position is the same, but the distribution of the inventory level is determined by the relation I = X − D.In this section we present an approach to derive a simple expression for a near-optimal critical stock level S++ which can easily be implemented in a spreadsheet. The approach is based on the presentation of the objective function in (5) keeping in mind that the expected inventory μIis a function of the critical stock S.We will approximate the distribution of the inventory level in two different ways and then we present a decision rule to choose from the two cases. For the optimization of the objective function we further simplify and analyze (5) for a strictly linear control rule. Thus we neglect that the order quantity is zero in case of an overshoot and use(9)Qt=F(S−Xt)=F(S−It−1)For the further analysis we need more information about the expected inventory level.Lemma 2If a strictly linear control rule as in (9) is applied, then the average inventory level is given as(10)μI=S−μDMwhere M stands for the scrap loss compensation factor, i.e.(11)M={FpforbinomialyieldFμZforstochasticallyproportionalyieldIf M > 1, expected yield losses are overcompensated, otherwise, if M < 1, they are undercompensated by the ordering rule. Additionally, the average order quantity is determined by(12)μQ=FMμDThe system dynamics under the strictly linear control rule is given as(13)It=It−1+Y(Qt)−Dtwhich, considering (2) under steady-state conditions, immediately leads to (12). The expression for the expected inventory level can then easily be obtained from (9).In order to exploit the optimality condition in (6), we need knowledge about the distribution of the inventory level. To this end we use two types of common distribution functions as proxy for the unknown real stationary inventory function. Let us first assume that the inventory level is normally distributed with mean μIand standard deviation σI. Then we can derive the following optimality condition.□Under the assumption of a normally distributed inventory level, the optimal critical levelSNorm+for a strictly linear control rule (9) minimizing (5) has to satisfy the following condition(14)SNorm+=μDM+ΦNorm−1(bb+h)σIwhere ΦNormdenotes the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal distribution. This solution can immediately be verified by inserting μI from (10) in (7).Under asymmetric demand and/or yield distributions one must be aware that also the inventory distribution will be asymmetric. Since the normal distribution does not capture this case we also consider another distribution for the inventory level, which can be used to approximate inventory asymmetry. To this end we propose to utilize a gamma distribution which, however, has to be mirrored in order to approximate an inventory distribution, which is usually expected to be skewed to the left under a critical stock policy. Let us assume now, that the inventory level can be written as(15)I=T(S)−Xwhere T(S) denotes the (due to the unlimited excess stock not really existing) maximum possible value for the inventory level I and X is a random variable distributed according to a gamma distribution with mean E[X] = E[T(S) − I] = T(S) − μI= T(S) − S + μD/M and standard deviation σI. ThenLemma 4 holds.Lemma 4For the strictly linear control rule (9) and under the assumption that the inventory level is given as I = T(S) − X whereX is gamma distributed, from exploiting (6) the following optimality condition is obtained(16)P(X≤T(S))=bb+hAppendix II.□Since the expectation of X depends on the difference of T(S) − S we have to determine T(S). Obviously, the probability that the inventory level is larger than the stock level S is equal to the probability that the order quantity Q is negative, resulting inP(Q≤0)=P(I≥S)=P(X≤T(S)−S)If the demand variability and the yield variability are relatively small, then the probability on the left hand side is close to zero, resulting in T(S) = S. We use this equation as an approximation for all situations and, as a consequence, the second approximate critical stock levelSGamm+has to satisfy the following condition(17)P(X≤SGamm+)=bb+hwhere X is gamma distributed with mean μD/M and standard deviation σI.Up to now we have derived two approximate critical levelsSNorm+andSGamm+under the assumption that negative order quantities are possible. Therefore, the real inventory level is underestimated and the obtained approximations for the critical stock level are overestimated. In order to adjust our formulas, we determine the partial expectation for the negative part of the order quantity. This can easily be performed under the assumption that the order quantity is distributed according to a normal distribution with mean μQand standard deviation σQin the following way:E[(−F(S−X))+]=−∫−∞0yφQ(y)dy=σQφN(−μQσQ)−μQΦN(−μQσQ)Since we are interested in a near optimal critical level under a linear control rule as given in (1) we reduce the critical levels by the value of the partial expectation of the negative order quantity.(18)Si++=Si+−(σQφN(−μQσQ)−μQΦN(−μQσQ))i=Norm,GammFor calculating the critical stock levelsSi++, it remains to determine expressions for σIσIand σQ. The expressions for the order quantity for binomial yield as well as for stochastically proportional yield can be found in Lemma 5.Lemma 5Given that M < 2 holds, the variance for the order quantity under a strictly linear control rule Q = F(S − X) and binomial yield is given as:(19)σQ2=F2(σD2+(1−p)μD)1−(1−M)2Note that these results hold for general lead times and not only for lead time zero. The respective proofs can be found in Appendix III.In contrast to this, the moments of the inventory level depend on the lead time and are given in Lemma 6.Lemma 6If M < 2 then the variance for the inventory level under a strictly linear control rule Q = F(S − X), lead time zero and binomial yield is given as:(21)σI2=σD2+(1−p)μD1−(1−M)2From (9) we directly get for the inventory variable that It − 1 = S − Qt/F. Thus, the steady-state variance of I is given byσI2=σQ2/F2so that from (19) and (20) we immediately yield the variance formulas of Lemma 6 in (21) and (22).□It is obvious that for the stability of the inventory process under steady-state conditions the compensation factor M (and thereby F) must not exceed a certain upper level. Additionally, the above analysis also makes clear that the critical stock level S only has an impact on the expected inventory level μI, while the variance of the inventory and order distribution is not affected by S.With (18) we have proposed two different approximations for the optimal critical level S*, and the question arises, which of the approaches should be preferred in a specific situation. Since the main difference between the approaches is the distribution assumption of the inventory level, we use a further attribute, the skewness γIof this distribution, to support our choice.Lemma 7The skewness of the inventory level γI under a strictly linear control rule, lead time zero and binomial yield turns out to be(23)γI=1σI3(μD3M3+3σI2μDM−ΩBI1−(1−M)3)withΩBI=3(1−M)[((1−p)M+(1−M)μD)(σI2+μD2/M2)+μD(σD2+μD2)/M]+(1−p)μD(3μD+2p−1)+μ3,DFor stochastically proportional yield the skewness of the inventory level is given as(24)γI=1σI3(μD3M3+3σI2μDM−ΩSP3M(1−M)−3M2ρZ2+F3μ3,Z)withΩSP=3(1−M)μD[(μD2+σD2)/M+(1−M)(σI2+μD2/M2)]+3M2ρZ2μD(σI2+μD2/M2)+μ3,DProofAppendix IV.□Based on the skewness γIof the inventory level we choose that critical stock from (18) that is calculated from the inventory distribution with a skewness level which is closest to the γIvalue. Thus the following decision rule is recommended. First compute the approximationSGamm++according to (17) and (18). Then, a gamma distribution is fit on the corresponding mean (μD/M) and standard deviation (σI) of the inventory level. In the next step the skewness γI, Gamm of this fitted distribution is computed asγI,Gamm=−2σIμD/Mand compared with the required skewness γIas derived in Lemma 7. If the value of γIis closer to zero (i.e. the γ value under normal distribution) than to γI, Gamm, then we use the approximationSNorm++according to (14) and (18), otherwiseSGamm++is chosen.Except from Inderfurth and Vogelgesang (2013), random yield models with positive lead times are not studied in detail in the literature and there are several open questions. We consider the situation where the yield is observed when the order arrives. Further, the analysis is based on the following sequence of events. At the beginning of the period the order, placed λ periods before, is delivered and yield is recognized. Second, under this yield information a new order can be placed based on the inventory position at the beginning of the period and according to the linear inflation rule as given in (1). Then demand occurs and inventory and backorder costs are charged at the end of the period.The first issue to be discussed is the information to be used for the order decision. Since the yield of an order becomes known at the moment of delivery, we can only include the expected yield in the inventory position resulting in the following definition of the inventory position:(25)Xt=It−1+Y(Qt−λ)+∑l=1λ−1E[Y(Qt−l)]Note that in case of a one period lead time (λ = 1) the last term in (25) disappears. This means that for this specific situation there is no outstanding order when the replenishment decision is made and thus, there is also no uncertainty about the yield of the last placed order.In the following we first model the system as a Markov chain. Then we show how the Markov model can be used to obtain a near-optimal critical stock level and additionally we propose a simple heuristic to compute near-optimal critical stock levels by a steady-state approach.At the moment when the yield becomes known, the inventory position has to be updated, resulting in the following recursive equation:(26)Xt+1=Xt+E[Y(Qt)]−Dt−(E[Y(Qt+1−λ)]−Y(Qt+1−λ))For the special case of a one period lead time the expectation terms in (26) cancel out each other and no open orders exist. Thus, no random information has to be incorporated in the inventory position, which therefore is identical to that in case of zero lead time. In contrast to this, the inventory position is an estimator in case of larger lead times where the last term in (26) can be interpreted as a correction term, defined as the difference between the expected and the actual yield(27)Rt+1−λ=E[Y(Qt+1−λ)]−Y(Qt+1−λ)Since no correction is necessary in case of a one period lead time, the formulae presented in the sequel apply for the situations with λ ≥ 2. For λ = 1 the definition of the inventory position analogously to Section 3.1 (i.e. Xt= It − 1 + Y(Qt − 1)), and the corresponding analysis can be applied.Similarly as in the case with zero lead time the difference of the inventory position and the critical stock level can be modeled as a Markov chain, but the recursive equation for Δtis now given as:Δt+1={Δt+E[Y(−FΔt)]−(Dt+Rt+1−λ),Δt<0Δt−(Dt+Rt+1−λ),Δt≥0Thus, the transition probabilities for i  ≥  0 and j ∈ SS can be computed as(28)pij=P(Δt+1=j|Δt=i)=P(Dt+Rt+1−λ=i−j)and for i < 0 and j ∈ SS as(29)pij=P(Δt+1=j∣Δt=i)=P(Dt+Rt+1−λ=i+E[Y(⌊−iF⌉)]−j)The stationary distribution of the inventory position is the solution of the system of equations as presented in (8) where the matrix of the transition probabilities is determined by (28) and (29). In order to obtain the distribution of the inventory level we define a modified demand process(30)η(λ+1)=∑i=0λDt+i+∑i=0λ−1Rt−iand use the following relation between the inventory position and the inventory level for λ ≥ 2It+λ=Xt+E[Y(Qt)]−η(λ+1)For λ = 1 the adapted demand process is not needed and the inventory level is directly given as It= Xt− DtLemma 8The optimal critical stock level S*(F) for any given value of F for the infinite horizon random yield problem with positive lead time and a linear control rule is the smallest value satisfying the following newsboy condition:(31)∑k=−∞−1P(η(λ+1)≤S+k+E[Y(⌊−Fk)])]vk+∑k=0+∞P(η(λ+1)≤S+k)vk≥bb+hwhere η(λ+ 1) is the modified demand as defined in (30).Appendix V.□In order to apply the approach presented above, the probability distribution of the correction R is needed. Since the distribution of the correction depends on the order quantity, it changes from period to period. Therefore, we rely on an approximation and determine the first two central moments of the correction R in equilibrium and fit a normal distribution on the moments. It is easy to see that for both yield types the first moment of the correction is equal to zero. However, for the variance we have to distinguish between the two yield types.Lemma 9For a binomial yield model the variance of the correction R as defined in (27) is independent of the order quantity and given asσR2=(1−p)μDUnder the assumption of a stochastically proportional yield model the variance of the correction R is dependent on the second moment of the order quantity as follows:σR2=σZ2(μQ2+σQ2)Appendix VI.□Using the approximations (19) and (20), the second moment of the order quantity can be approximated and the approximate stationary distribution of the inventory distribution can be computed. It remains to determine the variance of the sum of the corrections R in order to determine the distribution of the adapted demand process and the inventory level. It can be shown that the covariance of different correction factors is zero and we obtain the following relation.Lemma 10The variance of the sum of the correction factors is equal to the sum of the variancesVAR[∑i=0λ−1Rt−i]=∑i=0λ−1VAR[Rt−i]Appendix VII.□As mentioned above, we always approximate the distribution of the sum of the corrections in (30) with a normal distribution. If demand is also assumed to be normally distributed then the distribution of the modified demand in (30) is easily obtained since it is also a normal distribution. If period demand is assumed to be gamma distributed and i.i.d. then one convolution of a normal distribution and a gamma distribution has to be computed to obtain the distribution of the adapted demand process η as given in (30).Note that the Markov chain approach is not exact, since the distribution of the correction term is approximated. For λ = 1, however, the correction R in (27) is equal to zero so that the exact inventory distribution and optimal critical stock is determined.For calculating the approximate critical stock level S++ similar as is (18) under non-zero lead times, we can still use the expected order quantity μQfrom (12) as well as the standard deviation of the order quantity σQfrom (19) or (20), but need to determine the steady-state values for μIand σIfor positive lead times λ > 0.Lemma 11If a strictly linear control rule as in (9) is applied, then the average inventory level for both yield types and positive lead time is given as(32)μI=S−(λ+1M)μDwhere M denotes the scrap loss compensation factor as defined in (11).From the definition of the inventory position Xtin (26) it can be derived for the order quantity that(33)Qt=F·(S−It−1−∑i=1λ−1E[Y(Qt−i)]−Y(Qt−λ))Concerning the variance of Q, it already has been shown in Lemma 5 thatσQ2does not depend on the lead time λ. With regard to the variance of the inventory level I, however, this independence property does not hold. That is shown in Lemma 12.Lemma 12The variance for the inventory level under a strictly linear control rule Q = F(S − X) with M < 2, lead time λ > 0 and binomial yield is given as:(34)σI2=σD2+(λ−1+1M2)·M2(σD2+(1−p)·μD)1−(1−M)2For stochastically proportional yield withρZ2<2M−1the variance of the inventory level is given as:(35)σI2=σD2+(λ−1+1M2)·M2(σD2+ρZ2μD2)1−(1−M)2−M2ρZ2Appendix VIII.□Again it is evident that the critical stock S only has an impact on the mean inventory level μI. Since the variance of the inventory level is also known for positive lead time,SNorm+can be computed usingSNorm+=(λ+1M)μD+ΦN−1(bb+h)σIandSGamm+using (17) where the Gamma distributed random variable X has a mean (λ + 1/M)μDand standard deviation σIas given in (34) or (35). For the choice between the two approaches we still need the skewness of the distribution of the inventory level as described in Section 3.2.Lemma 13Under binomial yield, a strictly linear control rule and positive lead time λ > 0 the skewness of the inventory level is given as(36)γI=1σI3×((λ+1M3)μD3+3μDλ−1+1M2[(λ−1+1M3)σI2+(1M2−1M3)σD2]−μ3,D−λ−1+1/M31−(1−M)3·ΘBI)withΘBI=3M(1−M)μD(M(1−p)μD+(1−M)μD2+1−Mλ−1+1/M2(σI2−σD2)+M(μD2+σD2))−M3(1−p)(3μD2+(1−2p)μD)+M3μ3,Dand with σI from (34).Under the same assumptions and stochastically proportional yield we obtain(37)γI=1σI3×(μD3(λ+1M3)+3μDλ−1+1M2[(λ−1+1M3)σI2+(1M2−1M3)σD2]−μ3,D−λ−1+1M33M(1−M)−3M3ρZ2+F3μ3,Z·ΘSP)withΘSP=3μD[(M(1−M)2+M2ρZ2)(μD2+σI2−σD2λ−1+1/M2)+M2(1−M)(μD2+σD2)]+M3μ3,Dwhere σIis given as in (35).ProofAppendix IX.□The same decision rule is applied as in case of zero lead time to determine an approximate critical level S++.In this section we present the results of an extensive numerical study where the performance of our approaches is investigated and compared with existing ones. We have included a comparison with the method presented in Inderfurth and Vogelgesang (2013), abbreviated with I&V, which currently is the best-performing linear-inflation rule heuristic and applies to the same problem constellations as ours. The I&V approach also includes the NLH-1 method by Bollapragada and Morton (1999) as special case for λ = 0 and stochastically proportional yield. With the I&V method the critical stock level in case of binomial yield is computed according toSI&V=(λ+1)μD+k(λ+1)σD2+max{λ,1}(1−p)μD,In case of stochastically proportional yield Inderfurth and Vogelgesang suggested two different approaches. We have tested both of them, but since the second one is always outperforming the first one we only present the results for the following formulaSI&V=(λ+1)μD+k(λ+1)σD2+max{λ,1}ρZ21−ρZ2(μD2+σD2)where the safety factor k in these formulas is given ask=Φ−1(bb+h).From a methodological point of view, our steady-state approach uses the same idea of estimating the moments of the stationary inventory distribution, but deviates from the Inderfurth/Vogelgesang approach in two aspects. First, it adjusts the critical stock level according to (18). Second, it uses the option of switching to a gamma distribution for approximating the inventory distribution when this seems to be more promising as described in Section 3.2.Huh and Nagarajan (2010) have shown how to compute the optimal critical stock level in case of zero lead time using simulation to numerically estimate the distribution of the stationary net inventory level. For this special situation we have applied their approach to validate our results obtained by the Markov chain. Since both approaches lead to the same results they only differ in programming effort and computation time.All approaches are implemented in MATLAB. While the steady state approach and formulae from I&V are very easy to implement and computations are very fast, a little bit more effort is needed for the Markov chain and the simulation approach. Since the net inventory level is in general not bounded, the state space of the Markov chain is truncated to obtain a finite number of equations to be solved. The size of the state space is chosen such that the probability that a state outside the finite number of states will occur is negligible, and we validated our choice by a comparison with the results obtained by simulation. We have used the MATLAB function eig() to compute the steady-state distribution, which can be done in a very short time, even for large state spaces. Over all instances in our numerical design the maximum time observed for solving the system of equations was less than 0.2 seconds.In our simulation we have chosen a warm-up period of 2000 periods and we simulated in one simulation run 5000 periods. We have used a sequential sampling procedure to determine the number of simulation runs such that the half width of the 95 percent confidence interval for each C(F, S) was less than 0.5 percent of the corresponding sample average. Since for the approach of Huh and Nagarajan the fractile of the stationary distribution is needed, many runs (up to 1500) may be necessary for high service levels, since especially in this situation the estimate for the average backorder cost is quite sensitive. Especially for large lead times, large variability, and skewed distributions this can result in long computation times as for example several hours for one instance.In our experiments we have used the standard setting for the yield inflation factor, i.e.,F=1/1ppfor binomial yield andF=1/1μZμZfor stochastically proportional yield which is equivalent to M = 1. We fixed the mean demand μD= 20 and the holding cost parameter h = 1.Six different values for the backorder cost parameter are chosen, similar as in Huh and Nagarajan (2010)b/(b +  h) ∈ {0.85, 0.9, 0.95, 0.97, 0.99, 0.995}. We investigate two distributions for the demand and consider normally as well as gamma distributed demand. The latter is especially considered to allow for large demand variability and non-symmetric demand distributions. Since a discrete demand distribution is needed we compute the probability that demand is equal to k, k ∈ {0, 1, 2, …} as P(D ≤ k + 0.5) − P(D ≤ k − 0.5). For the normally distributed demand three different coefficients of variation are chosen (ρD∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}) and for the gamma distributed demand five different values are selected (ρD∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.75}). Besides the zero lead time case (λ = 0) we also allow for lead times λ ∈ {2, 5, 10}.Three different values for p are studied for the binomially distributed yield (p ∈ {0.5, 0.7, 0.9}). For the part of the numerical study where the stochastically proportional yield is considered, we have chosen a beta distribution for the yield, because thereby different scenarios can be modeled easily. We consider three symmetric distributions with different variability (μZ= 0.5, ρZ∈ {0.2, 0.4, 0.5774}). While the smallest coefficient of variation leads to a yield distribution similar to a normal distribution, the largest value ρZ= 0.5774 results in a uniform distribution for the yield. Further, three distributions with a positive skewness (μZ= 0.75, ρZ= 0.2; μZ= 0.85, ρZ= 0.2; μZ= 0.85, ρZ= 0.1) are studied. The densities of the different yield distributions are illustrated in Fig. 1.We have computed the optimal critical stock level S* using the Markov chain approach as presented in Section 3.1, and the approximated critical stock level S++ according to Section 3.2. For each instance i we have computed the relative cost difference δiasδi(S++)=C(S++)−C(S*)C(S*)·100%orδi(SI&V)=C(SI&V)−C(S*)C(S*)·100%and we have calculated the average (maximum) relative difference for N instances asδ¯=1N∑i=1Nδi(δmax=maxi=1,…,Nδi)The aggregated results of the 54 (90) instances with normally (gamma) distributed demand and binomial yield are summarized in Table 2. Note that for normally distributed demand the steady-state analysis leads to the same results as the approach of Inderfurth and Vogelgesang, since the correction presented in (18) does not have any impact due to the relative small yield uncertainty. Further, since the demand is normally distributed and the influence of the skewness of the yield is small, the approximation of the inventory level with a normal distribution works well.However, in case of gamma distributed demand the steady state analysis outperforms the approach I&V and reveals excellent results. In the worst case a maximum relative cost deviation of 2.54 percent is observed while δmax is equal to 41.52 percent for I&V. Further, in about 80 (60) percent of the instances with normally (gamma) distributed demand the optimal critical stock level S*is found by our steady-state approach and for the other instances the cost deviations are very small. The critical stock level is only overestimated in case of normally distributed demand. In contrast to this, it can also be underestimated in case of gamma distributed demand with high uncertainty.A closer look on the numerical results reveals that for the normally distributed demand situation the decision rule always selectsSNorm++, while in case of gamma distributed demandSNorm++is only chosen for small demand variability. This is also the reason why the approach of Inderfurth and Vogelgesang is not appropriate in situations where the normal distribution assumption is not valid. For large demand variability and high service levels relative cost deviations up to 40 percent can be observed if it is assumed that the inventory level follows a normal distribution and onlySNorm++is used as an approximation for the critical stock level, which illustrates the necessity of taking the skewness of the distribution of the inventory level into account.The results of the 108 instances with normally distributed demand and for the 180 instances with gamma distributed demand with stochastically proportional yield are summarized in Table 3.In case of stochastically proportional yield the approach of Inderfurth and Vogelgesang only works well in case of symmetric demand and yield distributions, because even under normally distributed demand large cost deviations can be observed if the yield distribution is not symmetric (see for example the data for μZ= 0.85, ρZ= 0.2 with δAv = 4.6 percent and δmax = 35 percent). The reason for this is that under non-symmetric distributions the fractile of the normal distribution differs heavily from the real fractile. We further would like to mention that in this situation the decision rule often selectsSGamm++for the approximated critical stock level and for gamma distributed demand in about 50 percent of the instances it is chosen as well.The steady-state approximation still works very well, but a little bit worse than in case of binomial yield. In 47 (40) percent of the instances with normally (gamma) distributed demand the approximation could find the optimal critical stock level S*. Large deviations from the optimal critical stock level are only observed if S*is underestimated, which is more likely to happen in case of very high critical ratios and large yield variability. While on average the relative cost deviations are very small, in a few instances the cost deviation is above or close to 10 percent. However, these large deviations occur for extremely high service levels, respectively critical ratios of 0.995 or 0.99, and are combined with an underestimated critical stock level. It is questionable if in practice the demand and yield distributions can be estimated so precisely that extremely high critical ratios make sense for exact stock determination.In case of positive lead time we have to use simulation to determine the optimal critical stock level S*, since no other methods are known up to now. For our comparison we first have computed the near-optimal critical level (SM) using the Markov chain approach, the approximated critical level S++according to formula (18) with the corresponding moments for the scenario with positive lead times, andSI&Vwith the formulas mentioned above. Then we have compared the average costs of our approaches with the optimal simulated costs and we report the relative difference for each instance. The average and the maximum deviation are defined corresponding to Section 5.1.For the binomial yield model we have computed 162 (270) instances for normally (gamma) distributed demand and we summarized the results in Table 4. Also for the positive lead time case the results are equal for the steady-state approach and the approach of Inderfurth and Vogelgesang in case of normally distributed demand.The performance of our two new approximations is excellent (for the Markov chain approach it is better than for the steady-state approach; the worst case performance is δmax = 0.99 percent) and in case of gamma distributed demand much better than the safety stock formula of Inderfurth and Vogelgesang. In case of large demand variability the tails of the normal and the gamma distribution are quite different, resulting in large cost differences for high service levels. Besides, the approach of Inderfurth and Vogelesang is improving with increasing lead time since the normal distribution assumption is violated less due to the central limit theorem.The optimal critical level is found with the approximation based on the Markov chain in 85 percent of the instances with normal demand and in about 65 percent in case of gamma distributed demand while for the approach based on the steady-state approximation the numbers are a little bit lower, 57 percent for normally distributed demand and about 49 percent for gamma demand distribution. With the Markov chain approach it is more likely to underestimate the optimal critical stock level, while the steady state formulas lead more often to an overestimation. For both approaches and both demand distributions it is not possible to identify situations which systematically lead to an over- or underestimation of the critical stock level.The approximation based on the Markov chain works better with increasing demand variability. Similar as in case of zero lead time, the steady-state approximationSNorm++is always chosen in case of normally distributed demand, because the symmetric demand and the little skewness of the binomial distribution seem to result in a nearly normally distributed inventory level. Under gamma distributed demand this can only be observed for small demand variability.The results for the 864 instances with stochastically proportional yield are presented in Table 5.While both approximations work on average very well, it can be seen that the steady-state approximation outperforms the approximation based on the Markov chain, especially in case of a non-symmetric yield distribution. The main reason for this is the approximation of the distribution of the correction factor R in Eq. (27) with a normal distribution. This may be inaccurate in case of a skew yield rate distribution. Due to the same reason our new steady-state approach also outperforms the approach of Inderfurth and Vogelgesang, which is also based on normal distribution assumption. This conclusion can be drawn based on the average cost performance as well as on the worst case performance which is about 18 percent for I&V and about 8 percent for the new steady-state approach. Additionally, the smallest number of instances where the relative cost deviation is larger than 5 percent is observed in case of the steady state approach (Table 6).Large cost deviations (more than 2 percent) are always induced by an underestimated critical stock level, which results in too many backorders. These situations only occur in case of very large critical ratios. Thus, we can conclude that, for practically relevant parameter instances the relative deviations are more than acceptable and our approximations which are easy to implement show a very good performance.Our numerical study shows that the Inderfurth/Vogelgesang heuristic can considerably loose performance if demands and/or yields show a higher level of asymmetry in their distributions while the quality of our steady-state approach remains to be fairly good. The superiority of the steady-state approach is especially remarkable in case of high critical ratios (∼service levels) and low lead times. Under normally distributed demand the deviations between both heuristics are just minor. Only in case of very high skewness of the yield rate distribution and a very large critical ratio our steady-state approach performs significantly better. Summarizing, we can conclude that the approaches for determining the critical stock level which are presented in this paper are of considerably high relevance in practical cases where we cannot be sure that demands and yields follow symmetric probability distributions. Further, the optimal critical stock levels can be computed very fast.From a practical point of view, it is evident that linear-inflation policies are the most attractive candidates for production and inventory control in systems with stochastic demand and random yield. The two approaches for policy parameter determination presented in this paper are superior to all other approaches developed so far. This is first because they can be used in a wide field of problem instances including relevant circumstances like non-zero lead times and binomial yields where most others cannot be applied. Second, in almost all cases both approaches reveal a very high performance level compared to the optimal linear-inflation rule of the two-parameter type. Third, the computational effort of parameter determination is competitive to other available approaches. The steady-state approach with its closed-form solution can be applied as spreadsheet application, and the Markov chain approach basically only needs the solution of a linear equation system.Both approaches also have the potential to be used for optimizing the yield inflation factor as second policy parameter since our analysis is valid for arbitrary inflation parameters. It is a matter of future research to investigate if structural solution properties can be found and exploited for easing parameter optimization in this context so that the high effort of simple numerical search procedures can be avoided. A major open problem area refers to the question how the inventory position within a linear-inflation policy should be defined under random yield if lead time is larger than one. First, the consideration of open orders by including expected yields as suggested in our approach is not the only viable way. Second, if multiple open orders from different periods have to be taken into account it will, in general, not be optimal to aggregate them to a single inventory position because each order contributes to the yield risk specifically. Up to now, only the approach in Inderfurth and Vogelgesang (2013) addresses this issue and gives a suggestion how to incorporate the separate yield risks of multiple open orders within a linear-inflation rule. However, it needs much more research in this field to find out how the structure of an optimal linear policy in the case of non-zero lead time might look like and to develop approaches for determining the (most likely more than two) parameters of this policy structure.Almost all research in the field of analyzing optimal policies and developing smart heuristics for random yield problems in periodic-review systems with stochastic demand deals with situations where fixed order costs are not present. From literature (see Yano & Lee 1995) we know that the already complicated optimal policy structure in the case with only proportional costs will be even much more complex if a fixed cost for ordering exists. In such a case a linear-inflation policy will only be satisfactory heuristic if the length of the review period will be treated as an additional decision variable. If such a policy will not perform reasonably well, a non-linear policy of the (s,S) or (R,s,S) type complemented by a yield inflation factor might work better. It is, however, a matter of future research to develop intelligent approaches to determine close-to-optimal parameters for such extended policies.Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2015.03.006.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
