@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Coordination of supply chains with bidirectional option contracts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the supply chain that deals with products having high demand uncertainty.We characterize the optimal order strategies with bidirectional options provision.We examine the feedback effects that come from bidirectional options provision.We develop the bidirectional option contracts to coordinate the supply chain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Bidirectional option contract,Structural property,Channel coordination,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we develop a supply contract for a two-echelon manufacturer–retailer supply chain with a bidirectional option, which may be exercised as either a call option or a put option. Under the bidirectional option contract, we derive closed-form expressions for the retailer’s optimal order strategies, including the initial order strategy and the option purchasing strategy, with a general demand distribution. We also analytically examine the feedback effects of the bidirectional option on the retailer’s initial order strategy. In addition, taking a chain-wide perspective, we explore how the bidirectional option contract should be set to attain supply chain coordination.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The present business environment is full of uncertainties. To compete effectively in such an environment, firms need to develop the capability of responding flexibly to changing market conditions. This is particularly true for firms dealing with perishable products with comparatively long production lead-times and short selling seasons, and subject to high demand uncertainty. In order to hedge against the loss associated with over- and under-ordering, retailers usually have to order less but more frequently from their upstream firms such as manufacturers so that they can well accommodate demand volatility. Such an order policy, however, exerts great pressure on the manufacturers because it requires them to have flexible capacity to cater for the irregular orders, which results in an increase in the manufacturers’ costs. As a result, conflicts arise between the channel partners, which inevitably impair channel efficiency.To address the issue of channel inefficiency, a typical approach is to design incentive contracts that provide the retailer with flexibility to respond to unanticipated demand without burdening the manufacturer. Among all such contract types, the option contract has attracted extensive attention and has been demonstrated to be effective in resolving the channel conflicts described above (Barnes-Schuster et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2010; Wang and Liu, 2007). Usually the option contract can be either the call option contract or the put option contract, which is characterized by two parameters, namely the option price and the exercise price. For the call option contract, the option price is an allowance paid by the retailer to the manufacturer for reserving one unit of the production capacity. The exercise price is the payment by the retailer to the manufacturer for exercising one unit of the call option. Hence, with the call option contract, the option buyer has the right to buy a certain quantity of the product at a specified price (the exercise price) on or before an expiry date. For the put option contract, the option price is an allowance paid by the retailer to the manufacturer for cancelling or returning one ordered unit of the product. The exercise price is the refund from the manufacturer to the retailer for exercising one unit of the put option. Hence, with the put option contract, the option buyer has the right to cancel or return some ordered units of the product at a specified refund per unit (the exercise price) on or before an expiry date. Obviously, with the option contract, on the one hand, the retailer acquires order flexibility by paying the option price. On the other hand, the manufacturer receives an early commitment from the retailer so that it can carry out better capacity and material planning, while the allowance received from selling the option justifies its assuming some demand risks from the retailer. Therefore, balancing these two countervailing forces, the option mechanism is beneficial to the channel and the channel partners concerned. This is especially true when the manufacturer is powerful enough and capable of absorbing the risks associated with demand and price uncertainties (Ritchken and Tapiero, 1986).However, research on the option mechanism in the past often focused on the single directional option, namely either the call option or the put option, with which the retailer is allowed to adjust the initial order only upwards or only downwards. Wang and Tsao (2006) showed that the call option contract induces the retailer to reduce the initial order commitment, leading to an increase in the channel shortage cost, while the put option contract prompts the retailer to increase the initial order commitment, leading to an increase in the channel over-stocking cost. Moreover, the biased orders under the single directional option may exacerbate the bullwhip effect in the supply chain. Hence, it is not in the best interest of the channel to allow the retailer to adjust the order only in a single direction. In addition, the market may be so volatile that at the juncture to purchase the option, the retailer is not sure of the direction in which it will need to adjust the order quantity. In this case, the retailer may need to purchase a bidirectional option so that it is able to adjust the order in either direction. Moinzadeh and Nahmias (2000)p. 421 pointed out that a natural extension of the single directional option is the bidirectional option. So far, however, some issues of the bidirectional option have remained unaddressed. For example, how is the retailer’s initial order strategy affected with the bidirectional option provision? In addition, how should the bidirectional option contract be set to achieve supply chain coordination? These issues are far more complicated than those of the single directional option because the bidirectional option provides the retailer with the chance of adjusting the order in either direction. In this paper we analytically explore these issues of the bidirectional option contract. As an initial attempt to address these issues, we consider the simplest supply chain structure comprising one manufacturer and one retailer. This setting strikes a proper balance between model realism and problem tractability.We organize the rest of this paper as follows: In Section 2 we present a brief review on the related literature. In Section 3 we develop the bidirectional option model. In Sections 4 and 5 we analyze the model and derive its structural properties. Finally, we conclude the paper and suggest topics for future research in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
