@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Average-cost efficiency and optimal scale sizes in non-parametric analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new cost-efficiency measure based on the notions of ray average cost and optimal scale size.The new efficiency measure (ACE) extends Banker and Thrall's (1992) TSRE measure to cost analysis.We establish a monotone inequality relationship between production-based and cost-based scale efficiency measures.We prove that optimal scale size is a more restrictive notion than most productive scale size.Our approach allows for a simultaneous determination of the regime and degree of scale economies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scale efficiency,Returns to scale,Scale economies,FDH,DEA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Under fairly general assumptions requiring neither a differentiable frontier nor a constant-returns-to-scale technology, this paper introduces a new definition of an optimal scale size based on the minimization of unit costs. The corresponding measure, average-cost efficiency, combines scale and allocative efficiency, and generalizes the measurement of scale economies in efficiency analysis while providing a performance criterion which is stricter than both cost efficiency and scale efficiency measurement. The average-cost efficiency is not reliant upon the uniformity of the firms’ input-price vector, and we supply procedures to compute it in both convex and non-convex production technologies. Empirical illustration of the theoretical results is given with reference to large sets of production units.average-cost efficiencyconstant returns to scaledata envelopment analysisdecision making unitfree disposal hullmost productive scale sizeoverall efficiency/cost efficiencyoptimal scale sizetechnical and scale radial efficiencyvariable returns to scale

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A long-established tradition deals with the issue of the optimal scale of production units without assigning a role to input prices. Since the pioneering contribution of Frisch (1965), the optimal scale size has been conceived of as the “technically optimal scale” maximizing average physical productivity along the production function, i.e. the increase in a single output relative to a proportional increase in all inputs. Baumol, Panzar, and Willig (1982) attempted to extend this analysis by including costs and a multiple-output setting, but their ray-average-cost function nevertheless did not account for a change in input proportions as it was only concerned with radial expansions of the given input and output mixes. In this tradition, the optimality of a scale size – that is to say the evaluation of the scale efficiency of a production unit – depends exclusively upon ray average productivity with no role being played by the evaluation of the allocative efficiency of its input mix. By formally developing the concept of most productive scale size (MPSS) for the case of multiple inputs and multiple outputs, Banker's (1984) seminal contribution confirmed this view (see also Färe, Grosskopf, & Lovell, 1985). However, this concept of optimality may become unsatisfactory when one reflects that Farrell (1957) denoted cost efficiency – the ability to minimize total cost borne for a given level of output – as overall efficiency precisely because of its capacity to include both the technical and the allocative aspects. Farrell, along with Koopmans (1951) and others, is one of the pioneers of that modern analysis of production which accounts for productive technologies possessing both feasible efficient and inefficient points. The first attempt to integrate scale and cost efficiency into a single measure from this perspective, where applied analysis has extensively relied on non-parametric methods employing linear and integer programming (see, e.g., Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984; Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978; Deprins, Simar, & Tulkens, 1984), was made by Färe and Grosskopf (1985). In a data envelopment analysis (DEA) framework, characterized by a convex technology, they introduced the cost measure of scale efficiency of a decision making unit (DMU) as the ratio of its constant returns to scale (CRS) cost-efficiency to that of its variable returns to scale (VRS). Sueyoshi (1997, 1999) extended this approach to the measurement of the degree of scale economies.11The ratio of marginal cost to average cost. In the paper, we will generally speak of ‘scale economies’ when monetary costs are being considered. Reference to productivity in physical terms (input-output) will be denoted by the use of ‘returns to scale’.No application of these measures to a non-convex production technology, such that of the free disposal hull (FDH), has yet been found: as an example, De Witte and Marques’ (2010) scale measure does not take account of input prices and is therefore not concerned with allocative efficiency.The kind of integration proposed by Färe and Grosskpof (1985) and Sueyoshi (1999) has, however, proved to be less than effective in prompting the inclusion of allocative efficiency in the definition of an optimal scale size. As a matter of fact, recent contributions dealing with the issue still base their definitions exclusively upon the maximal ray average productivity typical of the MPSS (see, e.g., Førsund & Hjalmarsson, 2004; Podinovski, 2004). In our opinion, one reason for this outcome might lie in the fact that Färe and Grosskopf's (1985) methodology does not envision a separation between scale and allocative efficiencies. As a consequence, their framework is unfit: a) to ascertain the logical relationship existing between primal (production-based) and dual (cost-based) optimal scale sizes22We use primal and dual with the same meaning assigned them by Färe and Grosskopf (1985); see ibid., p. 595. The same use of these words is made by Sueyoshi (1999) and Tone and Sahoo (2006).; b) to establish a clear-cut algebraic relationship between production-based and cost-based scale efficiencies.Our analysis aims at offering a solution to these research issues – including the introduction of the cost measure of scale efficiency in FDH technologies – under assumptions more general than those featured in the methodology of Färe and Grosskopf (1985) and Sueyoshi (1999). In fact, only free disposal and VRS are required, thereby relaxing the assumptions of convexity, CRS and differentiability of the production frontier. The purpose is that of integrating the research work initiated by Banker (1984) – characterized by VRS, MPSS and a simple method for the determination of returns to scale – with Färe and Grosskopf's (1985) cost measure of scale efficiency.To pursue this objective, we have introduced a new definition of optimal scale size (OSS) as the scale which minimizes the ray average cost, taking into account the allocative efficiency of the input mix. In particular, we propose an efficiency measure based upon the ratio between the ray average cost of a DMU's output vector – evaluated at its OSS – and its total cost. The measure is called average-cost efficiency because it can be interpreted as the potential reduction in unit cost that a DMU could achieve if it adopted the scale of production and the input mix of its OSS. This efficiency criterion is shown to be more restrictive than both VRS traditional measures of cost efficiency and scale efficiency based on ray average productivity.The outline of the paper is as follows. Under the free disposal assumption, Section 2 introduces the definitions of average-cost efficiency (ACE) and of OSS. Without having recourse to the usual regularity conditions, Section 3 characterizes an OSS and its relationship with an MPSS by means of the decomposition of the ACE measure into the sum of a scale and an allocative component. In general, an OSS need not coincide with an MPSS, precisely because of the potential allocative inefficiency of the latter. Section 4 is dedicated to illustrating the geometric and economic significance of our measure, and to its computation in convex and non-convex technologies, the last sub-section clarifying the role of our assumptions on input prices. Section 5 discusses the relationship of our analysis with the literature on scale and cost-scale efficiency, while pointing out the advantages that ACE measure achieves over the existing approaches. Detailed empirical applications, regarding the convex and non-convex case, are presented in Section 6, while Section 7 offers some concluding remarks on the features of our proposed performance-criterion and the potential for application in various economic sectors.The production technology upon which the analysis is based satisfies only the free disposability assumption, as it is the FDH of the observed production possibilities. Free disposal means that, given an observed input–output vector which we assume to belong to the technology, we postulate as a feasible point of the same technology any other vector which: a) has the same outputs, and inputs which are no smaller, b) has the same inputs, and outputs which are no larger. In other words, excess inputs and excess outputs can be disposed of at no cost. We adopt the original FDH model (e.g. Tulkens, 1993) in so far as it makes no specific assumption on the returns-to-scale regime, which is therefore VRS. Introducing some notation, we have n DMUs, with each DMU j (j = 1, …, n) using m inputs, xij(i = 1, …, m), to produce s outputs, yrj(r = 1, …, s). We assume that the observed input and output vectors of a generic DMU are, respectively, xj= (x1j, …, xmj)' ≥ 0 and yj= (y1j, …, ysj)' ≥ 0, where the prime indicates the transposition operation.33The vector-inequality sign means that each element of the left vector is weakly greater than the corresponding element of the right vector, with at least one component being strictly greater.If we denote the m × n matrix of inputs as X = [x1, …, xn] and the s × n matrix of outputs as Y = [y1, …, yn], then the production possibility set is expressed as(1)T={(x,y)|Xλ≤x,Yλ≥y,∑j=1nλj=1,λj∈{0,1};j∈J}whereλis the n × 1 vector with components equal to λj, and J = {1, …, n}.Being dependent exclusively upon the strong disposability assumption, the conclusions we reach carry over to a convex VRS production possibility set, i.e. a set which is obtained by simply changing the constraint on λjin (1), and which is defined as(2)TDEA={(x,y)|Xλ≤x,Yλ≥y,∑j=1nλj=1,λj≥0;j∈J}For future reference, we note that the CRS versions of the above technologies, which we denote respectively as TCRSandTCRSDEA, are obtained from (1) and (2) by substitutingλwith z, a vector whose j-th element is zj= wλj– where w > 0 is an arbitrary scaling factor.As far as costs are concerned, we posit that each DMU faces the same vector of input prices, p = (p1, …, pm) > 0, pxjthus being the actual total cost that DMU j bears for producing its output vector, yj. Uniformity of input prices across the different DMUs is being assumed only for notational convenience, while most of our results will in fact stand even when DMUs face varying input-price vectors (see, below, Section 4.3).In the literature on efficiency analysis, we have not found an efficiency concept involving the ratio of the average cost of a DMU's output to that of a reference unit. In fact, as previously stated, the measures of both Färe and Grosskopf (1985) and Sueyoshi (1997), while combining cost and scale efficiency, refer only to the total cost borne by a DMU for producing its output vector. A ratio relating to unit costs can however be devised in connection with the concept of ray average cost. Hence, we will consider the ratio between the ray average cost evaluated at a reference unit and that evaluated at the DMU's current scale size (i.e. total cost).Following Baumol's basic definition (see Baumol, 1977, p. 811; Baumol et al., 1982, pp. 48–49), the ray average cost of the generic DMU j is given as(3)RAC(yj)=C(tyj)twhere C( · ) is the total cost of production and t ≠ 1 is a positive scalar inducing an equiproportionate expansion or contraction in the components of output vector yj. Next, divide (3) by the actual total cost of producing yj, obtaining(4)RAC(yj)C(yj)=C(tyj)C(yj)×1tnote that, in the single output case, (4) coincides with the ratio between average costs of output tyjand output yj, while it can be interpreted as a ratio between ray average costs in the multiple output case. Next, select an arbitrary reference unit (xh, yh) ∈ T, and set44We are considering the set of affinely extended real numbers. The gamma coefficient is a scaling factor between vectors, and it can be seen that no contradiction arises by assuming that, when 0/0 occurs for a component, that component is excluded from comparison.(5)γj,h=maxr{yrjyrh},whereγj,h∈(0,∞]By choosingt=1γj,h, we can point out that1γj,h·yj=minr{yrhyrj}·yj≤yh, whileC(yh)=C(1γj,h·yj)=pxhbecause of the strong disposability of outputs. By inserting C(yj) = pxjand the former relationships into (4) we derive the final expression of the ACE ratio as(6)Rj≡pxhpxj·γj,hwhere γj, his the radial scaling factor obtained from the comparison between the output vector of DMU j and that of reference unit h. Thus, for an exogenously given reference-unit, the ACE ratio Rjindicates the gain in average cost that a single DMU j would achieve if it changed its scale size, by adopting xhto produce yhor, equivalently, the radial projection of its output vector onto the scale size of the reference unit,1γj,h·yj. To develop Rjinto an efficiency measure we introduce the notion of OSS as a scale that minimizes the ray average cost in multiple output production. This concept was suggested by the seminal study of Baumol et al. (1982) but it is not explicitly defined therein, and their analysis does not, moreover, account for the existence of inefficient operations in the production technology, i.e. points which are not on its frontier (see Kim, 1987). Our definition of OSS is given below.Definition 1For any given DMU j an OSS is a production possibility (xo, yo) ∈ T that minimizes Rj.This differs from Baumol et al.’s (1982) analysis of the M-locus,55The M-locus is defined as “the set of all output vectors that minimize ray average cost along their own rays”, see ibid., pp. 58–59. For a discussion of the determinants of the form of the M-locus, see ibid., pp. 126–133, but it abstracts changes in input prices and input ratios.which did not allow for changes in input ratios – while expanding outputs along their ray, it is evident that the input ratios in xowill generally differ from the ones in xj, so that Definition 1 of an OSS incorporates this neglected effect. In formal terms, an OSS is a solution to the program(7)minxh,yhRjsubject to(7a)(xh,yh)∈TWe point out that the existence of a solution to problem (7) is warranted as long as the ray average cost, pxh· γj, h, does not reach a zero value.66See Chavas and Cox (1999), note 18, p. 307.In our case, this is ensured by the assumptions on technology and prices, which imply both pxh> 0 and γj, h> 0. The optimal value corresponding to the solution of program (7) is denoted asRj*.From the positivity of pxh· γj, hand from the possibility of choosing the DMU under examination as its own OSS, it follows that(8)0<Rj*≤1In conclusion, we can remark that program (7) clearly coincides with minimizing the ray average cost pxh· γj, h. In this sense our definition is similar to that of Chavas and Cox (1999),77See Chavas and Cox (1999), section “Cost-based Scale efficiency”, pp. 307–308.although they neither develop an efficiency measure nor inquire into the properties of an OSS, both of which we will do below.Definition 2The ACE measure of a DMU is the minimum value given by the solution of program (7).In symbols, this gives us(9)ACEj≡minxh,yhRj≡pxopxj·γj,o=Rj*The idea behind (9) is that of incorporating the effect of the returns-to-scale regime into cost analysis by means of the scaling factor γj, o, and in this sense the measure combines cost and scale efficiency but – differently from Färe and Grosskopf (1985) and Sueyoshi (1997) – it relates to unit costs. Moreover, note that the ACE measure does not require a CRS estimation of the production possibility set, because T is assumed to be a VRS technology.As we have stated above, our approach is that of trying to ascertain the properties of an OSS under fairly general assumptions, without imposing the typical regularity conditions required for the existence of a transformation function and the calculation of scale and cost-scale elasticities (cf., e.g., Podinovski, 2004, p. 248; Tone & Sahoo, 2006, pp. 75–76). Obviously, the estimation of ACE depends upon – and can be simplified in accordance with – the properties of an OSS. In this regard, no distinction arises in the computation of the ACE of a cost inefficient DMU vs. that of a cost efficient one.Let us cite a basic definitionDefinition 3A generic production possibility (xh, yh) ∈ T is cost efficient, i.e. is a cost benchmark, if in T there is no other production possibility featuring both an output vector weakly greater than yhand a total cost less than pxh.On this point, see, e.g., Briec, Kerstens, and Vanden Eeckaut (2004, pp. 170–171) and Sueyoshi (1997, p. 782).Definition 3 leads us into an initial property of ACE.Proposition 1The ACE measure of a DMU is not greater than its cost efficiency measure.See Appendix A.1.The reason for this result can clearly be found in the fact that ACE embeds scale efficiency, i.e. the case γj, h≠ 1, in the usual cost efficiency analysis where γj, h≡ 1. We can now deal with the issue of the properties which characterize an OSS.Two preliminary properties characterize an OSS:Proposition 2An OSS must be cost efficient.See Appendix A.2.The intuition of this property is straightforward: if a given production possibility o, which is a candidate OSS, does not minimize the total cost of production of its own output vector, then an obvious way to reduce the ray average cost of DMU j is that of considering the cost benchmark of o as an alternative OSS. Therefore, Proposition 2 shows that cost efficiency is a necessary condition for an OSS, otherwise the ray average cost would not be minimized, while it is generally not sufficient because of Proposition 1.In principle, the definitions and the properties so far shown do not prevent unsuitable ACE measure behaviour: i.e. an OSS featuringRo*<1. The next proposition eliminates this possibility.Proposition 3An OSS yields the lowest ray average cost for its own output vector.see Appendix A.3.When the OSS minimizes only its own ACE ratio, the proposition is self-evident. Therefore, the proof considers the case in which an OSS minimizes the ACE ratio of a different DMU. The rationale for Proposition 3 can be easily understood in the single output case. Suppose that OSS 1 (x1, y1) minimizes (6) for a DMU j (xj, yj). Then, with respect to any different OSS – which we denote by 2 –px2pxj·yjy2≥px1pxj·yjy1clearly holds. This inequality can be easily rearranged into the followingpx2px1·y1y2≥1, which shows that OSS 1 minimizes the ray average cost of its own output.Note that, on the basis of Proposition 3, we are certain that for each OSS oRo*=1andRo≥1.Some additional important properties of OSSs can be inferred by means of the decomposition of the ACE measure.Herein, we will discuss the decomposition of the ACE into the sum of a radial component, which coincides with the ray average productivity, and a non-radial component depending upon the difference in the proportions in which the inputs are employed by a given DMU and by its OSS. These two elements account, respectively, for scale efficiency and allocative inefficiency of the DMU in question with respect to its OSS.The ray average productivity of a DMU j with respect to a candidate OSS h can be defined as(10)RAPj,h=δj,h·γj,h,withδj,h=maxi{xihxij}andγj,h=maxr{yrjyrh}Strictly speaking, the ray average productivity is determined by means of the radial projections of the fixed input-bundle xjand of the fixed output-bundle yjonto the respective bundles of the candidate OSS, xhand yh. The ensuing projected point is(11)(δj,h·xj,1γj,h·yj)∈Tand it belongs to the original VRS technology because δj, h· xj≥ xhand1γj,h·yj≤yh. As for the decomposition of the ACE ratio, (6), it can be seen that we can generate a non-negative input-slacks vector, having at least one null component, as sj= δj, h· xj− xh, from which we obtain pxh= δj, h· pxj− psj, where psj≥ 0. (6) can then be rearranged as(δj,h·pxj−psj)pxj·γj,h, which leads to the final expression(12)Rj=(δj,h−psjpxj)·γj,hThus, the ACE ratio of a DMU j can be interpreted as the algebraic sum of two addends: its ray average productivity (radial component) minus the ratio of the cost of input slacks to total cost multiplied by γj, h(non-radial component).88Decomposition (12) may not always be determinate in the presence of semi-positive units. However this possibility does not affect the validity of our results. See Appendices A.3 and A.5.On the one hand, the ray average productivity measures the scale efficiency of the DMU j with respect to its radial projection onto the candidate OSS h. On the other hand, the cost due to the input-slacks vector represents the allocative inefficiency of the radial projection of the DMU's input-bundle onto that of the candidate OSS: this depends upon the difference between the input mixes xjand xh(see Fig. 1).Banker (1984) defines the “MPSS for a given input and output mix” as “the scale size at which the outputs produced ‘per unit’ of the inputs is maximized”. In our terminology, the MPSS for DMU j is the scale size which minimizes (10), the radial component of ACE ratio. Following Podinovski's (2004) formulation of the optimization program,99For Banker's (1984) definition, see ibid., p. 37. For Podinovski's (2004) formulation, see ibid., p. 233; we remark that our gamma coefficient is defined as the reciprocal of that of Podinovski.we can say that a production possibility (xh, yh) ∈ T is an MPSS if and only if(13)minm(δh,m·γh,m)=1,where m represents any production possibility belonging to T, and the minimizer m* is not necessarily unique because of the possibility of multiple solutions. We can then remark that, for an MPSS h, m* = h is always a solution to program (13), and each alternative production possibility, m ≠ h, yields δh, m· γh, m≥ 1, where the equality sign holds only when multiple solutions occur.In a VRS convex production possibility set, TDEA, Banker and Thrall (1992) derive from the concept of MPSS a related efficiency measure: the technical and scale radial efficiency (TSRE) of a DMU. This VRS measure is given as the solution of the Charnes et al. (1978) formulation of the technical efficiency problem.1010See Banker and Thrall (1992), p. 77. The acronym TSRE is introduced by these authors in the same page.This minimum score is the minimum ray average productivity of the DMU under examination and coincides with its CRS technical efficiency score.1111See Proposition 2 and Corollary 2 in Banker (1984), pp. 39–40. Note that the MPSS in Banker's corollary 2 minimizes our expression (10), whose corresponding optimal value is equal toh0*.These relationships also hold in an FDH technology, T (see Soleimani-damaneh, Jahanshahloo, & Reshadi, 2006, p. 1057).We can now provide some properties based mainly upon expression (12).A fundamental characteristic of OSSs is the followingProposition 4An OSS must be an MPSS.See Appendix A.4.The next proposition qualifies more narrowly the relationship between OSSs and MPSSs.Proposition 5The OSS and the MPSS of a given DMU need not coincide.See Appendix A.5.Proposition 5 indicates that being an MPSS does not, in principle, suffice to become an OSS, i.e. to minimize the ray average cost of any DMU, simply because of the possible relevance of the size of the allocative inefficiency component which is generated by the radial projection of the given DMU's input and output mix onto a different MPSS. This non-sufficiency result is hardly surprising when the MPSS under consideration is not a cost-efficient unit: it also follows directly from Property 1. However, Proposition 5 tells us more: it points out that the same outcome can arise even for cost efficient MPSSs. Therefore, the corollary below can be immediately derived from Propositions 2, 4 and 5.Corollary 1Being a cost efficient MPSS is a necessary but not sufficient condition for being an OSS.Attention can now be paid to another corollary.Corollary 2The ACE measure of a DMU is not greater than its TSRE.See Appendix A.6.The characteristics established by Corollaries 1 and 2 derive from the fact that ACE brings allocative efficiency into the Banker and Thrall (1992) TSRE measure. The rationale for them is paradigmatically offered by the proof of Proposition 5, where it is shown that even a cost efficient MPSS can in principle achieve a further reduction in its ray average cost as a consequence of the adoption of the scale size of a different MPSS: this fact can determine an absolute value of the allocative component which more than compensates for either the constancy or the decrease in ray average productivity (see expression (12)). We will conclude this section by remarking that TSRE can be taken as the measure corresponding to application of the Baumol et al. (1982) minimization of ray average cost to a production technology which allows for inefficient operations.We are now finally in a position which allows us to better investigate the issue of the geometric and economic sense of the ACE measure.Proposition 4 ensures that an OSS, being an MPSS, is a boundary point which maximizes the ray average productivity for its input and output mix (cf. Banker & Thrall, 1992, pp. 75–76). However, as Proposition 5 points out, the OSS notion requires more than this, as an OSS needs to minimize the cost of the inputs ‘per unit’ of the outputs produced. In fact, our definition of an OSS as a scale size which minimizes the ray average cost of a given production possibility implies that optimization must be performed with simultaneous regard to both a radial projection along the fixed input and output mixes (in the search for maximum ray average productivity) and a change in the input mix (in the search for the minimum cost for each given level of the output vector). Because of the consideration of this second and allocative component, it is evident that our minimization of the cost ‘per unit’ of the outputs produced is more general than the standard conception of OSSs, which is based exclusively on the ray average productivity (see Baumol et al., 1982; Färe et al., 1985; Førsund & Hjalmarsson, 2004; Podinovski, 2004; Tone & Sahoo, 2005, 2006). From a geometric point of view, this means that, given an observed production possibility (xj, yj), in the space of the production technology we seek a production possibility (xo, yo) which – conditionally to p – warrants the maximum increase in the slope of the ray through the origin, without restricting the search along the fixed input and output mixes, xjand yj. Fig. 1 illustrates a three-dimensional space and a convex production technology, TDEA: A is a generic DMU, which can be either on the boundary of the technology or in its interior; QQ’ is an isoquant, which for convenience we suppose to correspond to the maximum feasible level of output, y0, and C is the OSS of DMU A. By construction, any point on the line segment CB is an MPSS: for simplicity's sake, consider point B. This vertex may even yield a ray through the origin (OB) having a slope greater than1212This would occur if the Euclidean distance of point B from the origin of the axes were smaller than that of point C.that of ray OC, and in any case, we can note that – given p– point B is not a solution to program (7) as a consequence of its cost inefficiency: isocost IS clearly shows that B yields a higher ray average cost when compared to point C.To put it another way, we can say that the minimization of the ray average cost of a DMU amounts to choosing the cost-efficient production possibility which maximizes the increase in the slope of the ray through the origin (in Fig. 1, from OA to OC).1313To be exact, this is not strictly true when there is more than one lying on the same horizontal line segment. In Fig. 1, this would occur when the isocost were tangent to segment CB: in this case, each point of the segment yields the same ray average cost for DMU A. This, however, can be regarded as an unlikely exception, because it requires the occurrence of another DMU having an identical level of output as the under examination, C. This condition becomes even more unlikely in the multiple-output case, where the output vectors of two distinct DMUs must be identical.As for the decomposition of the ACE measure, in Fig. 1 we can observe that the rotation from vector OA to vector OC can be decomposed into two movements: 1) the radial projection of point A along its input and output mixes onto point C (see expression (11)), which gives rise to C” lying on the same plane of isoquant QQ’; 2) the translation from point C” to C due to the change in the input mix. These movements represent, respectively, the increase in the ray average productivity and the allocative efficiency component, which combine to form the ACE measure of DMU A. Note that point C’ is, in fact, the radial projection possessing the same ray average productivity as point A, δA, C' · γA, C' = 1, and that C” clearly has a greater ray average productivity when compared to point A, therefore giving δA, C'' · γA, C'' < 1. A more general representation of a convex polyhedron TDEAis given in Fig. 2, where – with respect to Fig. 1 – we drop the assumption of having two DMUs with the same maximal output. In Fig. 2 DMUs A, B, C and D lie on the same facet, B and D have the same level of output and IS denotes a new isocost line. According to Corollary 1, the image is intended to illustrate the case of a cost efficient MPSS, DMU D, which is not an OSS. In fact, DMU D is both a cost efficient unit and an MPSS, but its OSS is nevertheless given by DMU A because the rotation from ray OD to ray OA increases the slope of the ray through the origin. The reason for this is the one already specified in the proof of Proposition 5: the radial projection of point D onto point A decreases or keeps constant the slope of the ray through the origin (decrease or constancy in ray average productivity), but the translation from this projected point to point A, corresponding to the allocative component, brings about an increase in the slope of the ray which more than compensates for its initial decrease (or constancy). As a result, the slope of ray OA is greater than that of ray OD.Having illustrated the geometric representation of the ACE measure, we will turn now to a discussion of its economic meaning. By definition, this measure represents the maximum reduction in average cost that a DMU can achieve by changing its scale size or, equivalently, by a radial expansion or contraction of its output mix. Thus, by construction, the ACE is an individual measure which is built upon the concept of minimum average cost in multiple-output production (see Baumol et al., 1982), whereas this concept has been generalized to take into account the efficiency effects of changes in input ratios due to relative prices. As such, ACE may play an important role both for public services and regulated sectors (e.g. utilities) where the minimization of costs is a leading factor of businesses’ management and regulatory policies (cf. Burridge, 2008; Jamasb & Pollitt, 2003; Lowry & Getachew, 2009). However, our proposed efficiency measure has a more general character which is also applicable to firms producing in competitive sectors. The following property sheds light upon this aspect:Proposition 6In a VRS technology, when the prices of the outputs can be taken as fixed, for a single average-cost inefficient DMU, the ACE supplies an approximation by defect of the potential increase in profits (or reduction in losses) which would ensue from the adoption of its OSS.See Appendix A.7.We conclude that ACE highlights the relevant role that allocative inefficiency of the input mix may play in the long-run equilibrium of an individual production unit (see end of Section 6.2). This analytical character is also valid for the industry as a whole, because the mean of ACE scores can be employed to estimate the efficient aggregate-cost ensuing from the optimal industry structure (Baumol et al., 1982). However, a discussion of such complex issue goes beyond the scope of the present work.As far as computational procedures are concerned, we will see that convexity of the technology makes a difference, implying a more complex procedure when compared to the non-convex case, which we examine first.A simple remark applies to a non-convex technology:Remark 1In an FDH technology, the set of cost efficient units in T coincides with the set of the cost benchmarks of its observed production possibilities, then – given Proposition 2 – the minimizer of program (7) belongs to this last set.At this point, we observe that the computation of the ACE measures for a set of DMUs can be reduced to a simple two-step procedure:1.Perform standard cost analysis to determine the set of cost benchmark units.For each DMU, calculate (6) over the set of cost benchmarks and choose as its OSS the observation that minimizes (6), along with the alleged minimum score.Alternatively, simply perform step 2 with respect to the entire set of DMUs, J.In itself, the computation of the ACE measure in T turns out to be fairly straightforward. Unfortunately this procedure cannot be applied to TDEA, because in a convex hull the set of cost efficient units contains the set of the cost benchmarks of the DMUs. Therefore, the above procedure can only provide an approximation by excess of the desired ACE measure.1414Cf. Briec et al. (2004), p. 175, on the non linearity of the ray-average-cost minimization program under convexity.In this case, we can employ an additional and fundamental property:Proposition 7The ACE measure of a DMU is equivalent to its CRS cost efficiency measure.See Appendix A.8.Proposition 7 is clearly very important, in that it establishes that an OSS under VRS coincides with the scale size which minimizes total cost under CRS. With regard to the computation of the ACE measure in TDEA, one can therefore directly solve the CRS cost efficiency problem. In this case, for each DMU, its variable-returns-to-scale OSS will be obtained as a convex combination of its CRS reference set, where each weight of the combination will be given aszj∑j=1nzj, i.e. the product between the CRS optimal-weight, zj, and the reciprocal of the sum of all of these weights.The aim of this subsection is that of clarifying the role played by the uniformity of input prices, pj= pj ∈ J, which has been assumed in the derivation of the properties of an OSS and of the ACE measure. First, observe that the alternative hypothesis pj≠ ph, when the input-price vector of the DMU under examination (pj) is employed for the evaluation of the cost of a reference unit (xh, yh) ∈ T, leads toRj=pjxhpjxj·γj,h, which clearly yields exactly the same properties we have obtained under the uniformity hypothesis. An example of this kind of analysis is offered by Sueyoshi (1997, 1999). A further possibility for discussion is that in which the price vectors considered in ratio (6) are different:Rj=phxhpjxj·γj,hand pj≠ ph. In this setting, it can easily be verified – from the related proofs – that only Proposition 4 and Corollaries 1 and 2 cease to hold. In sum, the diversity of input price vectors in ratio (6) entails only that:a)an OSS is no longer an MPSS: being an MPSS ceases to be a necessary condition;the ACE of a DMU can be greater, equal or smaller than its TSRE.In particular, note that the equivalence between ACE and CRS cost-efficiency measures still holds, so that ACE remains an effective and convenient way for measuring scale economies in both convex and non-convex production technologies.However, in the case under discussion, a qualification must to be made with regard to the computation procedure of the ACE measure. While the FDH technology does not require any modification in its estimation procedure, the DEA cost efficiency analysis must be conducted in the space of monetary cost and outputs. In fact, given that we are excluding the possibility of employing pjfor computing the costs at the numerator of Rj, the convex reference-unit,xh≡∑j=1nλjxjwith∑j=1nλj=1, has no reasonable input-price vector phwhich can be associated with it. Therefore, the only possibility left for the analysis is that of consideringch≡∑j=1nλjcjwhere cj≡ pjxj: convex combinations of the observed monetary costs are necessarily called for (cf. Tone & Sahoo, 2006, p. 73). The ACE measure can then be obtained by solving a CRS cost efficiency program in the cost-output correspondence set having elements (cj, yj).These conclusions confirm the generality of the ACE measure, whose computation and basic properties do not depend upon the identity of the input-price vectors of the DMUs under examination. This notwithstanding, it is our opinion that this identity, also known as the Law of one price, should be applied in the evaluation of efficiency in so far as it is both a normative requirement for the evaluation of Pareto efficiency (see Kuosmanen, Kortelainen, Sipiläinen, & Cherchye, 2010, p. 589) and a necessary means for ascertaining the relationship between primal and dual variables in the production possibility set (see Färe & Grosskopf, 1985, pp. 598 and 603).As we have seen from Proposition 7, the ACE is equivalent to the CRS cost efficiency measure. This feature reveals that the ACE criterion supplies a quantitative measure which is related to Färe and Grosskopf's (1985, p. 600) cost measure of scale efficiency, and coincides with Sueyoshi's (1997)overall and scale efficiency. Moreover, our measure can be decomposed in the same way as overall and scale efficiency by simply multiplying and dividing ratio (9) by pxcb, the total cost of the VRS cost benchmark of DMU j, thus obtaining the product of overall efficiency and cost scale efficiency (cf. Sueyoshi, 1997, pp.783–784):(14)Rj*=pxo·γj,opxj=pxcbpxj·pxo·γj,opxcbAccordingly, it becomes evident that the ACE indicates the combined inefficiency which is the result of both cost inefficiency and cost scale inefficiency.However, being based on our definition of an OSS, the ACE analysis exhibits some features and properties which cannot be currently found in the literature dealing with cost analysis and scale efficiency issues. First, the ACE does not rely on the restrictive CRS assumption which is typical of overall and scale efficiency. In this sense, we can state that our proposed measure can be regarded as the extension of Banker and Thrall's (1992) TSRE measure to cost analysis, i.e. to the case in which input mixes are not taken as fixed, which was excluded at the outset from Banker's (1984, p. 35) seminal analysis. Whereas the TSRE is a VRS measure indicating the combined effect of technical and scale efficiencies, the ACE is the analogous measure referred to allocative, technical and scale efficiencies. In other words, ACE can be taken as the dual version of the primal measure, TSRE. Observe that the substitution of the CRS assumption, by means of that of the VRS, warrants a ‘minimum extrapolation’ property: from the managerial point of view, this means that the ACE interpretation could supply ‘more realistic’ estimates when compared to the CRS cost efficiency measure. Obviously, this VRS interpretation involves reference to a scale size which does not coincide with the current scale of the DMU under evaluation.Second, the formulation based on the ray average cost has led to decomposition (12), which has allowed two important conclusions to be reached concerning the relationship between the primal and the dual approach:1)A monotone inequality relationship is established between the production and cost combined-efficiency measures of a DMU: we have in fact shown that ACE is not greater than TSRE. No similar feature can be found in the Färe and Grosskopf (1985) approach, where the standard decomposition of overall efficiency into a technical and an allocative component leads to a non-monotone inequality relationship between production scale-efficiency and cost scale-efficiency (cf. ibid., pp. 601–603; Sueyoshi, 1999, Proposition 5, p. 1602), in the sense that the former can generally be less than, equal to or greater than the latter. This indeterminacy can be avoided if reference is made to the combined scale-efficiency measures ACE and TSRE.An OSS need not coincide with an MPSS, because – for given input prices – being an MPSS is a necessary but not sufficient condition for becoming an OSS. As a consequence, the set of OSSs will be contained in that of MPSSs, but these sets will generally coincide not because an MPSS can be either cost inefficient or conversely, if cost efficient, cost scale inefficient, as explained by Corollary 1 and expression (14). This non-coincidence result is novel with respect to the findings of the relevant literature, which lacks a proper definition of an OSS: that is to say the specific dual definition we have brought to light. Related recent work on optimal scales in non-parametric analysis includes that of Førsund and Hjalmarsson (2004), Podinovski (2004) and Tone and Sahoo (2005, 2006). However, none of these contributions allows for input allocative efficiency in the definition of an optimal scale because for the dual optimal scale they rely on the same definition as that given for the primal one: the MPSS (see, Førsund & Hjalmarsson, 2004, Section 2.4, pp. 30–31; Podinovski, 2004, p. 241; Tone & Sahoo, 2005, p. 268; Tone & Sahoo, 2006, note 3, p. 75). Our analysis fills this gap and shows that the OSS notion is different and more restrictive when compared to that of an MPSS.Third, we know from Proposition 7 that an OSS under VRS coincides with the scale size which minimizes total cost under CRS. This means that the ACE measure can legitimately be used in the estimation of cost-based returns to scale (classification of scale economies) by simply applying it to the VRS cost benchmarks of the DMUs, i.e. to the efficient DMUs and to the projections of the inefficient DMUs onto the VRS cost frontier. In this case, the ACE measure is equal to cost scale efficiency, and units which exhibit a score equal to one operate under CRS. The remaining units, having a score lower than one,Rj*<1, may be either in a DRS regime (γj, o> 1) or in an IRS one (γj, o< 1), where γj, o= 1 is excluded.1515See Appendix A.9.In fact, being a ratio between ray average costs, the ACE ratio (6) can be immediately interpreted as a measure of the degree of scale economies, thus remedying the shortcoming of the Färe and Grosskopf (1985) approach (see Sueyoshi, 1999, p. 1602). Note also that our proposed approach is useful as it relies on the solution of only one programming problem (the CRS one) for each frontier point under evaluation, instead of the two problems required both in Färe and Grosskopf (1985) and in Sueyoshi (1999) – because of the need, respectively, to compare different returns to scale assumptions and to estimate the degree of scale economies.1616Färe and Grosskopf's (1985) method is based on the solution of both a CRS and a non-increasing returns to scale problem (see ibid., pp. 596–597 and p. 600). Sueyoshi (1999) introduces a dual of the VRS cost-problem to determine the intercept of the supporting hyperplane: when multiple solutions occur, the dual problem has to be solved twice, both as a maximization and a minimization problem (see ibid., p. 1601).Finally, the ACE ratio can even be used to extend the classification method suggested by Podinovski (2004) to scale economies, with a minimum computational burden. This is accomplished by computing the ACE ratio along the two distinct output-directions: γj, o> 1 and γj, o< 1, which allows the presence of “ɛ-scale reference units” to be ascertained for each DMU by enumerating the reference points which yield Rj< 1.Fourth, our analysis offers a solution to the determination of scale economies in a non-convex setting, which – as far as we are aware – has not yet been provided (cf. Briec et al., 2004; De Witte & Marques, 2010; Kerstens & Vanden Eeckaut, 1999; Sueyoshi, 1999). Moreover, thanks to our definition of an OSS, we have been able to propose a simple algorithm to compute CRS cost efficiency in an FDH technology (see Section 4.2). As regards this point, please note that the software programs currently available for FDH efficiency analysis do not include a routine for global CRS cost-efficiency.1717As an example, the latest version of the Benchmarking package, version 0.23, only allows for local CRS cost-efficiency in the FDH model; see Bogetoft and Otto (2013).The theoretical measures and relationships we have developed so far find their empirical application on two distinct data sets, consisting of observations regarding, respectively, the production of public services and the hydro-electric industry. In the first case, estimation will be carried out under the non-convex assumption (FDH) and an identical input price vector, while in the second a convex production set (DEA) will be assumed together with DMU-specific input price vectors. This second case will also feature a discussion of differences in the cost structures of a single DMU implied by ACE and TSRE.We will examine a five-output two-input production technology. This technology represents the activity of a network of DMUs producing public services over the whole country and belonging to the Italian Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency. The data set consists of observations from 92 offices in the year 2007, covering the entire set of production units. The outputs are denoted as follows: y1 registrations and re-registrations of vehicles (including issuing of registration certificates and registration plates), y2 operations on registration certificates (duplicates, change of address and ownership), y3 vehicle tests for safety and roadworthiness (including activity ensuing from private garage testing), y4 driving theory and practical-driving tests, y5 operations on driving licenses (duplicates, conversions, upgradings). The inputs consist of two different kinds of labour: x1 administrative staff (office and back-office operations), x2 technical staff (instructors, examiners, vehicle testers). Input prices, p1 and p2, are equal across offices. Summary statistics of input–output data are given in Table B.1 of Appendix B. The normalized level of input prices1818The numeraire is the wage of the base level of the administrative staff.is p1 = 1.209 and p2 = 1.836.We have theoretically proved that ACE is a more selective VRS efficiency-notion than the other two VRS-criteria we have herein considered: minimization of total cost for a given level of output (OE) and maximization of ray average productivity with a variable scale size (TSRE). Table 1 empirically illustrates this result where the right part of the table provides the number of inefficient and efficient DMUs under the various efficiency criteria. The left part of Table 1offers evidence for Proposition 1 and Corollary 2: the minimization of ray average cost with a variable scale size (ACE) delivers efficiency scores which are less than those derived from both OE and TSRE. ACE indicates that the evaluated sector can achieve a percentage reduction in unit cost which is equal, on average, to 41.12 percent [= (1 − 0.5888) × 100], while the analogous reduction in unit cost is 30.37 percentfor TSRE and 16.62 percentfor OE.In particular, observe that the average difference between the two scale efficiency measures (TSRE and ACE) amounts to nearly 11 percentage points. This shows that the traditional concept of minimum ray average cost – based exclusively on ray average productivity and measured by TSRE – can result in a significant underestimation of the potential gain in efficiency when compared to our more general notion which includes allocative inefficiency. Finally, note that if one were willing to accept the interpretation of ACE and TSRE as CRS measures, each of the three kinds of efficiency scores shown in Table 1 could also be referred, not only to the unit cost, but also to the total cost of production of the various DMUs. As for the right section of Table 1, we can remark upon the fact that the number of OSSs, 5, is lower than both those of the cost-efficient units (32) and of the MPSSs (11), confirming that the efficiency criterion based on the ray average cost is stricter than the remaining two criteria.Continuing beyond the information given by summary statistics, we note a comparison among the frequency distributions of the individual scores obtained from the three different efficiency criteria. Focusing on the comparison with OE, we notice that ACE analysis implies both much lower and more dispersed scores; this can be clearly seen in Fig. 3The frequency distributions of TSRE and ACE individual scores are presented in Fig. 4.The figure shows a significant difference in the shape of the two frequency-distributions: with respect to TSRE, ACE implies an appreciable shift in the mass from the first two scoring-classes [(0.9–1), (0.8–0.9)] to the last two [(0.5–0.6), (0–0.5)].Another important result of our analysis concerns the relationship between the MPSS and the OSS of the output mix of individual DMUs, Table 2 reports the composition of the corresponding setswhere the numbers are the DMUs’ identifiers and the asterisk denotes MPSSs that are not cost-efficient. In accordance with Propositions 2, 4 and 5, we see that the set of OSSs is contained in that of the MPSSs, showing that as much as six out of eleven MPSSs are not OSSs because, as a consequence of the allocative inefficiency of their input mixes, they are not able to minimize the unit cost for any DMU's output-mix, including their own (see Proposition 3). Only in one case is this due to cost inefficiency (DMU 9), while it results from cost scale inefficiency for the remaining five DMUs: 40, 63, 65, 68, 81 (cf. expression (14)). This emphasizes the importance of Corollary 1 which states that even a cost-efficient MPSS need not to be an OSS.Table 3offers the breakdown of the individual ACE measures into their radial and allocative components.The third column relates to the ratio of the two components, giving evidence of the fact that the weight of the allocative component can be notably relevant (almost 30 percenton average). Note that the maximum value observed for the radial component is greater than one, i.e. the ray average productivity of the corresponding DMU is greater than that of its OSS, clearly highlighting that the role of the allocative factor can be strong enough to cause a reference-unit which is not the MPSS of a given DMU to become its OSS (see Proposition 5). Overall, we have found that 58 DMUs out of 92 (63.03 percent) exhibit an OSS which differs from their MPSS.It is thus evident that the concepts of OSS and ACE can bring about empirical estimates of both the optimal scale and the alleged efficiency score of an individual DMU which diverge greatly from the analogous estimates derived from the MPSS and TSRE concepts.The price of each kind of output (fees) being uniform across the observations, we can conclude this subsection with an illustration of the application of Proposition 6.The first two columns in Table 4offer, respectively, the summary statistics of the revenue and cost factors (1 plus the rate of growth) of the various DMUs, while the last column refers to the difference between the two factors (revenue growth rate minus cost growth rate) computed for each DMU. Observe that the mean difference between the revenue's and the cost's rate of growth reaches 1.5448 (more than 154 percent), indicating a high potential increase in profits/reduction in losses corresponding to the change in the scale size of the individual office.We employed monthly observations relating to a three-input one-output technology which describes hydro-electric power generation at a sample of Chilean plants (Atkinson & Halabi, 2005). The data base may be found at http://qed.econ.queensu.ca/jae/datasets/atkinson001. Our data set was selected by choosing the last available year, 1997, thus resulting in a total of 246 observations1919The number of plants is 21, but for one of these, six observations are lacking. For more information on data, see Atkinson and Halabi (2005), Section 4. Given the nature of the data (monthly observations relating to different kinds of plants), we underline that the results of this subsection are to be understood principally as an exercise rather than a completely reliable description of the efficiency of the Chilean hydro-electric industry in 1997.; the summary statistics are presented in Table B.2 of Appendix B. The single output is y1, the quantity of electricity produced in KWh; inputs x1,x2 and x3 denote – respectively – the quantities of capital, water and labour; their corresponding prices, p1, p2 and p3, are in current Chilean pesos and are differentiated on both a monthly and plant basis: each observation features its own input-price vector which is not necessarily fixed across months, nor across plants. The results obtained for the three alternative efficiency notions are summarized in Table 5.Both the level of the summary statistics and the number of efficient units clearly show that ACE is a more demanding efficiency notion than both OE and TSRE. To complement the information given in Table 5, we compare the distributions of the efficiency scores and evaluate the statistical significance of their differences by means of the test proposed by Li (1996) for dependent observations. Fig. 5illustrates the frequency distributions of OE and ACE scores.The difference in the two frequency-distributions is evaluated as statistically meaningful at an error level below 1 percent, by means of Li's (1996) test statistic, which is equal to 50.7.As regards ACE and TSRE scores, the situation is shown in Fig. 6.The difference is more pronounced than that ascertained in Fig. 5, and this is confirmed by the greater value of the Li test statistic (143.8), which again delivers a statistically significant difference at an error level below 1 percent.Table 6 illustrates the composition of the MPSS and OSS sets where the numbers are the DMUs’ identifiers and the first column on the right of the table presents the DMUs which are an MPSS (DMUs with TSRE = 1), with asterisks denoting those which are not cost-efficient. The reference sets of the MPSS and of the OSS column indicate the production possibility which lies upon the efficient production surface2020See Banker (1984), Corollaries 2 and 3, p. 40.and determines, respectively, the TSRE score and the ACE score of the DMU on the first column on the right.Note that DMU 180is the only OSS, therefore 16 out of 17 MPSSs are unable to minimize the ray average cost of their output, proving that the difference between the OSS and MPSS sets can indeed be very large. Four cost-efficient MPSSs (DMUs 11, 160, 199, 216) fail to become an OSS as a consequence of their cost scale inefficiency, which fact validates empirically the role of Corollary 1 (cf. Fig. 2 above). The very high relevance of the allocative component of the ACE measure, which is responsible for the divergence between OSS and MPSS sets, is shown in Table 7.It can be observed that the ratio between the allocative and the radial component reaches a mean value of 0.94 (94 percent). With respect to the figures shown in Table 3 for the non-convex technology, we can comment that the greater incidence of the allocative component can be mainly ascribed to both the greater number of input-slacks per observation (2 vs. 1) and the larger number of observations (246 vs. 92). Overall, we can conclude that all of the theoretical properties of the concepts of ACE and OSS are empirically relevant even in the multiple-input single-output case.We will end this sub-section by means of two examples, aimed at explicitly illustrating the differences in the optimal cost structure of individual DMUs which are implied by ACE and TSRE.In Tables 8and 9, percentages denote the proportions of total cost represented by fixed and variable costs, which are respectively given as the cost of the capital input (x1) and of water and labour inputs (x2,x3), being p1, p2 and p3 the input prices paid by the DMU where the observation row contains the actual/observed cost structure of the DMU in question, while the TSRE and ACE benchmarks rows show the optimal cost structures which respectively result from the MPSS and the OSS.In both cases, it can be easily seen that the optimal cost structure stemming from the ACE notion reveals a remarkable difference when compared to both the actual and the TSRE cost structures, thus confirming that the managerial implications of our efficiency measure for decision-making can be important at the level of a single organization.Under fairly general assumptions, this study has introduced a new efficiency measure based upon unit cost, the ACE. This individual measure, which combines scale efficiency with allocative efficiency, is shown to be a consistent efficiency-notion, thereby providing a reliable measure of scale efficiency based on cost and generalizing Banker and Thrall's (1992) TSRE measure. Due to this combination, the ACE represents a performance-criterion which is stricter than both cost efficiency and scale efficiency based exclusively upon average productivity. The measure can be computed even when the input-price vector varies between firms, and it has important properties with regard to the analysis of scale economies and of the relationship between MPSSs and OSSs. Given its managerial and economic content, the ACE could prove especially relevant for application in public service sectors (including the estimation of standard costs) and regulated industries, as well as being useful for the analysis of firms operating in competitive industries.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
