@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dismantle or remanufacture?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the dynamic optimal disposition decision for returns.Disposition options are remanufacturing, and dismantling for distinct parts.Demands for remanufactured products and parts are stochastic.We prove the structure of the optimal policy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Logistics,Inventory,Dynamic programming,Remanufacturing,Dismantling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we study a firm’s disposition decision for returned end-of-use products, which can either be remanufactured and sold, or dismantled into parts that can be reused. We formulate this problem as a multi-period stochastic dynamic program, and find the structure of the optimal policy, which consists of monotonic switching curves. Specifically, if it is optimal to remanufacture in a given period and for given inventory levels, then it is also optimal to remanufacture when the inventory of part(s) is higher or the inventory of remanufactured product is lower.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we study a firm’s disposition decision for returned end-of-use products, which can either be remanufactured and sold, or dismantled into parts that can be reused. As an example, consider product recovery activities at IBM. In its remanufacturing facility, IBM remanufactures or dismantles returned servers and storage systems. While remanufactured products are sold at a restricted price to meet demand for used products, parts obtained through dismantling can be used to meet internal or external demand for spare parts (Ferguson, Fleischmann, & Souza, 2011).Broadly speaking, the problem we study belongs to the closed-loop supply chain (CLSC) literature; see Souza (2013) for a general review. In the CLSC literature, there is a significant stream of research on hybrid systems, where there are two supply sources (remanufacturing or buying new) for meeting a single demand stream for an item. In contrast to hybrid systems, our problem has a single supply source (returns) that can be used to meet multiple demand streams, specifically demands for remanufactured products, and for different parts. In other words, there are two disposition options for a return: remanufacturing, and dismantling. Several product disposition decisions are studied in the CLSC literature, including remanufacturing products that are perfect substitutes for new products, remanufacturing products that are imperfect substitutes for new products, dismantling for spare parts, and recycling for materials recovery (Thierry, Salomon, Nunen, & Wassenhove, 1995). Dismantling is different from other disposition options in that it yields multiple items, i.e. several distinct spare parts, each with its own independent demand stream. In the remainder of the literature review, we focus on the subset of the CLSC literature that includes dismantling as a disposition option.One stream of literature considers dismantling as the single disposition option. Much of this literature assumes that demands for multiple parts, which are obtained through dismantling, are deterministic. These models only consider uncertainty on the supply side; see Krikke, Van Harten, and Schuur (1998), Spengler, Ploog, and Schröter (2003) and Jorjani, Leu, and Scott (2004) for more details. Our research is different in that there are disposition options (remanufacturing and dismantling), and demands for parts are stochastic. Next, we position our work relative to the stream of literature with stochastic demand.The literature on dismantling with stochastic demand for parts can be categorized along two dimensions: number of periods (single-period vs. multi-period), and number of distinct parts obtained from dismantling (single part vs. multiple parts). In Inderfurth, de Kok, and Flapper (2001), there are multiple disposition options available in a multi-period setting, but each disposition option only generates one type of item with its own independent demand. Thus, one can interpret one of their disposition options as dismantling for a single part (unlike our model where dismantling yields multiple distinct parts). They build a dynamic program that minimizes the total expected discounted cost of product disposition and inventory, and propose a heuristic to allocate scarce returns into the multiple options according to their mean demand. Ferguson et al. (2011) study the profit-optimizing allocation of uncertain returns to two product disposition options, remanufacturing and dismantling, in two settings: (i) single period and multiple parts and (ii) multi-period and a single part. They show that the optimal policy balances the marginal expected profits across the disposition alternatives. In contrast to these two papers, our paper focuses on a multi-period, multi-part setting and contributes to the literature by providing the structure of the optimal disposition decision.Consider a firm that can recover the value of a used product, or return, through two disposition options: remanufacturing or dismantling for parts. We assume that returns have been pre-graded, and have sufficiently good quality so that both remanufacturing and dismantling operations have perfect yield. The remanufacturing operation costs the firm cRper unit, and results in one remanufactured product that can be sold in a secondary market at price rR. The dismantling operation costs the firm cD, and yields two spare parts, denoted as part 1 and part 2, that are sold separately at unit prices r1 and r2, respectively. Prices are exogenous, as it is common in other tactical decision models. In our context, remanufactured units and dismantled parts are priced relative to their new counterparts; hence the firm has little flexibility regarding price decisions.The firm keeps the remanufactured products and spare parts in inventory to satisfy demand in a finite planning horizon. We assume that the planning horizon is divided into T periods that are short enough so that the firm gets at most one return per period. Periods are numbered backwards, and we denote t as the number of periods remaining in the planning horizon. The sequence of events in one period is as follows. At the beginning of each period, the firm reviews IR, the inventory level of remanufactured products, and I1, I2, the inventory levels of parts 1 and 2, respectively. With probability λ the firm obtains a return and decides whether to remanufacture it or dismantle it for parts. (With probability (1−λ) there is no return, and no subsequent actions are taken in that period.) After adding the remanufactured product or dismantled parts to its inventories, the firm experiences demand for at most one unit. This demand is for a remanufactured product with probability (w.p.) pR, or for part 1 w.p. p1, or for part 2 w.p. p2. Unmet demand is lost, and leftover inventories of remanufactured products and parts are carried over to the next period.At the end of the last period, there is a unit salvage value of vR, v1, and v2 for any leftover inventory of the remanufactured product, part 1, and part 2, respectively. We assume that salvage values are large enough to cover the cost of dismantling or remanufacturing, that is, v1+v2⩾cDand vR⩾cR.Given our assumption that salvage values are large enough to cover the disposition cost, the firm in our model has no incentive to scrap a returned product. Practically speaking, scrapping may be warranted when there are large amounts of inventories of remanufactured products and/or parts. To capture this effect, we assume that there are limits on the inventories of the remanufactured product, and of each part. Let SR, S1, and S2 be the maximum inventory of remanufactured product, part 1, and part 2 that the firm can keep. When inventory of an item k reaches its upper limit, the additional item(s) obtained by remanufacturing or dismantling are disposed with unit salvage value vk.We establish a dynamic programming model with state space I={(I1,I2,IR)∣0⩽I1⩽S1,0⩽I2⩽S2,0⩽IR⩽SR}. Let x+=max{x,0}, and 1xdenote the indicator function. Denote by ft(I1,I2,IR) the firm’s optimal expected profit from period t onwards when the firm’s inventories are I1, I2, and IRat the start of the period before receiving a return (if any), with the terminal value function given byf0(I1,I2,IR)=v1I1++v2I2++vRIR+. Denote by gt(I1,I2,IR) the firm’s optimal expected profit from period t onwards when the firm’s inventories are I1, I2, and IRafter receiving a return (if any) and making a disposition decision (if any). Thus, the functions gtand ftare related as follows:(1)gt(I1,I2,IR)≔p1r11{I1>0}+p1ft-1([I1-1]+,I2,IR)+p2r21{I2>0}+p2ft-1(I1,[I2-1]+,IR)+pRrR1{IR>0}+pRft-1(I1,I2,[IR-1]+)+(1-p1-p2-pR)ft-1(I1,I2,IR).Given these definitions, the optimality equations are(2)ft(I1,I2,IR)=(1-λ)gt(I1,I2,IR)+λmax-cR+gt(I1,I2,min(IR+1,SR))+vR1{IR=SR},-cD+gt(min(I1+1,S1),min(I2+1,S2),IR)+v11{I1=S1}+v21{I2=S2}.The first term on the right-hand side of (2), (1−λ) gt(I1,I2,IR), is the expected profit-to-go when the firm receives no return in period t. The second term captures the expected profit-to-go when the firm receives a return; the first and second line correspond to the cases where the firm remanufactures and dismantles the return, respectively. In both cases, the firm incurs the disposition cost (cRfor remanufacturing and cDfor dismantling); the remanufactured product or dismantled parts are added to inventory provided that the upper limits are not reached. If an inventory level is at the upper limit, a salvage value is incurred.Define the first-difference operators of any function ht(i) asΔvuht(i)≔ht(i+u)-ht(i+v), wherei≔(I1,I2,IR),u,v∈R3. Let ekbe the vector inN3with all entries equal to zero except for one in the kth entry. Using this notation, for example,Δe1+e2e3gt(i)=gt(I1,I2,IR+1)-gt(I1+1,I2+1,IR)represents the benefit of having one more remanufactured product over having one more pair of parts. Similarly,Δe1e3gt(i)andΔe2e3gt(i)represent the benefit of having one more remanufactured product over one more part 1 and part 2, respectively. Likewise,Δ0e1gt(i),Δ0e2gt(i),Δ0e1+e2gt(i)andΔ0e3gt(i)represent the value of having one more of part 1, part 2, both parts, and remanufactured product, respectively.To explain the structure of the optimal policy, we first define some functional properties. Define VConcas a set of functionsh(i):N3↦R, where i=(I1,I2,IR), such that (a) h(·) is componentwise concave and (b) the value of adding of one unit to both I1 and I2 is decreasing in I1 and I2, i.e.,VConc≔h(I1,I2,IR)Δ0e3h(I1,I2,IR)is decreasing inIR;Δ0e1h(I1,I2,IR)is decreasing inI1;Δ0e2h(I1,I2,IR)is decreasing inI2;Δ0e1+e2h(I1,I2,IR)is decreasing inI1andI2..Define VSup/Subas a set of functionsh(i):N3↦Rthat are (a) supermodular in I1 and I2 for a given IRand (b) for a given value of either I1 or I2 submodular in the remaining variables, i.e.,VSup/Sub≔h(I1,I2,IR)Δ0e1h(I1,I2,IR)is increasing inI2;Δ0e1h(I1,I2,IR)andΔ0e2h(I1,I2,IR)are decreasing inIR..In addition, we define the set of functions VRDbelow, which will eventually enable us to capture the value of remanufacturing over dismantling:VRD≔h(I1,I2,IR)Δe1+e2e3h(I1,I2,IR)is increasing inI1,I2and is decreasing inIR;Δe1e3h(I1,I2,IR)is increasing inI1and is decreasing inIR;Δe2e3h(I1,I2,IR)is increasing inI2and is decreasing inIR..Notice the significance of the first property of VRD: If the value function ftin our model belongs to VRD, then the incremental value of having one more unit of remanufactured product over having one more pair of parts is increasing in the inventory of parts, and decreasing in the inventory of remanufactured products. Similarly, the second and third properties indicate that the incremental value of one remanufactured product over either part is increasing in the inventory of the part, and decreasing in the inventory of remanufactured products. One would expect the value functions ftto satisfy these properties.We will next show that the value functions ft(I1,I2,IR), for t=1,…, T belong to the three sets defined above. The result is obtained by induction, which uses the following lemma – all the proofs are included in the Appendix:Lemma 1(a)If ft−1(I1,I2,IR)∈VRD∩VConc, then gt(I1,I2,IR)∈VRD∩VConc.If ft−1(I1,I2,IR)∈VSup/Subthen gt(I1,I2,IR)∈VSup/Sub.If gt(I1,I2,IR)∈VRD∩VConc∩VSup/Subthen ft(I1,I2,IR)∈VRD∩VConc∩VSup/Sub.Corollary 1 below follows from Lemma 1 by noticing thatf0(I1,I2,IR)=v1I1++v2I2++vRIR+belongs to the set VConc∩VRD∩VSup/Sub.Corollary 1For t=1,…, T, ft(I1,I2,IR)∈VRD∩VConc∩VSup/Sub.According to Corollary 1, the value functions ft(·) belong to the set VConc. It follows that the marginal value of a remanufactured product or a part is decreasing in its own inventory, which is intuitive. In addition, the value functions ft(·) belong to the set VRD, as we expected. Hence, it follows that the incremental value of one remanufactured product over a part or a pair of parts is higher when there are fewer remanufactured products or more parts in inventory.In addition to these intuitive properties, Lemma 1 also reveals interesting relationships among remanufactured products and parts, namely that ft(·)∈VSup/Sub, which we explain as follows. In our model, the inventory of remanufactured products compete with the inventories of parts for a common resource, namely the returns. When the inventory of a part, say, part 2, is high, this competition favors remanufacturing over dismantling the returned product. Consequently, when the inventory of part 2 is high, we are less likely to add to the inventory of part 1, which increases the marginal value of part 1’s inventory. Thus, having more of part 2 increases the value of part 1, that is, parts 1 and 2 are “complements” in the economic sense. This is captured mathematically by the property that ft(I1,I2,IR) is supermodular in I1 and I2. Following the same logic, having more of the remanufactured product decreases the value of a particular part, say part 1. Hence, the remanufactured product and a particular part are “substitutes” in the economic sense. This corresponds to the property that ft(I1,I2,IR) is submodular in I1 and IR.For any period and starting inventories (I1,I2,IR)∈I, define the benefit of remanufacturing over dismantling as(3)Δgt(I1,I2,IR)≔-cR+gt(I1,I2,minIR+1,SR)+vR1{IR=SR}-[-cD+gt(min(I1+1,S1),min(I2+1,S2),IR)+v11{I1=S1}+v21{I2=S2}].The first line on the right-hand side (RHS) of (3) corresponds to the firm’s profit-to-go minus remanufacturing cost if the firm remanufactures. The second and third lines on the RHS of (3) corresponds to the firm’s profit-to-go minus dismantling cost if the firm dismantles. It follows that if Δgt(I1,I2,IR)> 0, then it is optimal for the firm to remanufacture; otherwise it is optimal for the firm to dismantle. The following lemma characterizes how Δgt(I1,I2,IR) depends on inventory levels.Lemma 2For t=1,…, T, Δgt(I1,I2,IR) is increasing in I1, I2and is decreasing in IRon state space I.The theorem below follows from Lemma 2 and establishes the existence of monotonic switching curves that characterize the structure of the optimal policy in any given period t.Theorem 1If in a given period it is optimal to remanufacture when the inventories of parts and remanufactured product are I1, I2and IR, then remanufacturing is also optimal when the inventories are (I1+1,I2,IR), (I1,I2+1,IR), (I1+1,I2+1,IR), or (I1,I2,IR−1).Fig. 1illustrates the optimal product disposition decision in different states. In Fig. 1(a), for given t and IR, there exists a switching curve that separates the region of (I1,I2) pairs where remanufacturing is optimal from the region of (I1,I2) pairs where dismantling is optimal. As IRincreases, this curve moves up, thus shrinking the region where remanufacturing is optimal. In Fig. 1(b), for given t and I2, there exists a similar switching curve. As I2 increases, this curve moves up, thus shrinking the region where dismantling is optimal.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
