@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ranking of investment funds: Acceptability versus robustness

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Funds performance via Sharpe ratio leads to misleading ranking.Sharpe ratio is not an acceptability index.Indexes of acceptability lack statistical robustness.Some degree of robustness may be saved.The less sensitive to outliers is the Average-Value-at-Risk ratio.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
(P) Investment analysis,Acceptability indexes,Fund ranking,Statistical robustness,Estimation error,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Within the class of performance ratios, the Sharpe measure can lead to misleading evaluation and various modificationshave been investigated. As a starting point, we consider the axiomatic approach based on the notion of acceptable index of performance. Our goal is to show how the promising properties possessed by alternative measures such as the Gain–Loss ratio or the Average-Value-at-Risk ratio are not compatible with the statistical robustness of their estimated counterparts. This clearly affects the ranking of funds and consequently the performance persistence. We study the qualitative robustness along with the quantitative resistance of the corresponding estimators in a nonparametric setting. We include the Value-at-Risk ratio which is not an acceptability index of performance. These measures do not possess qualitative robustness, nonetheless we show how some degree of resistance to data contamination restricted to bounded intervals can be recovered. Using the relationship between the influence function of estimators and their bias for large samples, we suggest the Average-Value-at-Risk ratio and the Value-at-Risk ratio as the less sensitive to outliers. As a consequence, acceptability is no longer a prerequisite for performance evaluation. To limit the alteration of a given ranking among alternative investment funds, one can use the not acceptable Value-at-Risk ratio as well. Eventually, we propose a modified ratio either of the α-trimmed mean or of the median to the Value-at-Risk.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A financial performance is meant as a number quantifying the return characteristics of a given investment portfolio, which is then used to judge the quality of managerial skillfulness or luckiness. Performance analysis stems from competition among financial institutions and may serve as a test of the market efficiency, see for example Fama (1970, 1972). The question is whether fund managers take advantage of different kinds of information not reflected by market quotes, and if they are able to provide an actual value-added service (compared to a given benchmark) that is yet persistent in time. Equivalently, performance analysis aims at rewarding those managers who are more able to process information. Essentially, a managed portfolio is formed in such a way to ensure the return objective and to fulfill the risk and asset allocation constraints provided by the investor.As a fundamental step in the investment management process, the measurement and evaluation of portfolio performance was traditionally based on the Sharpe ratio (reward-to-variability ratio). Unfortunately, the standard deviation of the return’s probability law does not properly consider both the upside and the downside potential of the portfolio return. Whence, several alternative measures have been proposed in the literature. Some of them are still based on the CAPM (see for example Amenc and Le Sourd, 2003, for a comprehensive survey) and refer to regression models, while others are in the form of performance ratios (see the extensive list in Farinelli, Ferreira, Rossello, Thoeny, & Tibiletti, 2008).Observe that until recent years performance ratios have not been considered under a unified framework. Cherny and Madan (2009) introduced a set of axioms (actually based on coherent risk measurement) which justify the notion of acceptability indexes of performance and spotlights the importance of the global risk component in the performance analysis as opposed to the classical decomposition into systematic risk and market risk originated by the CAPM. Since practitioners tend to prefer those measures which are easy to implement both for ex-post and ex-ante analysis and seem to adopt mostly the nonparametric ones, we restrict ourselves to Gain–Loss ratio, the Average Value-at-Risk ratio and the analogous Value-at-Risk ratio.11Cherny and Madan (2009) also propose other acceptability indexes which we do not include here, for they are only of theoretical interest.As opposed to them, the Sharpe ratio is not an acceptability index of performance. Assuming the statistical point of view, we ask ourselves to what extent these acceptability indexes are appropriate when estimation comes into play using historical data and performance persistence has to be assessed. There are several factors distorting their forecasting willingness such as survivorship effects, cycles effects, volatility clustering, bubbles etc. Furthermore, performance attribution is based on ranking funds by means of the estimated ratios, then a bad fit to the bulk of the data can change it drastically causing undue acknowledgement of managerial skill with consequences on a macro/micro-economic level. In fact, the correctness of performance evaluation is needed to understand how the industry of managed funds contributes to welfare, and how a private investor can choose the best manager. Consequently, a trade-off between the theoretical development of performance measurement (appropriate ratios for different risk characteristics) and the control of estimation errors is a fundamental issue.We only treat nonparametric estimation errors, and show how the less sensitive to data contamination among the aforementioned performance measures are the Average Value-at-Risk ratio and the Value-at-Risk ratio. On one hand, our findings are based on the fact that none of the four ratios are qualitative robust (see Rossello, 2014). On the other hand, our conclusions are drawn using the tool of influence function (to account for quantitative robustness) and are supported by simulation results. The robustness issue is then translated into the problem of fund ranking.Our contribution is different from that of the literature on robust portfolio selection. Some authors propose robust estimators of the covariance matrix when treating minimum-variance optimization, and this seems to provide more stable asset allocation instead of fixing the high out-of-sample feature of Sharpe ratios, see for example Merton (1980), Jorion (1991), Jagannathan and Ma (2003). Other authors study one step or two-steps procedures in robust portfolios with minimum-variance using M- and S-estimators of the risk functional, see for example Cavadini, Sbuelz, and Trojani (2001), DeMiguel and Nogales (2009), Lauprete, Samarov, and Welsch (2002), Perret-Gentil and Victoria-Feser (2004), and Welsch and Zhou (2007). Another piece of research treats robust portfolio selection assuming uncertainty information about the mean and the covariances of asset returns, see for example Ben-Tal and Nemirovski (2002), Costa and Paiva (2002), Goldfarb and Iyengar (2003); all these contributions use linear programming or quadratic cone programs. But in fact all the above represent a normative approach (essentially grounded on Portfolio Theory and Mean-Variance analysis) not directly applicable to robust performance measurement. Our work instead takes a step back to the question of what theoretical (actually axiomatic) foundation of performance analysis is right from the perspective of statistical robustness, which is what counts toward practical implementation of any measurement method. We find that acceptability is not so essential in performance evaluation. Eventually, we suggest how using the Value-at-Risk ratio generates resistant ranking among alternative funds.Since all the proposed ratios are not qualitative robust, in Section 3.1 we comment on the possible interaction between the reward and the risk estimators in terms of their functional dependence on the tail of the return distribution, and their continuity with respect to data contamination. Thus, we suggest that qualitative robustness only is not sufficient to determine the correctness of performance ratios, hence there is room to compare their degree of robustness. In Section 3.2 we use the influence function of ratios to investigate the sensitivity of the performance statistics to a large change in a small proportion of the data. Even if all the influence functions are unbounded on the whole range of hypothetical outliers, it is possible to restrict the attention to typical percentages of market variation and then to recover the significance of some of the ratios. This is confirmed by a Monte Carlo simulation of the corresponding estimation errors, as done in Section 3.3. In Section 4 we study the effect of data contamination on the ranking of managed funds and we suggest how to improve the robustness of performance ratios in order to save the persistence of that ranking. Section 5 contains concluding remarks.Reward-risk measures such as expected returns and volatilities in the Sharpe ratio can be (under)overestimated making it difficult to judge the true ability of a fund manager because of high variability of the delivered ranking, see for example Lo (2002). In fact, most of the traditional performance measures other than the Sharpe ratio, such as the Treynor ratio or the Jensen’s alpha are based on the CAPM and then on the Mean-Variance theory of portfolio selection. The limitations of such theory are well known. It is possible to attack the performance analysis problem directly by extending the CAPM to include skewness, see for example the nonparametric efficiency analysis of Joro and Na (2006). On the other hand, one may manipulate the Sharpe ratio by taking into account higher moments of the return distribution and replacing the return-to-variability ratio with a reward-to-risk ratio. See Zakamouline and Koekebakker (2009) for a preference-type approach based on the Generalized Sharpe ratio. The inadequacy of Sharpe ratio is also studied in a dynamic setting, see Cvitanic, Lazrak, and Wang (2008).In this paper we restrict ourselves to the new class of performance measures termed indexes of acceptability by Cherny and Madan (2009). These authors proposed a set of four axioms partially devoted to the theory of coherent risk measures and their representation via acceptability set of losses. On the other hand, an acceptability index (AI) is analog of the tilt coefficient and represents the attempt of the aforementioned authors to incorporate both exaggeration of losses and limitation of gains in accordance with exponential weighting of marginal utility.22Cherny and Madan (2009) also provide additional axioms that an AI must satisfies.The AI notion is quite flexible and recently several applications in different directions have been proposed, see for example Cherny and Madan (2010) or Rosazza Gianin and Sgarra (2013). Our interest is on those AIs that represent parsimonious models of financial performance; these can be easily computed using real world data without tedious calculation of too much parameters. Furthermore, as it is well known the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision suggests through its pillars (currently Basilea 4) that the risk measure to use in risk management has to be the Value-at-Risk (VaR) or its coherent version the Average-Value-at-Risk (AVaR). Therefore, we further focus our attention on the Gain–Loss ratio (GLR) and the Average Value-at-Risk ratio (AVaRR). In contrast, we keep the Sharpe ratio (SR) and the Value-at-Risk ratio (VaRR) as two widespread performance measures which fail to be AI’s. The latter is introduced in the literature by Dowd (2000). Let X denotes the random rate of portfolio’s return33Usually, X measures the excess return over a possibly random benchmark.from a trading strategy at a final date, over a fixed probability space. If X has distribution function (df) F we then have:•SR:=mv,where m is the expected returnE(X)corresponding to the functional θ1(F) = ∫xdF and v is the standard deviation corresponding to the functional θ2(F) = (∫(x − m)2dF)1/2.GLR:=mm−,wherem−=E(−min{X,0})is the shortfall corresponding to ∫x−dF; here x− ≔ −xI{x < 0}.AVaRR:=mρ(X),where ρ(X) is the coherent risk measure given by the average Value-at-Risk. This corresponds to−1α∫0αqs−(F)ds;the integrand is the lower quantileinf{x∈R:F(x)⩾α}at the level α ∈ (0, 1).VaRR:=mVaRα(X),where the denominator is the Value-at-RiskVaRα(X)=−qα−(F).Later in this paper we will deal with plug-in estimators of the above performance ratios. Writingθ(F)=θ1(F)θ2(F)for any of the performance measures θ ∈ {SR, GLR, AVaRR, VaRR} with random return X distributed according to F, the estimators for n-dimensional random samples are reported in Table 1.Fndenotes the empirical distribution function. Sometime we setθ^n=θ(Fn)and similarlyθ^n,i=θi(Fn),each i ∈ {1, 2}. Note that the numerator is always the mean. When ranking investment funds through performance ratios, one naturally requires that a contamination of the estimation procedure results in a small change of the resulting test statistics. The intuitive notion of robustness calls for the continuity of θ in the space of dfs endowed with some metric, see Rossello (2014) for a review of concepts and tools from robust statistics as applied to performance measurement. It is easy established that none of the current performance ratios θ is statistically robust. In the nonparametric setting used here, this essentially amounts to deviation ofFfrom the (ideal model of) df F whenever the former is estimated by i.i.d. observations x1, x2, … with underlying F. Since robust statistics aims at developing procedures which remain reliable under small deviations from the model, we take for granted this point of view and try to describe the local stability of the corresponding inference procedure to prevent the potential dangers in the context of fund ranking. This is because we focus on performance measures which are not in the realm of CAPM, thus our interests are not in showing that the market is inefficient. Instead, we are guided by the practitioners willingness of checking whether performance attribution is due to the real skill of the manager. The question is of practical importance toward the quantification of performance persistence.Does the lack of robustness discussed in Section 2 advise against the use of AI’s as opposed to the classical Sharpe ratio or to the VaRR? On one hand, the definition of qualitative robustness does not distinguish among different types of data contamination (see for example Definition 11.1 in Huber & Ronchetti, 2009) while we argue that those given by outliers are of relevant interest in performance evaluation. On the other hand, we think that a comparative analysis of robustness may spotlight the less sensitive performance ratio when contamination is taken from a realistic range, which is typically represented by a bounded interval. A formal argument can be based on the analysis of Krätschmer, Schied, and Zähle (2012). Statistical functionals such as the mean or the standard deviation are not continuous because of their tail-dependence and consequently they have nonrobust estimators. This is due to the definition of continuity based on the Lévy distancedLe´vyendowing the set of dfs. It is possible to recover the robustness lost by introducing a family of metrics(dup)p⩾0based on certain weight functions up, such that a proper choice of the parameter p provides a finer topology than the weak topology driven bydLe´vy.As a by-product, the mean m and the left-mean m− become continuous for p > 1; the standard deviation becomes continuous for p > 2 and the quantile for p ≥ 0. A comparison argument is then developed in Krätschmer et al. (2012) suggesting the following index of qualitative robustness for a statistical functional:iqr(θ^n)=(infp{p⩾0:θ^nisrobustw.r.t.dup})−1.The greater theiqr(θ^n)is, the more robust is the estimatorθ^n,withiqr(θ^n)=0andiqr(θ^n)=∞corresponding to the extreme cases of zero robustness and full robustness. Restrictingθ^n,1andθ^n,2to subspaces over which they become robust estimators, and the corresponding functionals θ1, θ2 are continuous in the sense of Krätschmer et al. (2012), see also Rossello (2014), requires to choose the common value of the parameter p such that their ratio is robust too, i.e. we need to replace the set in the definition above with{p⩾0:θ^n,1andθ^n,2arebothrobustw.r.t.dup}.It easy to computeiqr(θ^n)=1,in the case of the GLR and the VaRR, andiqr(θ^n)=12in the case of the SR. Thus, we can argue that this last performance measure has the less robust estimator. With this kind of analysis in mind, it makes sense to compare the local degree of robustness among θs using the tool of influence function so that one can establish what performance estimator is more robust.We conjecture that the apparent lack of qualitative robustness does not rule out a different comparative analysis based on the stronger notions of influence function and gross error sensitivity that account for quantitative robustness. Observe that the statistical functionals used in the definition of all the performance measures are linear. The biasθ(Fn)−θ(F)in the estimation procedure of a performance ratio φ(X) leads to the issue of estimators’ convergence, which in turn depends upon the continuity of θ with respect to some metric. But the stronger notion of differentiability of θ(·) can help us to compare robustness regardless the metrization of the set of dfs. The first order von Mises expansion(1)θ(Fn)−θ(F)=1n∑i=1nθ′(Fn−F)+Rngives a linear approximation of the ‘asymptotic bias’ if and only if θ is a linear statistical functional. In that case it is well known that:(i)θ′(Fn−F)is the influence functionIθ(x,F)=limɛ↓0θ(Fɛ,x)−θ(F)ɛ;here we define the gross error model Fε, x≔ (1 − ε)F + εδxand x is the generic observation xi.∫Iθ(x, F)dF(x) = 0.nRn→P0,as n → ∞, or equivalentlyRn=oP(n−1/2).The map x↦Iθ(x, F) is nothing but the ordinary right-hand derivative at ε = 0 of the function θ(Fε, x) − θ(F); under the above conditions the map F↦Iθ(x, F) is a linear functional. The mixture dfFɛ,x∈Drepresents the possible contamination of the original statistical model: with probability ε an observation x is not generated by the true df F, but instead is given by an unknown return distribution associated to an undetectable contamination at x. Therefore, Iθ(x, F) measures the influence of a small fraction of data points which do not pertain to F, also called gross errors. Estimators with an unbounded influence function are suspect because a small proportion of the observations would produce a large modification in the value ofθ(Fn).Remark 1Recall that under the above conditions the first order von Mises expansion is approximately an average of independent rvs with zero means. When they have all finite second moments, then the asymptotic biasn(θ(Fn)−θ(F))has a Normal distribution N(0, τ2), where τ2 = ∫(Iθ(x, F))2dF(x).Since θ is in ratio form, to compute Iθ(x, F) we need the following result which is stated here for ease of reference:Lemma 1Letθ(F)=θ1(F)θ2(F)be the statistic for the law-invariant performance ratio φ(X) = θ(F)with X ∼ F. If the reward functional θ1(F) and the risk functional θ2(F) have first order von Mises expansion, then their ratio has the influence functionIθ(x,F)=θ2(F)I1(x,F)−θ1(F)I2(x,F)(θ2(F))2,where I1(x, F) is the influence function of the mean, while I2(x, F) is the influence function of either the standard deviation, the left-mean, the AVaR or the VaR.The trivial proof is based on the definition of x↦Iθ(x, F) and the quotient rule of differentiation. Letqα−(F)=qα+(F)=qαand−1α∫0αqsds=μα.For the VaRR we further assume f > 0; actually it would suffice to assume F has strict positive density at the α-population quantile, this last supposed to be uniquely determined. The expressions of Ii(x, F) for i = 1, 2 are listed below (Table 2). The influence function of θ1(F) is easily computed. That of the standard deviation is based on the chain rule of differentiation. The expression for the left-mean is obtained as:I2(x,F)=ddɛ[∫−min{x,0}d((1−ɛ)F(x)+ɛδx)]|ɛ=0=ddɛ[(1−ɛ)∫−min{x,0}dF(x)+ɛ∫−min{u,0}δx)]|ɛ=0=−m−−min{x,0}.For the influence function of the VaR see for example Lehmann (2010) or Serfling (1980); it is also stated as Proposition 4.2 in Cont, Deguest, and Scandolo (2010). The influence function of the AVaR is set in Corollary 4.4 of Cont et al. (2010) and is based on an easy dominated argument applied to the risk functional. We are now in position to state:Proposition 1Given a performance ratio’s statisticθ(F)=θ1(F)θ2(F),assume the reward functional θ1(F) and the risk functional θ2(F) have first order von Mises expansion. Let θ ∈ {SR, GLR, AVaRR, VaRR}and f > 0.Then, we have the following influence functions:(2)ISR(x,F)=−2mv3x2+8m2+v2v3x+m(v−6m2)v3(3)IGLR(x,F)=x(m+m−)m−2I{x<0}+xm−I{x⩾0}(4)IAVaRR(x,F)=(m+αμααμα2x−mqα(1−α)αμα2)I{x⩽qα}+(1μαx+mqαμα2)I{x⩾qα}(5)IVaRR(x,F)=(−1qαx+mqα−m(1−α)f(qα)qα2)I{x<qα}+(mqα−1)I{x=qα}+(−1qαx+mqα+mαf(qα)qα2)I{x>qα}.The proof is in the Appendix. Now, the gross error sensitivityerr*(θ,F)=supx∈R|Iθ(x,F)|for any of the statistic corresponding to a performance ratio can be used as a criterion to judge the more robust performance measurement: the greater the err*(θ, F) is, the lower is the robustness, where F is chosen in the appropriate dom(θ). Unfortunately, its computation reveals that all the four statistics are very sensitive to gross errors sinceerr*(SR,F)=err*(GLR,F)=err*(AVaRR,F)=err*(VaRR,F)=∞.Nevertheless, it is easily seen thatlim supx∈R|IGLR(x,F)ISR(x,F)|=lim supx∈R|IAVaRR(x,F)ISR(x,F)|=lim supx∈R|IVaRR(x,F)ISR(x,F)|=0.Hence, the influence functions corresponding to the GLR, the AVaRR and the VaRR statistics are O(ISR(x, F)) and their degree of robustness decades slower than that of SR statistic, when larger (positive or negative) observations x are added. Note that ISharpe(x, F) is a quadratic in x which is convex if m < 0. The influence function IGLR(x, F) is piecewise linear, convex for m > −m−. When |m|, m− ≪ 1 it becomes almost linear. Similarly IAVaR(x, F) is piecewise linear and convex for m > −αμα, since under ‘normal market conditions’ we have μα> 0. Note that when m < 0 the influence functions of the SR, the GLR and the AVaRR are all convex provided that m ∈ ( − m−, 0) for the GLR and m ∈ ( − αμα, 0) for the AVaRR. The influence function of the VaRR has a jump at the population quantile x = qα; the two straight lines for x lower or higher than qαhave negative slope under normal market conditions, when qαis a negative number. Assuming zero expected return m = 0 we haveISR(x,F)=xv,IGLR(x,F)=xm−,IAVaRR(x,F)=xμαandIVaRR(x,F)=xqαI{x≠qα}+I{x=qα}so they are almost linear in x.In summary, the less robust performance statistic is the SR. If the estimated value of m is actually negative (positive), then the estimate of the SR can increase (decrease) too much and faster than the estimates of the GLR, the AVaRR and the VaRR. Fig. 1shows the four influence functions for values x between − 60 percent and 60 percent.The combined sensitivity to infinitesimal data contamination is showed in Fig. 2.It is clear how the influence functions of the AVaRR and the VaRR are very close to each other. The influence functions of the SR and GLR for x ∈ [ − 0.6, 0.6] are much more variable than the other two. This feature will be crucial in the analysis of the relationship between the influence function and the estimation error as we will see later.In our analysis we do not consider other well known performance measures such as the Treynor ratio or the Jensen’s Alpha. The formerφ(X)=E(X)var(Y)cov(X,Y),X,Y∈L2is a well known performance measure related to the CAPM, where Y represents the random return of the market portfolio; the reciprocal ofvar(Y)cov(X,Y)is the X-portfolio beta. It is clear that in the current paper the above is not directly comparable with our four performance ratios, since they are all based on univariate dfs. Instead, the statistical functional of the Treynor ratio depends upon a joint df F(x, y) so that the results of Sections 3.2 and 4 are not applicable. For the same reason, other performance quantities based on CAPM such as the Grinblatt–Titman measure (see Amenc & Le Sourd, 2003) cannot be considered here. It is possible to write down their formulas together with their statistical functionals using the notion of admissible performance measures of Chen and Knez (1996): the representation is made in term of the joint df of the underlying portfolio return and a performance benchmark.For large samples the estimation errorθ(Fn)−θ(F)of all the performance statistics can be evaluated approximately by∑i=1nIθ(xi,F).Using simulation we are going to study how outliers affect the estimation procedure and to show what are the performance ratios less sensitive to them. Since our assumed type of contamination is concerned with undetectable values xideviating from the true statistical model F, drawing from prescribed distributions must be subject to random deviation from the initial values. Therefore, we first run a Monte Carlo simulation under the Normal distribution N(m, v2) and the fat-tailed t-Student T(m, v, d) whit d degrees of freedom. The T-distribution accounts for higher probabilities of extreme outliers. As explained in Farinelli, Ferreira, Rossello, Thoeny, and Tibiletti (2009), to deal with investment performance one needs to account for different risk profile so that real world data must refer to a comprehensive asset universe. To estimate the population parameters d, m and v we then consider a dataset of historical rate of returns taken from six investment categories:1.Fund #1 = Ivy Balanced 1 (IYBIX aggressive allocation, mutual fund)Fund #2 = ProShares Ultra Russell 1000 Growth (UKF trading-leveraged equity, Exchange-Traded Fund, ETF)Fund #3 = Aberdeen Optimal Allocations Def I (GODIX conservative allocation, mutual fund)Fund #4 = Managers AMG Chicago Eq Part Bal C (MBECX, moderate allocation, mutual fund)Fund #5 = Henderson European Focus A (HFEAX, European Stock, mutual fund)Fund #6 = Invesco European Small Company Y (ESMYX, European Stock, mutual fund).Recall that ETFs are based on a passive investment strategy to track a given benchmark; they are traded on an exchange. Fund #1 seeks to provide current income, and long-term capital appreciation is secondary objective. Fund #1 comprises primarily stocks, debt securities and short-term instruments, depending on market conditions. Fund #2 seeks daily investment results, before fees and expenses, that correspond to twice the daily performance of the Russell 1000 Growth Index. The fund invests in equity securities and derivatives. Fund #3 invests in underlying funds, some of which are actively managed by the adviser, and invests in both traditional and non-traditional asset classes, i.e. equity funds, international equity funds, bond funds and short-term investments, real asset funds. Fund #4 ordinarily comprises equity securities and fixed income securities. Fund #5 invests in equity securities of European companies, such as preferred stock, convertible securities and depositary receipts. Fund #6 invests in securities of small-capitalization European issuers and in derivatives and other similar securities. Note that all these funds have different geographic connotation and refer to diverse risk aversion profiles. The summary statistics are showed in Table 3; 1510 data points range from April 9, 2007 to April 8, 2013. The estimated^in the case of t-distribution with kurtosiskur=3d−2d−4is given byd^=kur^−6kur^−3.Despite these empirical features, we use only the above estimates to feed a Monte Carlo routine as follows.1.For each fund we simulate n = 1000 valueszi(j)of returns drawing fromN(m^,v^2)andT(m^,v^,d^).We alter these values by additionxi(j)=zi(j)+h,where h is randomly selected from the set {0.1, 0.11, 0, 12, …, 0.6} representing market shocks pushing normal quotes up to ± 60 percent or more.We computebias(j)=∑i=1nIθ(xi(j),F)where F is referred to each of the distribution and θ ∈ {SR, GLR, AVaRR, VaRR}For j = 1 to 1000 we repeat steps 1–3 as well.We compute the average11000∑j=11000bias(j)and the standard deviation.We set α = 0.01 to compute qαand μα, and for the latter we computeμα=−m+vf(qα)α,where f is the density of N(0, 1), F is its df and qαis its α-quantile. For the t-Student case the formula readsμα=−m+v1αdB(d2,12)(1+qα2d)−d+12d+qα2d−1,where qαis the α-quantile of the standard T(0, 1, d) andB(d2,12)is the Beta function (see Broda & Paolella, 2011). The left-mean ism−=−m+v2πunder the Normal hypotheses, while in the t-Student case it can be deduced by the above formula for μαwith qα= 0 (in both cases without the factor1α). The results of Monte Carlo simulation are reported in Tables 4–6where the expected bias reported in the first four columns has a minus sign in the case of underestimation error.Simulation entails the GLR as the performance measure with the more biased estimator. The mean errors of the SR, the AVaRR and the VaRR are close to each other, but there is much more variability of the estimation error in the case of the SR except for fund #1. Moreover, with the chosen dataset the SR determines underestimation of bias 4 time out of 12. The simulation results suggest that despite qualitative robustness is lost, if we restrict the range of outliers in such a way that the sensitivity of performance statistics is confined to bounded intervals then it is possible to check which one exhibits the lower estimation error. It seems to us that under perturbation of normal market values ranging within ( − 60 percent, 60 percent) is sensible to use either the AVaRR or the VaRR as the more (locally) robust performance measures. This means that acceptability of ratios is not a prerequisite for performance evaluation when nonparametric estimation is taken into account. VaRR is a good substitute of AVaRR: the former is based on reward adjusted for risk with a robust estimator, while the latter has a denominator which is not robust (see Cont et al., 2010). Overall, this affect fund ranking as explained in the next section.In the current setting, two different dfs F and G are thought of as the true model of return due to the fund managers’ ability to outperform a given benchmark (active strategy), or to replicate the performance of a given market index (passive strategy). For any of the four performance ratios θ, we define the ranking principle(dom(θ), ≽θ) as the partial order among dfs where ≻θis the strict dominance and ≃θis the indifference relation. We consider the following representation:(6)F≽θG⟺θ(F)⩾θ(G),F,G∈dom(θ).The interpretation of (6) is straightforward: if the fund manager #1 is more able to process information than the fund manager #2, then it is expected that the former yields F and F ≽θG. Thus, any of the performance measure θ evaluated at F must be greater than its value at G. Contamination of the true dataset could reverse this ranking and may cause undue reward for the manager #2 based on exogenous factors but its ability. Actually, another possible alteration is that of mistaking F and G to be incomparable when one of the other relations ≺θ, ≻θor ≃θwas expected. However for small outliers robust ranking principles are not ruled out, even though the influence function Iθ(x, F) is unbounded. Indeed, the first order von Mises expansion (1) applied to the theoretical estimation error θ(Fε, x) − θ(F) gives ∫Iθ(x, F)dFε, x+ Rn, i.e. it is approximately εIθ(x, F). This leads to |θ(Fε, x) − θ(F)| ≈ ε err*(θ, F) so that the function ε↦|θ(Fε, x) − θ(F)| has slope the influence function Iθ(x, F) for an infinitesimal contamination ε → 0 of the dataset. This relation leads to a cut-off between the unboundedness of the influence function and the boundedness of the statistic θ(F(x)) taking value x on a bounded interval. Otherwise, the bias θ(Fε, x) − θ(F) can change a lot and the ranking principle between two return dfs can be different independently of the outliers in the gross error model Fε, x. For a similar discussion concerning welfare ranking see Cowell and Victoria-Feser (2002). For performance ratios the representation (6) leads to four possibilities:(R1)θ1(F) ≥ θ1(G) and θ2(F) ≥ θ2(G);θ1(F) ≤ θ1(G) and θ2(F) ≥ θ2(G);θ1(F) ≥ θ1(G) and θ2(F) ≤ θ2(G);θ1(F) ≤ θ1(G) and θ2(F) ≤ θ2(G).Let θ1(F) = m be the reward statistic, and let θ2(F) be any one of the risk statistics. Then the following holds:(i)inequalities involving the mean θ1 = m are nonrobust;inequalities involving the standard deviation θ2 = v are nonrobust;inequalities involving the left-mean θ2 = m−are nonrobust for negative outliers x < 0;inequalities involving θ2 = μα given by the AVaR andθ2=−qα−given by the VaR are nonrobust, for any α ∈ (0, 1).(i) It suffices to assume θ1(F) ≥ θ1(G), forF,G∈D1,otherwise we can exchange them. The domain of dfs is unbounded and if G is affected by a small contamination we havelimɛ→0(limx→∞θ1(Gɛ,x))=m+limɛ→0(limx→∞ɛx)=C1>0.Taking C1 sufficiently large we havelimɛ→0(limx→∞θ1(Gɛ,x))>θ1(F)⩾θ1(G).The same argument applies if x → −∞, taking the gross error model Fε, xand considering C < 0. (ii) Assume θ2(F) ≤ θ2(G), otherwise exchange F with G. Then we havelimɛ→0(limx→±∞θ2(Fɛ,x))=(v2+limɛ→0(limx→±∞ɛ(x−m)2))1/2=C2>0.Again, taking C2 sufficiently large the initial inequality can be reversed in the presence of a small contamination. (iii) Assume the same inequality as in (ii). Thus it can be the caselimɛ→0(limx→−∞θ2(Fɛ,x))=m−−limɛ→0(limx→−∞ɛmin{x,0})=C3>0and the inequality can be reversed by considering θ2(Fε, x) instead of θ2(F). (iv) Taking again the same inequality as in (ii), assumefF(qα−(F)),fG(qα−(G))>0for all α ∈ (0, 1). It follows−limɛ→0qα−(Fɛ,x)=−qα−(F)⩽−qα−(G)because the population quantile is uniquely determined (in fact is continuous) at any α, i.e.qα−(·)=qα+(·).If fF(x) = 0 for all x ∈ I = [c, d) with − ∞ < c < d < ∞ andfG(qα−(G))>0,let β ≔ F(c) and note that−qβ−(F)⩽−d<−c⩽−qβ−(G)implies−qβ−(F)⩽−qβ−(G)even if we take the limits of−qα−(F)as α↑β and α↓β. In both cases the inequality related to VaR is preserved. For the AVaR μα= μα(F) observe that its own definition impliesqα−∈L1(0,1)for any α ∈ (0, 1). Now defineh(qα−(F)):=qα−(F)+C4where C4 > 0. Then h ∈ L1(0, 1) and as a consequence|qα−(F)|⩽|qα−(F)|+C4∈L1(0,1).By dominated convergence we havelimɛ→0μα(Fɛ,x)=−1α∫0αlimɛ→0qu−(Fɛ,x)du=μα(F)which entails limε → 0μα(Fε, x) = μα(F) ≥ μα(G) and we are done.□Letθ(F)=θ1(F)θ2(F)be the SR or the GLR. Then the corresponding ranking principle≽θis nonrobust.Assume F≽θG is represented via (6). By (i) and (ii) of Lemma 2 any of the inequalities (R1) to (R4) can be reversed in the case θ = SR. Therefore a small contamination can give limε → 0SR(Fε, x) ≤ SR(G) which is equivalent to G≽SRlimε → 0Fε, x, meaning nonrobustness. For negative outliers x < 0 the same applies to GLR by (i) and (iii) of Lemma 2.□The above result says nothing about robustness of ranking for θ = AVaRR, VaRR. Notwithstanding, we run a historical simulation to evaluate the performance of an equally weighted portfolio consisting of funds #1 to #5 used in Section 3.3 (we discard fund #6 since it is of the same type of fund #5). To be more precise, we consider weekly performance reevaluation over the dataset modified to discard the first 110 data points. With the remaining 1400 observations we compute the four performance ratios 200 times. The VaRR is the highest 85 times out of 200, the AVaRR 66 times out of 200, the SR 30 times out of 200 and the GLR 19 times out of 200. This empirical analysis confirms the VaRR and the AVaRR as the more robust performance ratios. Indeed, a simple modification of them turns out to be performance ratios compatible with the ranking principle and eventually qualitatively robust. Define the α-trimmed mean asmα(F):=11−2α∫α1−αqu−(F)du,0<α<12and let(7)θ(F)=mα(F)θ2(F),θ2=AVaR,VaRbe the proposed ratios which are valid forF∈D1∩dom(θ2).Replace numerators in (R1) to (R4) with the α-trimmed mean.Proposition 3Take θ as defined by (7). Let F≽θG be the corresponding ranking principle. Assume that at least one of the density fF, fGis nonzero at the population quantile qα(·).Then ≽θis a robust ordering. Moreover, if F, Gare such thatqu−(·)is uniquely determined and0<α<12then the estimatorθ^ninvolving the VaR as a risk measure is qualitative robust.By hypotheses any of the inequalities (R1) to (R4) is valid. Definition (7) impliesqα−(F)∈L1(0,1)for any α ∈ (0, 1). Then a similar reasoning as in the proof of (iv), Lemma 2 enables us to apply dominated convergence:limɛ→0mα(Fɛ,x)=11−2α∫α1−αlimɛ→0qu−(Fɛ,x)du=mα(F).Whence, there is no violation of the assumed inequalities related to the numerator of (7). This together with the resistance of AVaR and VaR as showed in the proof of (iv), Lemma 2 provides the robustness of ≽θ. Finally, assuming further the VaR is defined for allF∈D1having quantile function qα(·) without jumps, i.e. giving the same value of the lower and upper quantiles,qα−(·)=qα+(·),we have thatθ^n,2=−qα−(Fn)is qualitatively robust at F. Since it is well known that the reward functional θ1(F) = mα(F) has a qualitative robust estimatorθn,1=θ1(Fn)forα∈(0,12),we conclude that their ratio is robust too and the proof is completed.□Proposition 3 shows that under suitable conditions we can work with robust performance measures which preserve the ranking among investment funds, independently of small contaminations in the dataset needed to estimate the θ(F). Therefore, performance attribution may be free of outliers and only the true ability of fund managers can be taken into account. The influence function of (7) is bounded confirming the robustness of its estimator. Let mα(F) = mα, defineW(F)=(1−2α)mα(F)+αqα−(F)+αq1−α−(F)to be the α-Winsorized mean and assume as in Proposition 3 that the quantile function has no jumps at α and 1 − α, where the lower and upper quantiles coincide. Then the influence function of the α-trimmed mean isImα(x,F)=qα−W1−2αI{x<qα}+x−W1−2αI{qα⩽x⩽q1−α}+q1−α−W1−2αI{x>q1−α},whereq•=q•−(F)=q•+(F)for α, 1 − α and W = W(F). By Lemma 1it follows that the influence function of the performance statistic (7) is(8)Iθ(x,F)=(W−qαqα(1−2α)−mα(1−α)qα2f(qα))I{x<qα}+W−qαqα(1−2α)I{x=qα}+(W−xqα(1−2α)+αmαqα2f(qα))I{qα<x⩽q1−α}+(W−q1−αqα(1−2α)+αmαqα2f(qα))I{x>q1−α},a bounded piecewise linear function of x. It is easily computed that conditions (i) to (iii) for the existence of the first order von Mises expansion (1) are fulfilled (see the Appendix). For practical implementation recall that the consistent estimatormα(Fn)of the α-trimmed mean is1n−2k(X(k+1)+⋯+X(n−k)),kn=:α<12,where (handling the ordered statistics related to the sample) one discards the k largest and k smallest observations, taking the average of the remaining n − 2k ones. Yet another choice for the numerator is to replace the mean m with the median med(F), which is well known to have robust estimator and bounded influence function. Hence, we think that the ratio of med(F) to the VaR or the AVaR also entails a performance measure coherent with the initial ranking principle ≽θ.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In judging fund management one quests for the performance attribution being resistant to data contamination. Otherwise, the estimated value of the performance ratios do not fully reflect managerial skills. If there is a nonzero probability of aberrant observations in the normal range of market rate of returns, then not all ratio statistics can be safely used in performance evaluation especially when alternative investment funds have to be ranked and the best has to be chosen. The first drawback is absence of qualitative robustness for Sharpe ratio, Gain–Loss ratio, Average-Value-at-Risk ratio and Value-at-Risk ratio. This does not rule out the use of these measures in performance management, and we explain how their different degree of sensitivity to outliers can be compared. For concrete ranges of return variability both the Average-Value-at-Risk ratio and Value-at-Risk ratio are the less sensitive to data contamination. Thus, acceptability of ratios is not the only criterion in performance evaluation when the nonparametric estimation issue is taken into account. It is possible to employ modified performance measures as the ratio of the α-trimmed mean to the VaR forα∈(0,12),which is qualitative robust and tends to generate resistant ranking among alternative investment funds.