@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Aggregation of Malmquist productivity indexes allowing for reallocation of resources

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We derive aggregate Malmquist productivity indexes allowing input reallocation.The aggregation scheme is justified by economic theory.The aggregation scheme is coherent with previous aggregation results.The aggregate indexes are relevant for firms or countries where reallocation of inputs is possible.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Efficiency,Productivity,Index aggregation,Reallocation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we consider aggregate Malmquist productivity index measures which allow inputs to be reallocated within the group (when in output orientation). This merges the single period aggregation results allowing input reallocation of Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) with the aggregate Malmquist productivity index results of Zelenyuk (2006) to determine aggregate Malmquist productivity indexes that are justified by economic theory, consistent with previous aggregation results, and which maintain analogous decompositions to the original measures. Such measures are of direct relevance to firms or countries who have merged (making input reallocation possible), allowing them to measure potential productivity gains and how these have been realised (or not) over time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When considering the efficiency of organisations (be they branches, firms, countries, etc.) it is useful to consider not only individual efficiencies but also the combined efficiency of a group (e.g. an industry) or a sub-group within a group. Measuring group efficiency dates back to Farrell (1957), who introduced the notion of structural efficiency. Important contributions were made by Førsund and Hjalmarsson (1979), who considered measuring the average decision making unit, Li and Ng (1995), who derived an aggregation scheme using shadow prices, Ylvinger (2000), who used weights derived from Data Envelopment Analysis, and Blackorby and Russell (1999) who found several impossibility results for efficiency aggregation. Recently, Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) developed an aggregation scheme for measuring group efficiency which is justified from an economic theory perspective. However, this aggregation scheme required the assumption that the current input endowment across firms in the group was taken as given and could not be reallocated between those firms. This assumption was relaxed by Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) who determined group efficiency measures allowing inputs to be reallocated between decision making units within the group. This is an important consideration for cases where such reallocation is possible – such as when the organisations considered are branches within a firm, when firms are merging within an industry, or when countries are merging into an economic union where reallocation of inputs is an important aspect. For a specific example, consider a bank with multiple branches. They can move staff, capital and other inputs between these branches, and so treating these inputs as fixed when measuring the efficiency of the overall bank fails to consider the true possibilities available to the bank. It is also important to consider not just group efficiency at one time period, but to also look at how it changes over time. The Malmquist productivity index of Caves, Christensen, and Diewert (1982) is a natural candidate for doing this, as it is popular for empirical use and has a number of interesting decompositions available. The aggregation scheme of Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) has already been extended intertemporally for the aggregation of Malmquist productivity indexes by Zelenyuk (2006). In our work, we seek to extend the group aggregation results allowing reallocation with the Malmquist productivity index to enable consideration of the change in group productivity over time, allowing reallocation of inputs across decision making units (when considering output orientation). This is a different approach (though with similar results) to the area of index number aggregation (for example see Diewert (1983, 1985) and references contained therein). The resulting information from our measures is of particular value to managers/leaders of merged firms/countries, or managers of branches within an organisation, as it allows them to measure the success or failure over time of endeavours to increase group output by reallocating inputs amongst individual units within the group.Our paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the key definitions for individual efficiency measures, and Sections 3 and 4 consider group efficiency measures, first assuming inputs cannot be reallocated and then relaxing this assumption. Section 5 then considers aggregation for Malmquist productivity indexes and group results assuming no reallocation of inputs. The main results are given in Section 6, which derives group Malmquist productivity indexes when relaxing the assumption of no reallocation, in such a way that the indexes decompose analogously to the original efficiency measures. Section 6 also discusses some important matters regarding practical implementation of these indexes. Section 7 then illustrates these results with a numerical example, using Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) to calculate the efficiency and productivity measures. Finally, Section 8 concludes the study, highlighting possible areas for future research.Let us begin by considering individual efficiency measures for a group of K decision making units (DMUs), indexedk=1,…,K. DMUs could be individual branches, whole firms/organisations, industries or even countries, depending on the purpose of the study. A DMU k uses a vectorxk=(x1k,…,xNk)′∈R+Nof N inputs to produce a vectoryk=(y1k,…,yMk)′∈R+Mof M outputs. Let the individual technology of DMU k at a given time periodτbe represented by the technology setTτk, defined as:(1)Tτk≡(xk,yk)∈R+N×R+M:DMUkcan produceykfromxkusing the technology in periodτ.The technology for DMU k at periodτcan be equivalently characterised using the output correspondence,Pτk:R+N→2R+Mwhere:(2)Pτk(xk)≡yk∈R+M:(xk,yk)∈Tτk,xk∈R+N.The technology of each DMU is assumed to satisfy standard regularity axioms (see Färe and Primont (1995) for more details). We impose these axioms throughout the paper as regularity conditions, though some of the results could be obtained with weaker assumptions (e.g. substituting weak disposability of inputs in place of free disposability). Specifically (∀k=1,…,Kand∀τ) we assume:Axiom 1The technology setTτkis closed.The output setPτk(xk)is bounded∀xk∈R+N.There is no ‘free lunch’, that is, one cannot produce something from nothing. Formally,(0N,yk)∉Tτk,∀yk⩾0M(i.e.yk⩾0M,yk≠0M).It is possible to produce nothing. Formally,0M∈Pτk(xk),∀xk∈R+N.Inputs and outputs are freely (strongly) disposable.Formally(x0,y0)∈Tτk⇒(x,y)∈Tτk,∀y≦y0,∀x≦x0.Axiom 6Output setsPτk(xk)are convex,∀xk∈R+N.Axiom 6 is required to ensure duality results hold. We do not yet make the stronger assumption that technology setsTτkare convex, but will introduce it later when considering practical estimation.We also involve the output-oriented Shephard (1970)distance functionDτk:R+N×R+M→R+∪{∞}, defined as:(3)Dτk(xk,yk)≡infθ:yk/θ∈Pτk(xk).This function completely characterises the technologyTτkin the sense that:(4)Dτk(xk,yk)⩽1⇔(xk,yk)∈Tτk.We also use it to define the Farrell-type technical efficiency (TE) measure of DMU k in periodτas:(5)TEτk≡TEτk(xk,yk)≡1/Dτk(xk,yk),(xk,yk)∈R+N+M.We also consider the dual characterisation ofPτk(xk)given by the revenue function:(6)Rτk(xk,p)≡maxypy:y∈Pτk(xk),xk∈R+N,p∈R++M,given a price row-vectorp=(p1,…,pM)∈R++Mcorresponding to the M outputs. Note that p is assumed to be the same for all DMUs, a necessary assumption for deriving the aggregation results that follow, which we will discuss further in Section 3. Given the revenue function, the revenue efficiency (RE) for a DMU k at periodτis:(7)REτk≡REτk(xk,yk,p)≡Rτk(xk,p)pyk,forpyk≠0,(xk,yk)∈R+N+M,p∈R++M.It will always be the case (for(xk,yk)∈Tτk) thatREτk(xk,yk,p)⩾TEτk(xk,yk), as a DMU can be technically efficient without being revenue efficient, but a revenue efficient DMU will always be technically efficient. The multiplicative residual that closes the inequality is called allocative efficiency (AE):(8)AEτk≡AEτk(xk,yk,p)≡REτk(xk,yk,p)/TEτk(xk,yk),(xk,yk)∈R+N+M,p∈R++M,which immediately provides the following decomposition, which holds for any periodτ:(9)REτk(xk,yk,p)=TEτk(xk,yk)×AEτk(xk,yk,p),∀(xk,yk)∈R+N+M,p∈R++M,pyk≠0,which will be useful later.Following Färe and Zelenyuk (2003), group efficiency measures can be constructed to measure the efficiency of a group of DMUs, taking current input endowments as given (an assumption we will later relax in Section 4 to allow reallocation of inputs between DMUs). Here we focus on aggregating all DMUs in a group, but it is possible to extend these results to aggregate separate subgroups of DMUs, and then consistently aggregate subgroups into larger groups (see Simar and Zelenyuk (2007)).LetX=(x1,…,xK), wherexk∈R+N, be the input endowments amongst DMUs within the group. We first consider a group output set for periodτ, the Minkowski sum of the individual output sets for a given periodτ:(10)P‾τ(X)≡∑⊕k=1KPτk(xk),xk∈R+N,k=1,…,K.This group output set shows all output possibilities for the group for a given input allocation X amongst DMUs. It can be used to define a group revenue function, analogous to the individual revenue function:(11)R‾τ(X,p)≡maxypy:y∈P‾τ(X),p∈R++M,and accompanying group revenue efficiency measure(12)RE‾τ≡RE‾τ(X,Y‾,p)≡R‾τ(X,p)pY‾,forpY‾≠0,whereY‾=∑k=1Kykis the aggregate group output.It should be noted that this assumes all DMUs face common output prices, and so group revenue is maximised against the same prices as all individual revenue functions. This common price can be understood as a theoretical benchmark price for deriving group revenue efficiency against, just as the true technology forms a benchmark for measuring group technical efficiency. In practice, prices are often constructed as averages using cost/revenue and quantity data, so the industry average price can be taken as the common price (see e.g. Fukuyama and Weber (2008)). Alternatively, shadow prices could be derived imposing the Law of One Price (see e.g. Kuosmanen, Cherchye, and Sipiläinen (2006), Kuosmanen, Kortelainen, Sipiläinen, and Cherchye (2010)). Practitioners should be aware of the limitations of these estimation methods for their own application, just as they should be aware of the limitations of different estimators of the technology. For example, the average price may be misleading where managers make decisions on marginal prices (see e.g. Camanho and Dyson (2005, 2008), Fukuyama and Weber (2008), Sahoo and Tone (2013)).1We thank two anonymous referees for these insights.1Our theoretical results hold for the common theoretical price and technologies, making no assumptions specific to a particular estimation technique, and so could be estimated using various techniques.A crucial result here is the intertemporal extension by Zelenyuk (2006) of a result originally derived by Färe and Zelenyuk (2003), which we summarise as a lemma:Lemma 1Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions:(13)R‾τ(X,p)=∑k=1KRτk(xk,p),xk∈R+N,p∈R++M,so group revenue efficiency is:(14)RE‾τ=∑k=1KREτ(xk,yk,p)·Sk,with weights(15)Sk=pykpY‾,k=1,…,K.Moreover,RE‾τcan be decomposed into aggregate technical and allocative components, as(16)RE‾τ=TE‾τ×AE‾τ,∀τ,where group technical efficiency is:(17)TE‾τ=∑k=1KTEτk(xk,yk)·Sk,k=1,…,K,and group allocative efficiency is:(18)AE‾τ=∑k=1KAEτk(xk,yk,p)·Saek,with(19)Saek=py∗k∑k=1Kpy∗kwherey∗k=ykTEτk(xk,yk),k=1,…,K.Intuitively, this means that the maximum revenue for the overall group of DMUs is equal to the sum of the individual maximum revenues. That is, if individual DMUs all maximise their revenues given their input endowments and facing the same output prices, then the sum will coincide with maximal group revenue defined by (11). This then allows group efficiencies to be expressed as a weighted sum of individual DMU efficiencies, and maintains a group level decomposition (16) analogous to the individual level decomposition (9).It is worth noting that an advantage of this aggregation scheme is that it is not ad hoc but is derived from economic theoretic arguments: revenue optimisation, a particular structure of group technology given by (10), and taking as given common output prices and the existing input allocation of each DMU, besides the regularity axioms of production theory. In the next section we discuss relaxing the assumption of no input reallocation presupposed by (10).The assumption that inputs cannot be reallocated across DMUs was relaxed by Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) (who in turn utilised some results from Li and Ng (1995)), whose results we summarise next. Unlike that paper, we consider an inter-temporal framework so we can use these results in Malmquist productivity indexes later.Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) note that given the Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) definition of a group output set, (10), if DMUs were operating under non-constant returns to scale (or some have superior technologies) there may be unrealised output gains from reallocating inputs between DMUs. Such gains would be over and above those gains from all DMUs operating efficiently given their current input endowment. To measure this, consider a group potential technology which is the Minkowski sum of individual DMU technologies in a given periodτ:(20)Tτg≡∑⊕k=1KTτk.This technology aggregation structure was also proposed by Li and Ng (1995) and Blackorby and Russell (1999). It can be equivalently characterised by the group potential output set:(21)Pτg(X‾)=y:(X‾,y)∈Tτg,whereX‾≡∑k=1Kxkis aggregate group input.We now define the corresponding efficiency measures, following Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007). Specifically, let the group potential technical efficiency be:(22)TEτg≡TEτg(X‾,Y‾)≡maxθθ:θY‾∈Pτg(X‾).Similarly, we can consider the dual characterisation ofPτg(X‾), the group potential revenue function:(23)Rτg(X‾,p)≡maxypy:y∈Pτg(X‾).Given this, let the group potential revenue efficiency be:(24)REτg≡REτg(X‾,Y‾,p)≡Rτg(X‾,p)pY‾.It must be also clear thatREτg(X‾,Y‾,p)⩾TEτg(X‾,Y‾), and with the same logic as the individual level, we can close this inequality by defining the group potential allocative efficiency as:(25)AEτg≡AEτg(X‾,Y‾,p)≡REτg(X‾,Y‾,p)/TEτg(X‾,Y‾).It immediately follows that:(26)REτg=TEτg×AEτg,∀τ.Intuitively, these measures are defined similarly to the individual efficiency measures, but now measure group efficiency w.r.t. the potential output set (21). They thus allow for inputs to be reallocated amongst DMUs in the group each period before determining group output for that period (which already implicitly allows outputs to be reallocated within the group).If we compare the group output sets with and without allowing full reallocation, we have the following important result:Lemma 2Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions:(27)P‾τ(X)⊆Pτg(X‾).See Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) for the proof. In words, the linearly aggregated output set (not allowing full reallocation) will always be a subset of the group potential output set (allowing full reallocation). This implies thatRτg(X‾,p)⩾R‾τ(X,p)which in turn impliesREτg(X‾,Y‾,p)⩾RE‾τ(X,Y‾,p). The multiplicative residual closing this inequality is responsible for reallocation, and so following the terminology in Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) is called group revenue reallocative efficiency, and is defined as:(28)RREτg≡Rτg(X‾,p)/R‾τ(X,p).It immediately follows that:(29)REτg=RE‾τ×RREτg,∀τ.We now state a useful decomposition we have forRREτg, in the following lemma.Lemma 3Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions, we have:(30)RREτg=TREτg×AREτg,∀τ,where group technical reallocative efficiency is(31)TREτg≡TEτg/TE‾τ,and group allocative reallocative efficiency is(32)AREτg≡AEτg/AE‾τ.Intuitively, each of these measure the residual component due to allowing full reallocation of inputs – the relative difference for the group between all DMUs being individually efficient (given their individual input endowments) and the group being collectively efficient (allowing reallocation of inputs between DMUs). The graphical intuition of group, group potential and group reallocative revenue efficiency can be seen in Fig. 1 in Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007).Given (27), it will always be the case (for feasible input–output combinations) thatRREτg⩾1andTREτg⩾1, with each equal to unity only when all DMUs are individually and collectively Farrell-type efficient. However, we cannot say whatAREτgwill be – it could be less than unity if the current group output mix is closer to maximising group potential revenue rather than individual revenues, and greater than unity in the opposite case.Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) also present reallocative measures for individual DMUs, defined as(33)RREτk≡REτg/REτk,(34)TREτk≡TEτg/TEτk,(35)AREτk≡AEτg/AEτk.These can then be aggregated into the group reallocative measures, which we summarise as Lemma 4 (see Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) for more details).Lemma 4Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions:(36)RREτg=∑k=1K(RREτk)-1·Sk-1,(37)TREτg=∑k=1K(TREτk)-1·Sk-1,(38)AREτg=∑k=1K(AREτk)-1·Saek-1,with the weights defined in(15)and(19).Finally, decompositions (16), (29) and (30) imply a final decomposition of aggregate efficiency:(39)REτg=TE‾τ×AE‾τ×TREτg×AREτg,∀τ.Our objective is to determine group Malmquist productivity indexes that maintain analogous decompositions to those expressed in (39).We now turn to consider the change in group productivity over time, measured using the Malmquist Productivity Index (MPI). This inter-temporal extension was provided by Zelenyuk (2006), whose results we summarise here, to be further extended to allow for reallocation of inputs in Section 6.The productivity change from period s to period t can be measured by the Malmquist productivity index of Caves et al. (1982), which in output orientation can be defined for a DMU k as(40)Mstk≡Mstk(xsk,xtk,ysk,ytk)=TEsk(xtk,ytk)TEsk(xsk,ysk)·TEtk(xtk,ytk)TEtk(xsk,ysk)-11/2.Note that it is now important to keep track of the time-subscripts of the input–output (-price) combinations, as these can now differ from the period of the technology they are being measured by. It should be noted that sometimes this productivity index produces infeasible results, that is, one or more of the technical efficiency scores are 0 (see Bjurek (1996)). Kerstens and Van de Woestyne (2014) review the empirical literature and conclude that the prevalence of infeasible results depends on the strength of assumptions, and researchers should be aware of this. For our purposes, we assume throughout that all the individual distance functions considered yield strictly positive and finite values ensuring that all the individual indexes and corresponding aggregation results are feasible. For example, this condition is always satisfied in the DEA context for output oriented measures when technologies are of non-increasing returns to scale.2We thank an anonymous referee for this insightful comment.2Following Zelenyuk (2006) the revenue (or dual) MPI from period s to t is:(41)RMstk≡RMstk(xsk,xtk,ysk,ytk,ps,pt)=REsk(xtk,ytk,pt)REsk(xsk,ysk,ps)·REtk(xtk,ytk,pt)REtk(xsk,ysk,ps)-11/2,and the allocative MPI from period s to t is:(42)AMstk≡AMstk(xsk,xtk,ysk,ytk,ps,pt)=AEsk(xtk,ytk,pt)AEsk(xsk,ysk,ps)·AEtk(xtk,ytk,pt)AEtk(xsk,ysk,ps)-11/2,with this decomposition holding for any input–output-price combination, any two periods s and t, and for all k:(43)RMstk=Mstk×AMstk,which we will want an analogue of at the aggregate level.It is worth reflecting briefly on what these measures mean, as the revenue and allocative MPIs appear to have been overlooked apart from Maniadakis and Thanassoulis (2004) (who present the input-oriented form) and Zelenyuk (2006), but in some respects are superior to the primal MPI when price information is available because they take prices into account. The primal MPI measures the change in productivity from periods s to t, with the first fraction measuring the change w.r.t. technology in period s and the second w.r.t. technology in period t, without taking prices into account, which is useful when price information is unavailable. By contrast, the revenue (or dual) MPI measures the change in productivity taking into account price information, so they also incorporate information on the allocative (in)efficiency of DMUs. The decomposition (43) shows that the dual MPI can be decomposed into a consideration of changes without and with prices, where the allocative MPI takes into account changes in the productivity of the allocation of outputs over the two periods. This can reflect both changes in the allocation itself as well as changes in the prices between periods, as this will change which allocations are most revenue efficient.Having defined the individual MPIs, we now summarise the results of Zelenyuk (2006) for the aggregate (group) MPIs in a lemma that we will use in deriving our results.Lemma 5Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions, let the group revenue MPI from period s to t be:(44)RM‾st≡RM‾st(Xs,Xt,Y‾s,Y‾t,ps,pt)=∑k=1KREsk(xtk,ytk,pt)·Stk∑k=1KREsk(xsk,ysk,ps)·Ssk·∑k=1KREtk(xtk,ytk,pt)·Stk∑k=1KREtk(xsk,ysk,ps)·Ssk-11/2=RE‾s(t)RE‾s(s)·RE‾t(t)RE‾t(s)-11/2.Then for any two periods s and t this can be decomposed into technical and allocative components as(45)RM‾st=M‾st×AM‾st,where(46)M‾st≡M‾st(Xs,Xt,Y‾s,Y‾t)=TE‾s(t)TE‾s(s)·TE‾t(t)TE‾t(s)-11/2,is the group technical MPI from period s to t, and(47)AM‾st≡AM‾st(Xs,Xt,Y‾s,Y‾t,ps,pt)=AE‾s(t)AE‾s(s)·AE‾t(t)AE‾t(s)-11/2,is the group allocative MPI from period s to t, with weights(48)Sae,jk=pjy∗,jk∑k=1Kpjy∗,jkwherey∗,jk≡yjkTEτk(xjk,yjk),k=1,…,K,τ,j=s,t.Thus the aggregate Malmquist productivity indexes can be constructed in such a way that the aggregate indexes decompose in a manner analogous to the individual indexes. Each of these group Malmquist productivity indexes are calculated from the individual efficiency scores, by aggregating them appropriately. The Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) aggregation scheme also makes it clear which weights to use for each group efficiency measure – the weights corresponding to the period of the input–output-price combination, rather than the period of the technology. By aggregating each group efficiency measure separately, changes in the share of individual DMUs between periods are already accounted for by changes in the weights.This aggregation scheme, however, does not allow for reallocation of inputs between DMUs, which is important to allow for because there are potential output gains from such reallocation. This would be particularly relevant for DMUs considering a merger, which makes such reallocation possible and desirable – firms merging within an industry, countries merging into a economic union that allows for reallocation of inputs, etc. In the next section, we relax this restriction.We now merge the concepts presented above to define group aggregate Malmquist productivity indexes for measuring the change in group potential productivity and group reallocative productivity over time. These form the main results of this paper. In deriving a coherent aggregation scheme, we want to ensure its consistency with economic theory and previous aggregation schemes, and in particular we want it to have decompositions that are analogous to the efficiency measures.Our first result proposes an aggregation scheme for the group potential MPI; satisfying a decomposition analogous to (26) and maintaining consistency with previous aggregation results.Proposition 1Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions, let the group potential revenue MPI from periods s to t be(49)RMstg≡RMstg(X‾s,X‾t,Y‾s,Y‾t,ps,pt)=REsg(t)REsg(s)·REtg(t)REtg(s)-11/2.Then for any two periods s andt,RMstgcan be decomposed into technical and allocative components as(50)RMstg=Mstg×AMstg,where(51)Mstg≡Mstg(X‾s,X‾t,Y‾s,Y‾t)=TEsg(t)TEsg(s)·TEtg(t)TEtg(s)-11/2,is the group potential technical MPI from periods s to t, and(52)AMstg≡AMstg(X‾s,X‾t,Y‾s,Y‾t,ps,pt)=AEsg(t)AEsg(s)·AEtg(t)AEtg(s)-11/2,is the group potential allocative MPI from periods s to t.The proof of this proposition follows from substituting the decomposition of group potential revenue efficiency, (26), into the group potential revenue MPI, (49), for each period, and then rearranging to separate out the group potential technical and allocative MPI measures.Intuitively, this proposition shows that we can define the group potential revenue MPI in the same style as the group MPI measures in Section 5, and this can be decomposed into group potential technical and allocative MPI measures which are also in the same style as other group MPI measures. Similarly to the group technical MPI, the group potential technical MPI measures the change in group productivity from period s to t, but now allowing for reallocation of inputs between DMUs within the group. Likewise, the group potential revenue MPI measures the change in group revenue productivity, allowing for reallocation of inputs, and (unlike the group potential technical MPI) takes into account price information. The decomposition allows the researcher to determine which productivity changes are due to changes in group technology or group technical efficiency, and which are due to changes in output prices or group allocative efficiency.We also want to decompose the group potential revenue MPI into group revenue and group revenue reallocative MPI measures, analogous to decomposition (29) and consistent with previous results. This is achieved in Proposition 2.Proposition 2Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions, we have:(53)RMstg=RM‾st×RRMstg,which holds for any two periods s and t, whereRM‾stis defined in(44)and where(54)RRMstg≡RRMstg(X‾s,X‾t,Y‾s,Y‾t,ps,pt)=RREsg(t)RREsg(s)·RREtg(t)RREtg(s)-11/2=∑k=1K(RREsk(xtk,ytk,pt))-1·Stk∑k=1K(RREsk(xsk,ysk,ps))-1·Ssk·∑k=1K(RREtk(xtk,ytk,pt))-1·Stk∑k=1K(RREtk(xsk,ysk,ps))-1·Ssk1/2,is the group revenue reallocative MPI from periods s to t. The last equality following from substituting(36)in place of the group revenue reallocative efficiency.Similarly to Proposition 1, the proof follows by substituting the decomposition of group potential revenue efficiency, (29), into the group potential revenue MPI, (49), and then rearranging to separate out the group revenue MPI and group revenue reallocative MPI measures.In words, the group reallocative revenue MPI captures the productivity change component due to allowing full reallocation, beyond that of all DMUs in the group operating efficiently. Improvements in this measure indicate that group potential revenue productivity has grown faster than group revenue productivity, implying that the group has moved closer to the optimal production level/allocation when allowing full reallocation of resources than the production level/allocation when restricting reallocation.Moreover, the value of decomposition (53) is that it can reveal the source of group potential revenue productivity changes. For example, if group potential revenue productivity improves, this could be in a way which also improves group revenue productivity proportionally, e.g. technological improvement (then group revenue reallocative productivity would be close to unity); in a way which is neutral for group revenue productivity, e.g. shifts along the frontier (then group revenue reallocative productivity would increase proportionally); in a way which lowers group revenue productivity, e.g. shifts towards the optimal group allocation at the cost of individual efficiency (then group revenue reallocative productivity would increase even more than group revenue potential productivity), or with some combination of improvement of group revenue productivity and group revenue reallocative productivity.In turn, we can decompose the group revenue reallocative MPI into technical and allocative reallocative MPIs over time, analogous to (30):Proposition 3Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions, we have:(55)RRMstg=TRMstg×ARMstg,which holds for any two periods s and t, where(56)TRMstg≡TRMstg(X‾s,X‾t,Y‾s,Y‾t)=TREsg(t)TREsg(s)·TREtg(t)TREtg(s)-11/2=∑k=1K(TREsk(xtk,ytk))-1·Stk∑k=1K(TREsk(xsk,ysk))-1·Ssk·∑k=1K(TREtk(xtk,ytk))-1·Stk∑k=1K(TREtk(xsk,ysk))-1·Ssk1/2,is the group technical reallocative MPI from periods s to t, and(57)ARMstg≡ARMstg(X‾s,X‾t,Y‾s,Y‾t,ps,pt)=AREsg(t)AREsg(s)·AREtg(t)AREtg(s)-11/2=∑k=1K(AREsk(xtk,ytk,pt))-1·Sae,tk∑k=1K(AREsk(xsk,ysk,ps))-1·Sae,sk·∑k=1K(AREtk(xtk,ytk,pt))-1·Sae,tk∑k=1K(AREtk(xsk,ysk,ps))-1·Sae,sk1/2,is the group allocative reallocative MPI from periods s to t. Again, the last equalities come fromLemma 4.Similarly to before, the proof of this follows from substituting the decomposition of group revenue reallocative efficiency, (30), into the group revenue reallocative MPI, (54), and then rearranging to separate the group technical and allocative reallocative MPI measures.Intuitively, this decomposition allows us to identify the sources of changes in the group revenue reallocative MPI. One source is due to changes in the group technical reallocative MPI, which reflects that changes in the group technology allow additional potential gains in technical efficiency from reallocation. Another source is due to changes in the group allocative reallocative MPI, which reflects price changes leading to the group input–output combination being closer to all DMUs being individually efficient (given input endowments) or the group collectively being efficient (allowing for reallocation). It is also important to note that each component of (54)–(57) can be constructed from the individual efficiency measures.By determining these group MPI measures such that they are consistent with previous aggregation results, and in particular have analogous decompositions to the group efficiency measures, it is also the case that other group decompositions not yet mentioned hold analogously for these MPI measures. In particular, both the group potential technical and allocative MPIs can be decomposed to reveal changes in the group MPIs and changes in the group reallocative MPIs.Corollary 1Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions and propositions, we have:(58)Mstg=M‾st×TRMstg,and(59)AMstg=AM‾st×ARMstg,which both hold for any two periods s and t.The proof of both of these follows from taking the group decompositions (31) and (32), rearranging in terms of group potential efficiency, substituting them into their respective group potential MPI measures, and rearranging to separate out the group MPIs from the group reallocative MPI measures.The intuition is very similar to that for Proposition 2, and in particularly the discussion of the decomposition (53). Likewise these decompositions allow determination of the source of changes in group potential MPIs. It is also important to observe that each component of (58) and (59) can be constructed from the individual efficiency measures, as described in Lemma 5 and Proposition 3.Finally, we also have the following decomposition for the group potential revenue MPI:Corollary 2Given regularityAxioms 1–6, and the above definitions and propositions, we have:(60)RMstg=M‾st×AM‾st×TRMstg×ARMstg,which holds for any two periods s and t.The proof of this follows from substituting the decompositions (45) and (55) into decomposition (53).In words, this allows a fuller decomposition of the group potential revenue MPI, to more precisely identify the sources of productivity change between some periods s and t. As with other MPIs, the interpretation is that values greater than unity indicate an improvement over time, values less than unity indicate a decline, and values equal to unity indicate no overall change. The overall value can then be decomposed into other values, each of which is also interpreted relative to unity. Thus in decomposition (60), if the group potential revenue MPI has increased, was that due to improvements in the group technical MPI (M‾st), the group allocative MPI (AM‾st) or the group reallocative MPIs (TRMstgandARMstg)? These in turn can be further decomposed by applying existing individual level MPI decompositions to the group measures – for example the group technical MPI can be decomposed to differentiate between group technological change and group efficiency change (for individual level MPI decompositions see Färe, Grosskopf, Lindgren, and Roos (1994), Färe, Grosskopf, Norris, and Zhang (1994), Simar and Wilson (1998) to mention just a few, and see Zelenyuk (2006) for an example of a decomposition of aggregate MPI).Overall, we have been able to derive group potential and group reallocative Malmquist productivity indexes, and have done this in a manner which maintains analogous decompositions of the group MPIs to those we had with the original measures. Unlike Zelenyuk (2006), our results allow for the reallocation of inputs between DMUs, and so are applicable in a wider variety of cases, especially measuring the productivity gains due to mergers.A few important remarks are in order about these results:Remark 1Practical ImplementationMost components of our MPI measures (TE‾τ,RE‾τ, etc.) can be constructed from individual efficiency measures, as must be clear from (14), (17), etc. In deriving the theoretical measures we made no assumptions specific to any estimation technique, and the individual efficiency measures could be estimated using a variety of well established methods – Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), Stochastic Frontier Analysis (SFA), etc. Remark is only needed, then, on practical estimation of the group potential efficiency measures. A common approach here is to make two additional assumptions, as is usually done in the framework of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), a common estimation method for MPIs. These assumptions are thatTτkis convex and identical across DMUs. With these assumptions the results of Li and Ng (1995) can be used to obtain(61)Tτg=KTτ,whereTτ=Tτkis convex,∀k=1,…,K,∀τ,and so here we will have for any periodτ:(62)Pτg(X‾)=KPτ(x̃),wherex̃≡K-1∑k=1Kxk, soPτ(x̃)is the output set of the average DMU in the group. Using these results, the group potential efficiencies are equal to the efficiency measures of the average DMU in the group, that is, we have:(63)REτg(X‾,Y‾,p)=REτ(x̃,ỹ,p),(64)TEτg(X‾,Y‾)=TEτ(x̃,ỹ),(65)AEτg(X‾,Y‾,p)=AEτ(x̃,ỹ,p)=REτ(x̃,ỹ,p)/TEτ(x̃,ỹ),whereỹ≡K-1∑k=1Kykand where RE, TE and AE are as defined in (7), (5) and (8) respectively, with superscript k dropped. The proof of (63)–(65) can be found in Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007).In practice, a researcher does not always have access to corresponding output prices. The aggregation scheme presented here can still be used in this case, for example with shadow prices (as in Li and Ng (1995)). Alternatively, price independent weights can be used, which were originally developed by Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) and extended by Färe and Zelenyuk (2007) and Simar and Zelenyuk (2007). The principle used here is to make the additional assumption that the share of industry revenue from each output is a known constant, and then use the resulting output revenue shares to calculate price independent weights. Specifically, for a given time periodτ, assume:(66)pm,τY‾m,τ∑m=1Mpm,τY‾m,τ=am,τ,m=1,…,M,whereY‾m,τ=∑k=1Kym,τk, andam,τ∈[0,1](m=1,…,M)are constants (estimated or assumed) such that∑m=1Mam,τ=1. After obtaining such constants, let:(67)ϖm,τk=ym,τkY‾m,τ,be the industry share of DMU k in producing the mth output in periodτ. The output-oriented price independent weights in periodτfor each DMU are then:(68)Sτk=∑m=1Mam,τϖm,τk,k=1,…,K,which are the weighted sums of a DMU’s share of industry output for each output, weighted by the industry revenue share of each output in periodτ. A special case, applicable if theam,τwere unavailable, is to assume them to be identical for all outputs, yielding an unweighted arithmetic average of output shares, as in Färe and Zelenyuk (2003). Note that Simar and Zelenyuk (2007) also extend this to the subgroup context to derive price independent weights for aggregating within and between subgroups in output orientation.The group efficiency MPIs presented here use an arithmetic averaging scheme, while many researchers had been using an unweighted geometric average instead. Following discussion in Zelenyuk (2006), we note that the arithmetic averaging is not ad hoc but comes from the derivations. On the other hand, if a geometric weighting scheme were to use the same weights, its first order approximation around unity would be the same as that of the arithmetic scheme we use. Monte Carlo simulations suggested that the difference between weighting schemes is relatively small for the range of productivity changes commonly encountered in practice. This suggests that if researchers prefer to use a geometric averaging scheme this is possible in practice, although the economic justification of the arithmetic averaging appears to have more solid theoretical ground.Here, we present a numerical example using simulated data to illustrate the measures derived above in practice. We start with the same simulated dataset as Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) and Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) for our first period. This data is composed of two inputs and two outputs for 20 DMUs, with first period output prices of 1 and 0.1 respectively. As for Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) and Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007), efficiency scores for each DMU are calculated via Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) with output orientation, assuming variable returns to scale (though of course other estimation methods could also be used). Our first period results are the same as those of the previous papers, and are presented in Appendix A.To calculate the MPI measures we need a second period of data. We create this by applying various transformations to the first period data, to see its affect on the resulting group MPI measures. We present the aggregate first and second period results for five transformations in Table 1. Throughout this section, the subscripts denote the time period, 1 or 2.One can see that there is a sizeable reallocation effect in this example in the first period: while without reallocation of inputs we could increase revenue by 21.8%, with reallocation we could increase it by 43.5%. The group revenue reallocative measure thus indicates that there is a further 17.8% potential improvement in group revenue available from reallocating inputs optimally between DMUs. Similar statements apply to the second period results. The full second period results are in Appendix A.The results (and estimating equations) for the MPI measures for the same transformations are shown in Table 2. A few things stand out from these results.•If we keep inputs and output prices constant but scale outputs upwards (as in transformation 1, as could be the result of improved technology, etc.), the resulting group revenue and technical MPIs (structural and potential) indicate productivity improvement by the amount we scaled by, but all aggregate allocative and reallocative MPIs are equal to unity. Intuitively, by scaling up outputs proportionally (while keeping inputs and output prices fixed) we have scaled up the estimated technology proportionally, but the efficiency of our allocation within each period is unchanged; that is, the gains to the aggregate revenue MPIs are purely from technological improvements, not any allocative/price or reallocative improvements. Likeiwse, there are no group reallocative MPI changes because our allocations between DMUs have not changed, nor has the price ratio – just the technology. This is what one would expect should happen to the aggregate indexes.If we keep inputs and outputs constant but scale output prices upwards (as in transformation 2, as could be the results of inflation, etc.), the resulting aggregate MPIs all equal unity. Intuitively, by scaling prices upwards proportionally, our technology is unchanged and our price ratio is unchanged, so there is no change in productivity, again as one would expect.If we keep inputs and output prices constant over time but period 2 outputs are unrelated to those in period 1 (as in transformation 3), the change in productivity will depend on how those outputs have changed. In the particular example illustrated here, there was a larger increase in the group technical MPI than the group potential technical MPI, and the group allocative MPIs have increased, but with other examples the opposite effects were observed. The one result that remains constant is that the group revenue reallocative MPI always equals unity, which is to be expected. Intuitively, while inputs and prices remain constant between both periods there is no change in the potential group revenue gains from input reallocation, because maximal revenue depends on optimal outputs, not actual outputs, and given unchanged prices and inputs, optimal outputs are unchanged. To see this, re-express the group revenue reallocative MPI, (54), in terms of the group revenue functions (following (28)):(69)RRMstg=Rsg(X‾,pt)/R‾s(X,pt)Rsg(X‾,ps)/R‾s(X,ps)·Rtg(X‾,pt)/R‾t(X,pt)Rtg(X‾,ps)/R‾t(X,ps)-11/2,where the subscript forX‾and X are dropped as they are the same for both periods in this example. Ifps=ptthe expression collapses to unity, regardless of the technology in periods s and t.If we keep inputs and outputs constant but pick new prices that are not proportional to the first period (as in transformation 4), this leads to a number of changes. We find a change in the group revenue and allocative MPIs (structural and potential), though how much and what direction would depend on the new price ratio relative to the curvature of the frontier. We also see as a comparatively small change in the group technical MPI and the reallocative MPIs, and no change in the group potential technical MPI. In all cases, however, the change in group MPIs is very small compared to the price change – in our numerical example we illustrate a 50% increase in the price of good one and a 400% increase in the price of good two, but the change in the group potential revenue MPI was only 3%, and even with more dramatic price changes (including changing which output was more expensive between the two periods) the group MPI changes were comparatively small. This shows that the group MPIs are robust to price changes when quantities are unchanged. In particular, the change to the group technical MPI is comparatively small even to the other group MPIs. Intuitively, changing the price ratio changes the revenue gained (and thus the revenue MPIs and also the allocative MPIs) but does not change the technology, and hence is likely to have a comparatively small effect on the group technical MPI, only through changing the weights. Moroever, as group potential technical efficiency, (22), is not affected by revenue shares, it is unchanged between the two periods (a result that holds whatever price changes are made).Finally, we keep outputs and output prices constant and proportionally increase the inputs of technically inefficient DMUs (as in transformation 5). We find, as we would expect, that our group technical and revenue MPIs (both structural and potential) decrease, because the inefficient DMUs have become more inefficient. In this specific example, all inefficient DMUs (k∈{1,3,4,6,7,8,10,11,13,18,19}) increased their inputs by 20%, leading to the aforementioned group MPIs decreasing by around 10%. Here, there was little change in the aggregate allocative MPIs, showing that the decline was mainly in technical efficiency, and virtually no change in the group reallocative revenue and reallocative technical MPIs, indicating that there was little change in the possible gains from reallocating inputs between DMUs. In other examples we tried (both increasing and decreasing the inputs of the inefficient DMUs) we witnessed these group allocative and reallocative MPIs increasing, decreasing or being unchanged, though in all cases the changes in the group reallocative MPIs were proportionally much smaller than those in the group structural and potential MPIs.In summary, we have illustrated several interesting cases in which the group potential and reallocative MPI results will be unity. If all outputs for all DMUs increase proportionally (inputs and output prices unchanged), the aggregate allocative and reallocative MPIs will be unity. If output prices are scaled proportionally (inputs and output unchanged), all aggregate MPIs will be unity. Whenever inputs and prices of outputs are constant between two periods, the group revenue reallocative MPI will be equal to unity. If second period output prices are not proportional to first period output prices (inputs and outputs unchanged), the group potential technical MPI will be unity, and the group technical MPI and group reallocative MPIs will change in a comparatively small way to the group revenue and allocative MPIs. Finally, if inefficient DMUs increase their input usage (outputs and output prices unchanged), all measures may change, though aggregate allocative and reallocative MPIs will have a comparatively small change. This simple exercise thus provides some indication for what researchers can expect in practical application of these techniques, and the interpretation of such results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
