@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improved branching disjunctions for branch-and-bound: An analytic center approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new approach to generate branching disjunctions based on the shape of the polyhedron.Uses the analytic center concept and Dikin’s ellipsoid from interior-point methods.Finds the minimum-width disjunction by solving a quadratic problem.Tested on multidimensional knapsack problems and MIPLIB instances. Shown to perform well.Tested within a branch-and-bound setting that is entirely based on interior-point concepts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interior-point methods,Analytic center,Integer programming,Branch-and-bound,Generalized branching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In classical branch-and-bound algorithms, the branching disjunction is often based on a single variable, which is a special case of the more general approach that involves multiple variables. In this paper, we present a new approach to generate good general branching disjunctions based on the shape of the polyhedron and interior-point concepts. The approach is based on approximating the feasible polyhedron using Dikin’s inscribed ellipsoid, calculated using the analytic center from interior-point methods. We use the fact that the width of the ellipsoid in a given direction has a closed form expression to formulate a quadratic problem whose optimal solution is a thin direction of the ellipsoid. While solving a quadratic problem at each node of the branch-and-bound tree is impractical, we use an efficient neighborhood search heuristic for its solution. We report computational results on hard mixed integer problems from the literature showing that the proposed approach leads to smaller branch-and-bound trees and a reduction in the computational time as compared with classical branching and strong branching. As the computation of the analytic center is a bottleneck, we finally test the approach within a general interior-point based Benders decomposition where the analytic center is readily available, and show clear dominance of the approach over classical branching.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Branch-and-bound is the main general methodology for integer programming (IP) problems. Over the years, this methodology has been refined and implemented in commercial solvers. One crucial component of the branch-and-bound method is the selection of the branching disjunction. In commercial solvers, the branching disjunction is based on a single integer variable that is fractional in the current optimal solution of the linear programming relaxation. Selecting the “right” variable for branching is a major factor in speeding-up the branch-and-bound algorithm. Particularly, selecting the variable that leads to a maximum increase in the lower bound of the subproblem, an approach that is known as strong branching, yields good results in practice (Linderoth & Savelsbergh, 1999).To motivate the proposed approach, let us introduce the generic mixed integer program:(1)minbTys.t.ATy+s=c,s≥0yjinteger∀j∈J.Starting from the linear programming relaxation of (1), the branch-and-bound algorithm proceeds by iteratively creating new problems by branching on a variable whose current optimal solution violates the integer requirements. A variable yjwhose value is fractional in the current optimal solution is chosen and the feasible region is split to two regions based on the branching constraints yj≤ ⌊ yj⌋ and yj≥ ⌈yj⌉ respectively. Such branching constraints are a special case of the more general approach where the constraintsπTy≤randπTy≥r+1are used. The importance of general branching disjunctions was first discussed in Lenstra (1983) who developed a polynomial time algorithm for general integer programs with a fixed number of variables. Lenstra’s algorithm uses the shape of the polyhedron to derive branching constraints in oblique directions. It was implemented in Cook, Rutherford, Scarf, and Shallcross (1993). Besides using general branching constraints, another major difference is that Lenstra’s algorithm generates several branches at a node of the branch-and-bound tree as opposed to two branches in classical branch-and-bound. A study of the complexity of Lenstra’s algorithm and the shape of the polyhedron is done in Vera and Derpich (2006). In the context of classical branching, Derpich and Vera (2006) also used the shape of the polyhedron to set priorities for branching and showed that it leads to a significant reduction in the number of nodes that need to be explored. Although using the shape of the polyhedron was shown to have theoretical and practical importance, methods for deriving generalized branching disjunctions focused on estimating the change in the objective function value rather than the shape of the feasible set. Particularly, Owen and Mehrotra (2001) developed a heuristic to derive general disjunctions where an approach similar to strong branching is used to set the variables’ coefficients in the disjunctions to{−1,0,1}. Although the proposed approach does not require basis reduction as in Lenstra’s algorithm and was shown to significantly reduce the number of branching, its main disadvantage is the need to solve two linear programs in order to fix the coefficient of each variable. In Mahajan and Ralphs (2009) model the problem of finding a general disjunction that maximizes the bound improvement as a mixed integer program and use a generic software for its solution. Computational experiments show a significant reduction in the number of branching nodes. The mixed integer program that is used to generate the disjunctions, however, isNP-hard and could be computationally expensive to solve in practice (Mahajan & Ralphs, 2010).Recent work by Mahmoud and Chinneck (2013) showed that general branching disjunctions can help reach feasible solutions quickly without sacrificing computational efficiency. This is achieved by heuristically constructing general disjunctions fast, and including them only if they are likely to help.Using the fact that the cutting planes that are used to generate valid inequalities can be used to generate branching disjunctions, Karamanov and Cornuéjols (2011) propose an approach that uses Gomory mixed integer valid inequalities as general disjunctions in branch-and-bound, while Cornuéjols, Liberti, and Nannicini (2011) uses reduce-and-split inequalities to improve the quality of the Gomory mixed integer disjunctions.In this paper, we present a new approach to generate branching disjunctions based on the shape of the polyhedron and the analytic center concept from interior-point methods (Sonnevend, 1988). At each node, the polyhedron is approximated using Dikin’s ellipsoid which is centered at the analytic center. We show that finding the minimum-width disjunction over the ellipsoid is equivalent to solving a quadratic problem. Since the solution of a quadratic problem at each node of the branch-and-bound tree is computationally expensive, we use an efficient neighborhood search heuristic for its solution. Furthermore, to make the approach more computationally tractable, we propose to use the approach in methods where the analytic center is readily available, such as in column generation where columns are generated at the analytic center (Elhedhli & Goffin, 2004) or Benders decomposition based on the analytic center (Naoum-Sawaya & Elhedhli, 2013). In such cases, the analytic center is calculated once and then used to generate columns/cuts and to derive branching disjunctions. In fact, this work complements previous work on the use of the analytic center and interior-point methods to solve integer programming problems. The concept of analytic center was first introduced in Sonnevend (1988) and then used in a cutting plane algorithm in Goffin, Haurie, and Vial (1992) and Goffin and Vial (2002). In Elhedhli and Goffin (2004), it was shown that interior-point methods enjoy the same benefits as simplex-based methods if incorporated within a column generation/Lagrangian relaxation scheme; and in Naoum-Sawaya (2014) and Naoum-Sawaya and Elhedhli (2011), it is shown how high quality feasible integer solutions are generated based on the analytic center. Furthermore as shown in Borchers and Mitchell (1991), Merle, Hansen, Jaumard, and Mladenovic (1999), Gondzio, Gonzalez-Brevis, and Munari (2013), and Munari and Gondzio (2013), there is growing evidence that the use of interior-point based methods in the context of branch-and-bound-and-cut offers advantages over the standard simplex approaches. In this work, we tackle another important component of branch-and-bound, that of branching. Furthermore, the proposed algorithm can be viewed as an extension of the approach of Derpich and Vera (2006) to general disjunctions where instead of branching on single variables as in Derpich and Vera (2006), the proposed approach uses more general branching disjunctions based on the shape of the polyhedron.We test the proposed interior-point based branching approach in three settings. First, we implemented a branch-and-bound algorithm in C and used it to compare the approach against strong branching on randomly generated instances and on multidimensional knapsack problems from the OR-Library as in Derpich and Vera (2006). The approach is found to explore 25 percent less nodes and reduce computational time by 18 percent. Second, the proposed approach is tested within Cplex on 54 instances of the MIPLIB library. It is found to clearly outperform Cplex’s default settings and to perform as well as Strong branching in terms of the number of nodes explored. The computational time, however, is significantly larger. Finally, the approach is implemented within a branch-and-bound setting that is entirely based on interior-point concepts, namely the analytic center-Benders-branch-and-cut method and is tested on the multicommodity capacitated fixed charge network design. It is found to explore 23 percent less nodes and to require 33 percent less computational time than classical branching, and to perform well on hard instances.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the main results of the paper related to the use of analytic center to derive general branching disjunctions. Section 3 discusses the use of the generalized branching approach in Benders-branch-and-cut. Computational results are provided in Section 4. Section 5 summarizes the paper and highlights future research.As the efficiency of branch-and-bound algorithms is often measured by the number of nodes solved to prove optimality, branching disjunctions are selected to minimize this criteria. In practice, however, estimating the number of nodes due to a particular branching disjunction is extremely hard. While the majority of research has focused on considering the bound improvement as an indicator on the quality of branching, in this paper we introduce a new approach based on approximating the shape of the polyhedron using Dikin’s ellipsoid and then finding the disjunction that minimizes the width over the ellipsoid. The rationale behind using the thin direction for branching was first established by Lenstra (1983) after observing that branch-and-bound algorithms require several levels of branching to prove the feasibility or infeasibility of thin polytopes.Following the same approach as in Derpich and Vera (2006) who showed evidence of correlation between the size of the axis of the ellipsoid and the width of the polyhedron, we use an inscribed ellipsoid to approximate the polyhedron at each node. Let us denote byPt={(y,s):ATy+s=c;s≥0}the polyhedron of the problem at node t of the branch-and-bound tree, which contain the branching constraints up to that node. For convenience, let us drop the subscript t. The analytic center of P is the point that maximizes the product of the distances from the boundaries of the polyhedron, i.e., the solution ofmax{∏i=0msi,ATy+s=c,s>0},which is equivalent tomax{∑i=0mlnsi,ATy+s=c,s>0}. It can be computed using Newton’s method (Elhedhli & Goffin, 2004; Ye, 1997). Given the analytic center(y¯,s¯)of P, the ellipsoidE={s:∥S¯−1(s−s¯)∥<1}={y:(y−y¯)T(AS¯−2AT)(y−y¯)<1},whereS=diag(s),is inscribed in P (Ye, 1997). See Fig. 1for an illustration.As discussed earlier, the aim is to find a branching disjunction based on the minimum width of the ellipsoidal approximation. For that, we define the ellipsoidal width w(P, v) of P in a direction v as the width of the ellipsoidal approximation of P in the direction v(2)w(P,v)=max{vTy:y∈E}−min{vTy:y∈E}whose solution is given by the following theorem.Theorem 1w(P,v)=maxy{vTy:y∈E}−miny{vTy:y∈E}=2vT(AS¯−2AT)−1vLet us writemax{vTy:y∈E}asmaxy{vTy:(y−y¯)T(AS¯−2AT)(y−y¯)<1},whose Lagrangian is given by(3)maxy,λ>0vTy+λ((y−y¯)T(AS¯−2AT)(y−y¯)−1).The derivatives with respect to y and λ are given by(4)v+2λ(AS¯−2AT)(y−y¯)=0(5)(y−y¯)T(AS¯−2AT)(y−y¯)=1whose solution is(6)(2λ)2=vT(AS¯−2AT)−1v.Taking the positive root for λ, leads to(7)ymax=y¯+1vT(AS¯−2AT)−1v(AS¯−2AT)−1v.The maximum objectivevTymaxis then(8)aTy¯+vT(AS¯−2AT)−1v.Similarly, the minimum objective corresponds to the negative root, which is(9)aTy¯−vT(AS¯−2AT)−1v.Therefore,(10)max{vTy:y∈E}−min{vTy:y∈E}=2vT(AS¯−2AT)−1v□Finding the vector v that minimizes the ellipsoidal width is equivalent to solving the convex quadratic program(11)minvvT(AS¯−2AT)−1v.Given v, a valid branching disjunction is derived. A disjunction is valid for branching if the optimal solution at the current node of the branch-and-bound tree is cut while the optimal integer solution of the problem remains feasible. Therefore, in this paper, we consider disjunctions of the form(12)πTy≤π0∨πTy≥π0+1whereπ∈{−1,0,1}nandπ0∈Z. Hence, the disjunction that minimizes the ellipsoidal width is the solution of(13)minππT(AS¯−2AT)−1π(14)s.t.π∈{−1,0,1}n,πj=0∀j∉J.Solving problems (13) and (14) to optimality at each node of the branch-and-bound tree is computationally intractable. For that, we use a neighborhood search heuristic.In this section, we introduce a neighborhood search algorithm that is inspired from Owen and Mehrotra (2001) to find branching disjunctionsπTy≤π0∨πTy≥π0+1that minimize the ellipsoidal widthπT(AS¯−2AT)−1π. The algorithm starts by sorting the variables according to an increasing order of the ellipsoidal width corresponding to the single-variable disjunction. Note that this is equivalent to sorting the variables according to the corresponding values in the diagonal of the square matrix(AS¯−2AT)−1. The algorithm first selects the minimum value single-variableπ¯disjunction and then attempts to find a better disjunction by flipping each elementπ¯ibetween+1,−1,and 0. A similar algorithm was used in Owen and Mehrotra (2001) to find general disjunctions that maximize the lower bound. A major difference however is that the approach of Owen and Mehrotra (2001) requires the solution of two linear programming relaxation when each element is flipped in contrast to the proposed approach which only requires the evaluation of the ellipsoidal widthπT(AS¯−2AT)−1π. The neighborhood search heuristic is outlined below:1.Initialization:1.1CalculateQ=(AS¯−2AT)−1.Let N denote the set of integer variables whose value in the current optimal solution is non integer, i.e.N={i|i∈J,y¯i∉Z}.Sort the variables in N in ascending order of the corresponding value in the diagonal of the matrix Q. Let n(j) denote the variable in position j of the sorted array.Initialize the disjunction asπ=en(1)where eiis a vector of all zeros with entry i set to 1.Forj=2;j≤|N|;j=j+12.1Letπ¯=πand setπ¯n(j)=1Ifπ¯T(AS¯−2AT)−1π¯≤πT(AS¯−2AT)−1πSetπ=π¯Letπ¯=πand setπ¯n(j)=−1Ifπ¯T(AS¯−2AT)−1π¯≤πT(AS¯−2AT)−1πSetπ=π¯Calculater=⌊πTx¯⌋and return the disjunctionsπTy≤r∨πTy≥r+1Although generalized branching has been shown to significantly reduce the size of branch-and-bound trees, the majority of the approaches discussed in the literature suffer from large computational burden limiting the use of generalized branching in practice. In the presented approach, the computational bottleneck lies in the calculation of the analytic center which favors the use of the proposed generalized branching scheme within solution methodologies where the analytic center is readily available. The Benders-branch-and-cut method introduced in Naoum-Sawaya and Elhedhli (2013) uses the analytic center to derive strong Benders inequalities within a branch-and-cut tree. Particularly, the Benders-branch-and-cut method solves the problem(15)mindTy+θ(16)s.t.A1Ty≤c1,(17)(c2−MTy)λ≤θλ∈HP,(18)(c2−MTy)μ≤0μ∈HR,(19)y≥0andinteger,where cuts (17) and (18) are generated inside a branch-and-cut scheme using the analytic center of the relaxation and HPand HRare the sets of extreme points and extreme rays of the Benders subproblem, respectively. Since the analytic center has been calculated and hence no additional computational effort is required, we propose to use it to derive generalized branching constraints rather than enforcing the integrality constraints using classical branching.In this section, we present computational results conducted on a Sunblade 2500 workstation with a 1.6 gigahertz processor and 2 gigabytes of RAM. We conduct three sets of testing. First, in order to evaluate the proposed generalized branching approach without the effect of preprocessing, heuristics, and cutting planes, we implement a pure branch-and-bound algorithm and conduct tests on randomly generated instances and on multidimensional knapsack problems as done in Derpich and Vera (2006). We then integrate the proposed branching approach in Cplex and conduct tests on general mixed integer problems from the MIPLIB library. Finally, we present results on the integration of the proposed generalized branching approach in Benders-branch-and-cut.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented a new approach to derive general branching disjunctions based on the shape of the polyhedron and the analytic center notion from interior-point methods. We use Dikin’s ellipsoid to find a disjunction that minimizes the width of the polyhedron. We formulated a quadratic program to find the minimum width disjunction and proposed a neighborhood search heuristic for its solution. We conducted computational experiments on general mixed integer problems using a pure branch-and-bound algorithm and using Cplex branch-and-bound-and-cut with all default features enabled. In a pure branch-and-bound method, the proposed approach outperforms strong branching. Using the Cplex branch-and-cut implementation, the proposed approach outperformed strong branching in 26 out of the 54 tested instances and outperformed Cplex default branching in 44 instances in terms of the number of nodes that are explored at the expense of taking longer computational time. Since the calculation of the analytic center is computationally expensive, the proposed branching approach is tested within and analytic center-Benders-branch-and-cut method where the analytic center is available, and is found to outperform classical branching. Exploring a hybrid branching rule that takes into account the shape of the polyhedron as well as other information such as the objective function coefficients and the effect on the resulting relaxation bounds as in strong branching is a promising future research direction.