@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Min–Max vs. Min–Sum Vehicle Routing: A worst-case analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study Min–Sum VRP (min total distance) and Min–Max VRP (min longest route).We compare the optimal costs from the worst-case point of view.We compare the structure of the optimal solutions in worst-case instances.We motivate the design of heuristic algorithms for the Min–Max VRP.We show that the Min–Max approach should be adopted only when it is well justified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicle Routing Problem,Min–Sum,Min–Max,Worst-case Analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The classical objective function of the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is to minimize the total distance traveled by all vehicles (Min–Sum). In several situations, such as disaster relief efforts, computer networks, and workload balance, the minimization of the longest route (Min–Max) is a better objective function. In this paper, we compare the optimal solution of several variants of the Min–Sum and the Min–Max VRP, from the worst-case point of view. Our aim is two-fold. First, we seek to motivate the design of heuristic, metaheuristic, and matheuristic algorithms for the Min–Max VRP, as even the optimal solution of the classical Min–Sum VRP can be very poor if used to solve the Min–Max VRP. Second, we aim to show that the Min–Max approach should be adopted only when it is well-justified, because the corresponding total distance can be very large with respect to the one obtained by optimally solving the classical Min–Sum VRP.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is the problem of determining a set of routes that visit a set of customers at minimum distance, where each route satisfies a capacity constraint. This problem is interesting both from the theoretical and the practical points of view. In fact, finding an optimal solution is really challenging and this problem is solved daily by companies worldwide. In the last 50years, numerous variants have been studied, including the case with one vehicle (Traveling Salesman Problem – TSP), the case with multiple uncapacitated vehicles (Multiple TSP – MTSP), and the more traditional case with several capacitated vehicles (Capacitated VRP – CVRP). The latter case, which was introduced in Dantzig and Ramser (1959), plays a central role in distribution management. The first exact algorithms for the CVRP were proposed by Christofides, Mingozzi, and Toth (1981a, 1981b). The best known exact algorithms are the ones proposed by Fukasawa et al. (2006) and Baldacci, Christofides, and Mingozzi (2008), Baldacci, Mingozzi, and Roberti (2011). For a recent survey on exact algorithms for the CVRP, we refer the reader to Baldacci, Mingozzi, and Roberti (2012). Although it is possible to optimally solve instances of the TSP with several thousands of customers, the CVRP remains very difficult to solve optimally, even if a few hundred customers are considered. Therefore, both heuristic and metaheuristic algorithms have been proposed for its solution. The most famous heuristic is the Savings algorithm by Clarke and Wright (1964). The best known metaheuristics are the Adaptive large neighborhood search by Pisinger and Ropke (2007) and the Hybrid genetic algorithm recently proposed by Vidal, Crainic, Gendreau, and Prins (2014). We refer to Toth and Vigo (2002) and Golden, Raghavan, and Wasil (2008) for two comprehensive books on the VRP and to Laporte, Toth, and Vigo (2013) for a recent overview of exact, heuristic, and metaheuristic approaches.The classical objective function of the VRP is the minimization of the total distance traveled by all vehicles (Min–Sum). In this paper, we also focus on the case in which the aim is to minimize the longest route (Min–Max). This new objective function is important in several situations. For example, in disaster relief efforts the aim is to serve all victims as soon as possible, in computer networks the aim is to minimize the maximum latency between a server and a client, in workload balance the aim is to balance the amount of work among drivers on a given day or across a time horizon. A limited number of papers is devoted to the Min–Max VRP. A tabu search algorithm is proposed in França, Gendreau, Laporte, and Müller (1995) for the Multiple TSP. Averbakh and Berman (1996) study the problem in which two salesmen must visit nodes on a tree. Applegate, Cook, Dash, and Rohe (2002) develop specialized cutting planes and a distributed search algorithm to solve the so-called Newspaper routing problem. Carlsson, Ge, Subramaniam, and Ye (2009) study the multi-depot case and propose an LP-based balancing approach and a region partition heuristic. Wang, Golden, and Wasil (2013) develop a three-phase heuristic able to significantly improve upon the LP-based balancing approach. Ren (2011) proposes a hybrid genetic algorithm. Yakici and Karasakal (2013) propose a heuristic approach for the case with split deliveries and heterogeneous demands. Campbell, Vandenbussche, and Hermann (2008) propose for the first time a comparison of the solutions obtained with alternative objective functions. They define Min–Max and Min–Sum in a different way: Min–Max aims at minimizing the arrival time to the latest customer and Min–Avg (or Min–Sum) aims at minimizing the average arrival time or, equivalently, the sum of the arrival times to the customers. The paper by Huang, Smilowitz, and Balcik (2012) extends this work by studying how alternative objectives, based on equity, efficiency, and efficacy metrics, influence the structure of the routes. The solutions obtained on the basis of the definitions of Min–Max and Min–Sum used in Campbell et al. (2008) can be very different from the ones obtained on the basis of our definition of Min–Max and Min–Sum. Consider for example the simpler TSP case. Our Min–Sum and Min–Max objectives are equivalent, while if the aim is to minimize the latest arrival, the routing can significantly differ. In fact, Campbell et al. (2008) show that the worst-case ratio between the total length of the route obtained by minimizing the latest arrival and the total length of the route obtained by minimizing the total length is 3/2.The length of the longest route in the Min–Sum VRP is not lower than the length of the longest route in the Min–Max VRP, while the total distance in the Min–Max VRP is not lower than the total distance in the Min–Sum VRP. Our aim is to consider several variants of the VRP. For each of these variants, we aim to answer the following questions:1.What is the ratio of the length of the longest route in the Min–Sum VRP to the length of the longest route in the Min–Max VRP, in the worst case?What is the ratio of the total distance of the Min–Max VRP to the total distance of the Min–Sum VRP, in the worst case?The answer to the first question tells us if minimizing the total distance can imply a significant increase in the length of the longest route. In that case, the design of heuristic, metaheuristic, and matheuristic algorithms for the Min–Max VRP is well-motivated. The answer to the second question tells us if minimizing the longest route can imply a significant increase in the total distance. In that case, this objective should be really well-justified to be adopted.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the variants of the VRP studied in the paper are formally described. In Section 3, the worst-case analysis concerning the Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles is shown. Section 4 focuses on the Capacitated VRP with a finite number of vehicles. Section 5 concerns the Multiple TSP. Section 6 focuses on the Service time VRP with a finite number of vehicles. Some conclusions are presented in Section 7.LetG(V,E)be a complete graph, whereV={0,1,…,n}is the set of vertices and E is the corresponding set of edges. Vertex 0 corresponds to the depot, while vertices1,2,…,ncorrespond to the customers. Each customer has to be served in full by one route (i.e., splitting of the demand is not allowed). Letcijbe the distance corresponding to the edge(i,j)∈E. We consider the following four variants of the VRP:1.Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles: Each customeri=1,2,…,nhas a demanddi>0not greater than the vehicle capacity C. An infinite fleet of vehicles is available.Capacitated VRP with a finite number of vehicles: Each customeri=1,2,…,nhas a demanddi>0not greater than the vehicle capacity C. At most k vehicles are available.Multiple TSP: The customers just have to be visited (i.e., no demand has to be satisfied). Each vehicle has infinite capacity. Exactly k routes have to be determined.Service time VRP with a finite number of vehicles: Distances are replaced by travel times. Customer demands are given in terms of service times. The duration of any route is the sum of travel time and service times of the customers visited by the route. At most k vehicles are available and there is no limit on the total load or duration of a route.In the Min–Sum VRP, the problem is to determine a set of routes that minimizes the total distance (or total time). Instead, in the Min–Max VRP, the problem is to determine a set of routes that minimizes the length (or duration) of the longest route.In the Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles, each customeri=1,2,…,nhas a demanddi>0not greater than the vehicle capacity C. An infinite fleet of vehicles is available.Let us denote byrMM∞the length of the longest route in the optimal solution of the Min–Max Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles and byrMS∞the length of the longest route in the optimal solution of the Min–Sum Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles.Theorem 1There exists an instance class with parameter∊such thatrMS∞rMM∞→∞for∊→∞.Let0⩽∊<1be a real number such that1∊is an integer. Consider the following instance class with parameter∊:•Single depot called node 0.Number of customers:n=1+1∊(nodes1,2,…,1+1∊).Vehicle capacity:C=1∊.Demand of customer 1:d1=1∊.Demand of customersi=2,3,…,n:di=∊.Depot to customer distances:c0i=1, fori=1,2,…,n.Customer to customer distances:cij=1-∊fori,j=1,2,…,n,i≠j.The corresponding optimal solutions are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b).An optimal solution of the Min–Sum Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles is the following: Serve customer 1 directly and all the remaining customers2,3,…,nin the same route. In fact, sinced1=Cand splitting of the demand is not allowed, customer 1 has to be served directly. Moreover, the length of the route serving customers2,3,…,nis1+(1-∊)(1∊-1)+1=1∊+∊. This length cannot be reduced by using more routes to serve these customers. In fact, let2⩽R⩽1∊(R integer) be the number of routes to serve these customers. The corresponding length is2R+(1-∊)(1∊-R), which is greater than1∊+∊forR⩾2. Therefore, the length of the longest route isrMS∞=1∊+∊.An optimal solution of the Min–Max Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles is the following: Serve each customer1,2,…,ndirectly. In fact, since customer 1 has to be served directly, a lower bound on the optimal length of the Min–Max VRP is given by the length of the route serving customer 1, that is 2. Since the solution in which each customer1,2,…,nis served directly has length equal to 2, this solution is optimal for the Min–Max Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles. Therefore, the length of the longest route isrMM∞=2.Hence, in this instance classrMS∞rMM∞=1∊+∊2→∞for∊→0.□Let us now denote byzMS∞the total distance in an optimal solution of the Min–Sum Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles and byzMM∞the total distance in an optimal solution of the Min–Max Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles.Theorem 2There exists an instance class with parameter∊such thatzMM∞zMS∞→∞for∊→∞.Let0⩽∊<1be a real number such that1∊is an integer. Consider the following instance class with parameter∊:•Single depot called node 0.Number of customers:n=1+1∊(nodes1,2,…,1+1∊).Vehicle capacity:C=1∊.Demand of customer 1:d1=1∊.Demand of customersi=2,3,…,n:di=∊.Depot to customer distances:c0i=1, fori=1,2,…,n.Customer to customer distances:cij=∊, fori,j=1,2,…,n,i≠j.The corresponding optimal solutions are shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b).An optimal solution of the Min–Max Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles is the following: Serve each customer1,2,…,ndirectly. In fact, sinced1=Cand splitting of the demand is not allowed, customer 1 has to be served directly. Therefore, a lower bound on the optimal length of the Min–Max Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles is given by the length of the route serving customer 1, that is 2. Since the solution in which each customer1,2,…,nis served directly has length equal to 2, this solution is optimal for the Min–Max Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles. Therefore, the optimal total distance iszMM∞=2n=2(1+1∊).An optimal solution of the Min–Sum Capacitated VRP with an infinite number of vehicles is the following: Serve customer 1 directly and all the remaining customers2,3,…,nin the same route. In fact, customer 1 has to be served directly. Moreover, the length of the route serving customers2,3,…,nis1+∊(1∊-1)+1=3-∊. This length cannot be reduced by using more routes to serve these customers. In fact, even the length of any solution having just two routes to serve these customers is at least 4. Therefore, the optimal total distance iszMS∞=5-∊.Hence, in this instance classzMM∞zMS∞=2(1+1∊)5-∊→∞for∊→0.□In Section 4.1, we develop Theorems 3 and 4 relating to the worst-case ratios of the Min–Sum and Min–Max solutions. In Section 4.2, we define route-optimal routing plans and extend Theorems 3 and 4. (We point out that route-optimal routing plans are used in proving Theorem 11.) We discover that the bounds apply not only to the ratios between the Min–Max and the Min–Sum solutions, but also to ratios between any route-optimal solution and the Min–Max or the Min–Sum solutions.In the Capacitated VRP with a finite number of vehicles, each customeri=1,2,…,nhas a demanddi>0not greater than the vehicle capacity C. At most k vehicles are available.Let us denote byrMMkthe length of the longest route in the Min–Max VRP solution,rMSkthe length of the longest route in the Min–Sum VRP solution,zMMkthe total distance of the Min–Max VRP solution, andzMSkthe total distance of the Min–Sum VRP solution.In this section, we want to extend what we know aboutrMM∞vs.rMS∞andzMM∞vs.zMS∞beyond Theorems 1 and 2, when we add the constraint that there are at most k vehicles available.Theorem 3rMSkrMMk⩽kand the bound is tight.rMSk⩽zMSk⩽zMMk⩽krMMk. A worst-case example is displayed in Example 3. Note that Theorem 3 reduces to Theorem 1 ask→∞. Consider the following instance class with parameter∊:•Single depot called node 0.2kcustomers:–k inner loop customers (nodes 1 to k)k outer loop customers (nodesk+1to2k).Vehicle capacity: C.Customer demand:di=C2ki=1,…,2k.Depot to customer distances:–inner loop:c0i=∊≪1i=1,…,kouter loop:c0,k+i=1+∊i=1,…,k.Customer to customer distances:–between inner customers:cij=∊i,j=1,…,k,i≠jbetween outer customers:ck+i,k+j=2+∊i,j=1,…,k,i≠jbetween inner and outer customers:ci,k+j=1ifi=j1+∊ifi≠j.The optimal solutions of the Min–Sum and the Min–Max VRP are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). The Min–Sum solution has a single route, serving the inner and outer customers alternatingly in a sequence1,k+1,2,k+2,…,k,2k. The Min–Sum solution has objectiverMSk=2k+(k+1)∊. The solution cannot be improved by using more routes. In fact, all the outer customers must be served on the same route. Suppose the customers are served on R routes with2⩽R⩽k(R integer). The length of these R routes is at least2R(1+∊)+(2+∊)(k-R)=2k+(k+R)∊>2k+(k+1)∊. If all the outer customers are served on a single route, this route has length at least2k+(k+1)∊. Hence, a lower bound on the Min–Sum solution is2k+(k+1)∊and the solution in Fig. 3(a) is optimal with respect to the Min–Sum objective.The Min–Max solution has k routes. Theithroute (i∈1,2,…,k) serves the inner customer i and the outer customeri+k. The Min–Max solution has objectiverMMk=2+2∊. In fact, in any feasible solution, the route serving at least one outer customer has length no less than2+2∊. Therefore, a lower bound on the optimal length of the Min–Max solution is2+2∊. Hence, the solution in Fig. 3(b) is optimal with respect to the Min–Max objective. SincerMSk=2k+(k+1)∊andrMMk=2+2∊, we have the relationshiprMSk=krMMk-(k-1)∊. Hence, in this instance classrMSkrMMk=krMMk-(k-1)∊rMMk→kfor∊→0.□Theorem 4zMMkzMSk⩽kand the bound is tight.zMMk⩽krMMk⩽krMSk⩽kzMSk. A worst-case example is displayed in Example 4. Note that Theorem 4 reduces to Theorem 2 ask→∞. Consider the following instance class with parameter∊:•Single depot called node 0.k customers (nodes 1 to k).Vehicle capacity: C.Customer demand:di=Cki=1,…,k.Depot to customer distances:c0i=1i=1,…,k.Customer to customer distancescij=∊≪1i,j=1,…,k,i≠j.The optimal solutions of the Min–Max and the Min–Sum VRPs are shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b). The Min–Max solution has objectivezMMk=2kand the Min–Sum solution has objectivezMSk=2+∊(k-1). The solution in Fig. 4(a) is optimal with respect to the Min–Max objective because any route serving at least one customer will have length at least 2. The solution in Fig. 4(b) is optimal with respect to the Min–Sum objective because a solution with R routes, where2⩽R⩽k(R integer), has length not less than2R+∊(k-R). For sufficiently small∊, this value is greater than2+∊(k-1). Therefore, we have the relationshipzMMk=kzMSk-∊k(k-1). Hence, in this instance classzMMkzMSk=kzMSk-∊k(k-1)zMSk→kfor∊→0.□A route-optimal routing plan is one in which every individual route in the plan is optimized in terms of total distance. Therefore, what differentiates two route-optimal routing plans is only the assignment of customers to the routes. The Min–Sum solution is obviously route-optimal. A Min–Max solution may not be route-optimal because, if we focus on only the maximal route, the other routes do not need to be optimal. However, among these Min–Max solutions, there is at least one route-optimal solution. We consider route-optimal Min–Max solutions in this paper.Let us denote withrMMkthe length of the longest route in the Min–Max solution,rMSkthe length of the longest route in the Min–Sum solution,rRkthe length of the longest route in any route-optimal solution,zMMkthe total distance of the Min–Max solution,zMSkthe total distance of the Min–Sum solution, andzRkthe total distance of any route-optimal solution.Theorem 5Assume the triangle inequality is valid, thenrRkrMMk⩽kand the bound is tight.Given a Min–Max solution with at most k routes, we traverse every route in a sequence. For example, as illustrated in Fig. 5, the Min–Max solution has two routes. Suppose route one is0-1-2-0and route two is0-3-4-0. The sequence is therefore0-1-2-0-3-4-0. The length of travel isL=zMMk. ThenrRk⩽L=zMMk⩽krMMk. The first inequality is valid because the maximal route of a route-optimal solution serves only a subset of the customers served by the giant route. By route-optimality and the triangle inequality,rRk⩽L. The bound is tight (see Example 3), since a Min–Sum solution is a route-optimal solution.□IfrRkis replaced byrMSk, Theorem 5 reduces to Theorem 3.Assume the triangle inequality is valid, thenzRkzMSk⩽kand the bound is tight.Given a Min–Sum solution with at most k routes, we traverse every route in a sequence in the same manner as in the proof of Theorem 5. The length of travel isL=zMSk. The length of each routeρin a route-optimal solutionrR(k,ρ)⩽L=zMSkbecause every route serves only a subset of the customers served by the giant route. By route-optimality and the triangle inequality, the above inequality holds. Therefore,zRk=∑ρ=1k′rR(k,ρ)⩽kL=kzMSk, wherek′⩽kindicates the actual number of routes in a solution. The bound is tight because the Min–Max solution in Example 4 is a route-optimal solution. So, we can use Example 4 as our worst-case example. □IfzRkis replaced byzMMk, Theorem 6 reduces to Theorem 4.The distances must satisfy the triangle inequality, otherwise the bounds in Theorems 5 and 6 may not hold. In fact, these ratios can be arbitrarily large, as shown in Example 5.There are four customers and at most two vehicles. We assume that the capacity of each vehicle is greater than the sum of demands of all the customers. The distance matrix is presented in Table 1. Observe that the triangle inequality is violated ifM>2. The solution displayed in Fig. 6(a) is optimal with respect to both the Min–Max and the Min–Sum objectives. Therefore,rMM2=3andzMS2=6. The solution shown in Fig. 6(b) is route-optimal andrR2=2+MandzR2=4+2M. The ratiorR2rMM2=zR2zMS2=2+M3can be made arbitrarily large for sufficiently big M.In the Multiple TSP, the customers just have to be visited (i.e., no demand has to be satisfied), the capacity of each vehicle is infinite, and exactlyk⩾2routes have to be determined.Let us denote byrMMMthe length of the longest route in the optimal solution of the Min–Max Multiple TSP,rMSMthe length of the longest route in the Min–Sum Multiple TSP,zMMMthe total distance in the optimal solution of the Min–Max Multiple TSP, andzMSMthe total distance in the optimal solution of the Min–Sum Multiple TSP.Theorem 7rMSMrMMM⩽kand the bound is tight.rMSM⩽zMSM⩽zMMM⩽krMMM. From Example 6, we see that the bound is tight. Consider the following instance class with parameter∊:•Number of routes:k⩾2.Single depot called node 0.Number of customers:2k-1(nodes1,2,…,2k-1).Depot to customer distances:c0i=1for customersi=1,2,…,k, whilec0i=∊2for customersi=k+1,k+2,…,2k-1, where∊<12(k-1).Customer to customer distances:cij=2-∊fori,j=1,2,…,k,i≠j, whileci,k+i=1-∊2fori=1,2,…,k-1. The remaining distances satisfy the triangle inequality.The corresponding optimal solutions are displayed in Fig. 7(a) and (b).An optimal solution of the Min–Sum Multiple TSP is as follows: Serve customersi=1,2,…,kin the same route and serve customersi=k+1,k+2,…,2k-1directly. The total distance of this solution is2+(2-∊)(k-1)+2∊2(k-1). This solution is optimal. In fact, since the triangle inequality holds, any solution in which the customersi=1,2,…,kare not served in the same route has a length at least equal to2R+(2-∊)(k-R), where2⩽R⩽k(R integer) is the number of routes built to serve these customers. Since∊<12(k-1),2R+(2-∊)(k-R)>2+(2-∊)(k-1)+2∊2(k-1). Therefore, in any optimal solution, customersi=1,2,…,kare served in the same route. Moreover, since k routes have to be built, customersi=k+1,k+2,…,2k-1have to be served directly. Therefore, the length of the longest route isrMSM=2+(2-∊)(k-1)=2k-∊(k-1).An optimal solution of the Min–Max Multiple TSP is as follows: Serve customers i andk+iin the same route, fori=1,2,…,k-1, and serve customer k directly. The length of the corresponding longest routerMMMis 2. This solution is optimal because any route serving one of the customersi=1,2,…,khas a length at least equal to 2.Hence, in this instance classrMSMrMMM=2k-∊(k-1)2→kfor∊→0.□zMMMzMSM⩽kand the bound is tight.zMMM⩽krMMM⩽krMSM⩽kzMSM. From Example 7, we see that the bound is tight. Consider the following instance class with parameter∊:•Number of routes:k⩾2.Single depot called node 0.Number of customers:2k-1(nodes1,2,…,2k-1).Depot to customer distances:c0i=1for customersi=1,2,…,k, whilec0i=∊for customersi=k+1,k+2,…,2k-1, where∊<23(k-1).Customer to customer distances:cij=∊fori,j=1,2,…,k,i≠j, whileci,k+i=1-∊fori=1,2,…,k-1. The remaining distances satisfy the triangle inequality.The corresponding optimal solutions are shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b).An optimal solution of the Min–Max Multiple TSP is as follows: Serve customers i andk+iin the same route, fori=1,2,…,k-1, and serve customer k directly. The length of the corresponding longest route is 2. This solution is optimal because any route serving one of the customersi=1,2,…,khas a length at least equal to 2. Therefore,zMMM=2k.An optimal solution of the Min–Sum Multiple TSP is as follows: Serve customersi=1,2,…,kin the same route and serve customersi=k+1,k+2,…,2k-1directly. The total distance of this solution is2+3∊(k-1)<4, as∊<23(k-1). This solution is optimal. In fact, any solution in which the customersi=1,2,…,kare not served in the same route has a total distance at least equal to 4, as at least two routes are needed to serve these customers and the length of each of these routes is at least equal to 2. Therefore, in any optimal solution, these customers are served in the same route. Moreover, since k routes are needed to have a feasible solution, customersi=k+1,k+2,…,2k-1have to be served directly.Hence, in this instance classzMMMzMSM=2k2+3∊(k-1)→kfor∊→0.□In this section, we introduce a variant of the VRP in which the customer demands are given in terms of service times. Therefore, the demands contribute directly to route duration. We replace distances with travel times, so the total duration of a route is the sum of travel time and service times of the customers visited by the route. We assume there are at most k routes and no limit on the duration of a route. Additional notation is introduced in Section 6.1. The goal is to compare the quality of the Min–Max and the Min–Sum solutions.This section is organized as follows. In Section 6.1, we discuss how and to what extent the routing of the Min–Sum and Min–Max solutions will change with the addition of customer service times. In Section 6.2, we explore whether the bounds for the ratios in Theorems 3 and 4 are still valid or tight when we include service times.Here, we provide some additional notation. Let T be the total service time of all the customers,zMMSbe the total duration of the Min–Max solution including travel and service times, andzMSSbe the total duration of the Min–Sum solution including travel and service times.Theorem 9Since no maximum route-duration constraint is assumed, the routing of the Min–Sum solution is unaffected by service times. Therefore,zMSS=zMSk+T.The routing of the Min–Max solution may, however, be affected by customer service times. We present three examples next. In Fig. 9, we see that the Min–Max routing plan may change by adding different service times for customers. In Fig. 10, we see that even with uniform service times, the Min–Max solution can change. In Fig. 11, we see that even when the original solution is perfectly balanced (same number of customers and same travel time on every route), the solution may still change with the addition of uniform service times. Therefore we havezMMS≠zMMk+Tin general.Example 8There are four customers and two routes. The travel time matrix is presented in Table 2. Assume a service time of 1 unit for customers 1 and 4 and service time of 3 units for customers 2 and 3. The Min–Max solutions without and with service times are displayed in Fig. 9(a) and (b). The travel times are labeled next to edges and the service times are labeled next to nodes. If the routing plan in Fig. 9(a) were used in the problem with service times, the Min–Max value would be 9. The Min–Max value of the routing plan in Fig. 9(b) is 8.There are four customers and two routes. The travel time matrix is presented in Table 3. Assume a uniform service time of 10 units. The Min–Max solutions without and with service times are displayed in Fig. 10(a) and (b). If the routing plan in Fig. 10(a) were used in the problem with service times, the Min–Max value would be 34. The Min–Max value of the routing plan in Fig. 10(b) is 26.There are six customers and two routes. The travel time matrix is presented in Table 4. Assume a uniform service time of 10 units. The Min–Max solutions without and with service times are displayed in Fig. 11(a) and (b). If the routing plan in Fig. 11(a) were used in the problem with service times, the Min–Max value would be 53. The Min–Max value of the routing plan in Fig. 11(b) is 45.In this subsection, we extend Theorems 3 and 4 to include nontrivial service times. LetrMSSbe the duration of the longest route in the Min–Sum solution,rMMSbe the duration of the longest route in the Min–Max solution, including travel and service times.Theorem 10When we consider service times,rMSSrMMS⩽kand the bound is tight.The inequality can be proved in the same way as with Theorem 3. To show that the bound is tight, we modify Example 3, which was used to prove Theorem 3, by considering a uniform service time of t units for each customer (see Example 11).The solution in Fig. 12(a) is optimal with respect to the Min–Sum objective by Theorem 6, sorMSS=2k+2kt+(k+1)∊. We now show that the solution in Fig. 12(b) is optimal with respect to the Min–Max objective. The duration of the maximal route is the sum of three parts, the travel time and the service times of inner and outer customers.•Service of the outer customers:The solution in Fig. 12(b) is feasible which gives the objective function value an upper bound of2+2t+2∊. Therefore, every route in the optimal solution could serve at most one outer customer. If a route serves two or more outer customers, the duration of that route is at least4+2t+3∊. Since there are k routes and k outer customers, each route serves exactly one outer customer. The service time contribution is exactly t for this one customer.Travel time:Given that a route serves one outer customer, its travel time is at least2+2∊.If any route serves two or more inner customers, its duration is at least2+3t+3∊and the solution is worse than the one in Fig. 12(b), so all routes serve exactly one inner customer in the optimal solution. The service time contribution from each inner customer is t.Summing the three parts, a lower bound on the Min–Max objective function value is2+2t+2∊and it is achieved by the solution in Fig. 12(b). Hence,rMMS=2+2t+2∊andrMSS=krMMS-(k-1)∊.Therefore, in this instance classrMSSrMMS=krMMS-(k-1)∊rMMS→kfor∊→0.□Assume the triangle inequality is valid, thenzMMS⩽kzMSS-(k-1)T, and the bound is tight.(1)zMMS=zRk+T(2)⩽kzMSk+T(3)=kzMSS-T+T(4)=kzMSS-(k-1)T.In Eq. (1), the total duration of the Min–Max solution is the sum of service times and travel time. We assume that the Min–Max solution is route-optimal (if not, we can apply to each individual route an exact algorithm to optimally solve the corresponding TSP), which allows us to apply Theorem 6, which states thatzRk⩽kzMSk, to obtain Eq. (2). From Theorem 9, we havezMSS=zMSk+T, which yields Eq. (3).To show that the bound is tight, we modify Example 4, which was used to prove Theorem 4, by considering a uniform service time oft=Tkunits for each customer (see Example 12).The optimal solutions of the Min–Max and the Min–Sum VRPs are shown in Fig. 13(a) and (b). The Min–Max solution has objectivezMMS=2k+Tand the Min–Sum solution has objectivezMSS=2+∊(k-1)+T. The solution in Fig. 13(a) is optimal with respect to the Min–Max objective because any route serving at least one customer will have duration at least2+t. The Min–Sum solution in Fig. 13(b) has the same configuration as that in Fig. 4(b) because the Min–Sum solution is independent of service time (Theorem 9). Therefore,zMMS=2k+T=k(2+∊(k-1)+T)-k∊(k-1)-(k-1)T=kzMSS-k∊(k-1)-(k-1)T. Hence, in this instance classzMMS→kzMSS-(k-1)Tfor∊→0.□Although the RHS of the inequality in Theorem 11 is written as a difference, it is never negative becausezMSS⩾T. In fact the RHS is at least equal to T.WhenT=0ork=1and the triangle inequality is valid, Theorem 11 reduces to Theorem 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
