@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Selecting green suppliers based on GSCM practices: Using fuzzy TOPSIS applied to a Brazilian electronics company

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A five phase methodology is proposed to select the suppliers based on green practices.Proposed a modified TOPSIS to deal with uncertainties in the decision making.Proposed TOPSIS methods outperforms the other methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Green supply chain management (GSCM),Green supplier selection,Fuzzy set theory,TOPSIS,Triangular fuzzy number,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to an increased awareness and significant environmental pressures from various stakeholders, companies have begun to realize the significance of incorporating green practices into their daily activities. This paper proposes a framework using Fuzzy TOPSIS to select green suppliers for a Brazilian electronics company; our framework is built on the criteria of green supply chain management (GSCM) practices. An empirical analysis is made, and the data are collected from a set of 12 available suppliers. We use a fuzzy TOPSIS approach to rank the suppliers, and the results of the proposed framework are compared with the ranks obtained by both the geometric mean and the graded mean methods of fuzzy TOPSIS methodology. Then a Spearman rank correlation coefficient is used to find the statistical difference between the ranks obtained by the three methods. Finally, a sensitivity analysis has been performed to examine the influence of the preferences given by the decision makers for the chosen GSCM practices on the selection of green suppliers. Results indicate that the four dominant criteria are Commitment of senior management to GSCM; Product designs that reduce, reuse, recycle, or reclaim materials, components, or energy; Compliance with legal environmental requirements and auditing programs; and Product designs that avoid or reduce toxic or hazardous material use.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Environmental issues are no longer a concern only for environmental experts; environmental awareness affects almost all parts of our society and it is a special concern for our industrial sectors (Sarkis, 1998; Hart & Dowell, 2011). Companies and their decision makers must consider environmental issues in all of their administrative activities (Marcus & Fremeth, 2009), including the role of the supply chain (Linton, Klassen, & Jayaraman, 2007) and the firms’ selection of suppliers (Genovese, Lenny Koh, Bruno, & Esposito, 2013). One of the most important and difficult decisions in supplier selection process is the commitment to environmental causes (Dekker, Bloemhof, & Mallidis, 2012). Thus, the process for supplier selection creates a new research area known as green supplier selection, and this area has many research gaps still to be explored (Kumar, Jain, & Kumar, 2014). Green supplier selection should be considered important when companies are looking for greener supply chain management, including, for example, remanufacturing targets (Xiong, Zhou, Li, & Chan, 2013).Several environmental criteria may be emphasized when selecting the most environmentally friendly suppliers (Dekker et al., 2012). For example, several studies have suggested that the supplier selection can be based on the criteria related to environmental practices (Humphreys, Wong, & Chan, 2003) or to hazardous material management (Hsu & Hu, 2009). Other studies address social, economic, and environmental sustainability practices as the criteria for the supplier selection (Govindan, Khodaverdi, & Jafarian, 2013) in the context of more sustainable supply chains (Seuring, 2013). However, the best manner by which a firm might select suppliers based on their GSCM reputation is still a missing link in the literature.Hence, studies that propose supplier selection based on the supplier’s adoption of Green Supply Chain Management (GSCM) practices, a modern environmental sustainability concept, is still to be done. GSCM offers an expanded perspective on environmental management that considers practices adopted both inside and outside the company (Ageron, Gunasekaran, & Spalanzani, 2012), and this approach can generate more business opportunities for firms (Wang & Chan, 2013). In addition, although studies on supplier selection based on environmental criteria in many national contexts are available (Baskaran, Nachiappan, & Rahman, 2012; Large & Thomsen, 2011), proposals that consider the realities of the developing countries – mainly the BRICs countries – are still scarce and deserve more attention from researchers. For example, in 2010, Brazil formulated new environmental legislation called the National Solid Waste Policy. This new legislation requires firms and municipalities to adopt proactive green management values and practices, and companies are feeling pressured to enact these environmentally sensitive practices in a timely manner (Jabbour, Jabbour, Sarkis, & Govindan, 2013a).Suppliers that adopt GSCM practices may encourage improved environmental performance throughout the entire supply chain (Genovese et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2014). Advances in creating novel supplier selection approaches as part of applying GSCM may help companies to address continuing challenges in the green supplier selection process and thus to improve their environmental performance (Handfield, Walton, Sroufe, & Melnyk, 2002). Clearly, a company’s environmental management performance level is highly correlated with its adoption of green supplier selection practices (Jabbour & Jabbour, 2009). In this context, many quantitative approaches have been proposed to facilitate the green supplier selection process more efficiently. For example, researchers have proposed the application of Green Data Envelopment Analysis (Kumar et al., 2014), hierarchical fuzzy TOPSIS approach (Wang & Chan, 2013), and other methodologies, such as life cycle assessment, multi-criteria decision making, and analytical hierarchy process (Seuring, 2013).No current research discusses how companies might use GSCM practices as criteria by which to select green suppliers. Within this context, a primary concern of the present study is to explore how a company can select green suppliers who employ GSCM practices based on a fuzzy approach. The aim of the article is to select the green suppliers based on the GSCM practices using the fuzzy TOPSIS approach. Additionally, this research discusses the case of a Brazilian company operating in an electronic sector. Brazil is an emerging country which belongs to the BRICS group; Brazil is also responsible for about 35% of all the Latin America GDP (European Commission, 2007), which certainly attracts the attention of many international economic players. Further, systematic searches – using the words “green supply chain,” “supplier selection,” “green,” “environmental,” or “green practices” – conducted in the ISI Web of Knowledge database during 2012 and 2013 showed no similar research to this proposal.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
