@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Timing and eco(nomic) efficiency of climate-friendly investments in supply chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze the timing decision of a company which can invest in a CO2-saving project.Doing this, we use a real options game-theoretic model.Total emission of the supply chain increases with carbon price uncertainty.Furthermore, inefficiency increases with the length of the supply chain.Cooperation and vertical integration improve ecologic as well as economic efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Emission trading,Optimal investment timing,Real options,Game theory,Supply chain management,Eco-efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Emission trading schemes such as the European Union Emissions Trading System (EUETS) attempt to reconcile economic efficiency with ecological efficiency by creating financial incentives for companies to invest in climate-friendly innovations. Using real options methodology, we demonstrate that under uncertainty, economic and ecological efficiency continue to be mutually exclusive. This problem is even worse if a climate-friendly project depends on investing in of a whole supply chain. We model a sequential bargaining game in a supply chain where the parties negotiate over implementation of a carbon dioxide (CO2) saving investment project. We show that the outcome of their bargaining is not economically efficient and even less ecologically efficient. Furthermore, we show that a supply chain becomes less economically efficient and less ecologically efficient with every additional chain link. Finally, we make recommendations for how managers or politicians can improve the situation and thereby increase economic as well as ecological efficiency and thus also the eco-efficiency of supply chains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The emission of greenhouse gases (GHG), for example, CO2, NOx, or CH4, has been identified as a key driver of global warming. As global warming is expected to have fatal consequences at economic, ecologic, and social levels, it is necessary to reduce GHG emissions so as to prevent or at least reduce global warming. To date, several companies and states have set themselves the goal of reducing their own CO2 emissions. For example, Wal-Mart recently announced its goal to eliminate 20 million metric tons of GHG emissions from its global supply chain by 2015 and the U.S. retailer Tesco plans to have its carbon–neutral supply chain in place by 2050 (Caro, Corbett, Tan, & Zuidwijk, 2011). Moreover, some firms explicitly attempt to offset not only their own emissions but also the emissions from all other firms involved in the supply chain.1For example, the Brazilian company Natura Cosméticos has a zero-emission strategy and offsets not only its own emissions, but also any remaining emissions of all supply chain participants (Caro et al., 2011).1The concept of eco-efficiency as an operational measure allows reporting a supply chain’s economic performance per unit of environmental impact and thus makes it possible to compare companies and entire supply chains (Schaltegger, 1998). For example, the British low-cost-carrier EasyJet has successfully increased its eco-efficiency from 8.9 passenger-kilometers per emitted kilogram of CO2 in 2001 to 11.8 passenger-kilometers per emitted kilogram of CO2 in 2010.2http://2011annualreport.easyjet.com/corporate-responsibility/environment.aspx.2Nevertheless, its Irish competitior Ryanair still shows a higher eco-efficiency of approximately 13.8 passenger kilometers per emitted kilogram of CO2.3http://www.ryanair.com/doc/about/ryanair_brighter_planet_2011.pdf.3However, such proactive environmental awareness is rare and predominately driven by the threat of being punished by either customers or the government. Most companies need direct financial incentives to invest in climate-friendly projects. To this end, governments use different environmental policies, for example, cap-and-trade systems like the European Union Emission Trading System (EUETS) or environmental taxes to induce firms to mitigate emissions and thus improve their eco-efficiency.The above examples make it abundantly clear that greening the supply chain is only possible through the joint efforts by multiple parties, rather than by single companies. Presently, however, there is a lack of in-depth research on two highly pertinent issues. First, when do firms optimally invest in emission mitigating strategies given uncertainty in emission allowance prices? And, second, how is timing affected by the structure of the supply chain?The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of related literature in the field of supply chain management and game theory with particular focus on real options. Section 3 presents an n-echelon supply chain model under the assumption that the costs saved by investing in a CO2 saving project are proportional to a random spot price for emission allowances and that investment timing is the result of a sequential bargaining game. Section 4 summarizes the numerical results of the comparative-static analysis; Section 5 discusses possible coordination policies that can further improve the economic and ecological efficiency of the supply chain. Section 6 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
