@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Locating series FACTS devices for multi-objective congestion management improving voltage and transient stability

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Locating FACTS devices by conventional methods makes power systems vulnerable.The proposed multi-objective method gives an economical and robust solution.Multi-objective method proposes a different TCSC location with more efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple objective programming,Congestion management,FACTS devices,Electricity markets,Power system stability margin,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Transmission congestion management is a vital task in electricity markets. Series FACTS devices can be used as effective tools to relieve congestion mostly employing Optimal Power Flow based methods, in which total cost as the objective function is minimized. However, power system stability may be deteriorated after relieving congestion using traditional methods leading to a vulnerable power system against disturbances. In this paper, a multi-objective framework is proposed for congestion management where three competing objective functions including total operating cost, voltage and transient stability margins are simultaneously optimized. This leads to an economical and robust operating point where enough levels of voltage and transient security are included. The proposed method optimally locates and sizes series FACTS devices on the most congested branches determined by a priority list based on Locational Marginal Prices. Individual sets of Pareto solutions, resulted from solving multi-objective congestion management for each location of FACTS devices, are merged together to create the comprehensive Pareto set. Results of testing the proposed method on the well-known New-England test system are discussed in details and confirm efficiency of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In today’s competitive electricity markets, generators compete to sell more power and consumers try to buy the most economical energy for more profit. However, the transmission network, as a medium between power generation and consumption centers, has a limited capacity as well as its own security concerns. Congestion in electricity markets occurs when the transmission network is unable to accommodate all of market desired transactions due to some violations in its operating limits (Shahidehpour & Almoush, 2001). Congestion in electricity markets, if not controlled, can lead to market power (Anderson & Cau, 2011) and oligopoly (Pineau, Rasata, & Zaccour, 2011). Congestion management, the action of controlling the transmission system to observe its transfer limits, is perhaps the fundamental transmission management problem (Christie, Wollenberg, & Wangensteen, 2000). Then, System Operator (SO), which is the responsible agency to keep the electricity market competitive and secure, should mitigate congestion using available facilities and/or market-based tools.For congestion management purposes, some facilities such as phase shifting transformers or Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS) devices can be used to efficiently enhance existing transmission networks by increasing power transfer capacity as an effective alternative to constructing new transmission lines. How much and where to install the FACTS devices has been interesting for power system operators to enhance reliability and capacity of power systems and this issue is previously investigated by researchers from different aspects. Methods based on Optimal Power Flow (OPF) (Soler, de Sousa, & da Costa, 2012), as a nonlinear large-scale optimization problem, arguably provide the most efficient solutions in locating and sizing of FACTS devices. Authors in (Besharat & Taher, 2008) presented a method to find optimal locations of Thyristor Controlled Series Compensators (TCSCs) in congestion management. The method, which uses the real power performance index, minimizes reactive power losses of the power system. In (Kumar & Sekhar, 2013), authors compared the performance of Sen Transformer (ST) with Unified Power Flow Controllers (UPFC) in performing congestion management in hybrid markets. Also, the optimal locations of ST and UPFC are obtained through a Mixed-Integer Nonlinear programming problem. In (Ya-Chin, Rung-Fang, Tsun-Yu, & Chan-Nan, 2011), an ordinal optimization technique is used to solve the problem of finding the best locations of Static Var Compensators (SVCs) and TCSCs so that power system loadability is enhanced. In (Acharya & Mithulananthan, 2007), authors proposed a method based on Locational Marginal Prices (LMPs) to locate FACTS devices. The method uses the economic signals of LMP to find the best branches to install FACTS devices. It is worthwhile to note that power system stability concerns are not considered in the above mentioned works. After mitigating congestion, power systems are usually operated at their stability limits due to the maximum usage of transmission facilities to gain more profit in the electricity market. Such a power system can be highly vulnerable against disturbances. Therefore, it is mandatory to relieve congestion so that enough levels of power system security are preserved after congestion management.On the other hand, considerable research is conducted to use FACTS devices in order to improve voltage or transient security of power systems. Security can be enhanced by locating FACTS devices in a way that enough stability margins are ensured. It is the responsibility of SO to manage congestion fairly and make policies by encouraging investors to install FACTS devices in congested areas in order to remove congestion in long term. In (Haque, 2008), the first swing stability of power systems with the presence of FACTS devices is evaluated using time domain simulations and a strategy is proposed to adjust the parameters of FACTS devices in order to increase the Critical Clearing Time (CCT) of faults. Also, authors in (Zamora-Cárdenas & Fuerte-Esquivel, 2010) proposed the optimal placement of series FACTS devices with the aim of providing enough level of transient security. CCT is used as an index of proximity to transient instability.The literature works consider only just one of voltage stability or transient stability concerns in the locating and sizing of FACTS devices. However, the other stability margin may be deteriorated while the first stability margin is optimized. Such a power system is vulnerable against disturbances. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance both voltage and transient stability margins simultaneously in determining the location and size of FACTS devices. To the best of knowledge of authors of this paper, there is a research gap to simultaneously improve both objective functions of voltage and transient stability in locating and sizing of FACTS devices. Multi-objective Mathematical Programming (MMP) is an efficient method when there is more than one objective function to be optimized. In MMP problems, there is no single optimal solution that optimizes all of objective functions (Mavrotas, 2009). In such problems, the concept of optimality is replaced with efficiency or Pareto optimality (Zio & Bazzo, 2011). Efficient (or Pareto, non-dominated, non-inferior) optimal solutions are ones that cannot be improved in one objective function without deteriorating at least one of the other objective functions. Among MMP techniques, ε-constraint methods offer several advantages over weighting methods (Mavrotas, 2009). In ε-constraint methods, a decision maker picks up the most preferred Pareto solution among the obtained efficient Pareto solutions. Among ε-constraint methods, the modified augmented ε-constraint (Esmaili, Amjady, & Shayanfar, 2011a) gives more efficient Pareto solutions than others.Considering the above mentioned literature review, the contribution of this paper is to present a framework for locating and sizing of FACTS devices enhancing both voltage and transient stability margins using the modified augmented ε-constraint method as discussed above. Recent trends of electricity markets have intensified stresses in power systems and they are operating near stability limits because of being pushed by generators and demands for more profit. In previous works such as (Acharya & Mithulananthan, 2007), series FACTS devices are located using a single objective optimization problem for congestion management. However, our proposed method here offers three competing objective functions. The first one is the total operating cost of power system as the main objective function which should be minimized in an electricity market. The second and third objective functions are the voltage and transient stability margins, respectively, both of which are maximized. The well-known indices of Voltage Stability Margin (VSM) (Amjady & Esmaili, 2003) and Corrected Transient Stability Margin (CTEM) (Da-Zhong, Chung, Yao, & Wennan, 2000) are employed in this paper as the voltage and transient stability margins, respectively. It is noted that we could integrate stability limits into the single objective method as constraints of VSM⩾VSMdesiredand CTEM⩾CTEMdesired, where VSMdesiredand CTEMdesiredare the desired values of stability margins. Although this type of modeling is easier, choosing appropriate values for the desired thresholds is controversial: if we choose low desired stability values, we lose the advantage of having a more secure system; if we choose a high desired stability values, the solution space of the optimization problem may vanish and the problem cannot be solved. As a result, it is controversial to consider stability limits as constraints. However, using the proposed framework, it is ensured to establish enough levels of voltage and transient security after installing FACTS devices. Although in this paper TCSC is considered as a series FACTS device to be optimally located and sized, the proposed multi-objective optimization can be easily extended to find the optimal location and size of any other FACTS devices. After locating the FACTS devices at the most congested branches and solving its optimization problem using the modified augmented ε-constraint method, its Pareto solution set is obtained and added to the comprehensive Pareto solution set. Finally, the best Pareto solution among the comprehensive Pareto set is selected by a fuzzy decision maker. This achieves a more efficient solution than selecting the best of each individual Pareto set.It should be noted that the multi-objective method proposed here for optimal placement of TCSCs consideres only a single snapshot of the power system with an individual load level. However, the load level varies in real applications over different times. Then, the proposed OPF should be extended to a muti-period OPF taking into account the variation of load level over the span of planning horizon probably considering power system uncertainties (Capitanescu, Fliscounakis, Panciatici, & Wehenkel, 2012). In this paper, the extension is not done in order to keep the paper length sensible. In addition, congestion can be resulted from either stability constraints (usually happens in sparsely meshed longer lines with higher impedances) or thermal constraints (usually happens in densely meshed shorter lines with lower impedances). The most limiting constraint (stability or thermal) will determine the line operational limit. Most real systems have in fact a combination of both types of lines. The main focus of this paper is on long lines with stability problems and higher impedances, which can be compensated by installing a series FACTS device.In case of no congestion in a pool electricity market, spot prices (Oliveira, Ruiz, & Conejo, 2013) of electric energy at all buses are equal to Market Clearing Price (MCP). However, in case of congestion in the market, the LMP in each bus may differ. The difference between LMPs of two terminal buses of a branch can be a measure of congestion on that branch. In other words, a larger LMP difference in terminals of a branch means a high level of congestion (this claim is confirmed below mathematically). Thus, the LMP difference can be used to find the most congested branches as the best locations to install series FACTS devices to improve the transfer capability of the most congested branches. It is noted that bus LMPs are a byproduct of the OPF optimization solution and they are determined after solving the OPF. The spot or nodal price of each bus (ρi) is composed of three components (Acharya & Mithulananthan, 2007): the marginal energy component (λ), the marginal loss component (λLoss,i), and the marginal congestion component (λCon,i) as follows:(1)ρi=λ+λLoss,i+λCon,iwhere λ is the marginal energy component at the reference bus and it is the same for all buses. Then, nodal price differences between two buses across branch i–j can be written as:(2)ρij=ρi-ρj=(λLoss,i-λLoss,j)+(λCon,i-λCon,j)For a power system, the loss component of spot prices has about similar values for all buses compared with the congestion component. Then, the first term of differences in Eq. (2) is negligible. By this assumption, the LMP difference between two buses in an electricity market can be treated as the difference of marginal congestion components. This confirms the fact that the LMP difference across a branch indicates the congestion level of that branch. As a result, branches with higher LMP differences can be assumed more congested and all branches can be sorted from congestion level point of view. The most preferred branches to locate series FACTS device are ones with the higher level of congestion: we get more benefit by installing the same FACTS device at a more congested branch. This can be used to construct a priority list of branches to locate the series FACTS device to mitigate congestion. It is noted that branches connected to a generator bus are omitted from this priority list because of Sub Synchronous Resonance (SSR) problems. Also, branches with capacitive currents are also omitted from this priority list because the series FACTS device cannot relieve congestion in such branches.Different models can be used for TCSC as a series FACTS device depending on the application and study. In steady state applications, TCSC can be simply presented as a variable static capacitor between buses i and j as shown in Fig. 1, where Zijand jBshrepresent the series and shunt impedance of the transmission line, respectively, and −jxcrepresents the TCSC capacitive reactance. This type of modeling TCSC for steady state purposes is prevalent and is also used by previous papers like (Ya-Chin et al., 2011).In fact, locating TCSC along a transmission line changes the related entries in the network admittance matrix. However, some techniques are available to model TCSC without altering the original admittance matrix. One of the models, widely used in steady state applications of TCSC, is the power injection model (Ying, Song, & Sun, 2002), where the effect of TCSC is reflected as power injections at terminal buses of i and j between which the TCSC are located. The power injection caused by TCSC can be yielded by differentiating power injections to buses i and j in the two cases with and without TCSC. Consequently, the TCSC in the power injection model is represented by four injected powers (Ying et al., 2002) as follows:(3)PiTCSC=|Vi|2ΔGij-|Vi||Vj|[ΔGijcos(δi-δj)+ΔBijsin(δi-δj)](4)QiTCSC=-|Vi|2ΔBij-|Vi||Vj|[ΔGijsin(δi-δj)-ΔBijcos(δi-δj)](5)PjTCSC=|Vj|2ΔGij-|Vi||Vj|[ΔGijcos(δi-δj)-ΔBijsin(δi-δj)](6)QjTCSC=-|Vj|2ΔBij+|Vi||Vj|[ΔGijsin(δi-δj)+ΔBijcos(δi-δj)]wherePiTCSC,QiTCSC,PjTCSC, andQjTCSCare power injections (positive or negative) due to installing the TCSC in branch i–j. Also, |Vi|, δi, |Vj|, and δjare voltage magnitudes and phases of buses i and j. ΔGijand ΔBijdepend on TCSC reactance and are given as:(7)ΔGij=xcrij(xc-2xij)rij2+xij2rij2+(xij-xc)2(8)ΔBij=-xc(rij2-xij2+xcxij)rij2+xij2rij2+(xij-xc)2where rijand xijrepresent the resistance and reactance of the branch, respectively, on which the TCSC is located. The optimal value of xcis determined by the congestion management problem. Using the power injection model, the original lumped π equivalent circuit (before installing TCSC) of the transmission branch i–j can be modified as Fig. 2with added equivalent power injections resulted from TCSC.In this section, first, the mathematical formulation of proposed multi-objective congestion management is presented. Then, the modified augmented ε-constraint is briefly reviewed as an efficient tool to solve the proposed multi-objective congestion management and to produce individual efficient Pareto solution sets, which make up the comprehensive Pareto set. Finally, the most preferred Pareto solution is picked up by a fuzzy decision maker as the final solution of the multi-objective problem. The overall algorithm of the proposed framework is shown in Fig. 3. The constructing of priority list in the proposed algorithm to locate TCSC is previously described in Section 2.1 and the other steps are explained in the subsequent subsections.The step-by-step algorithm of the proposed multi-objective congestion management using TCSCs is as follows:1.Run a single-objective OPF for market-clearing to determine the most economical operating point of the electricity market and LMPs of buses without any TCSC.Calculate VSM and CTEM at the base case (VSM0 and CTEM0) and their sensitivities to be used in (15) and (23).Identify the most congested branches with higher LMP differences using (2) as best locations to locate TCSCs.Locate a TCSC at the first most congested branch (i=1).Run the proposed multi-objective congestion management using objective functions of f1, f2, and f3 as defined by (9), (15), and (23) and constraints of (3)–(8), (14), (22), and (24)–(40). In this step, the set of Pareto solutions corresponding to TCSC on branch i is obtained by employing the modified augmented ε-constraint technique presented in Section 3.2.Add the feasible Pareto solutions to the comprehensive Pareto set. Each Pareto solution is a potential solution to the congestion management problem and has its optimal cost, VSM, CTEM, and TCSC value.Select the next most congested branch as determined in step 3 and locate a TCSC on this branch. Run steps 5–6 for all branches determined in step 3.For each Pareto solution in the comprehensive Pareto set, calculate the membership of each objective function and the overall membership of the Pareto solution using (42)–(44).Pick up the Pareto solution with highest overall membership as the best Pareto solution and as the solution to our MMP problem. This Pareto solution is the most preferred one with the given weighting factors for objective functions.The proposed multi-objective framework for congestion management has three competing objective functions subject to a set of power system constraints. The first one as the main objective function (f1) is the total operating cost of the power system. The second and third objective functions (f2 and f3) are the well-known stability indices of VSM and CTEM, respectively. The proposed multi-objective congestion management minimizes the cost and maximizes VSM and CTEM to enhance the stability of the power system. It is worthwhile to note that enhancing VSM and CTEM in the proposed method ensures that the obtained solution after congestion management be a secure operating point. Consequently, the proposed multi-objective optimization makes the power system more robust against disturbances and consequently makes keep low the rate of blackouts.The total operating cost of the electricity market is given by:(9)Minimizef1=∑k∈SGCGk(PGk)-∑k∈SDBDk(PDk)where CGkand BDkrepresent the bid curve of generator k and benefit curve of demand k, respectively. Also SG and SD are the set of participating generators and demands in the market, respectively. The bid curve of generators and benefit curve of demands are usually considered as quadratic functions (Kalczynski, 2012).In order to make the power system robust against voltage related disturbances, it is necessary to maintain an adequate level of voltage security after congestion management. VSM is used here to measure voltage security. This index is briefly reviewed here for self-sufficiency of this paper, but readers are referred to (Amjady & Esmaili, 2003) for more detailed information. Continuation Power Flow (CPF), which is widely used in voltage stability studies, is applied here as a tool for voltage stability bifurcation analysis in the load domain. In CPF, loads and generations are increased by the loading parameter of λ as:(10)PD=PD(BC)+λ·PDstep(11)QD=QD(BC)+λ·QDstep(12)PG=PG(BC)+(λ+kG)·PGstepwhere PD(BC), QD(BC), and PG(BC) are powers of loads and generators at the base case and PDstep, QDstep, and PGstepare generator and load power increments. The loading parameter of λ multiplies generator and load increments. KGbalances network losses when load and generation are increased. The maximum value of the loading parameter form the base case up to the Saddle Node Bifurcation (SNB) point represents the VSM and employed here as the voltage stability index. In this paper, the VSM is normalized by the base case load and expressed in percent.VSM can be written as a function of decision variables of the congestion management problem:(13)VSM=f(PDk,QDk)where PDkand QDkare active and reactive power consumption of demand k, respectively. In voltage stability studies, PDkand QDkare usually elevated with a constant power factor (Esmaili, Amjady, & Shayanfar, 2011b) by CPF. Therefore, we can say that variables of PDkand QDkare dependent and thus the VSM can be assumed as a function of only demand reactive power QDk. To derive the sensitivity of VSM with respect to reactive power of demands, the linear approximation from Taylor series around the base case point (before installing TCSC) is applied here. It is worthwhile to note that this linear approximation remains valid only if VSM changes linearly in the given range around the base case operating point. The linearity of VSM in a given range is confirmed in our previous works (Esmaili et al., 2011b). Consequently, the VSM deviation from the base case after congestion management can be expressed as:(14)ΔVSM≅-∂VSM∂QDiQiTCSC-∂VSM∂QDjQjTCSC+∑k∈SD∂VSM∂QDkΔQDkwhere buses i and j are the two terminal buses of the branch where the TCSC is installed.QiTCSCandQjTCSCare reactive powers injected to buses due to installing TCSC as depicted in Fig. 2. Therefore, their terms in (14) appear with a negative sign since the sensitivities are those of loads that are withdrawn from buses. Also, in view of the fact that active power variations have a little effect on VSM (Esmaili et al., 2011b), the effect of active powers injected by TCSC is ignored in (14). Therefore, the final VSM after congestion management is given by:(15)f2=VSM=VSM0+ΔVSMwhere VSM0 is the VSM value in the base case. f2 is the second objective function that is maximized in the proposed multi-objective framework. Indeed, the proposed MMP problem optimizes reactive powers of TCSC and demands so that VSM is improved.In order to make the power system able to withstand against credible faults and transient stability disturbances, an enough level of transient security should be provided after congestion management. In order to measure transient security in the proposed congestion management framework, CTEM (Da-Zhong et al., 2000) as a well-established and linear transient stability index is employed here. This index is briefly reviewed here but readers are referred to (Da-Zhong et al., 2000) for more detailed formulation. After occurring a fault, generators are divided into two sets. The motion between the set of advanced generators A and the set of non-advanced generators B with respect to Center Of Inertia (COI) can be written as:(16)Meqω̇AB=MeqMA∑i=1nA(Pmi-Pei)-MeqMB∑i=1nB(Pmi-Pei)≡PABwhere:(17)αA=∑i=1nAMiαi/MA,αB=∑i=1nBMiαi/MB,αAB=αA-αB(18)ωA=∑i=1nAMiωi/MA,ωB=∑i=1nBMiωi/MB,ωAB=ωA-ωB(19)MA=∑i=1nAMi,MB=∑i=1nBMi,Meq=MAMB/(MA+MB)whereMi: Inertia constant of machine i.ωi: Speed of machine i with respect to COI.αi: Angle of machine i with respect to COI.Pmi: Mechanical power input of machine i.Pei: Electrical power output of machine i.As shown above, ωABand αABare the speed and angle difference between two sets of advanced and non-advanced generators, respectively. Also, Corrected Transient Kinetic Energy (CTKE) is the kinetic energy resulted from the speed difference. PABas given by (16) is the accelerating power between two sets of critical and noncritical generators. A positive PABimplies a positive derivative of ωABor an increasing angular separation and vice versa. Corrected Transient Potential Energy (CTPE) based on PABis defined as follows:(20)CTPE=-∫αABSEPαABPABdαABwhereαABSEPindicates the angle vector αABat stable equilibrium point (SEP) of the post-fault power system. CTEF is defined as:(21)CTEF=CTKE+CTPE=12MeqωAB2-∫αABSPαABPABdαABCTEM is mainly a function of generators’ active power generation. To derive the sensitivity of CTEM with respect to each generation in the proposed multi-objective framework, the first order approximation from Taylor series around the base case operating point of the power system is used. Since CTEM retains linearity in a wide range with respect to several operating parameters such as fault clearing time, pool generation rescheduling, and curtailment of a bilateral transaction (Da-Zhong et al., 2000), the applied first order approximation yields enough accuracy. Using this approximation, the change in CTEM due to generation shifts after congestion management can be given by:(22)ΔCTEM≅∑k∈SG∂CTEM∂PGkΔPGkConsequently, the final CTEM after congestion management is given by:(23)f3=CTEM=CTEM0+ΔCTEMwhere CTEM0 is the CTEM value before applying congestion management. f3 is the third objective function that is maximized in the proposed multi-objective framework. In fact, the proposed MMP problem optimizes active powers of generators so that CTEM is improved. It should be noted that the power system model used for the proposed method is the AC model, which is more accurate than the DC model. Furthermore, there is no limitation to consider higher degrees of detail in time domain simulation for dynamic modeling of power system components such as generators.The proposed multi-objective congestion management including the three previously explained objective functions and with the TCSC installed in branch i–j (selected from the priority list) is optimized subject to (3)–(8), (14), (22), and the following power system constraints:(24)xcmin⩽xc⩽xcmax(25)PGk-PDk=|Vk|∑m∈SN|Ykm||Vm|cos(δk-δm-θkm)k∈SN‾(26)QGk-QDk=|Vk|∑m∈SN|Ykm||Vm|sin(δk-δm-θkm)k∈SN‾(27)PGi+PiTCSC-PDi=|Vi|∑m∈SN|Yim||Vm|cos(δi-δm-θim)for busi(28)QGi+QiTCSC-QDi=|Vi|∑m∈SN|Yim||Vm|sin(δi-δm-θim)for busi(29)PGj+PjTCSC-PDj=|Vj|∑m∈SN|Yjm||Vm|cos(δj-δm-θjm)for busj(30)QGj+QjTCSC-QDj=|Vj|∑m∈SN|Yjm||Vm|sin(δj-δm-θjm)for busj(31)PGkmin⩽PGk⩽PGkmaxk∈SG(32)QGkmin⩽QGk⩽QGkmaxk∈SG(33)PDkmin⩽PDk⩽PDkmaxk∈SD(34)QDk=PDktan(ϕDk)k∈SD(35)PGk=∑m∈SGnPGm,QGk=∑m∈SGnQGmk∈SN(36)PDk=∑m∈SDnPDm,QDk=∑m∈SDnQDmk∈SN(37)Vkmin⩽|Vk|⩽Vkmaxk∈SN(38)|Sk(V,δ)|⩽Sbmaxk∈SB(39)VSM⩾VSM0(40)CTEM⩾CTEM0Eq. (24) specifies limits of the TCSC series reactance used in (7) and (8). SN represents the set of power system buses andSN‾is the SN from which buses i and j are excluded. Also, SG, SD, and SB are set of generators, demands, and branches, respectively. Eqs. (31) and (32) confine the generated active and reactive power of generators to their limits. Also, (33) gives the active power limits of demands participating in the market. Eq. (34) sets the reactive power of demands assuming a constant power factor for demands. Eq. (35) gives nodal generation of buses as the sum of generation units while multiple units are installed at one power plant. Similarly, (36) gives nodal consumption while multiple demands are located at one bus. The constraint (37) forces all bus voltages to be in the given acceptable range after congestion management. Eq. (38) observes the rating of branches including lines and transformers. In (39), VSM0 is the base case VSM and this constraint ensures that VSM is not deteriorated after congestion management. Similarly, constraint (40) ensures that the CTEM is not deteriorated after congestion management.The problem with the objective functions of f1, f2, and f3 as presented by (9), (15), and (23) and constraints as explained by (3)–(8), (14), (22), and (24)–(40) represents a nonlinear and large-scale multi-objective optimization problem which should be solved with efficient techniques. It is noted that the proposed formulation can be extended to include N−1 contingencies. Removing a branch from the network affects powers of generators, bus voltages, the admittance matrix, and branch flows in the post-contingency state, and accordingly, VSM and CTEM, as functions of generator and load powers, vary for each post-contingency state. Therefore, all we need to encompass N−1 contingencies is to add constraints similar to Eqs. (14), (15), (22), (23), (25)–(32), (35), (37)–(40) for each credible contingency to the constraints of the problem. This type of including contingencies is already used in previous papers like (Amjady, Aghaei, & Shayanfar, 2009) and in order to keep this paper short, we do not list the N−1 contingency constraint here. In the following subsection, the modified augmented ε-constraint method, as one of the most efficient methods, is briefly reviewed and is used to solve the proposed multi-objective optimization problem.Details of the modified augmented ε-constraint method is elaborated in (Esmaili et al., 2011a) and we here only present a brief review about this method for sake of self-sufficiency of this paper. Assume a multi-objective problem with p objective functions of fi(x) (i=1,…,p), wherex∈S is the vector of optimization decision variables and S is the feasible solution space determined by problem constraints. Without loss of generality, we consider here all objective functions for maximization. In all types of ε-constraint methods, one of objective functions as the main objective function is optimized by assuming the other non-main objective functions as constraints added to the feasible solution space of S. In the ordinary ε-constraint (Mavrotas, 2009), there is no guarantee that the obtained Pareto solutions are efficient. That is, they may be dominated by another better solution. In order to overcome this drawback, the augmented ε-constraint was introduced in (Mavrotas, 2009), where the inequality constraints of the objective functions are transformed into equality constraints by introducing positive surplus variables, known also as slack variables. Then, the main objective function is augmented by sum of the surplus values. This mechanism prevents generating inefficient solutions as given by ordinary ε-constraint. However, the drawback of the augmented ε-constraint method is that it takes sum of slack variables in the augmentation considering the same importance for all slack variables, while each objective function has its own relative importance in the MMP problem, in which a decision maker picks up the most preferred Pareto solution using weighting factors of objective functions. Therefore, the augmented ε-constraint method does not consider the relative importance of the objective functions in generating the Pareto solutions; this is inconsistent with the decision maker policy. To remedy this inconsistency, the modified augmented ε-constraint method was proposed in (Esmaili et al., 2011a) where the relative importance of the objective functions is explicitly modeled in generating the Pareto solutions. In the modified augmented ε-constraint, which is used here, the main objective function is augmented by weighted sum of slack variables introduced by transforming inequality constraints to equality constraints as:(41)Maximizef1(x)+(r1/w1)×(w2×s2/r2+w3×s3/r3+⋯+wp×sp/rp)Subject to:f2(x)=e2+s2,f3(x)=e3+s3,…,fp(x)=ep+sp,x∈S,si∈R+where siand riare the slack variable and the range, respectively, of objective function fi. Also, wiis the weighting factor of objective function fi. Also, e2,…,epare the right hand side of newly added constraints yielded from the non-main objective functions. The augmented part prevents generating inefficient solutions; mathematically, it can be proven that the modified augmented ε-constraint method only generates efficient solutions (Esmaili et al., 2011a). The slack variables are scaled to the main objective function range (r1) to avoid scaling problems known also as masking effects. Also, they are also weighted by weighting factors of objective functions to get more efficient Pareto solutions. By parametric variation of e2,…,ep, Pareto optimal solutions are obtained.The minimum and maximum values of fi, calculated using the payoff table (Esmaili et al., 2011a), are denoted here asfiminandfimax, respectively. Then, the range of fiis determined asri=fimax-fimin. This range is divided into qiequal intervals that are used in parametric discrete grid in (41). Using the modified augmented ε-constraint method, the multi-objective optimization problem having p objective functions indeed is converted into∏i=2p(qi+1)single objective optimization sub-problems. Each sub-problem has the solution space of S, which is further limited by its own inequality constraints for f2,…,fp. Pareto optimal solutions are obtained by solving these sub-problems. The solution space may vanish in some sub-problems leading to infeasible solutions; such sub-problems are discarded.After solving the proposed multi-objective congestion management by installing TCSC on the candidate branch determined by the priority list, individual Pareto solution sets are obtained as previously described in Fig. 3. Then, the comprehensive Pareto set is constructed by merging the individual Pareto sets. Here, a fuzzy decision maker is used to select the most preferred Pareto solution from the comprehensive Pareto set. In the fuzzy decision maker, benefitting from soft decision making advantage, all objective functions including the main objective function are fuzzified by linear membership functions. For objective functions being minimized (f1 in our case), the membership function is defined as:(42)μik=1fik⩽fiminfimax-fikfimax-fiminfimin⩽fik⩽fimax0fik⩾fimaxwherefiminandfimaxare the minimum and maximum values of objective function i, respectively, in the comprehensive Pareto set. Also,fikandμikare the value of objective function i and its membership, respectively, in the Pareto solution k. For objective functions being maximized (f2 and f3 in our case), the membership function is similarly defined as:(43)μik=0fik⩽fiminfik-fiminfimax-fiminfimin⩽fik⩽fimax1fik⩾fimaxIndeed,μikindicates the degree of optimality of fiin the kth Pareto optimal solution. The overall membership function of the kth Pareto optimal solution (μk) is calculated considering its individual membership functions as follows:(44)μk=∑i=1pwi·μik∑i=1pwiwhere w1,…,wpare weighting factors of objective functions. For a congestion management problem, these weighting factors are selected by the system planner considering the relative importance of economical and security aspects. Finally, the Pareto solution having the highest membership function of μkis chosen as the most preferred Pareto solution or as the final solution of the multi-objective problem based on the given weighting factors. Using (44), the most preferred Pareto solution is selected among the comprehensive Pareto set, not individual Pareto sets. This trend, which is an innovative selection of the Pareto solution, gives a more efficient solution than determining the best of each Pareto set individually.The proposed multi-objective placement of TCSC is examined on the New-England power system, a well-known test system with 39 buses, 34 lines, 2 shunt capacitors, 12 transformers, 19 loads, and 10 machines. The reason of selecting this test system is that its dynamic data are available from (Pai, 1989) and (Ledesma, 2013) to calculate CTEM. The one line diagram of the network is depicted in Fig. 4. In this paper, the rating of branches 1–2, 6–7, 12–11 and 17–27 is set to 150, 330, 40 and 50 MVA, respectively, as additional assumptions.All optimizations here are solved using the CONOPT solver of GAMS (General Algebraic Modeling System) software package (GAMS., 2013) employing its Non-Linear Programming (NLP) model. Transient analysis of the test system is investigated by the time domain simulation of PSS/E 30 software package (PTI., 2004) developed by PTI. To get more accurate results in calculating CTEM, the integration time step is reduced to 0.1milliseconds in PSS/E 30. A three-phase short circuit on bus 26 is applied here as a credible fault (Da-Zhong et al., 2000) to evaluate its transient stability. This fault is cleared after 100milliseconds by tripping line 25–26. Also, PSAT software package (Milano, 2013) is used here to evaluate voltage stability and to determine VSM.In order to get bus LMP values, single objective congestion management at the base case (without any TCSC) is run on the test system by minimizing the total cost of (9) subject to constraints (25)–(38) without any stability constraint. The single objective congestion management cost for the base case is obtained as 9595.50$/hour. The resulted LMP for 39 buses are depicted in Fig. 5, where LMP is mostly higher in buses located in congested area. Mathematically, this is reasonable: LMP of buses at congested area is higher due to a larger congestion term in LMP terms as described by (1).LMP differences across branch terminals are obtained from bus LMPs using (2). Branches with a higher LMP difference represent the most congested branches and then they are the best ones to locate the TCSC. Of course, the number of branches to be included in the priority list can be selected by the operator. The longer list, the more computation burden. In Table 1, the priority list is shown for the first five prior branches. Columns 1 and 2 in the table show the priority number and branch terminals, respectively. Column 3 represents the branch LMP difference. Column 4 gives the single objective congestion management cost if TCSC is located at that branch. Column 5 gives the TCSC value (xc) normalized by the branch reactance and is obtained after solving single objective congestion management. It is noted that the TCSC range in the simulations is assumed between zero and 70% capacitive compensation (TCSC here is defined as its reactance normalized by its branch reactance). If there is no TCSC in the market with the required size (70% of the branch reactance), we can choose the nearest upper available rating because it is possible to adjust the required compensation from zero to its rated value. As seen in Table 1, installing TCSC on the first branches with higher LMP difference leads to a better congestion management cost; this verify the efficiency of the LMP difference criterion in making the priority list. It is worthwhile to note that in highly congested branches of Table 1 (branches 6–7, 1–2, and 5–8), the proposed method set the TCSC at its upper limit. This is because of the fact that TCSC can compensate reactive deficiency in heavily loaded branches by neutralizing some parts of their inductive reactance. However, in less congested branches like branch 5–6 and 3–4, there is not a serious lack of reactive power in lightly loaded branches. For this reason, TCSC optimal value for such branches is determined a lower value (17% and 48% in Table 1).After occurring a large disturbance such as a fault, generators are divided into two groups of advanced (critical) and non-advanced (noncritical) ones. The separation between angles of these two generator groups continues more as long as the fault presents. After clearing the fault, the system may be transient stable or unstable depending on the duration and severity of the fault as well as the power system strength and operating point. For the test case under study with the fault mentioned above, generators at buses 31 through 38 are determined as advanced or critical ones, while generators at buses 30 and 39 are identified as non-advanced or non-critical. This can be seen from Fig. 6(a): angles of the two non-advanced generators at buses 30 and 39 (indicated on the figure) decrease during the fault (from t=1seconds to t=1.1seconds). However, angles of the advanced generators (at buses 31–38) increase during the fault. These result are in accordance with previous works like (David & Xujun, 2002) for this test system under the examined fault. As seen in Fig. 6(a), although the system experiences some oscillations in the generators’ angle, it remains stable as angles are converged to a new post-fault status. As mentioned by data tips in Fig. 6, the worst angle difference happens between the green curve (belonging to generator 38) and the red curve (belonging to generator 39) with the value of 44.95−(−11.42)=56.37rad. The worst angle difference is a criterion for the severity of the applied disturbance and higher levels of the worst angle difference could make the power system unstable.After locating TCSC and congestion management, it is expected that the power system shows a better strength from transient stability point of view. In Fig. 6(b), variations of generator angles are depicted after locating TCSC. As seen in this figure, the worst angle difference between the blue1For interpretation of color in Figs. 6 and 7, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.1curve (belonging to generator 37) and the red curve (belonging to generator 39) is 25.61−(−10.75)=36.36rad. This value, compared with 56.37rad before locating TCSC, represents a more robust power system from transient stability point of view. In other words, we have managed to enhance transient stability of the power system after locating TCSC. From generation point of view, before locating TCSC, total generations of critical and noncritical generators are 4970megawatt and 1235.5megawatt, respectively. However, after locating TCSC, total generations of critical and noncritical generators become 4680.6megawatt and 1522.2megawatt, respectively. As a result, total critical generation is reduced from 4970.00megawatt before locating TCSC to 4680.60megawatt after locating TCSC leading to a more stable system.Locating TCSC can change the power flow of branches by changing the power transfer capability of the branch on which the TCSC is installed. Then, the generation may be shifted from less or non-critical generators to critical generators; a phenomenon that deteriorates the transient stability. Also, the power shifts may so accomplished that the voltage stability is being worsen after congestion management. To practically check this, the VSM and CTEM values are calculated and presented in Table 2after locating TCSC on the priority list branches and solving single objective congestion management. These results demonstrate how locating TCSC can change stabilities margins. In Table 2, if the single objective solution of Acharya and Mithulananthan (2007) is compared with that of the base case with no TCSC (Cost=9595.50$/hour, VSM=42.26%, CTEM=10.21per unit), it can be seen that the cost has got a better value (7959.69$/hour against 9595.50$/hour) since it is minimized in the optimization problem. However, the voltage stability is dramatically worsen (16.22% againt 42.26%) and transient stability remaines approximately unchanged (10.14per unit against 10.21per unit). Therefore, the single objective method has no control over voltage and transient stability margines and in this case study, it deteriorated the voltage stability margin. In such a situation, a disturbance can easily lead the power system to voltage collapse. Depending on the power system, CTEM may be also deteriorated after locating TCSC. Indeed, this solution of the single objective method of Acharya and Mithulananthan (2007) is not practical for this case study because of threatening security limits. We expect a better stability status of the power system after installing a TCSC. Consequently, the single objective placement of TCSC cannot ensure enough stability margins and then the locating and sizing of TCSC must be chosen by providing a sufficient level of stability margins after congestion management; this is accomplished by using the proposed multi-objective congestion management.In order to ensure enough stability margins after the placement of TCSC, multi-objective congestion management is used as described in Fig. 3. The modified augmented ε-constraint method is used to solve the multi-objective congestion management for each priority. Here, the number of grid points is considered to be 3 for f2 and f3 (q2=q3=3). Therefore, we have totally 4×4=16 optimization sub-problems to be solved by the modified augmented ε-constraint method for each priority. A payoff table for each priority is constructed to determine the range and discrete grid points of VSM and CTEM objective functions. For the first priority (branch 6–7), the payoff table is obtained as Table 3. It is also calculated for the other priorities; however, to shorten the paper, only the payoff table of the first priority is presented here.Each row in the payoff table is obtained by individually optimizing the corresponding objective function. For instance, when f2 is maximized, the solution gives f1=19606.07$/hour, f2=45.02%, and f3=15.85per unit According to the payoff table, the minimum and maximum values of VSM and CTEM are obtained as 45.02–16.22=28.82% and 33.18–10.14=23.04per unit, respectively. As seen in Table 3, by optimizing one objective function, other objective functions are somewhat deteriorated. This implies that the three objective functions are competitive in the examined New-England test system. The Pareto solution set after solving the 16 sub-problems for the first priority, while TCSC is located on branch 6–7, is obtained as Table 4. The Pareto solution set is also obtained for the other priorities. However, only the first priority set is reported here to shorten the paper.After solving the multi-objective congestion management for all of the five priorities, we have totally 5×16=80 Pareto solutions at most in the comprehensive Pareto set. The selecting of the most preferred solution-with the highest membership-depends on the weighing factors of the objective functions as previously expressed in (44). The total membership of Pareto solutions categorized by priorities is depicted in Fig. 7by assuming equal weighing factors of 1/3, for the time being, for the three objective functions of cost, VSM, and CTEM. Total membership of Pareto solutions indeed reflects their optimality from multi-objective point of view. As seen in Fig. 7, the optimality of Pareto solutions differs significantly if the TCSC is installed on each one of the five prior branches. The highest total membership belongs to Pareto 11 of branch 1–2 priority (on the blue curve) as specified in the figure by a data tip (X=11, Y=0.7212).In Table 5, the best solution resulted from each priority is presented considering equal weighting factors for objective functions. This table shows in fact the most preferred Pareto in the five curves of Fig. 7 as the five most preferred branches to locate TCSC. It is noted that it may not possible to place TCSC on some branches due to environmental or geographical restrictions. Such branches can be easily excluded from the list and we can proceed to the next feasible one. In this table, columns 3, 5, and 7 show the optimal values of the objective functions. Also, columns 4, 6, and 8 represent the membership values of the objective functions. For example, the congestion management cost for the first priority is accomplished as 8625.31$/hour with the membership of 0.8390. In column 9, μkgives the overall optimality of the multi-objective solution calculated by (44) considering the assumed weighting factors for the objective functions. TCSC in the last column shows the optimal value of the TCSC (normalized by the branch reactance) to be installed on the branch of column 2.As seen in Table 5, the most preferred branch to install TCSC by the multi-objective congestion management is determined as branch 1–2 (with the highest value of μk=0.7212), the corresponding row in the table are in bold text. However, according to the priority list of Table 2, if single objective congestion management is used without no stability constraints, the best branch to install TCSC is selected as branch 6–7. As seen, there are significant differences in the solutions of single objective solution (Table 2) and multi-objective solution (Table 5). Although installing TCSC using the single objective solution leads to a less cost than the multi-objective solution (7959.69$/hour in Table 2 against 8845.39$/hour in Table 5), stability margins in the single objective solution are too low. Since there are three objective functions, the quality of solutions shall be judged by the total membership value, not merely by the cost. Indeed, the single objective solution is the one indicated in Fig. 7 by the data tip (X=1, Y=0.3412) located on the red curve of branch 6–7. On the other hand, the multi-objective solution is indicated in Fig. 7 by the data tip (X=11, Y=0.7212) on the blue curve of branch 1–2. As seen, the multi-objective solution gives an obvious superiority over the single objective solution (0.7212 against 0.3412). This means that the multi-objective method can satisfy the optimality of the final solution more efficiently than the single objective method. As a result, the multi-objective method not only proposes a different branch to install TCSC compared with the single objective solution but also it results in a more efficient solution.In practical electricity markets, the cost objective function is usually more important than the other stability related objective functions for the system operator. Then, the operator can set a higher weighting factor for the cost objective function to emphasize the cost against stability objective functions. Of course, this depends on the stability status of the power system. For example, in power systems with a high rate of transient stability problems, the system operator may assign a higher weighing factor for CTEM to enhance transient stability and to decrease the rate of outages. The proposed framework has the ability to accept desired weighting factors for different power systems. For instance, a case is shown in Table 6where cost is the prominent objective function. In this case, the weighting factors for the cost, VSM, and CTEM objective functions are considered as 0.6, 0.2, and 0.2, respectively.If results of the proposed multi-objective method in Table 6 are compared with the single objective method in Table 2, we can say that the cost increases by ignorable amount as much as 8284.18–7959.69=324.49$/hour (4.1%); however, VSM is improved greatly as much as 42.58%−16.22%=26.36% and CTEM is improved as much as 16.81−10.14=6.67per unit (65.8%). This means a practical and more secure operating point given by the proposed method. Of course, the cost increment of 324.49$/hour is the cost that should be paid for enhancement of security.As seen in Table 6, assigning different weighting factors can change the solution of the multi-objective congestion management. Since a higher weighting factor is assigned to the cost objective function in this case, the cost is more improved (8284.18$/hour) than the case of Table 5 (8845.39$/hour). Of course, the VSM and CTEM are a bit deteriorated in this case (42.58% and 16.81per unit) compared with Table 5 (43.38% and 23.47per unit) due to having lower weighting factors. In Table 2, the single objective solution without any stability constraint leads to the cost of 7959.69$/hour. The difference of costs in Tables 5 and 6 with this value can be treated as the price of providing security for the power system. The price of providing security for cases of Tables 5 and 6 weighting factors is obtained as 8845.39–7959.69=885.70$/hour and 8284.18–7959.69=324.49$/hour, respectively. The case of Table 5 weighting factors needs more improvement of stability margins than the case of Table 6 weighting factors. In view of the fact that in case of Table 6 weighting factors, it is assumed that the power system is in a good condition of stability, assigning a higher value for the cost objective function can save the congestion management cost (324.49$/hour against 885.70$/hour). This implies that the operating cost or energy prices will be higher if higher levels of security are established for the power system. Inasmuch as it is one of the vital responsibilities of the SO to retain enough security in the power system at a reasonable cost, the right and fair decision should be made by the SO on behalf of market participants to achieve the maximum possible social welfare in the electricity market.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Traditional congestion management methods may lead to an operating point which makes the power system vulnerable against stability disturbances after relieving congestion. In this paper, a multi-objective framework is proposed for locating TCSCs for congestion management so that enough levels of voltage and transient stability margins are established after congestion management. More preferred branches are selected using Locational Marginal Prices of branches as an index of congestion severity. The proposed multi-objective optimization encompasses congestion management cost as the main objective function and voltage and transient stability margins as the subsequent objective functions. VSM and CTEM as well-known indices are employed as measures of voltage and transient stability margins, respectively. Pareto solutions are generated using the modified augmented ε-constraint method, generating only efficient Pareto solutions, and the most preferred Pareto solution is picked up by a fuzzy decision maker. The proposed method along with a previous similar method is tested on the New-England test system on the same circumstances and their results are compared and discussed to evaluate their performance. According the obtained results, multi-objective solution not only proposes a different branch to install TCSC but also gives a more efficient solution than the traditional single objective solution.