@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring two explanations of loyalty in application service provision

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model two conflicting explanations of loyalty in application service provision.One stream of literature focuses on partnership-trust.Other literature focuses on service quality-satisfaction.We test our model using a survey of 135 ASP client firms.We find that satisfaction, not trust, predicts ASP loyalty.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in service industries,Application service provider,Partnership,Service quality,Trust,Loyalty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
While the application service provider (ASP) market continues to grow, it is fiercely competitive, and ASPs encounter difficulties in retaining customers and achieving long-term profitability. One stream of prior literature suggests that customer loyalty is driven by service quality, while another argues that loyalty is driven by partnerships between the firms. However, to date these competing explanations have not been tested together in the ASP context. This empirical study contributes to the literature by unifying these two previously separate streams of research on customer loyalty. Using a survey of 135 ASP clients, we find a significant relationship between the service quality perspective and the partnership perspective. We thus argue that service loyalty models ought to include both of these constructs in order to effectively explain service loyalty.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Application service providers (ASPs) represent an important evolution of information technology (IT) outsourcing services. The ASP model differs from conventional IT service outsourcing in that services are delivered on demand (Liu, Methapatara, & Wynter, 2010). ASP services can be engaged and disengaged at short notice, thereby allowing customers from a range of industries to achieve capital and infrastructural savings in ownership of their software solutions (Benlian & Hess, 2011; Kern, Kreijger, & Willcocks, 2002). The application services market is hence more diverse and complex than the traditional service market, and firms are struggling to understand how best to manage these differences (Gartner Research, 2009). The contribution of ASP to small, medium and large companies is currently significant and further research into ASPs and the SME market is required (Bayrak, 2013; Demirkan & Cheng, 2008): the ASP market is forecast to reach $69.8billion by 2015 (Global Industry Analysts, 2011), while the Asia–Pacific region has a projected growth of more than 18% over the period 2011–2015, as the demand for contractual IT services increases.While this expected growth is a positive outcome for ASP as a business model, a closer look indicates a less than comfortable situation. Application service providers have encountered significant competition in retaining customers and achieving long-term profitability. International financial pressures mean that “clients are deferring project decisions, consolidating their vendor relationships, and starting to renegotiate prices with their existing providers” (Forrester Research, 2008, p. 1). Competition between ASPs is becoming more fierce: recent practitioner literature describes how “vendors will jockey to position themselves as thought leaders, strategic advisors, aggregators and implementers of architected solutions” (Gartner Research, 2011, p. 10). Contractual agreements are typically much shorter in the ASP context (Chang, Yen, Ng, & Chang, 2012; Susarla, Barua, & Whinston, 2009; Yao & Murphy, 2005), so customers need not remain with unsuitable providers. Retaining the loyalty of customers is thus a key challenge facing ASP managers.The academic explanation for loyalty in the ASP context is not clear. One stream of research has argued that partnership builds trust, which leads to customer loyalty. More specifically, effective commercial partnerships enhance the trust, communication, cooperation, and functionality of the relationships that exist among parties, thus reducing conflict (Anderson & Narus, 1990). For example, Heart (2010) observed a positive relationship between trust and partnership in the SaaS context, while Rustagi, King, and Kirsch (2008) explored the use of control mechanisms to improve trust between partners in outsourcing relationships. Another stream of research has argued that service quality contributes to satisfaction, yielding long-term customer retention and loyalty (Heskett, Sasser, & Hart, 1990). For example, Ma, Pearson, and Tadisina (2005) examined how increases in service quality affected satisfaction among current and future ASP clients. Liu, Du, and Tsai (2009) also examined the relationship between service quality and satisfaction and its effects on service portal use.However, in the context of loyalty, these two streams assume conflicting positions. On one hand, perceptions of service quality depend on explicit activity signals (Bhargava & Sun, 2008; Zeithaml, Parasuraman, & Malhotra, 2002). To improve service quality, managers must carefully assess and evaluate their customer needs (Fan, Kumar, & Whinston, 2009; Väyrynen & Kinnula, 2012). These explicit signals must be well documented, so that both parties have evidence of the other’s requirements and behavior (Dabholkar, Shepherd, & Thorpe, 2000; Grönroos, 1984). However, the other stream assumes that loyalty is based on trust, which can exist without explicit signals. Reichheld and Schefter (2000, p. 107) state that “to gain the loyalty of customers, you must first gain their trust”, Rosanas and Velilla (2003, p. 56) write that “loyalty and trust…represent the two sides of the same coin”, and Uys (2008, p. 907) argues, “loyalty requires trust”. Harris and Goode (2004) also claim that loyalty depends on trust. However, trust entails “a...level of faith in the intentions of the other party” (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998, p. 400), and so formalized indicators and contractual mechanisms of behavior may be ineffective (Granovetter, 2008; Shapiro, 1987; Sitkin & Roth, 1993). Moreover, formal mechanisms “may not only fail to restore trust, but may lead to an escalating spiral of formality and distance that increases distrust” (Sitkin & Roth, 1993, p. 386). For this reason, Rosanas and Velilla (2003, p. 56) argue that “both trust and loyalty…cannot be expressed in the formal rules of an organization that specifies the results to be obtained”.Because one explanation of loyalty depends on trust (positive beliefs in the absence of evidence), and the other depends on explicit requirements (clear signals of service requirements), the two explanations are in conflict. These two perspectives thus need to be tested together in order to better understand this situation. We argue that the current understanding of trust in the outsourcing literature is incomplete: to resolve this incompleteness, we use an explanation from trust theory which posits that interdependent partnership among parties will motivate and build trusting behaviors (Rousseau et al., 1998). We apply the construct of partnership to a model of loyalty in the outsourcing context, using the wider service literature as a basis. We argue that these trust perceptions may not hold in the ASP context, where partners cannot easily monitor each other’s behavior. In this case, service partners may lack the positive belief-based evidence that allow them to trust.The focus of this study is thus to examine the relationships among partnership, service quality, and customer loyalty. Our objective is to unify the partnership-trust and service quality-satisfaction explanations of loyalty. Based on prior attitude-behavior research, we argue that the customer evaluations of the ASP’s level of partnership and quality of service would influence their affective states (i.e., trust and customer satisfaction) which, in turn, affect customer loyalty (i.e., behaviors). Nevertheless, we also argue that customer loyalty is more influenced by customer satisfaction than trust. Furthermore, based on the existing literature, we anticipate that partnership would lead to a higher level of service quality perceptions by customers. The results of this study could provide the literature with new insights into how working partnerships and service quality affect customer loyalty (Anderson & Narus, 1990; Delone & McLean, 2003; Grover, Cheon, & Teng, 1996; Lee & Kim, 1999; Sharma & Gupta, 2002). This work also has implications for ASPs that are interested in establishing continuing partnerships. Our results help ASP firms understand how to retain customers in the highly dynamic application service market, thereby growing their businesses and obtain and maintain competitive advantage in the digital era. We especially contribute to calls for a better understanding of the SME response to ASP services (Altaf & Schuff, 2010; Bayrak, 2013; Jeong & Stylianou, 2010).Application service providers deliver business-to-business e-commerce services for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that cannot otherwise afford to implement expensive and complicated information systems (IS) (Heart & Pliskin, 2002; Smith & Kumar, 2004). ASPs are thus an outsourcing solution for SMEs that offer a leasing arrangement rather than a purchasing decision (Dibbern, Goles, Hirschheim, & Jayatilaka, 2004). However, the use of ASPs differs from typical IT outsourcing in terms of adoption, use and consequences, in particular in relation to SMEs (Smith & Kumar, 2004). The ASP model has been attractive to firms because it appears less risky, with fewer barriers to investment than traditional IS outsourcing (Ekanayaka, Currie, & Seltsikas, 2002). For example, SMEs can switch to different ASPs when their services do not match business needs and expectations (Barthelemy, 2001; Bennett & Timbrell, 2000; Fulford & Love, 2004), and thus retaining customer loyalty is a major challenge faced by ASPs.The general service literature provides a basis for examining these phenomena. In explaining customer loyalty, the marketing management and IS literatures have emphasized both service marketing (Jiang, Klein, & Carr, 2002; Susarla, Barua, & Whinston, 2003; Zeithaml, 2000) and relationship marketing (Sheth & Parvatiyar, 2002). For the most part, these two streams of studies have developed without much overlap (Berry, 2002; Fullerton, 2005a), even though some of the related studies both focus on the same customer loyalty-related dependent variables (Fullerton, 2005b; Morgan & Hunt, 1994).One view, principally based in the marketing literature, holds that service quality leads to customer loyalty (Zeithaml, 2000). A number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain this relationship, reflecting the popularity of loyalty as a construct in prior service research (Bloemer, De Ruyter, & Wetzels, 1999; Han, Kwortnik, & Wang, 2008; Jones & Taylor, 2007). For example, higher service quality results in more of the service partner’s needs being met in a cost-effective and timely manner. This relationship results in greater satisfaction, and a desire to continue it (Fullerton, 2005b). Higher service quality demonstrates a sensitivity to partner expectations (Brady & Cronin, 2001; Parasuraman & Grewal, 2000), and has been seen as a key factor in prior literature, whereby relational partners develop feelings of commitment (Allen & Meyer, 1990) because they enjoy dealing with the partner on an ongoing basis (Morgan & Hunt, 1994). This enjoyment reinforces satisfaction between partners, and raises the perceived switching costs involved in finding alternative partners (Fullerton, 2003), resulting in greater loyalty. Higher service quality also means that the relationship partners are more likely to accept price increases (Anderson, 1996; Zeithaml, Berry, & Parasuraman, 1996), be willing to act as a reference customer for promotional purposes (Anderson, 1998; Zeithaml et al., 1996), and to spread positive news of the relationship to others by word of mouth (Zeithaml, 2000).Another view of loyalty is based on the effects of interrelated partnership in the service relationship, and this has largely been examined separately from the service quality perspective discussed above (Fullerton, 2005b). It holds that loyalty is driven by mutual trust between the partners, which, in turn, is motivated by the desire to achieve shared goals (Mohr & Spekman, 1994). Partnership builds trust by demonstrating a willingness to make significant relationship investments (Gundlach, 1995), establish an understanding of service and quality level requirements (Ma et al., 2005), and aim for compatibility, commitment and cooperation with regard to strategic goals (Jeong & Stylianou, 2010). This partnership behavior also establishes a vested interest between both parties to engage in behaviors that promote long term interaction and interdependence (Kumar, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 1995). The more durable and intimate the level of partnership, the higher the trust between the service partners, and the greater the level of loyalty and retention. These factors lead to higher confidence in the service relationship, and contribute to trust between partners.After entering into a relationship with an ASP, a firm develops perceptions about the ongoing health and suitability of the partnership. These perceptions affect each party’s attitudes to the relationship, in turn affecting their intentions to end, change or preserve it (Ajzen & Fishbein, 2005; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). Positive perceptions are likely to lead to positive attitudes and behaviors. In the case of ASP relationships, positive perceptions of partnership and service quality are likely to lead to positive trust and satisfaction attitudes, which, in turn, lead to positive loyalty and continuance behaviors (Kettinger & Park, 2009). By contrast, negative perceptions of partnership and service quality will lead to negative attitudes towards trust and satisfaction, which can then result in lower continuance and loyalty affiliation behaviors. In this behavioral context, a valid relationship between the two parties can thus lead to continuance of the partnership (Klein, Crawford, & Alchian, 1978) and greater loyalty (Fullerton, 2005b; Fullerton & Taylor, 2002). Continuance is also rooted in switching costs (Gilliland & Bello, 2002) and scarcity of alternatives (Allen & Meyer, 1990). Based on this discussion, the overall research model is presented in Fig. 1.As Fig. 1 shows, we model both explanations for customer loyalty in the ASP context theorized in the prior literature. Our model also includes four hypotheses, each of which are detailed below.Trust is seen as a vital attribute in an IT outsourcing relationship (Sabherwal, 1999). Empirical evidence has noted that trust increases commitment, enhances relationship longevity, reduces conflict between business partners, and can moderate the negative effects of uncertainty (Anderson & Narus, 1990). Trust is regarded as a safety net for financially-constrained small- and medium-sized enterprises when they are looking for IT outsourcing service, because they generally cannot secure tangible assurances in the form of mutual investments (Sharif, Kalafatis, & Samouel, 2005). However, the literature remains inconclusive with regard to whether a higher degree of partnership between small- and medium-sized firms and their ASPs could help to create more trust. Moreover, this study supposes that if a firm considers that its ASP is honest, capable, and providing a high quality service, then the firm is more likely to trust and rely on it. As partnership and quality of service represent antecedents that can elicit a firm’s positive perceptions of its ASP, this study thus presents the following hypothesis:Hypothesis 1The degree of IT outsourcing partnership has a positive effect on the firm’s trust of its ASP.Loyalty is an important construct in prior service research (Han et al., 2008). A number of prior studies have drawn attention to the effect of trust on a firm’s behavior with regard to IT outsourcing (Lee, Huynh, & Hirschheim, 2008; Sharif et al., 2005), and mutual trust has been positively linked to outsourcing success (Lee et al., 2008), while trust also positively affects a firm’s long term orientation (Sharif et al., 2005). We argue that the more a small- and medium-sized firm trusts its ASP, the more likely the firm will continue its IT outsourcing relationship with the ASP. Therefore, the second hypothesis is as follows:Hypothesis 2There is a positive relationship between a firm’s trust of its ASP and its loyalty to its ASP.Service quality leads to satisfaction by improving the relationship between a customer’s service expectations and the level of service provided to them (Oliver, 1980), and a number of prior studies have examined this relationship. For example, Liu et al. (2009) found a significant relationship between service quality and customer satisfaction in online portals. Bardhan, Demirkan, Kannan, Kauffman, and Sougstad (2010) illustrated how IT service providers work to increase quality assurance in order to improve satisfaction by improving the design and delivery of the outsourced IT services. Tallon (2010) presented similar empirical evidence regarding service quality from the banking industry, while Anderson, Fornell, and Mazvancheryl (2004) illustrated how a reduction in quality can also negatively affect service satisfaction. Consistent with this prior literature, we anticipate a positive relationship between service quality and satisfaction in the ASP context. This leads to our third hypothesis:Hypothesis 3The quality of service provided by an ASP has a positive effect on the firm’s satisfaction with its ASP.Studies of business-to-business buyer behaviors have found that satisfaction with a product or service has a positive impact on attitudinal brand loyalty (Bennett, Hartel, & McColl-Kennedy, 2005). From a marketing viewpoint, a consumer’s continuance intention can be determined by their level of satisfaction (Anderson & Narus, 1990; Grover et al., 1996). Similarly, satisfaction has a strong linkage to repurchase intention (Anderson & Sullivan, 1993) and customer retention (Bolton, 1998; Rust, Zahorik, & Keiningham, 1995). Therefore, we argue that when a small- and medium-sized firm is satisfied with the IT outsourcing service they receive, they are more likely to remain loyal to the outsourcing relationship with their current ASP. Our fourth hypothesis is thus as follows:Hypothesis 4There is a positive relationship between a firm’s satisfaction with its ASP and its loyalty to its ASP.In addition to our core hypotheses, the model includes three controls in order to eliminate alternative explanations. These controls are discussed below.Prior IS studies have emphasized the importance of partnership in outsourcing (Lasher, Ives, & Jarvenpaa, 1991; Lee & Kim, 1999). Recent research has noted that healthy relationships can significantly enhance the benefits for both firms and their service providers (Lee, Huynh, Kwok, & Pi, 2003). In the marketing realm, researchers have identified a number of factors that affect working partnerships between firms and their service providers, such as communication, cooperation, and conflict resolution (Anderson & Narus, 1990). However, the literature is still ambiguous with regard to the partnership effects that arise between ASPs and small- and medium-sized firms, even though previous research indicated that the concept of partnership includes both benefits and risk sharing (Goo, Kishore, Nam, Rao, & Song, 2007). Therefore, this study considers partnership as a key factor in improving the performance of IT outsourcing, because ASPs should develop strategic partnerships that seek long-term relationships with small- and medium-sized firms.IT outsourcing is provided by an external service provider, and can involve various facets of a firm’s IT development, operations and management (Rustagi et al., 2008). A key variable in measuring the overall success of an information system is the whole quality of service, which includes information quality, system quality, and service quality (Delone & McLean, 2003, 1992). Since services are fundamentally different from physical goods, a client firm will always consider an ASP’s trustworthiness and willingness to provide services as part of the quality of service (Lee & Kim, 1999). Because of the imprecise nature of services and the difficulty of ensuring consistent quality, firms often form ongoing relationships (i.e., partnerships) with their service providers (Grover et al., 1996), and these are formed with respect to specific service requirements and desired quality levels.Satisfaction is based on a pleasurable level of service fulfillment (Oliver, 1996), or a post-purchase evaluation of quality given pre-purchase expectations (Anderson & Sullivan, 1993; Woodruff, Cadotte, & Jenkins, 1983). IS researchers have posited that user satisfaction is one of the most important measures of information system success (Delone & McLean, 2003, 1992). A client firm’s satisfaction with their ASP is thus influenced by the perceived performance of the focal service and the quality of the interaction with the service provider (Cronin & Taylor, 1992). Therefore, this study includes this relationship – the influence of expected service quality, as well as the quality of the ongoing partnership, will both directly affect the satisfaction of small- and medium-sized firms with their IT outsourcing – to enhance the external validity of our hypothesis testing.A firm may not switch their IT outsourcing relationship to another ASP if there are no alternative providers to turn to. The availability of alternative ASPs thus means that a client firm is not bound to a single provider, and so we hence add the availability of alternatives to our model as a control variable.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
