@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stochastic lot sizing manufacturing under the ETS system for maximisation of shareholder wealth

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We address carbon management in manufacturing optimization.We incorporate carbon emission trading in stochastic lot sizing for make-to-order manufacturing.We aim to maximise shareholder wealth while mitigating environmental impact of carbon emission in manufacturing.Numerical results highlight the significance of carbon emission trading in operations management.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Production planning,Lot sizing,Carbon emission,ETS,Shareholder wealth,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The issues of carbon emission and global warming have increasingly aroused worldwide attention in recent years. Despite huge progresses in carbon abatement, few research studies have reported on the impacts of carbon emission reduction mechanisms on manufacturing optimisation, which often leads to decisions of environmentally unsustainable operations and misestimation of performance. This paper attempts to explore carbon management under the carbon emission trading mechanism for optimisation of lot sizing production planning in stochastic make-to-order manufacturing with the objective to maximise shareholder wealth. We are concerned not only about the economic benefits of investors, but also about the environmental impacts associated with production planning. Numerical experiments illustrate the significant influences of carbon emission trading, pricing, and caps on the dynamic decisions of the lot sizing policy. The result highlights the critical roles of carbon management in production planning for achieving both environmental and economic benefits. It also provides managerial insights into operations management to help mitigate environmental deterioration arising from carbon emission, as well as improve shareholder wealth.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The vast majority of physical and biological systems on the earth have reportedly been affected by huge regional and global climate abnormalities resulting from excessive emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (GHGs), such as nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane (CH4).The recent global assessment made by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), set up jointly by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to provide an authoritative international statement of the scientific understanding of climate changes, shows that the anthropogenic global warming over the last three decades has posed discernible risks on our planet (Parry, Canziani, Palutikof, Linden, & Hanson, 2007)Archer and Pierrehumbert (2011), for example, reported the number of great inland flood catastrophes per decade between 1996 and 2005 was twice as large as between 1958 and 1980, while the resultant economic loses had to be increased by a factor of five.Annamalai, Hafner, Sooraj, and Pillai (2012) stated that monsoon rainfall over South Asia has decreased while sea surface temperature over the warm pool increased during the last several decades, according to several sets of observations.Sarkis and Cordeiro (2012) argued that the industry's air emissions have numerous deleterious environmental impacts at the global, regional and local levels, including global warming, acid rain, and smog.In a review of urban transportation network design problem, Farahani, Miandoabchi, Szeto, and Rashidi (2013) emphasized the significance of considering CO2 emissions minimisation as one of the problem objective functions, due to the large emission amount involved in traffic and its dramatic impacts on health and global warming.These problems of global warming and climate changes are largely attributable to the excessive emission of GHGs, especially its main component—CO2. Alarmed by their far-reaching adverse impingements, a great number of governments and international organizations have launched a series of programs to cut emission of GHGs. In 1992, for example, the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) negotiated the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), with the goal of stabilizing GHGs concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. So far, 154 nations have signed the UNFCCC and agreed to reduce atmosphere concentrations of GHGs to achieve this long-term environmental objective. Later in 2005, the Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC was adopted to set binding obligations on industrialized countries to reduce their carbon emissions into the atmosphere. In the most recent UN climate summit (UN Climate Summit 2014), the UN Secretary General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, called for consensus of all member states on concluding a meaningful legal agreement in 2015.All these efforts highlight the severity and urgency of the issues of carbon emission and global warming. In order to effectively execute their environmental responsibilities, numerous countries and regions have enacted and implemented various concrete measures to cut GHGs emissions, mainly including regulations and standards, taxes and charges, voluntary agreements, tradable permits and so forth, to curb the carbon emission of their home companies (Hahn, 2013). As a result, an increasing number of companies are required to monitor their carbon emission to evaluate the environmental impacts of their operations in pursuit of economic interests.Despite the extensive concerns of carbon emission reduction mechanisms in industries, thus far the carbon emission problem in production planning has received little academic attention. Few studies have been reported on the production planning optimisation problem under the regulation of carbon emissions.Absi and Kedad-Sidhoum (2009) attempted to incorporate constraints on carbon emissions into a multi-sourcing lot sizing supply chain environment, aimed at minimising the total cost expense and limiting the carbon emission per unit product. Four possible carbon emission constraints were proposed in their research, composed of the periodic carbon emission constraint, the cumulative carbon emission constraint, the global carbon emission constraint, and the rolling carbon emission constraint.Yalabik and Fairchild (2011) conducted an economic analysis in order to examine the effects of customers, regulations, and competitive pressures on a firm's investments in environmentally friendly productions. Solving the model yielded that the regulatory pressure had the intended effect of reducing carbon emission as long as the firm's initial emission level was below a certain threshold. If the initial emission was above this threshold, the pressure might have an adverse effect and the subsidiaries supporting environmental innovation could be a better alternative.Helmrich, Jans, Heuvel, and Wagelmans (2014) studied the generalisation of a lot sizing problem under the production environment with a carbon emission constraint, which was introduced as a condition imposed on an alternative cost function.These studies incorporate the carbon emission problem into the traditional operations optimisation in the form of certain absolute emission constraints or cost constraints. It means that, in order to reach the emission reduction target, companies are obliged to trim down their productions, leading to a waste of investments and slowdown of economies.Indeed, compared with these emission constraints, the market-based emission trading system (ETS) has grown to a more popular emission reduction measure over the world. It has been extensively adopted on a global scale to control carbon emission into the atmosphere. Programs already in effect encompass the European Union ETS, the Australian ETS, the New Zealand ETS, the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) in the North-eastern United States, the California ETS, and the Tokyo ETS. A lot of other countries are on the verge of commencing operations (Mansell & Sopher, 2013).Despite its widespread applications in the global market, ETS is rarely considered in operations management. Hua, Cheng, and Wang (2011) looked into an inventory model by combining the cap-and-trade system into the traditional EOQ model. Benjaafar, Li, and Daskin (2013) presented another inventory model under the emission regulation of the cap-and-trade system.Up to now, we have not been able to find any paper on the study of the carbon emission problem in production planning under the market-based ETS mechanism. We therefore attempt to explore this problem for a stochastic make-to-order (MTO) production planning environment with the lot sizing policy, aimed at effective management of carbon emission under the ETS mechanism, associated with productions for maximisation of shareholder wealth.First, the carbon emission problem is examined under the ETS mechanism, for it is now a well-established and popular marked-based emission reduction mechanism on a global scale. ETS, also known as the cap-and-trade system, establishes a cap on aggregate carbon emission by a source, and requires it to hold permits not larger than the cap or to purchase permits for the excessive carbon emission. The trading unit of ETS is the carbon credits. According to Carbon Trade Exchange (CTX), a carbon credit is defined as the right to emit one tonne of CO2 equivalent either removed, avoided, or sequestered (Mansell & Sopher, 2013). ETS helps reduce GHGs emission, promote renewable and low-carbon energies, as well as facilitate transfer of green technologies from developed to developing countries. Its market-based characteristic makes it more efficient than other carbon emission mechanisms.Second, we study the production planning problem from the perspective of shareholders, rather than focusing merely on local optimisation objectives, such as times, costs, or profits. Indeed, the maximisation of shareholder wealth and sustaining a steady cash flow have become the top priority of most enterprises (Erasmus & Lambrechts, 2006; Madden, 2002; Young & O'Byrne, 2001). This has recently been entrenched as the overall principle of corporate governance on a global scale (Lazonick & O'Sullivan, 2000). Kolb (2008) argued that the principle of shareholder wealth maximisation was and ought to be the overall objective of all corporate activities. The most recent depression in the global economy has further highlighted the economic benefits of shareholder wealth maximisation.Third, the proposed production planning model is examined in an MTO supply chain mode. A diverse variety of customer preferences and fierce market competition has been motivating a growing number of firms to adopt the MTO strategy to meet diversified market demands, as well as to avoid excessive inventory of finished products in the supply chain channel (Bowersox, Stank, & Daugherty, 1999). Recently, MTO has received much attention due to its major successes in high-tech companies and traditional manufacturing companies (Gunasekaran & Ngai, 2009).By exploring the proposed model, we first intend to understand the role of the ETS policy in the carbon emission control. We are concerned about how effectively the ETS policy can curb the GHGs emission and eventually stabilize the carbon concentration in the atmosphere.Besides the environmental consideration, the impacts of the ETS policy on the operations and interests of investors are another primary concern. Our research will not only illustrate the influences of carbon emission trading, pricing, and caps on the lot sizing policy in operations management, but also explore their impacts on the interests of corporate investors involved in the proposed production planning model.The analytical and numerical results underline the critical role of the ETS mechanism for production planning in both the environmental conservation and the shareholder wealth advancement. It helps corporate executives gain a more in-depth understanding of the potential shareholder wealth drivers under the regulation of the ETS mechanism. Also, it may contribute to the corporate transition to a low-carbon economy through investment in energy efficiency and clean energy technologies.Our paper has two limitations. First, we concentrate on the production planning problem with lot sizing, without considering other production planning problems. Second, due to our focus on the impacts of the ETS policy on carbon emission and benefits of investors, other problems related to ETS, such as carbon emission pricing, will not be involved in our research.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, a stochastic lot sizing queuing network integrated with the objective function for maximising shareholder wealth is derived. The corresponding manufacturing planning mode under ETS is then formulated. Section 3 proves several analytical optimisation properties. In Section 4, numerical examples together with analysis of the optimisation results are conducted to validate the proposed model. Section 5 draws conclusions and provides several recommendations for the future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
