@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Equilibrium existence and uniqueness in network games with additive preferences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A network game is analyzed through a complementarity problem.We consider concave additive preferences that encompass the quasi-linear ones.Equilibrium uniqueness is established with a P-matrix.Our results extend previous findings related to network sparsity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Network game,Additive preferences,Complementarity problem,P-matrix,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A directed network game of imperfect strategic substitutes with heterogeneous players is analyzed. We consider concave additive separable utility functions that encompass the quasi-linear ones. It is found that pure strategy Nash equilibria verify a non-linear complementarity problem. By requiring appropriate concavity in the utility functions, the existence of an equilibrium point is shown and equilibrium uniqueness is established with a P-matrix. For this reason, it appears that previous findings on network structure and sparsity hold for many more games.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It has been found that the linear complementarity problem (henceforth LCP) is a fundamental mathematical problem associated with major economic problems such as linear and quadratic programming problems, bimatrix game problems, as well as more general equilibrium problems (Cottle et al., 1992). In the present paper, we are interested in a new application of a complementarity problem: finding a Nash equilibrium in network game problems. A particularity of this class of games is that an action of a player affects the marginal payoff of her neighbors, i.e., a player’s payoff depends on personal effort as well as on the efforts exerted by her neighbors (Jackson, 2008).Specifically, we concentrate on network games where efforts are strategic substitutes, in other words, where an increase in one player’s strategy makes the best response of her neighbors decrease.1This outcome may arise in local public goods games (i.e., games with positive externalities), when the players in a neighborhood have an incentive to “free-ride” (Allouch, 2012; Ballester and Calvó-Armengol, 2010; Bramoullé and Kranton, 2007; Bramoullé et al., 2011; Bloch and Zenginobuz, 2007; Corbo et al., 2007; Galeotti et al., 2010), or in games of common property resources (i.e., games with negative externalities), when the players have an incentive to consume more resource than the efficient level (Ilkiliç, 2010; Johari and Tsitsiklis, 2004; Rébillé and Richefort, 2012).1The literature in this area has focused on games where preferences are quasi-linear and Nash equilibria in pure strategies (henceforth PSNE) exist. The analysis of equilibrium uniqueness is then achieved by studying the following LCP (Ballester and Calvó-Armengol, 2010; Corbo et al., 2007). Given a network of relationshipsΛ∈R+N×Nand a vector of peaks2In these games, it is assumed that each player l has a unique effort levelel∗that maximizes her preferences. Thus,el∗is player l’s peak. It corresponds to a “satiation” point above which marginal utility becomes negative.2e∗≫0, determine an effort profileeˆ⩾0such that(1)(I+Λ)Teˆ-e∗⩾0,[(I+Λ)Teˆ-e∗]Teˆ=0,where the symbol ⩾ (resp. ≫) means that each component is greater than or equal (resp. greater), the superscript T denotes the transpose of a matrix or a vector, and I stands for the identity matrix. The first inequality checks whether the sum between a player’s own effort and the effort exerted by her predecessors is not less than her peak. The second equality states that a player exerts no effort if the total effort exerted by her predecessors is equal or higher than her peak.In such games, sufficient conditions for the uniqueness of PSNE have been established with I+Λ belonging to particular classes of matrices, and have then be related to certain eigenvalues of Λ: the largest eigenvalue (or spectral radius) (Ballester and Calvó-Armengol, 2010; Ballester et al., 2006; Corbo et al., 2007) and the lowest eigenvalue (Allouch, 2012; Bramoullé et al., 2011). The eigenvalues of a network adjacency matrix carry details about local structural properties of networks (Cvetković et al., 1997). There are two main results. First, using the Perron-Frobenius theory of non-negative matrices, it has been found that equilibrium uniqueness is guaranteed for all e∗≫0 whenever the spectral radius of Λ is sufficiently low (Ballester and Calvó-Armengol, 2010). This condition derives from contraction of the best response functions and holds for directed and undirected networks. It states that there exists a unique equilibrium point whenever the density of the link structure is sufficiently low.Second, using the theory of potential games and spectral graph theory, a sharper condition has been found: the LCP specified by (1) admits a unique solution for all e∗≫0 if the lowest eigenvalue of Λ is sufficiently high (Bramoullé et al., 2011). This result provides the best known sufficient condition for the uniqueness of PSNE in these games (when the spectral radius is sufficiently low, the lowest eigenvalue is sufficiently high, but not vice versa). It implies that there exists a unique equilibrium point whenever the sparsity of the link structure is sufficiently high. This result is, however, based on two important assumptions: (i) the network is undirected, i.e., Λ is symmetric, and (ii) best response functions are piece-wise linear. In fact, there have been few attempts to establish uniqueness when best response functions are non-linear, and all of them have considered the case of undirected networks, a special case of directed networks (Allouch, 2012; Bramoullé et al., 2011).The present paper tackles the problem of equilibrium uniqueness in directed network games of imperfect strategic substitutes with non-linear best response functions. The focus here is on concave additive separable utility functions that encompass the quasi-linear ones. Firstly, we find that PSNE are characterized by a complementarity problem that extends the problem specified by (1). Secondly, by requiring appropriate concavity in the utility functions, the existence of a PSNE is shown. Then, using the methodology introduced by Rosen (1965) for concave games, we establish the uniqueness of PSNE with a P-matrix3A formal definition of P-matrix is given in Section 4.3(Fiedler and Pták, 1962). As a corollary, it appears that previous findings related to network structure and sparsity (see Bramoullé et al., 2011) are true for more general preferences, and therefore for many more games.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the game. Sections 3 and 4 establish equilibrium existence and equilibrium uniqueness, respectively. Section 5 describes the relationship between uniqueness and network sparsity. Section 6 presents two main applications of the model and extends the analysis in two directions. Section 7 sets out the conclusions. Note that all vectors considered in this paper are column vectors, and are denoted by lowercase bold letters. We reserve the use of uppercase bold letters for matrices.There are N players and the set of players isN={1,…,N}. Let eldenotes player’s l individual effort ande=(e1,…,eN)∈R+Nan effort profile of all players. Players are arranged in a weighted and directed network. The basic representation of the network is given by its N×N weighted adjacency matrix Λ, where λkl∈[0, ∞) denotes the intensity of the link from player k to player l. We may interpret it as the rate of substitution from player k’s effort to player l’s effort (by convention, λkk=0 for all k). Notice that the network is directed and weighted, i.e., Λ is asymmetric and non-negative.Henceforth, we shall consider preferences that admit an additive separable utility representation with respect to individual effort and collective effort. The utility of an agent l is given byul(el,El)=vl(el)+wl(El),where player’s l collective effort is given byEl=el+∑k:k≠lλklek. Since collective effort is based on the collection of individual efforts, we may assume that the utility function is defined for all (el, El) such that El, el⩾0. Utility is taken to be cardinal and may allow an interpretation in terms of benefits and costs (see Remark 1 below).Technical assumptionsA1. For all l,vl′(0)+wl′(0)>0.A2. For all l,vl′(∞)+wl′(∞)<0.A3. For all l, vland wlare continuously differentiable and concave, with vlor wlstrictly concave.Assumption A1 implies that under autarky (i.e., if the network is empty) the agent will provide some effort, otherwise in any network she will free-ride (we do not assume, however, that preferences are monotonic). Assumption A2 implies that the preferences are single-peaked w.r.t. individual effort for any given level of collective effort and allows a trade-off between individual and collective effort. Assumption A3 reflects the convexity of preferences.We assume that the strategy of utility-maximizing individual effort involves a simultaneous-move gameG(Λ,v,w)with strategy space el⩾0 for each playerl∈N, where (v, w) denote the preference profile of the players and payoffs are given byulel,el+∑k:k≠lλklek=vl(el)+wlel+∑k:k≠lλklek.For all players, utility maximization occurs where the effort level is such that marginal utility is equal to zero. LettingΛ∼=I+Λ, we find that all PSNE admitted byGare characterized by a non-linear complementarity problem.4Note that this problem is slightly different to the “classical” non-linear complementarity problem that can be found in the literature (see, e.g., Cottle et al., 1992; Karamardian, 1969).4Property 1LetG(Λ,v,w)be a network game. Then, a profileeˆ∈R+Nis a PSNE if and only ifeˆsatisfies(2)v′(eˆ)+w′(Λ∼Teˆ)⩽0,[v′(eˆ)+w′(Λ∼Teˆ)]Teˆ=0,where for all l,(v′(eˆ))l=vl′(eˆl)and(w′(Λ∼Teˆ))l=wl′(eˆl+∑k:k≠lλkleˆk).The proof is straightforward in relation to the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions of utility maximization with individual effort constrained to be non-negative. Then, we observe that the complementarity problem specified by (2) extends the LCP specified by (1).Remark 1Public goods in networksTo position ideas on the generality of the problem analyzed in this paper, consider a network game with quasi-linear preferences, i.e., for all l,ul(el,El)=vlel+wl(El),where vlis a constant,wl′(0)>-vl>wl′(∞)andwl″<0. Within this context, a profileeˆ∈R+Nis a PSNE if and only ifeˆsatisfiesv+w′(Λ∼Teˆ)⩽0,[v+w′(Λ∼Teˆ)]Teˆ=0.If, for all l, −vlis in the range ofwl′, the problem leads to a LCP whereeˆ∈R+Nis such thatΛ∼Teˆ-(w′)-1(-v)⩾0,[Λ∼Teˆ-(w)-1(-v)]Teˆ=0,which turns out to be equivalent to the LCP specified by (1), since e∗≫0 is the vector such that, for all l,vl+wl′el∗=0. This model, pioneered by Bramoullé and Kranton (2007)5In Bramoullé and Kranton (2007), the utility of an agent l is given byul(el,El)=bl(El)-clel,where blis a twice-differentiable strictly concave benefit function with bl(0)=0,bl′>0andbl″<0, andcl<bl′(0)is a constant that denotes the individual marginal cost of effort.5, is the traditional model analyzed in the literature on local public goods games (Ballester and Calvó-Armengol, 2010; Bramoullé et al., 2011; Bloch and Zenginobuz, 2007). It is therefore a limiting case of the model developed and analyzed in the present paper.The next section presents sufficient conditions pertaining to the existence of a solution to the problem specified by (2).In games where PSNE are characterized by the LCP specified by (1), the proof of equilibrium existence is straightforward in that the set of individual best responses defines a piece-wise linear mapping from a convex compact subset of a Euclidean space into itself, and the existence of an equilibrium point is guaranteed. Establishing the existence of a solution to the complementarity problem specified by (2) is less immediate. To achieve this objective, we follow an analytic approach to check whether the best response of each agent satisfies the hypothesis of Brouwer’s Fix Point Theorem. We obtain the following result.Theorem 1LetG(Λ,v,w)be a network game. Then,Gadmits a PSNE whenever A1, A2 and A3 are met.Let l be an agent. Since ul=vl+wlis stricly concave,ul′(0)=vl′(0)+wl′(0)>0andul′(M)=vl′(M)+wl′(M)<0for some M>0 there exists a uniqueel∗>0such thatul′el∗=vl′el∗+wl′el∗=0. Moreover,el∗is l’s maximum.Let Fl⩾0 be a level of collective effort exerted by other agents than l. Agent’s l utility is given byul(el,el+Fl)=vl(el)+wl(el+Fl).By assumption, ul(., .+Fl) is strictly concave, so ul(., .+Fl)′ is strictly decreasing and continuous. The best response given Flisbl(Fl)=[ul(.,.+Fl)′]-1(0),iful(0,0+Fl)′>00,otherwise.Sinceul(.,.+Fl)′⩽ul(.,.)′we havebl(Fl)⩽bl(0)=el∗.It follows that the autarkic equilibrium effort is always greater than the equilibrium effort in a network.Let us check that the best response is continuous w.r.t. Fl. Let Fl⩾0.1st case:ul(0,0+Fl)′=vl′(0)+wl′(Fl)<0.Then, bl(Fl)=0. Sincewl′is continous, there exists some neighborhood V of Flsuch thatvl′(0)+wl′(F)<0for F∈V. Thus, bl(F)=0 for F∈V so blis continuous at Fl.2nd case:ul(0,0+Fl)′=vl′(0)+wl′(Fl)⩾0.By definition, (el, Fl) with el=bl(Fl) is a solution to the equationxl(e,F)=vl′(e)+wl′(e+F)=0.Now,∂xl∂e(el,Fl)=vl″(el)+wl″(el+Fl)<0by strict-concavity, so in accordance with the implicit function theorem there exists some differentiable and invertible function γ such thatFl=γ(el)on some open neighborhood V of el, satisfyingxl(e,γ(e))=vl′(e)+wl′(e+γ(e))=0.Thus, bl(Fl)=el=γ−1(Fl) on U=γ−1(V) ∋ Fl, so blis continuous at Fl.Consider the mappingB:∏l0,el∗→∏l0,el∗e↦bl∑k:k≠lλkleklB is continuous w.r.t. e since bland(e↦∑k:k≠lλklek)are continuous for all l. According to Brouwer’s Fix Point Theorem, B admits a fix point e and e is a PSNE of the network gameGby construction.The next section focuses on the special case of a unique PSNE to the gameG. Following Cottle et al. (1992)’s terminology, we describe a global uniqueness result6By contrast, Bramoullé et al. (2011) present a local uniqueness result since their proof, based on Taylor approximation of best responses, provides conditions under which a given equilibrium is the only equilibrium in one of its neighborhoods.6as we provide conditions under which the solvable complementarity problem specified by (2) provides only one solution. Henceforth, we assume that A1, A2 and A3 are satisfied.It is well known that matrix classes play a paramount role in the theory of the LCP. One of the most fundamental classes is that consisting of P-matrices.7Cottle et al. (1992) defines the traditional LCP as follows. GivenM∈RN×Nandq∈RN, determine z⩾0 such thatMz+q⩾0,(Mz+q)Tz=0.It is well known that the above LCP provides a unique solution for all vectors q if and only if M is a P-matrix (Samelson et al., 1958). See also Theorem 3.3.7 in Cottle et al. (1992, p. 148).7In this section, we establish the uniqueness of solutions to the complementarity problem specified by (2) with such a matrix. Let us introduce the class of P-matrices.Definition 1Fiedler and Pták, 1962Let M be a real matrix. Then, M is said to be a P-matrix if all its principal minors are positive.An essential feature of P-matrix is that it does not reverse the sign of any non-zero vector, i.e.,∀x≠0,∃k/xk(Mx)k>0.Note also that MTis a P-matrix whenever M is a P-matrix.8See Plemmons (1977) for a survey of the properties associated with real square matrices whose principal minors are positive.8To establish equilibrium uniqueness, we follow the analytic approach introduced by Rosen (1965) for proving uniqueness in concave games. We obtain the following result.Theorem 2LetG(Λ,v,w)be a network game. Then,Gadmits a unique PSNE wheneverΛ∼is a P-matrix.Let l be an agent. Each agent l satisfies its maximization program given others’ efforts, (ek)k:k≠l,maxvl(el)+wl(el+Fl):s.t.el⩾0whereFl=∑k:k≠lλklek.Let μlbe the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker’s multiplier associated with the constraint −el⩽0. Under the technical conditions, vl(.)+wl(.+Fl) is strictly concave and differentiable. The first order conditions are therefore sufficient,vl′(el)+wl′(el+Fl)+μl=0withμlel=0,μl⩾0.Let us assume that there are two PSNE, e0≠e1. Let{rl}l∈R+N. Multiplying agent’s l first order condition at e0 byrlel1-el0and agent’s l first order condition at e1 byrlel0-el1we have,rlel1-el0vl′el0+wl′el0+∑k:k≠lλklek0+rlel1-el0μl0=0,rlel0-el1vl′el1+wl′el1+∑k:k≠lλklek1+rlel0-el1μl1=0.Adding up both equalities and summing over l, it comes∑lrlel1-el0vl′el0+wl′el0+∑k:k≠lλklek0+∑lrlel0-el1vl′el1+wl′el1+∑k:k≠lλklek1+∑lrlel1-el0μl0+∑lrlel0-el1μl1=0.Now, for all l,μl0el0=0andμl1el1=0, thus,∑lrlel1-el0vl′el0+wl′el0+∑k:k≠lλklek0+∑lrlel0-el1vl′el1+wl′el1+∑k:k≠lλklek1+∑lrlel1μl0+∑lrlel0μl1=0.Sinceel0,el1,μl0,μl1,rl⩾0it holds∑lrlel1-el0vl′el0+wl′el0+∑k:k≠lλklek0+∑lrlel0-el1vl′el1+wl′el1+∑k:k≠lλklek1⩽0orIneq.r:∑lrlel1-el0vl′el0+wl′el0+∑k:k≠lλklek0-vl′el1+wl′el1+∑k:k≠lλklek1⩽0.Let x=e1−e0≠0. Since,Λ∼is a P-matrix,Λ∼Tis also a P-matrix. Then for some l0,xl0(Λ∼Tx)l0>0that is,el01-el00el01+∑k:k≠l0λkl0ek1-el00+∑k:k≠l0λkl0ek0>0,the two factors having same sign. Sincevl0is concave, sovl0′is non-increasing, thusel01-el00vl0′el00-vl0′el01⩾0andwl0is concave, sowl0′is non-increasing, thusel01-el00wl0′el00+∑k:k≠l0λkl0ek0-wl0′el01+∑k:k≠l0λkl0ek1⩾0,with a strict inequality where strict concavity holds, soel01-el00vl0′el00+wl0′el00+∑k:k≠l0λkl0ek0-vl0′el01+wl0′el01+∑k:k≠l0λkl0ek1>0.Choosing,rl0=1and rl=0 for l≠l0, we obtain from the Ineq.rel01-el00vl0′el00+wl0′el00+∑k:k≠l0λkl0ek0-vl0′el01+wl0′el01+∑k:k≠l0λkl0ek1⩽0,a contradiction. So, x=e1−e0=0 and uniqueness is established.□It is worth noting that our uniqueness result carries over one change in the technical assumptions.Remark 2Constrained effortAssumption A2 in the technical assumptions, i.e., v′ (∞)+w′(∞)<0, implies that the agents’ best responses take values in a bounded set. This assumption can be replaced directly by assuming that el∈[0, Ml], for alll∈N, where 0⩽Ml<∞, the proof of equilibrium uniqueness being slightly modified to take into account the boundedness constraints.When best response functions are piece-wise linear, the uniqueness of PSNE is traditionally related to the largest and the lowest eigenvalues of the network adjacency matrix in order to obtain information on the typical link structures that yield a unique equilibrium (Allouch, 2012; Ballester and Calvó-Armengol, 2010; Ballester et al., 2006; Bramoullé et al., 2011).9There is an extensive literature in algebraic graph theory that studies the properties of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of adjacency matrices associated with a graph. One fundamental result implies that any graph is completely determined by its eigenvalues and eigenvectors. See Chapter 2 in Cvetović et al. (1997).9When the network is directed, the adjacency matrix is asymmetric and its eigenvalues are generally complex numbers. By Theorem (3,3) of Fiedler and Pták (1962), the uniqueness condition we established with a P-matrix may be related to the lowest real eigenvalue of the network adjacency matrix and its principal submatrices. This means the gameGadmits a unique PSNE if the lowest real eigenvalue of Λ and its principal submatrices is sufficiently high. To our knowledge, however, there is no result that establishes a relationship between structural properties of directed networks and the lowest real eigenvalue of their associated adjacency matrix. Previous works on the spectra of directed network adjacency matrices have essentially focused on the spectral radius of adjacency matrices (Brualdi, 2010).When the network is undirected or acyclic, there are substantial improvements. We provide two results related to these particular link structures. The first concerns undirected networks and extends Bramoullé et al.’s (2011) result to the case of additive separable preferences. A network is undirected if and only if its adjacency matrix is symmetric. Since real symmetric matrices are Hermitian, they do not admit complex eigenvalues. Let μmin(Λ) be the lowest eigenvalue of the network adjacency matrix. We obtain the following result.Corollary 1LetG(Λ,v,w)be a network game and let the network be undirected. Then,Gadmits a unique PSNE whenever μmin(Λ)>−1.Let Λ be an undirected network adjacency matrix. Therefore, Λ is symmetric, andΛ∼is also symmetric. Hence, its eigenvalues are real. Since μmin(Λ)>−1 if and only ifμmin(Λ∼)>0,Λ∼is a P-matrix. So, by Theorem 2,Gadmits a unique PSNE. □The lowest eigenvalue of a symmetric and non-negative adjacency matrix is a standard measure of the sparsity of the network (see, e.g., Bell et al., 2008). The higher the lowest eigenvalue, the sparser the network. Then, Corollary 1 states that the gameGadmits a unique PSNE whenever the network is sufficiently sparse.The next result concerns acyclic networks. A typical example is a river network where links represent flows of water (Ambec and Sprumont, 2002). It is well known that a triangular matrix is a P-matrix if and only if all its diagonal entries are strictly positive.10This is due to the fact that every principal minor of a triangular matrix equals a product of diagonal elements.10Since a network adjacency matrix is similar to a triangular matrix if and only if the network is acyclic, we obtain the following result.Corollary 2LetG(Λ,v,w)be a network game and let the network be acyclic. Then,Gadmits a unique PSNE.Let Λ be an acyclic network adjacency matrix. Therefore, Λ is similar to a triangular matrix with diagonal entries equal to zero and all of its eigenvalues are zero. Thus, all the eigenvalues ofΛ∼are equal to 1, and consequently, its determinant is equal to 1. The same observation holds for all principal submatrices ofΛ∼. It follows thatΛ∼is a P-matrix. Hence, by Theorem 2,Gadmits a unique PSNE. □Corollary 2 states that acyclic networks are always sufficiently sparse to guarantee uniqueness of PSNE to the gameG.11Note that the number of directed links in an acyclic network with N players cannot exceed N(N−1)/2.11Simultaneous-move games have many applications in management sciences, ranging from production and inventory management to finance (Wang and Parlar, 1989). The model developped in this paper belongs to a particular class of games: social dilemma games.12See Eaton (2004) for a detailed presentation of the four main social dilemma games (i.e., games of strategic substitutes/complements and negative/positive externalities).12In particular, the present work is related to the branch of the literature on social dilemmas that study games of strategic substitutes, since ∂2ul/∂ek∂ el⩽0 for all k≠l, with negative or positive externalities.When ∂ul/∂ek⩽0 for all k≠l, the externalities are negative. The model is thus suitable for studying the non-cooperative allocation of a common property resource. The utility function of an agent l is given byul(el,El)=vl(el)-wl(El),where eldenotes the amount of resource consumed by player l, vlis a concave benefit function and wla convex cost function. This particular cost function lends credence to the idea that players incur a cost from the consumption of their neighbors, and that the resource has a scarcity value; while concave benefits underpin the idea that the marginal benefit of consumption declines with the level of consumption (see, e.g., Smith, 1968).When ∂ul/∂ek⩾0 for all k≠l, the externalities are positive. The model is thus suitable for studying the voluntary provision of a local public good. The utility function of an agent l is given byul(el,El)=wl(El)-vl(el),where eldenotes the contribution to the local public good made by player l, vlis a convex cost function and wla concave benefit function. This particular benefit function underpins the idea that players enjoy a benefit from the contribution of their neighbors, and that the value of the public good has a physical restriction; while convex costs lend credence to the idea that players allocate their income between their contribution to the local public good and their private good consumption (see, e.g., Bergstrom et al., 1986).We now discuss two possible extensions of this work. Firstly, our analysis is restricted to additive utility functions. Consider generalC2utility functions ul(el, El) for all l that cause the following complementarity problem. Given a network of relationshipsΛ∈R+N×Nand ultwice differentiable and continuous functions for all l, determine an effort profileeˆ⩾0such thatu′(eˆ,Λ∼Teˆ)⩽0,[u′(eˆ,Λ∼Teˆ)]Teˆ=0,where for all l,(u′(eˆ,Λ∼Teˆ))l=∂ul∂el+∂ul∂Eleˆl,eˆl+∑k:k≠lλkleˆk.Establishing the existence of a unique solution to the above problem might require finding the appropriate shape in the utility functions. This is, however, a non-trivial issue.Secondly, a characterization of the unique Nash equilibrium should be possible, at least when the equilibrium is interior. Letting Fl⩾0 be a level of collective effort exerted by other agents than l, the utility of an agent l is given by ul(el, el+Fl)=vl(el)+wl(el+Fl). Assume there is a unique interior equilibriumeˆ. It is such that, for all l,vl′(eˆl)+wl′(eˆl+Fl)=0. This means, when the range of-vl′is included in the range ofwl′,eˆlsatisfiesFl=fl(eˆl)-eˆl,wherefl=wl′-1∘-vl′. When best responses are piece-wise linear,fl(eˆl)=el∗a constant, and the unique equilibrium profile may be expressed in terms of a network centrality vector (Ballester and Calvó-Armengol, 2010; Ilkiliç, 2010). Then, it would be pertinent to derive a structural solution to the above system of equalities. This is another open issue.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
