@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sovereign debt markets in light of the shadow economy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the controversial role of the informal sector in the economy.We use data from 64 countries between 2003 and 2007.Our results show that the informal sector affects credit ratings and lending costs.Our study has important implications in the context of the ongoing debt crisis.It suggests that a reduction in the informal sector helps in reducing lending costs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk analysis,Finance,OR in banking,Informal sector,Credit ratings,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We investigate the controversial role of the informal sector in the economy of 64 countries between 2003 and 2007 by focusing for the first time on the impact it has on sovereign debt markets. In addition to a standard ordered probit regression, we employ two nonparametric neural network modeling techniques in order to capture possible complex interactions between our variables. Results confirm our main hypothesis that the informal sector has significant adverse effects on credit ratings and lending costs. MLP neural networks offer the best fit to the data, followed by the RBF neural networks and probit regression, respectively. The results do not change with respect to the stage of economic development of a country and contradict views about the possibility of significant economic benefits arising from the informal sector. Our study has important implications, especially in the context of the ongoing sovereign debt crisis, since it suggests that a reduction in the informal sector of financially challenged countries is likely to help in relaxing credit risk concerns and cutting down lending costs. Finally, a decision tree analysis is used to exploit the inherent discreteness in the data and derive intuitive rules with respect to the level of the informal sector.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tax evasion and the informal sector are highlighted in the press as the root of the sovereign debt crisis in certain countries such as Greece and Portugal11See, for example, "Such (tax) evasion has played a significant role in Greece's debt crisis, and as the country struggles to get its financial house in order, it is going after tax cheats as never before" (Greek Wealth Is Everywhere but Tax Forms, New York Times, Suzanne Daley, May 1, 2010). The informal sector in Greece and Portugal is estimated in 2007 at 26.5 percent and 23.5 percent, respectively, against an average of 18.24 percent in the euro zone (estimates by Schneider et al., 2010).. Rating agencies also emphasize the protagonistic role of the informal sector by justifying recent downgrades of country credit ratings on the basis of pervasive tax evasion22For, example, Moody's downgraded Greece's debt to "highly speculative", from Ba1 to B1, in March 2011 citing "endemic tax evasion" as one of the main reasons for its decision.. At an economic policy level, reducing tax evasion in Greece has been one of the key conditions set by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in order to provide a 110 billion euro bail-out from the debt crisis (e.g., see IMF Country Report No. 10/110, May 2010). Notwithstanding, some concerns have also been voiced about the possible negative side-effects from stamping out tax evasion33See, for example, "Tax evasion. Dues and don'ts. Southern Europe will have trouble increasing its tax take", Economist, August 12, 2010.. These developments provide the dramatic background for the present paper along with a motivation to try and clarify the unexplored relationship between the informal sector and sovereign debt markets.The inherently mysterious nature of the informal economy means that its drivers, consequences and theoretical underpinnings remain ambiguous. The term itself is controversial and is encountered also as the economy or sector which is black, grey, shadow, hidden, unrecorded, unreported, illegal, subterranean, underground, parallel, clandestine, second or household. Under a broad definition which focuses only on legal activities, it includes "all economic activities that contribute to the officially calculated (or observed) gross national product but are currently unregistered" (Schneider & Enste, 2000). As discussed in the literature, tax evasion is a key symptom and driver of activities in the informal sector. Much research attempts to understand the links between the formal and informal sector of the economy. However, these concentrate almost entirely on the real sector by looking at positive and negative effects of the informal sector on aspects of the economy which include: competitiveness, income, inequality, corruption, public revenues and policy effectiveness (for reviews see La Porta & Shleifer, 2008; Schneider, 2005).In the present paper we explicitly examine for the first time the links between the informal sector and sovereign debt markets. Our main hypothesis is that countries which have larger informal sectors face worse sovereign credit ratings and higher lending costs. This stems from the theoretical and empirical literature which shows the harmful economic effects of the informal sector with respect to, for example, tax revenues, public goods and services, competitiveness, productivity, efficiency and growth. Motivated by Schneider (2005), we also test if the informal sector has an asymmetric impact on sovereign debt markets which depends on the stage of economic development of a country.As suggested by the current literature on modeling of credit risk (see, for example, Bennell, Crabbe, Thomas, & ap Gwilym, 2006; Christodoulakis, 2014; Elgin & Uras, 2013; Sawik, 2012; Terradez, Kizys, Juan, Debon, & Sawik, 2015), our analysis uses both parametric and nonparametric methods along with data mining techniques. In particular, we use order probit regression, MLP and RBF neural networks, and, decision trees. Overall, our empirical results indicate that the informal sector is an important predictor of credit risk in all the approaches considered. Specifically, it has damaging effects for both industrialized and developing countries on credit ratings issued by S&P, Moody's and Fitch and on lending costs, respectively.Our analysis provides an important extension to the existing literature. First, it provides modellers, researchers and analysts with a new variable that can be used to improve credit risk predictions and decisions. Second, it shows that MLP neural networks allow the most efficient exploitation of the information in the dataset considered. Standard parametric models cannot deal as successfully with the complexities and behavior of the data. Moreover, our approach in employing neural network models in assessing the significance of the informal economy is innovative. In particular, we partially overcome the black-box nature of the neural network models by using for the first time variable importance analysis via simulation. Third, investigating the link between the informal and financial sector helps us to better understand the impact of the informal sector on economic development and growth. Sovereign debt markets are fundamental dimensions of financial health; they can significantly amplify or inhibit economic activity and constitute a critical element of the financial sector. It has become clear today that understanding the role of the financial sector, in which sovereign debt plays a key role, is crucial in modeling the economy as a whole (see Brunnermeier & Sannikovy, 2014, inter alia). Moreover, the effectiveness or appropriateness of economic policies can depend significantly on financial market-determined variables such as interest rates and investment risk premia (see Akitoby & Stratmann, 2008). Fourth, a variety of stakeholders in the financial sector, both inside and outside a country, which includes financial intermediaries, regulators, policy makers, information brokers, lenders, corporations, risk managers and investors, are interested on the potential effects that the informal sector may have on their decisions and goals which involve sovereign debt (see Ferreira & Gamab, 2007). Fifth, our paper contributes to the important discussion pertaining the widespread evidence concerning the links between corruption, credit ratings and lending costs (see among others, Caulkins et al., 2013). In particular, since the informal sector is associated with corruption, it is important to see if and how it also affects debt markets. Finally, given the ongoing sovereign debt crisis in Europe, any new findings about the drivers of country ratings and costs of debt are particularly valuable. It is crucial to understand the function of the informal sector since it may provide a useful policy lever, metric or window of information.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper investigates for the first time the empirical links between the informal sector and sovereign debt markets using parametric and nonparametric methods. The results confirm our main hypothesis that larger informal sectors with respect to the GDP of a country can be associated with worse credit ratings and higher costs of debt, respectively. Results are consistent between the alternative parametric and nonparametric methods used. In terms of model fit, we find that MLP neural networks have the superior performance, followed by RBF neural networks and probit regression, respectively. This finding extends previous results in the literature concerning the adverse economic effects of the informal sector. According to our analysis, the impact of the informal sector does not change between industrialized OECD and non-OECD countries. Our analysis also derives intuitive credit risk decision rules on the basis of the shadow economy.Overall, our results lend support to the recently advocated policies of reducing the informal sector in the countries of the Eurozone that face a sovereign debt crisis. It does not appear that sovereign debt market participants see any benefits in the informal sector. Additional research is needed in order to further understand and theoretically model the economic mechanism through which the informal sector impacts the financial sector in general. Also, it is important to investigate the short-term effects and causalities between the informal sector and financial markets in general. Finally, a caveat in our analysis is that due to lack of data our sample did not include the global economic crisis period. Future research could investigate the impact of reducing the informal sector when countries face financial difficulties such as an economic recession or pressures in the debt market.