@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimizing the simultaneous management of blood pressure and cholesterol for type 2 diabetes patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the simultaneous control of blood pressure and cholesterol for patients with type 2 diabetes.We present a trade-off analysis between costs and quality-adjusted life years.We compare optimal guidelines to current treatment guidelines.Results indicate that coordination of treatment can reduce costs while improving length and quality of life.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in medicine,Markov decision process,Type 2 diabetes,Blood pressure treatment,Cholesterol treatment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a Markov decision process (MDP) model to determine the optimal timing of blood pressure and cholesterol medications. We study the use of our model for a high-risk population of patients with type 2 diabetes; however, the model and methods we present are applicable to the general population. We compare the optimal policies based on our MDP to published guidelines for initiation of blood pressure and cholesterol medications over the course of a patient’s lifetime. We also present a bicriteria analysis that illustrates the trade off between quality-adjusted life years and costs of treatment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently over 25 million people in the United States have diabetes. In 2010, approximately 1.9 million people aged 20 or older were newly diagnosed with diabetes (CDC, 2011). Treatment of the diabetes population can be costly: it is estimated that $153 billion per year in direct medical costs is spent on diabetes-related treatment in the United States (Dall et al., 2010), and this yearly cost is expected to triple in the next 25years. Two ways to control costs are to (1) manage medication costs through reduced medication use and (2) prevent or delay the occurrence of stroke and coronary heart disease (CHD) events for which diabetes patients are particularly at risk, thereby reducing the hospitalization and other significant follow-up costs associated with these events. Optimizing medication treatment decisions poses a challenge because reduced medication use may cause an increase in events.In addition to cost, important criteria to consider from the patient perspective include life expectancy and quality of life. Expected quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) are a commonly used criteria in the health policy literature associated with both quality of life and mortality (Gold, Stevenson, & Fryback, 2002). They are defined as a measure of a life year on a 0 (dead) to 1 (perfect health) scale, where decrements from 1 represent the burden of treatment, minor illnesses, and debilitating diseases or events. QALYs can measure the trade-off between the burden of medication and the benefits of prevention of stroke and CHD events.Several risk models have been developed to predict the probability of complications of type 2 diabetes over the course of an individual’s lifetime (Kothari et al., 2002; Stevens, Kothari, Adler, Stratton, & Holman, 2001; Stevens et al., 2004; Eastman et al., 1997; Eddy & Schlessinger, 2003). These models serve as a guide to clinicians for establishing the importance of treatment; however, there has been little investigation of how to effectively use these risk models to design optimal treatment policies for blood pressure and cholesterol management. The research presented in this article seeks to bridge this gap by furthering the basic knowledge of how to optimally treat cardiovascular risk in patients with diabetes over the course of their lifetime.We present an MDP to determine the optimal timing of medical treatment decisions for blood pressure and cholesterol control in patients with type 2 diabetes. We consider two different bi-criteria MDP formulations. First, we use our model to find the optimal treatment decision that trades off the expected time to first event and the cost of medication. Second, we use our model to find the optimal treatment decisions that trade off expected QALYs and total costs of treatment (medication costs plus one-time and follow-up treatment costs for adverse events). In both cases we combined the two criteria using a willingness-to-pay factor to balance life years (LYs) and QALYs against the costs of medication and treatment, respectively. We vary the willingness-to-pay factor to estimate the efficient frontier of treatment policies. We also evaluate the most common treatment guidelines in the United States and other countries applied to U.S. patients and compare them to the Pareto-optimal policies from our model.Our model considers control of coexisting stochastic risk factors, which is a problem that arises in the context of many chronic diseases. There is a significant literature on treatment optimization. However, to our knowledge ours is the first to examine simultaneous control of multiple risk factors. We highlight the benefits of coordinated treatment over the myopic nature of current guidelines by comparing costs, QALYs, and event-free LYs for the different policies.We address several specific research questions in this article including the following: How much can coordinated management of coexisting risk factors improve patient outcomes (e.g., QALYs, LYs before an adverse health event) over current guidelines? What effect does treatment coordination have on costs? How should treatment plans differ for males and females? How dependent is the optimal treatment regimen on an individual patient’s metabolic risk profile? To help answer these questions, we present patient-specific treatment plans based on our model. We also compare expected LYs and medication costs, and expected QALYs and total costs for optimal treatment plans and current practice guidelines.The remainder of this article is organized as follows: In Section 2 we provide background on diabetes treatment and a review of the relevant literature. In Section 3 we give a detailed description of the MDP model. In Section 4 we present numerical results. Finally, in Section 5 we highlight main conclusions and directions for future work.We focus on the prevention of stroke and CHD events since they are the leading causes of death for patients with type 2 diabetes. Most patients with diabetes use medication to manage blood pressure and cholesterol since they are the most significant controllable risk factors for stroke and CHD. Glucose control is also important, particularly for the prevention of microvascular events (such as blindness and nerve damage); however, it has not been shown that tight control of glucose in individuals with diabetes has significant risk reduction for cardiovascular events (Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group, 2008; ADVANCE Collaborative Group, 2008; Duckworth et al., 2009).There are many published recommendations in the United States and other countries for initiation of blood pressure and cholesterol medications. Table 1provides a summary of U.S. and international guidelines for initiation of these medications based on well-established risk factors. We evaluated the current U.S. guideline for diabetes patients, which we refer to as U.S. 1. This guideline uses the same treatment thresholds for all patients with diabetes. For comparison we also evaluated a U.S. guideline for patients without diabetes, which we refer to as U.S. 2. This guideline defines a different risk-based treatment threshold, depending on risk level defined by factors including gender and age, as defined in Table 1. In the United States, guidelines for initiation of blood pressure and cholesterol medications for all types of patients have been developed by two independent committees, the seventh Joint National Committee (JNC 7) (Antonopoulos et al., 2002) for blood pressure guidelines and the Adult Treatment Panel III (ATP III) (Chobanian, Bakris, Black, Cushman, & Green, 2003) for cholesterol guidelines. For diabetes patients these guidelines are “one size fits all”; all diabetes patients are treated to the same threshold, regardless of risk of events, gender, age, or any other factors. The uncoordinated treatment of these risk factors is questionable since blood pressure and cholesterol both affect the overall health of a patient and his or her risk of complications (Stevens et al., 2001; Stevens et al., 2004).U.S. and other international guidelines are typically defined by clinical thresholds for stroke and CHD risk factors (other events which are less common such as kidney failure and neuropathy also influence guidelines). The most common risk factors considered by the guidelines are cholesterol and systolic blood pressure (SBP). There are several measures associated with cholesterol including low-density lipoprotein (LDL), high-density lipoprotein (HDL), lipid ratio (LR), and total cholesterol (TC). A patient’s TC is a combination of LDL, HDL, and triglycerides, a relationship estimated by the Friedewald equation (Friedewald, Levy, & Fredrickson, 1972). A patient’s LR is TC divided by HDL. If any of these risk factors are outside of the specified threshold the guideline recommends the patient should begin an additional medication for cholesterol or blood pressure treatment, as appropriate. Note, for ATP III∗ in Table 1, patients with increased risk are treated at lower LDL thresholds than low risk patients.Risk models that use risk factors as inputs, including the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) risk engine (Stevens et al., 2001; Stevens et al., 2004; Kothari et al., 2002), make it possible to build models in which initiation of medications affects probabilities of complications for patients with diabetes. The UKPDS model is a set of risk equations based on a large cohort of diabetes patients in the United Kingdom; inputs for the risk equations include time since diagnosis of diabetes, age, SBP, LR, and gender. We use the UKPDS model to estimate probabilities of fatal and nonfatal stroke and CHD events in our MDP.Several models related to our MDP model have been studied. In the context of type 1 diabetes, Parker, Doyle, and Peppas (2001) provide an overview of control algorithms for real-time monitoring and management of blood glucose. Algorithms are presented to determine appropriate insulin delivery. Other models focus on treatment decisions for patients with type 2 diabetes. Denton, Kurt, Shah, Bryant, and Smith (2009) proposed a non-stationary MDP model to study the optimal timing of statin initiation for cholesterol management, providing optimal control for a single risk factor. Kurt, Denton, Schaefer, Shah, and Smith (2011) provide structural properties of the optimal statin initiation policy. Timbie, Hayward, and Vijan (2010) simulated initiation of blood pressure and cholesterol medications in order to treat to the U.S. guideline targets. However, this simulation model was only used at one point in the patient’s life rather than simulating the use of guidelines over a patient’s lifetime. Shah et al. (2011) also studied the impact of managing blood pressure and cholesterol according to guidelines for treatment (U.S. and international) over the course of a patient’s lifetime.MDP models have also been used to determine the optimal timing of one-time medical interventions for a number of diseases other than diabetes. Alagoz, Maillart, Schaefer, and Roberts (2004), Alagoz et al. (2007) provide a discrete-time, infinite-horizon, stationary MDP model to determine the optimal timing of liver transplantation based on a patient’s MELD score. They also present structural results, proving sufficient conditions for the existence of a control-limit policy for transplantations. Shechter, Bailey, Schaefer, and Roberts (2008) present an MDP model for the optimal initiation of HIV treatment according to a patient’s CD4 count with the goal of maximizing a patient’s quality-adjusted lifetime. They assume a stationary, infinite-horizon model and prove that a control-limit policy exists in terms of the patient’s CD4 count.This article contributes to the existing literature in two main ways. First, we present a novel model formulation to determine optimal treatment policies for management of a chronic disease over the course of a patient’s lifetime. Our model involves the use of multiple medications for simultaneous control of multiple risk factors. To our knowledge, we are the first to model simultaneous optimal control of multiple risk factors. Most related research concentrates on optimal treatment decisions for a single risk factor. Previously proposed diabetes models are descriptive in nature (e.g., simulation models, or Markov chains) and do not provide dynamic, prescriptive policies over time as our work does. Second, we use our model to answer important policy questions regarding the benefits of coordinating treatment guidelines for cholesterol and blood pressure control. We anticipate our findings will provide insights into the ordering of treatment decisions in other contexts.Our MDP model defines the patient’s health status (including SBP, TC, and HDL), current medications, number of stroke and CHD events that have occurred in the past, and risk of future stroke and CHD events based on a discrete set of health states, also described with the term metabolic states. A discrete set of actions represent the initiation of various treatment options. The objective of our model is to find the optimal sequence and timing of medications to manage stroke and CHD risk. Fig. 1provides a simplified state transition diagram of our model for the purpose of illustrating the problem. In the diagram, solid lines illustrate the actions of initiating one or both of the most common medications (statins (ST), ACE inhibitors (AI)), and dashed lines represent the occurrence of an adverse event (stroke or CHD event) or death from other causes. In each medication state, including the no medication state (∅), patients probabilistically move between health states, here represented by L (low), M (medium), H (high), and V (very high). For patients on one or both medications, improvements in patient risk factors (blood pressure, cholesterol, or both) reduce the probability of adverse events.In our model treatment decisions are assumed to be irreversible. Once a patient begins a blood pressure or cholesterol medicine, it is assumed that he or she remains on the medication for the remainder of his or her life. This is consistent with clinical recommendations for these medications (Snow, Aronson, Hornbake, Mottur-Pilson, & Weiss, 2004; Vijan & Hayward, 2004; Chobanian et al., 2003). In some cases, major side effects may cause patients to discontinue treatment (e.g., statins can cause liver problems or severe muscle pain). However, this occurs in a small proportion of patients.The problem we explore in this article is a generalization of the above two-medication problem, depicted in Fig. 1, in which the patient may elect to initiate one or more of a set of available treatments at each decision epoch. This optimal treatment problem can be viewed as a nested stopping time problem. After the first medication is initiated (the first stopping time is chosen), there is a subsequent stopping time problem for the next medication to be initiated, and so on. A brief description of the MDP model is presented below.Actions are taken at a discrete set of decision epochs indexed by t=1,…,T, where epoch t represents the year [t,t+1). This range constitutes the finite decision horizon. Similar to other studies (Denton et al., 2009; Kurt et al., 2011; Shah et al., 2011), yearly decision epochs are used to represent annual visits to a clinician. Ages above T are represented by an infinite post-decision horizon, assuming no new medications are initiated, allowing for accrual of rewards for patients living past the end of the decision horizon.States are composed of living states and absorbing states. Each living state is defined by the factors that influence a patient’s cardiovascular risk: the patient’s TC, HDL, and SBP levels, medication status, and history of stroke and CHD events. We denote the set of the TC states byLTC={L,M,H,V}, with similar definitions for HDL,LHDL={L,M,H,V}, and SBP,LSBP={L,M,H,V}. The thresholds for these ranges are based on clinically-relevant cut points for treatment found in Table 2(Cleeman et al., 2001). The history of stroke and CHD events is defined by the current number of events the patient has had up to some maximum number, k:LS={0,1,…,k}andLCHD={0,1,…,k}. Elements of these sets are indexed by ℓTC, ℓHDL, ℓSBP, ℓS, and ℓCHD, respectively. The set of health states is given byL=LTC×LHDL×LSBP×LS×LCHD. Elements ofLare indexed by ℓ.The set of medication states is denoted byM={m=(m1,m2,…,mn):mi∈{0,1},∀i=1,2,…,n}, where n denotes the number of medications. If mi=0, the patient is not currently on medication i, and if mi=1, the patient is currently on the medication. When a patient begins treatment i, the medication effects are denoted by ωTC(i), representing the proportional change in TC, ωHDL(i), representing the proportional change in HDL, and ωSBP(i), representing the proportional change in SBP. Note, in general cholesterol medications result in decreased TC and increased HDL, while blood pressure medications result in decreased SBP. The medications we consider are targeted specifically at either cholesterol or blood pressure and each has negligible effect on the other risk factor. For example, if medication i is a blood pressure medication, then ωTC(i)=ωHDL(i)=0.The living states in the model are denoted by(ℓ,m)∈L×M. The absorbing states are represented by the death states:D={DS,DCHD,DO}. The three types of death states represent dying from a stroke,DS, a CHD event,DCHD, or other causes,DO. The absorbing states will be denoted byd∈D. Including living and absorbing states, there are a total of 43×2n×(k+1)2+3 states in our model.At each decision epoch, it must be determined which medications to initiate (if any). The action space is dependent on the history of medications that have been initiated in previous epochs. For each medication, at each epoch, medication i can be initiated (I) or initiation can be delayed (W). These actions are defined for medication i as follows:(1)A(ℓ,mi)={Ii,Wi}ifmi=0,{Wi}ifmi=1,whereA(ℓ,m)={A(ℓ,m1)×A(ℓ,m2)×…×A(ℓ,mn)}. Actiona∈A(ℓ,m) denotes the action taken in state (ℓ,m). If a patient is in living state (ℓ,m) and takes actiona, the medication state is then denoted bym′, where mi′ is set to 1 for any medications i that are newly initiated by actiona; mi′=mifor all medications i which are not newly initiated. Once medication i is initiated, the patient’s blood pressure and cholesterol are modified by the medication effects denoted by ωTC(i), ωHDL(i), and ωSBP(i), resulting in a reduction in the probability of having a stroke or CHD event.Three types of probabilities are incorporated into the model: probabilities among health states, probability of events (both fatal and nonfatal), and probability of death from other causes. At epoch t∈1,…,T, death from other causes occurs with probabilityπtO. If the patient is in state(ℓ,m)∈L×M, a nonfatal stroke or CHD event occurs with probabilityπtS(ℓ,m)andπtCHD(ℓ,m), respectively, which depend on the patient’s age, health state, medication status, and other risk factors such as race and gender. Fatal stroke and CHD events occur with probabilityπ̃tS(ℓ,m)andπ̃tCHD(ℓ,m), respectively. Given that the patient is in state (ℓ,m) at epoch t, the probability of moving into one of the absorbing statesd∈Dat epoch t+1 is denoted byp¯tm(d|ℓ), where(2)p¯tm(d|ℓ)=πtOifd=DO,π̃tCHD(ℓ,m)ifd=DCHD,π̃tS(ℓ,m)ifd=DS,for(ℓ,m)∈L×M, andp¯tm(d|d)=1for all t∈1,…,T. The probability of having a nonfatal event or dying (from an event or other causes) is denoted byπt∗(ℓ,m), where(3)πt∗(ℓ,m)=1-πtCHD(ℓ,m)-π̃tCHD(ℓ,m)πtS(ℓ,m)+1-πtS(ℓ,m)-π̃tS(ℓ,m)πtCHD(ℓ,m)+π̃tS(ℓ,m)+π̃tCHD(ℓ,m)+πtO.Given that the patient is in health stateℓ∈L, the probability of being in health state ℓ′ in the next epoch following is denoted by qt(ℓ′∣ℓ). The transition probabilities between health states do not depend on the medication state since the transition probabilities qt(ℓ′∣ℓ) are computed from the natural progression of blood pressure and cholesterol in the absence of medication; however, the medication state does alter the associated thresholds for each TC, HDL, and SBP state, defined in Table 2, based on medication effects. Thus, medication use reduces probabilities of events. We defineptm(j|ℓ)to be the probability of a patient being in statej∈L∪Dat epoch t+1, given the patient is in living state (ℓ,m) at epoch t, wheremincorporates the actionataken at time t. The probabilityptm(j|ℓ)is defined by the following:(4)ptm(j|ℓ)=1-∑d∈Dp¯tm(d|ℓ)qt(j|ℓ)ifℓ,j∈L,p¯tm(j|ℓ)ifℓ∈L,j=D,1ifℓ=j∈D,0otherwise.The reward rt(ℓ,m) is the dollar reward for QALYs minus treatment and medication costs accrued in decision epoch t in living state (ℓ,m) as described in the following equation:(5)rt(ℓ,m)=R(ℓ,m)-CO-(CS(ℓ)+CCHD(ℓ))-(CFS(ℓ)+CFCHD(ℓ))-CMED(m),for t=1,…,T, where R(ℓ,m)=R0(1−dS(ℓ))(1−dCHD(ℓ))(1−dMED(m)) is the dollar reward for one QALY. The quantity R0 is the dollar reward per QALY, which is analogous to the willingness-to-pay threshold in health economics studies. When a patient has an event or initiates a medication, her quality of life is decreased. The decrement factors dS(ℓ), dCHD(ℓ), and dMED(m) represent the decrease in quality of life from a stroke, a CHD event, or medication initiation, respectively. Event decrement factors are used in the year the event occurs and every year thereafter. Medication decrement factors are used in every year that the patient is using the medication. If the patient is on multiple medications, dMED(m) is the sum of the individual medication decrements. The costs CO, CMED(m), CS(ℓ) and CCHD(ℓ), and CFS(ℓ) and CFCHD(ℓ) represent cost of other health care for diabetes patients, cost of medications, cost of initial hospitalization for stroke and CHD events, and cost of follow-up treatment for stroke and CHD events, respectively.For a patient in living state (ℓ,m) in epoch t, let vt(ℓ,m) denote the patient’s maximum total expected discounted rewards prior to her first event or death. The following recursion defines the optimal action in each state for t=1,…,T−1:(6)vt(ℓ,m)=maxa∈A(ℓ,m)rt(ℓ,m′(a))+λ∑∀j∈L∪Dptm′(a)(j|ℓ)vt+1(j,m′(a)),where j indexes states inL∪D,m′(a)is defined as the medication statemwith actionataken into account, and λ∈[0,1)is the discount factor per decision epoch, which is commonly set to 97% in health economic evaluations (see Chapter 7 of Gold, Siegel, Russell, & Weinstein (1996) for a discussion of this). The boundary condition is given by vT(ℓ,m)=rT(ℓ,m)+E[PDHR∣ℓ,m], where E[PDHR∣ℓ,m] is the expected post–decision horizon reward (PDHR). This represents expected rewards for a patient living past the decision horizon (e.g., past age 100). The PDHR depends on the state and treatment status of the patient in the last year of the decision horizon and the number of years into the post–decision horizon that the patient lives. This approximation of rewards is needed because of the limited samples in the data set for older patients.Various criteria can be expressed using the general reward function in Eq. (5). For example, letting R(ℓ,m)=1 for all patients with ℓS=ℓCHD=0 and all cost parameters set to zero represents the objective of primary prevention (i.e., the value function for a given state at a given decision epoch is the expected LYs to first event). Another primary prevention model criterion that can be expressed using the reward function is to let R(ℓ,m)=1−dMED(m) for patients with ℓS=ℓCHD=0. This primary prevention model takes into account the downside of treatment by incorporating the disutility of treatment before a patient’s first event. A third primary prevention model would incorporate both the disutility and cost of medications before the patient has any events. Thus, R(ℓ,m)=R0 and all costs other than CMED(m) are set to zero. In all of these cases, patients with ℓS≠0 or ℓCHD≠0 have R(ℓ,m)=0. As we discuss in Section 4, inclusion or removal of different parts of the general reward function (e.g., costs of other medical care for diabetes patients) can greatly affect optimal policies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our findings suggest the use of coordinated treatment of blood pressure and cholesterol can reduce the costs of treatment and hospitalization while improving length and quality of life. For primary prevention, the same event-free LYs from U.S. 1 could be achieved with optimal guidelines at a reduced cost. Using the optimal guidelines with large values of R0 allows for additional LYs before an event or death over U.S. 1, though costs can be higher.For the combined primary and secondary prevention, the model-based optimal treatment policies result in medications being initiated over a longer time period than with U.S. 1, producing a reduction in costs and in some cases improvement in expected QALYs. Since female patients have a later onset of stroke and CHD risk, compared to males, the delayed initiation of drugs from the optimal treatment policies is sufficient to manage risk of events while improving quality of life and reducing costs. Female patients can save at least $7378 per patient on average over a lifetime compared to the U.S. and international guidelines. The main impact of the optimal policies for male patients is seen on the cost side. Male patients can save at least $4573 per patient on average in lifetime costs compared to the U.S. and international guidelines. Implementation of the optimal policies could produce approximately the same expected QALYs as with the implementation of U.S. 1 while greatly reducing the overall cost of treatment.We have quantified the benefits of coordinated treatment and highlighted the need for the U.S. treatment guidelines to coordinate treatment for blood pressure and cholesterol medications. The coordination of these types of medications is particularly beneficial since both blood pressure and cholesterol medications are used to prevent the stroke and CHD events. While we have presented the benefits of coordinated treatment for the management of blood pressure and cholesterol in diabetes patients, there are general insights that can be gained from the management of multiple risk factors for other types of patients.In the future we could extend our model to include additional medications and treatment for other related risk factors. For example, aspirin could be added to the model since aspirin helps reduce the risk of stroke and CHD events in high risk individuals, albeit with the low probability of significant side effects such as gastrointestinal bleeding. In addition, the model could be extended to manage HbA1c with the use of glucose control medications. It is possibly a limitation in our current model that we use modification of surrogate markers (blood pressure and cholesterol) to reflect the benefits of medication rather than modified risk of events (stroke and CHD). In the future, the model could be altered to allow for modified risk of events to reflect the benefits of medication.Our model has some limitations. While the medication effectiveness parameters are estimated from observational data, we do not explicitly model treatment effectiveness based on adherence to medication, and we do not account for changes in medication adherence over time. Similarly, we do not explicitly model treatment effectiveness based on medication dosage. The parameters used to calibrate our model are for patients who have health insurance and therefore may not perfectly reflect the general population. Our results are for a typical patient represented by the general trends we observe in the observational data used to calibrate our model and the all other cause mortality based on average population estimates. Our model could be calibrated to reflect individual risk factors for specific types of patients.