@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A methodology for supporting strategy implementation based on the VSM: A case study in a Latin-American multi-national

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We crafted an enhanced methodology for organizational redesign based on the VSM.First documented use of the VSM as tool for strategy implementation in a large MNC.We describe in detail a successful application of mixed research methods.Innovative, participatory practices, which sought to overcome VSM’s limitations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
(I) OR in developing countries,(S) Complexity theory,Problem structuring (P),Viability theory,Organizational redesign,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Soft OR tools have increasingly been used to support the strategic development of companies at operational and managerial levels. However, we still lack OR applications that can be useful in dealing with the “implementation gap”, understood as the scarcity of resources available to organizations seeking to align their existing processes and structures with a new strategy. In this paper we contribute to filling that gap, describing an action research case study where we supported strategy implementation in a Latin American multinational corporation through a soft OR methodology. We enhanced the ‘Methodology to support organizational self-transformation’, inspired by the Viable System Model, with substantive improvements in data collection and analyses. Those adjustments became necessary to facilitate second order learning and agreements on required structural changes among a large number of participants. This case study contributes to the soft OR and strategy literature with insights about the promise and constraints of this soft OR methodology to collectively structure complex decisions that support organizational redesign and strategy implementation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dyson, Bryant, Morecroft, and O’Brien (2007) view the strategic development process as one that explicitly incorporates reflective engagement and analytical reasoning, supported by models to help assess and rehearse strategic options. Systemic and soft OR researchers have traditionally contributed to the development of strategic management through the provision of methods and tools. Nevertheless, there is still a pervasive scarcity of resources to assist managers in dealing with what has been called in the strategy literature the “implementation gap” (Atkinson, 2006). In particular, the difficult task of adapting structures to the requirements of a newly agreed structure, has not been covered yet by any soft OR researcher.In this paper we present an example of a soft OR methodology, the “Methodology to support organizational Self-Transformation” (Espinosa & Walker, 2012), adapted and used for such a purpose in a Latin-American multinational corporation. In order to be fit for this purpose, the intervening consultants had to further develop the methodology. This was achieved through the use of mixed methods in data gathering and analysis, and by the innovative design of meetings and workshops to support strategic agreements. These new tools, sought to: (a) investigate the structural constraints that prevented effective strategy implementation in a large organization and (b) facilitate the emergence of a political consensus among members representing all levels of organization, on cultural, structural and technological changes to mitigate such existing constraints.In the final section, we reflect on the way that the innovations in methods and tools supported group learning, and provided improved reliability and robustness to the analyses. We close with a critical assessment of the experience, based on the feedback received from organization members through different assessments and suggest open paths for continued research in this field.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The research project presented in this paper contributes to on-going research in soft OR by improving an existing soft OR methodology through the development of data collection and analyses tools to support a large intervention, and VSM redesign processes that structure even further the ways of engagement with the customers. This is particularly useful when the intervention happens in a large organization.Our case study exemplifies the use of VSM as a “non-codified” use of PSM; that is, as a PSM that has been useful to structure collective knowledge on organizational structure, processes and roles, in a context of strategy development, and more specifically, strategy implementation. It also explains in detail, and in a completely different context from the ones published before, the way that the VSM can be used as a meta-language to facilitate second order learning in an organization going through a self-transformation process. As Gharajedaghi would say, in order to achieve second order learning “these systems need to go through an active process of unlearning and redesign” (2007). Here we have experienced the process of unlearning by collectively challenging existing roles and structures, rethinking them using VSM distinctions, and challenging underlying assumptions about power structures and possible new ways of relating between roles.