@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Weekly self-scheduling, forward contracting, and pool involvement for an electricity producer. An adaptive robust optimization approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Optimization of the self-scheduling, and market strategy of an electricity producer.An adaptive two-stage robust optimization model is proposed, two variants are considered.Two case studies are analyzed, and several instances are investigated.Risk analysis are made by solving each instance for multiple values of budget parameters.The two variants of the algorithms have a similar performance, with some exceptions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in energy,Robust optimization,Electricity market,Renewable energy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the optimization under uncertainty of the self-scheduling, forward contracting, and pool involvement of an electricity producer operating a mixed power generation station, which combines thermal, hydro and wind sources, and uses a two stage adaptive robust optimization approach. In this problem the wind power production and the electricity pool price are considered to be uncertain, and are described by uncertainty convex sets. To solve this problem, two variants of a constraint generation algorithm are proposed, and their application and characteristics discussed. Both algorithms are used to solve two case studies based on two producers, each operating equivalent generation units, differing only in the thermal units’ characteristics. Their market strategies are investigated for three different scenarios, corresponding to as many instances of electricity price forecasts. The effect of the producers’ approach, whether conservative or more risk prone, is also investigated by solving each instance for multiple values of the so-called budget parameter. It was possible to conclude that this parameter influences markedly the producers’ strategy, in terms of scheduling, profit, forward contracting, and pool involvement. These findings are presented and analyzed in detail, and an attempted rationale is proposed to explain the less intuitive outcomes. Regarding the computational results, these show that for some instances, the two variants of the algorithms have a similar performance, while for a particular subset of them one variant has a clear superiority.forward contractshydro pump-storage generation unitsblocks of the forward contractsgenerating unitsoptimality cuts in the Master problemfeasibility cuts in the Master problemtime periodsthermal generation unitsproduction cost function coefficients for unit i (€/hour)cold start-up cost of unit i (€/hour)number of periods unit i must be off at the beginning of the time horizontime periods spanned by contract fshut-down cost (€)minimum down time of unit i (hour)minimum number of periods a unit i must be off at the beginning of the time horizonhot start cost of unit i (€/hour)minimum number of periods a unit i must be on at the beginning of the time horizonminimum power output of unit i (megawatt)maximum power output of unit i (megawatt)power produced at t=0 by unit i (megawatt)maximum ramp-down rate of unit i (megawatt)maximum ramp-up rate of unit i (megawatt)maximum shutdown rate of unit i (megawatt)spinning reserve for period t (megawatt)maximum start-up rate of unit i (megawatt)number of periods unit i must be on at the beginning of the time horizoninitial state of unit i{on,off}={1,0}minimum up time of unit i (hour)cold start hours of unit i (hour)initial status of unit i (hour)conversion factor betweencubichectometers3andmeter3/seconds in one hourwater head in plant i (meter)power consumption factorpower generation factornatural inflow of water for plant i (meter3/seconds)maximum turbined and pumped flow of water for plant i (meter3/seconds)maximum volume of water in the reservoir of plant i (cubichectometers3)minimum volume of water in the reservoir of plant i (cubichectometers3)minimum volume of water in the reservoir of plant i at the of the horizon (cubichectometers3)energy price of buying block j of forward contract f (€/megawatthour)energy price of selling block j of forward contract f (€/megawatthour)shut-down cost of unit i in period t (€)total startup, shutdown, production, and online cost of unit i (€)total startup, shutdown and online cost of unit i (€)startup cost of unit i in period t (€)power bought through block j of forward contract f (megawatt)power sold through block j of forward contract f (megawatt)operational profit of the producer per week (€)power output of unit i in period t (megawatt)power bought in the pool in period t (megawatt)power sold in the pool in period t (megawatt)power output of the pumped-storage hydro unit i in period t (megawatt)power consumption of the pumped-storage hydro unit i in period t (megawatt)turbined flow of water in plant i in period t (meter3/seconds)pumped flow of water in plant i in period t (meter3/seconds)volume of water stored in the reservoir of plant i (cubichectometers3)dual variables of the inner problem of the recourse problemdual variables of the inner problem of the recourse problemdual variables of the inner problem of the recourse problemdual variables of the inner problem of the recourse problemdual variables of the inner problem of the recourse problemvariable that approximates the recourse problem optimal valueon/off status of unit i in period tstartup status of unit i in period tshutdown status of unit i in period tselection of forward contract f to buy energyselection of forward contract f to sell energynominal wind power output in period t (megawatt)down deviation from the nominal wind power output in period t (megawatt)up deviation from the nominal wind power output in period t (megawatt)nominal pool price in period t (€/megawatthour)down deviation from the nominal pool price in period t (€/megawatthour)up deviation from the nominal pool price in period t (€/megawatthour)budget of uncertainty parameter for the pool prices and wind power outputwind power output in period t (megawatt)dummy variable to replace the bilinear termzt+αtdummy variable to replace the bilinear termzt-αtpool price in period t (Dollar/megawatthour)=1 if the pool price is at the upper bound of the set=1 if the pool price is at the lower bound of the set=1 if the wind power output is at the upper bound of the set=1 if the wind power output is at the lower bound of the set

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In general, electricity producers operating in electricity markets sell their energy through bilateral contracts or in the pool. The details of these operations depend on the specific market design where the producer is integrated. For a review on market structure and designs see Conejo, Carrion, and Morales (2010) and Oliveira, Ruiz, and Conejo (2013).From the point of view of the electricity producer, the selling strategy for each time period should take in consideration the power generation capacity of the producer, and to some extent also to the option to buy electricity from the market to meet the committed sales. Therefore, in this decision making problem the producer faces two integrated challenges: (1) the self-scheduling of the generation units and (2) the optimal forward contract selection and pool involvement.The basic problem involving unit self-scheduling determines the optimal power outputs of the producer’s generation units subject to feasible operation, which provides a basis to define the market involvement. In general, self-scheduling problems are related to Unit Commitment (UC) problems of thermal and/or hydro units. These are classical scheduling problems that have been addressed by a number of authors using decomposition strategies such as Lagrangian Relaxation, and in the last decade with Mixed Integer Linear (MILP) models, see for example Arroyo and Conejo (2000) and Li and Shahidehpour (2005). Several authors have proposed UC MILP models for systems with thermal units, aiming at developing: (a) tight linear relaxations, by generating facets of the ramping up and down constraints of the units (Ostrowski, Anjos, & Vannelli, 2012), convex hull formulations for the minimum up and down time constraints (Lee, Leung, & Margot, 2004; Rajan & Takriti, 2005), and tight approximate formulations for the linearization of the quadratic objective function (Frangioni, Gentile, & Lacalandra, 2009); (b) compact formulations (Hedman, Ferris, O’Neill, Fisher, & Oren, 2010; Morales-Espana, Latorre, & Ramos, 2013a); and (c) accurate representations of the operations and thermal units (Frangioni, Gentile, & Lacalandra, 2008; Morales-Espana, Latorre, & Ramos, 2013b). The self-scheduling of hydro systems has also been addressed with MILP models, and Mixed Integer Nonlinear Programming (MINLP) models. In MILP models, the nonlinearities of the hydro plants are linearized using piecewise linear approximations, see for example Conejo, Arroyo, Contreras, and Villamor (2002), and Borghetti, D’Ambrosio, Lodi, and Martello (2008) for a tighter linear approximation. MINLP models have been also considered for the self-scheduling of hydro plants, where detailed nonlinear expressions for the power generation function, and relations between the water head and the volume of water in the reservoir are considered. These nonlinear functions are strongly related with the power generation and therefore with the self-scheduling of the hydro units. Recently, the short-term hydro scheduling has been addressed using a detailed nonconvex MINLP model combined with a deterministic global optimization approach to overcome the local solutions of the nonconvex MINLP model (Lima, Marcovecchio, Novais, & Grossmann, 2013).The self-scheduling problems described above are mainly considered as deterministic, however, in reality, some parameters are subject to uncertainty, such as the electricity demand, electricity prices of the pool, or the renewable energy based generators power output. In this context, stochastic programming models and decomposition methods, or strategies based on conditional value-at-risk analysis have been applied to cope with the uncertainty of some parameters (Conejo, Nogales, Arroyo, & Garcia-Bertrand, 2004; Fleten & Kristoffersen, 2007; Jabr, 2005; Nowak & Romisch, 2000). However, several problems that address self-scheduling with uncertainty fall in the category of self-scheduling in a market environment that is mentioned in the next paragraph.The second problem is related with the market involvement using trading tools, such as forward contracts and pool involvement. In general, the electricity producers establish forward contracts in order to hedge against the electricity pool prices volatility, whereby signing contracts the producer chooses to have a fixed certain revenue, instead of relying on the uncertain pool prices. The decision making process related to optimal offering (contracts and pool) can be recast as an optimization problem under uncertainty, which has been studied considering different features, namely: (a) self-scheduling and offering strategies (Amjady & Vahidinasab, 2013; Barroso, Street, Granville, & Pereira, 2011; Conejo et al., 2004; Fleten & Kristoffersen, 2007; Kazempour & Moghaddam, 2011; Yamin & Shahidehpour, 2004); (b) offering models for wind power producers where the uncertainty of the wind power plays an important role (Angarita, Usaola, & Martinez-Crespo, 2009; Baringo & Conejo, 2013; Conejo et al., 2010; Morales, Conejo, & Perez-Ruiz, 2010); (c) self-scheduling and strategic offering (Baslis & Bakirtzis, 2011; Cerisola, Baillo, Fenandez-Lopez, Ramos, & Gollmer, 2009; Pousinho, Contreras, Bakirtzis, & Catalao, 2013; Ruiz & Conejo, 2009); (d) offering models that represent the behavior of competitors, but do not include self-scheduling (Bakirtzis, Ziogos, Tellidou, & Bakirtzis, 2007; Gountis & Bakirtzis, 2004; Ni, Luh, & Rourke, 2004; Wen & David, 2001); (e) forward contracts strategies without self-scheduling (Conejo et al., 2010; Dent, Bialek, & Hobbs, 2011; El Khatib & Galiana, 2007; Falbo, Felletti, & Stefani, 2010; Feng, Gan, Zhong, & Ni, 2007); (f) self-scheduling, forward contracting and pool offering (Garces & Conejo, 2010; Guan, Wu, Gao, & Sun, 2008; Simoglou, Biskas, & Bakirtzis, 2012). A relevant review regarding mathematical programming approaches for optimal offering is given in Kwon and Frances (2012), and a recent review on optimal offering strategies for hydro systems can be found in Steeger, Barroso, and Rebennack (2014).Two recent works addressed the market involvement from two different perspectives. The first looks at the electricity market as a supply chain, considering the different interactions between players and market floors, analyzing for example the overall level of trading in the pool, as a function of the different types of contracts and market structures (Oliveira et al., 2013). The second focus on a small producer that has to maximize the profit through the contract selection and pool sales (Falbo et al., 2010). These latter authors propose an integrated risk management approach to deal with the combination of upstream and downstream uncertainty faced by the electricity producer, and conclude that signing a forward contract is not always the best way to mitigate risk, and therefore, some pool involvement is recommended. In general both works lead to important insights regarding the forward contracting and pool involvement, which are also discussed in this work from the electricity producer point of view.From the above references, the problem tackled in Garces and Conejo (2010) resembles the problem studied in this work. Those authors address the weekly self-scheduling, forward contracting and (Monday) pool offering, subject to the uncertainty in the pool prices, using a stochastic programming approach. However, there are significant differences between both works, namely the level of time resolution of the model, the electricity production system, and the methodology to deal with uncertainty. The production system in that work is based on thermal units, while here it encompasses a thermal unit, pump-storage hydro plant, and a wind farm, which constitutes a much more general system. In addition, their approach to deal with uncertainty and risk is based on stochastic programming and the conditional value at risk for risk management, while in this work a different approach is developed. Furthermore, an additional source of uncertainty, the wind power output, is considered here.In these problems, whenever the uncertainty is present, it is mainly addressed using stochastic programming approaches, while an alternative rationale stream addresses the optimization under uncertainty via a robust optimization framework.The objective of robust optimization is to obtain a solution for the problem under uncertainty, where by robust it is meant that such solution is the optimal for the worst conditions within an uncertainty set describing the problem uncertainty. Robust optimization has its foundations on robust control, and on the optimization of Linear Programming problems involving hard constraints subject to uncertainty (Ben-Tal & Nemirovski, 1998; Soyster, 1973). Robust optimization has three main advantages: (1) under specific conditions, the resulting problems are computationally tractable, without an exponential increase of the size of the model; (2) results can be very reliable, due to the fact that worst case situations are considered; and (3) it does not require a distribution of probabilities as stochastic programming does. On the other hand, the main disadvantage relies on the fact that it is not straightforward and sometimes meaningful to define and control the conservatism level. However, the conservatism inherent to robust optimization has been controlled through the parameterization of budget constraints (Bertsimas & Sim, 2003), resulting in a risk framework analogous to the risk management strategies implemented in stochastic programming to minimize risk. A comprehensive review on robust optimization theory can be found in Bertsimas, Brown, and Caramanis (2011), and a review on its application in Gabrel, Murat, and Thiele (2014).In the area of energy systems, robust optimization has been applied mainly in two sub-areas: (1) power systems and (2) the optimal strategic planning of oil supply chains (Ribas, Hamacher, & Street, 2010). In power systems it has been mainly applied to deal with the uncertainty in unit commitment problems, and market offering. The application of robust optimization to the unit commitment problem involves solving problems with different features, for example considering uncertainty in the power demand, wind power, demand response, and reserves determination, see for example the work of Bertsimas, Litvinov, Sun, Zhao, and Zheng (2013), Jiang, Zhang, Li, and Guan (2010), Zhang and Guan (2009), Zhao and Zeng (2010), and Zugno and Conejo (2013). These authors have also developed new variants of constraint generation algorithms based on Benders’ Decomposition (Benders, 1962), in order to efficiently address the bi-level optimization problems resulting from the adaptive robust optimization formulations. Two of these variants are further discussed later in this work.A robust optimization framework was also applied in Baringo and Conejo (2011) and Dominguez, Baringo, and Conejo (2012) to derive optimal market offering strategies for a price-taker power producer for the day-ahead market. In their approaches instead of relying on an electricity forecast distribution via scenarios, they propose an uncertainty convex set for the electricity price. Recently, a similar approach was proposed for the market offering of a solar power producer.The objective of the present work is to address the optimization under uncertainty of the self-scheduling and market involvement of an electricity producer. The main contributions of this work are the following: (1) development of an adaptive robust optimization model for a power producer that involves two decision stages, and considers the option of forward contracting, self-scheduling, and pool involvement; this represents the point of view of the producer in a market environment, which is a different framework from the models presented in Bertsimas et al. (2013), Jiang et al. (2010), Zhang and Guan (2009), Zhao and Zeng (2010), and Zugno and Conejo (2013); (2) two sources of uncertainty are considered, namely the wind power and electricity prices, which are defined by convex uncertainty sets; (3) analysis and characterization of the properties of the overall approach involving the models and the two constraint generation algorithms implemented; (4) derivation of a linearization scheme for bilinear terms based on the characteristics of the problem, which is further discussed in Section 7.1.The two constraint generation algorithms are applied to solve two case studies involving different thermal units, and for each case three electricity price forecasts are considered.The structure of the paper is the following: the introduction is presented in Section 1. In Section 2, the problem statement is defined. Section 3 gives a compact formulation of the deterministic model. The optimization under uncertainty is formulated as a general two stage adaptive robust optimization in Section 4. In Section 5 the two algorithms used are analyzed. In Section 6, the uncertainty convex sets are defined. Section 7 shows the derivation of the master and subproblem used. In Section 8 the case studies are described, and the results are analyzed. The conclusions are presented in Section 9, and in Appendix A the detailed model involving the forward contracts selection, and unit commitment of the thermal and hydro units is described.This paper addresses the optimal self-scheduling and market involvement of an electricity producer that owns different generation units. The portfolio of this producer includes a wind farm, a thermal plant, and a pump-storage hydro plant. It is assumed that the producer can operate as a virtual power plant, where either the power produced by the wind farm or the thermal unit can be used to pump water back to the reservoir of the hydro plant. The producer can interact with the electricity market by establishing weekly contracts and participating in the pool. The time horizon is one week, with a time resolution of one hour. The decision framework involves two stages, the first occurs before the beginning of the week, when the producer has the option to sign one or more forward contracts, and it must decide the hourly commitment of the thermal unit during the time horizon. On the second stage, the producer has to dispatch the thermal unit, decide the operation of the pumped-storage unit, and the power bought and sold in the pool for each hour of the week. The electricity prices in the pool and the wind power are uncertain, and the uncertainty is defined using convex uncertainty sets. The objective is to determine the optimal production schedule for the hydro and thermal units, forward contracts and pool involvement that maximize the profit of the producer. It is assumed that the producer is a price-taker, and it does not consider the behavior of the other competitors.The deterministic model used in this paper has three main blocks, the first is related with the definition and choice of the forward contracts, the second involves the operation of the thermal unit, and the third is concerned with the pumped-storage hydro plant operation. These three blocks are linked by the overall energy balance. The detailed equations describing the operating constraints of each unit are presented in detail in Appendix A, while in this section a general formulation is given:(1)max∑f∑jλf,jsellff,jsell-λf,jbuyff,jbuyDf+∑tλtptsell-ptbuy-cop,(2)s.t.:cop=∑i∈TH∑tcui,t+Aiui,t+Bipi,t+cdi,t,(3)∑i∈THpi,t+∑i∈HYptbi,t+ptbuy+∑f∑jff,jbuy+wt=∑i∈HYppi,t+ptsell+∑f∑jff,jsell,∀t,(4)ff,jbuy,ff,jsell∈Πf,j,∀f,j,(5)pi,t,ui,t,ui,tup,ui,tdn∈Ωi,t,∀i∈TH,t,(6)ptbi,t,ppi,t∈ϒi,t,∀i∈HY,t,whereff,jbuyandff,jsellare the power bought and sold at pricesλf,jbuyandλf,jsell, respectively, through block j of forward contract f,λtis the electricity pool price in periodt,copis the total cost of the thermal unit during the time horizon,cui,tandcdi,tdenote the startup and shutdown costs of the thermal unit i in periodt,AiandBirepresent cost coefficients,pi,tis the power output of unit i in periodt,ui,t,ui,tup, andui,tdnare binary variables that indicate the on/off, startup, and shutdown status of the thermal units,ptbi,tandppi,tdenote the power output and consumption, respectively, of the pumped-storage hydro unit in periodt,wtis the wind power output in period t, andptbuyandptsellare the power bought and sold in the pool in period t, respectively. The objective function of the problem aims to maximize the operational profit of the generation facilities given by the profit of selling energy through weekly contracts plus the profit obtained from the participation in the pool minus the costs incurred with the thermal generation. Eq. (2) defines the total cost of the thermal unit involving the startup, operation, and shutdown costs. Eq. (3) represents the energy balance, stating that the energy generated in each time period by the thermal plant, hydro plant, wind farm plus the energy acquired through the contracts and from the pool is equal to the energy consumed by the pump mode of the pumped-storage hydro plant plus the energy sold through the contracts plus the energy sold in the pool.Πf,j,Ωi,t,ϒi,trepresent the forward contract selection, and the feasible regions of operation of the thermal, and pumped-storage hydro units. The deterministic model summarized above can be represented by the generic formulation:(DET)maxx,z,ycxTx+czTz+cyTys.t.Cx⩽bDz=dFy+Gx=wAz+By⩽dHy⩽hx,y⩾0,z∈{0,1},wherex,z, and y denote the vectors of variables, A,B,C,D,F,G,H,cxT,czT,b,d,w, and h are matrices and vectors with known parameters.The weekly self-scheduling of the producer and its participation in the market can be described as an optimization problem under uncertainty with recourse (Garces & Conejo, 2010). The decision framework described in Section 2 can be described by an adaptive robust optimization model. In the first stage it is maximized the partial profit given by the difference between the revenues from the forward selling contracts and the costs of both the forward buying contracts and thermal commitment costs. In a second stage the partial profit is calculated as the difference between the revenues of selling energy in the pool and the variable costs involving both the purchase of energy in the pool and the operating costs of the thermal unit. A general formulation of the robust counterpart of the deterministic model presented before can be stated as(RO)maxx,zcxTx+czTz+R(x,z)s.t.Cx⩽bDz=dx⩾0,z∈{0,1},where x and z are the first stage variables, andR(x,z)is the adaptive recourse profit as a function of x and z, parameterized over the uncertainty set W. In the framework of a robust optimization approach, the recourse profit is maximized for the worst case realization of the stochastic parameters within W, which is broadly translated as the minimum of the maximum profit subject to the constraints of the recourse problem, as in(RP)R(x,z)=minw,cymaxycyTys.t.Fy=w-GxBy⩽d-AzHy⩽hy⩾0s.t.w,cy∈W,where y are the second stage variables, and w andcydenote the parameters subject to uncertainty. The construction of the set W will be specified later for the problem studied in this work. The inner problem of the recourse problem (RP) is a Linear Programming (LP) problem for fixed values of w andcy:(IRP)IR(x,z,w,cy)=maxycyTys.t.Fy=w-GxBy⩽d-AzHy⩽hy⩾0,and based on duality theory, the dual of the inner problem of (IRP) is given by(DIRP)DIR(x,z,w,cy)=minα,β,μw-GxTα+d-AzTβ+hTμs.t.FTα+BTβ+HTμ⩾cyα∈R,β⩾0,μ⩾0,whereα,β,μare the dual variables corresponding to the sequence of constraints of the problem (IRP). Assuming the strong duality property, thenIR(x,z,w,cy)=DIR(x,z,w,cy)at the optimum. Integrating the dual of the inner problem with the outer problem results the following recourse problem:(RP1)LDR(x,z)=minw,cy,α,β,μw-GxTα+d-AzTβ+hTμs.t.FTα+BTβ+HTμ⩾cyα∈R,β⩾0,μ⩾0w,cy∈W.Problem (RP1) is characterized by a convex feasible region that is independent of the first stage variables x and z, and by a bilinear term involving the variables w and α in the objective function. This nonlinear term can be linearized, but it requires the previous definition of the polyhedral uncertainty set W, see Section 6. At this point it is assumed that Problem (RP1) can be solved. Using the above formulation for the recourse problem, Problem (RO) is equivalent to(RO2)maxx,zcxTx+czTz+minw,cy,α,β,μw-GxTα+d-AzTβ+hTμs.t.FTα+BTβ+HTμ⩾cyα∈R,β⩾0,μ⩾0w,cy∈Ws.t.Cx⩽bDz=dx⩾0,z∈{0,1}.Problem (RO2) does not have a trivial optimization formulation because of the bi-level structure involving a Max–Min problem that cannot be solved by a standard solver. In this work, Problem (RO2) is addressed using a constraint generation algorithm based on Benders’ Decomposition (Benders, 1962). This approach has been studied by other authors to solve similar problems, see for example Jiang et al. (2010), Thiele, Terry, and Epelman (2009), Zhang and Guan (2009), Zhao and Zeng (2010), and Zugno and Conejo (2013). From the algorithmic point of view, the constraint generation algorithm relies on an iterative procedure, where on each iteration two problems are solved. First, a subproblem is solved using initial guesses for the first stage variables, and its solution involving the dual variables is used to construct Benders type cuts that are added to the master problem formulation. At this level, a lower bound on the objective function of the problem is calculated, as detailed in the algorithm description. In a second stage the master problem is solved, generating a new set of first stage variables, and an upper bound for the objective function of the problem. The algorithm stops when the gap between the lower and upper bound reaches a pre-specified tolerance. A description of the algorithm and formulations of these two problems are presented in Fig. 1.The following considerations are in order regarding the constraint generation algorithm:1.The uncertainty of the wind power and of the electricity prices is described by polyhedral sets, which ensures that the solution of the outer problem of the subproblem is at one of the extremes of the polyhedral set. The construction of these sets is an active area of research, and therefore, for a matter of simplicity a simple set representation is used.The dual of the inner problem (DIRP) has a feasible region that is independent of the first stage decision variables. This property is common in the subproblems of Benders Decomposition, and it is useful to build the master problem.The objective function of the subproblem has a set of bilinear terms involvingwtandαt. Based on the feasible region of the subproblem and the polyhedral sets used, this nonlinearity can be linearized and the solution of the resulting subproblem is still at one of the vertices of the subproblem (Thiele et al., 2009; Zhao & Zeng, 2010).Any feasible solution from the subproblem is a valid cut for the master problem, while the optimal solution is the tighter cut.The master problem (MP) is built over a relaxation of Problem (RO2). There are two steps involved in the construction of the master. The first one, involves the replacement of the recourse problem by a new variable Θ that is limited by the constraintΘ⩽minw,cy,α,β,μw-GxTα+d-AzTβ+hTμ. While, in the second step this inequality is approximated by the set of inequalities:(7)Θ⩽wk-GxTαk+d-AzTβk+hTμk,k∈O,which are incrementally added to the master problem during the iterative procedure of the algorithm above. This is the main difference between the typical Benders Decomposition and the column generation algorithm, where in the latter the master is relaxed and progressively tightened by including additional cuts.In general the master problem should be built to generate first stage decisions that ensure that the problem (RP1) is bounded, which guarantees complete recourse of the subproblem. However, if that is not possible for all first stage decisions, and the problem (RP1) becomes unbounded, then a the feasibility cut similar to the one used in Benders’ Decomposition would be added to the master problem:(8)0⩽wk-GxTαk+d-AzTβk+hTμk,k∈S.This feasibility cut is built using the extreme rays of the dual obtained with the solution of the problem (Hooker & Ottosson, 2003):(FP1)SLDR(xk,zk)=minw,α,β,μw-GxkTα+d-AzkTβ+hTμs.t.FTα+BTβ+HTμ⩾0α∈R,β⩾0,μ⩾0w∈W.The case study addressed in this work exhibits complete recourse, and therefore the feasibility cuts discussed above are not used. However, for the sake of clarity they are briefly mentioned.An improved constraint generation algorithm called primal cut algorithm was proposed in Zhao and Zeng (2010). These authors keep the same logic of the constraint generation algorithm, but the master problem is extended to include information about the subproblem. This information is based on the full set of constraints of the primal (inner problem of the recourse problem) built over a copy of the primal variables. Their main motivation was to improve the feasibility of the subproblem, through the transfer of information from the subproblem to the master, in order to generate first stage variables that help the subproblem to remain feasible. Based on this, the master problem has the following formulation:(PMP)PF(x,z)=maxx,z,ΘcxTx+czTz+Θs.t.Θ⩽wk-GxTαk+d-AzTβk+hTμk,k∈OΘ⩽cyTkyk,k∈OFyk=wk-Gx,k∈OByk⩽d-Az,k∈OHyk⩽h,k∈OCx⩽bDz=dx⩾0,z∈{0,1},yk⩾0,Θ∈R.The disadvantage of the primal cut algorithm relies on the size of the master problem, which increases in number of equations and variables when compared with constraint generation algorithm. This suggests that the overhead of these extra equations and variables should be studied case by case, because for certain problems this overhead may not be worthy.The uncertainty associated with the wind power and electricity prices is described by polyhedral sets, which are built around a nominal value and bounded by a lower and upper bound. To protect against over conservative situations arising from extreme values of the uncertainty sets, budget constraints parameterized over a budget constant are considered. This is a common technique used to control the level of conservatism in robust optimization, and it may adopt different formulations (Bertsimas & Sim, 2004; Thiele et al., 2009; Zhao & Zeng, 2010). In this work, the polyhedral set for the uncertainty is given byW=Ww∪Wλ, whereWwandWλare the sets for the wind power and electricity prices. Therefore, the polyhedral set for the wind power involves the relation between the wind power, the nominal value and the lower and upper values as given bywt=w¯t+zt+wtu-zt-wtland the budget constraint∑tzt++zt-⩽Γwhere Γ is the budget parameter that limits the variation of the wind. Note thatΓ⩽|T|, where|T|is the number of time periods. A high value of Γ implies that a high number of periods, with wind power outputs exhibiting deviations from the forecast nominal value have been accounted for. Conversely, smaller values of Γ correspond to a lower number of such wind power outputs being accounted for. A conservative approach will therefore tend to favor the former, since most worst cases have already been contemplated, while a more risk prone approach will be keen to select the latter. Hence, the wind set definition is given by(9)Ww=wt⩾0,zt+,zt-∈{0,1},∀t,:wt=w¯t+zt+wtu-zt-wtl,∑tzt++zt-⩽Γ,wherew¯tis the nominal wind power,wtuandwtlare the upper and lower bound for the wind power, andzt+andzt-are binary variables that define the bounds of the uncertainty set. The polyhedral set for the electricity price follows a similar rationale:(10)Wλ=λt⩾0,yt+,yt-∈{0,1},∀t,λt=λ¯t+yt+λtu-yt-λtl,∑tyt++yt-⩽Γwhereλ¯tis the nominal electricity price,λtuandλtlare the upper and lower bound for the electricity prices, andyt+andyt-are binary variables that define the bounds of the uncertainty set.The robust optimization formulation for this problem is represented by(11)P=maxX∑f∑jλf,jsellff,jsell-λf,jbuyff,jbuyDf-cp+minWmaxY∑tλtptsell-ptbuy-∑i∈TH∑tBipi,t(12)s.t.:cp=∑i∈TH∑tcui,t+Aiui,t+cdi,twhereX=yfsell,yfbuy,ui,t,ui,tup,ui,tdnff,jbuy,ff,jsell:Eqs.(A.3a)–(A.5),(A.11)–(A.18),(A.27)–(A.29)Y=pi,t,ptsell,ptbuy,ptbi,t,ppi,t,qi,t,qpi,t,vi,t:Eqs.(A.2),(A.6)–(A.9),(A.30)–(A.32)where cp is the cost of the thermal unit associated with the first stage decisions involving the startup, shutdown and fixed operation costs, X represents the feasible region defined by the equations that describe the forward contact selection, and the startup and shutdown operations of the thermal unit, Y is the feasible region of operation of the thermal and hydro plants, and the energy water balance, and W denotes the uncertainty set that describes the uncertainty of the wind power and electricity prices. The two next sections describe the construction of the subproblem and master problems based on the above specific formulation.The derivation of the subproblem for the constraint generation algorithm is performed in two steps, the first is the construction of the dual of the inner problem of the recourse problem, which was presented with the generic formulation (IRP), and corresponds to the dual of the problem with the feasible region Y described above. The specific formulation of the dual is given by(13)Profitpool=min∑t∑f∑jff,jsell-ff,jbuy-wtαt:+∑i∈TH∑tPiuui,tβi,t+-Pilui,tγi,t+∑i∈TH∑t=1P0i+RUiU0i+SUiui,tupζi,t+∑i∈TH∑t>1RUiui,t-1+SUiui,tupηi,t+RDiui,t+SDiui,tdnϑi,t+∑i∈HY∑t=1V0i+GQiinμi,t+∑i∈HY∑t>1GQiinνi,t+∑i∈HY∑tQiuϖi,t+Qiuρi,t-Vilτi,t+Viuυi,t-∑i∈HY∑t=tfViEφi,t(14)s.t.:-αt⩾λt∀t:ptsell(15)αt⩾-λt∀t:ptbuy(16)αt+βi,t-γi,t+ζi,t-ηi,t+1+ϑi,t+1⩾-Bi∀i∈TH,t=1:p(17)αt+βi,t-γi,t+ηi,t-ηi,t+1-ϑi,t+ϑi,t+1⩾-Bi∀i∈TH,t>1:p(18)μi,t-νi,t+1-τi,t+υi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t=1:v(19)νi,t-νi,t+1-τi,t+υi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t>1,t<tf:v(20)νi,t-φi,t-τi,t+υi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t=tf:v(21)Gμi,t-KitHiξi,t+ϖi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t=1:q(22)Gνi,t-KitHiξi,t+ϖi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t>1:q(23)αt+ξi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t:ptb(24)-αt+πi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t:pp(25)-Gμi,t-KipHiπi,t+ρi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t=1:qp(26)-Gνi,t-KipHiπi,t+ρi,t⩾0∀i∈HY,t>1:qp(27)αt,ξi,t,πi,t∈R∀i,t(28)βi,t,γi,t,ζi,t,ηi,t,ϑi,t,μi,t,νi,t,ϖi,t,ρi,t,τi,t,υi,t,φi,t⩾0∀i,tIn this problem, the first stage variablesui,t,ui,tup,ui,tdn,ff,jbuy,ff,jsell, and the variables from the outer problem of the recourse problemλtandwtare fixed. Note that for each equation the dual variable is shown on the right. An interesting feature of the dual problem is that if the producer has the option to buy and sell electricity in the pool and the prices are deterministic, thenαt=-λt.The second step of the construction of the subproblem involves merging the dual with the outer problem of the recourse problem, which corresponds to the general formulation (RP1). In this problem the variableswtandλtare not fixed, but rather defined over the polyhedral set W. Therefore, the objective function of the previous problem exhibits bilinear terms involvingwtandαtthat can be linearized. The procedure to linearize is as follows. Based on the definition of the uncertainty set of the wind, the bilinear term can be replaced by the right hand side (rhs) of the equation(29)wtαt=w¯tαt+zt+wtuαt-zt-wtlαt,∀t,where on the rhs the bilinear terms can be replaced by two new variables,vt+andvt-,(30)vt+=zt+αt,∀t,(31)vt-=zt-αt,∀t,and these can be linearized using the following inequalities(32)vt+⩽M1zt+,∀t,(33)vt+⩽αt+M21-zt+,∀t,(34)vt-⩾M3zt-,∀t,(35)vt-⩾αt-M41-zt-,∀t,whereM1,M2,M3, andM4are Big-M constants. The optimal values for these constants can be determined analytically through the following reasoning. The dual variableαtis related with the electricity prices,λt, by Eqs. (14) and (15), and based on the definition of the uncertainty set of the electricity prices, these equations can be replaced by-αt⩾λ¯t+yt+λtu-yt-λtlandαt⩾-λ¯t+yt+λtu-yt-λtl. Therefore, the inequalities above can be improved by considering thatαt⩽-(λ¯t-λtl)andαt⩾-(λ¯t+λtu), leading to(36)vt+⩽-λ¯t-λtlzt+,∀t,(37)vt+⩽αt+λ¯t+λtu1-zt+,∀t,(38)vt-⩾-λ¯t+λtuzt-,∀t,(39)vt-⩾αt,∀t.Note that the bounds on the dual variableαtare related with the power bought and sold in the pool, and therefore, if the model does not consider the option to buy electricity from the pool, then it is not possible to determine a lower bound forαt. Consequently, the Big-M parameterM3must be set to a nonpositive value with a large absolute value. Taking into consideration the merging of both problems, the substitutions and linearizations described, the formulation of the subproblem is given by(40)Profitpool=min∑t∑f∑jff,jsell-ff,jbuyαt-∑tw¯tαt+wtuvt+-wlvt-+∑i∈TH∑tPiuui,tβi,t+-Pilui,tγi,t+∑i∈TH∑t=1P0i+RUiU0i+SUiui,tupζi,t+∑i∈TH∑t>1RUiui,t-1+SUiui,tupηi,t+RDiui,t+SDiui,tdnϑi,t+∑i∈HY∑t=1V0i+GQiinμi,t+∑i∈HY∑t>1GQiinνi,t+∑i∈HY∑tQiuϖi,t+Qiuρi,t-Vilτi,t+Viuυi,t-∑i∈HY∑t=tfViEφi,t(41)s.t.:-αt⩾λ¯t+yt+λtu-yt-λtl,∀t,(42)αt⩾-λ¯t+yt+λtu-yt-λtl,∀t,(43)vt+⩽-λ¯t-λtlzt+,∀t,(44)vt+⩽αt+λ¯t+λtu1-zt+,∀t,(45)vt-⩾-λ¯t+λtuzt-,∀t,(46)vt-⩾αt,∀t,(47)∑tzt++zt-⩽Γ(48)∑tyt++yt-⩽Γ(49)Eqs.(16)–(28)The specific formulation of the master problem is the following:(50)Profitmaster=maxy,u,f∈X∑f∑jλf,jsellff,jsell-λf,jbuyff,jbuyDf-cp+Θ,(51)s.t.:cp=∑i∈TH∑tcui,t+Aiui,t+cdi,t,(52)Eqs.(A.3a)–(A.5), (A.11)–(A.18), (A.27)–(A.29),(53)Θ⩽∑t∑f∑jff,jsell-ff,jbuyαtk-∑tw¯tαtk+wtuvt+,k-wtlvt-,k+∑i∈TH∑tPiuui,tβi,tk+-Pilui,tγi,tk+∑i∈TH∑t=1P0i+RUiU0i+SUiui,tupζi,tk+∑i∈TH∑t>1RUiui,t-1+SUiui,tupηi,tk+RDiui,t+SDiui,tdnϑi,tk+∑i∈HY∑t=1V0i+GQiinμi,tk+∑i∈HY∑t>1GQiinνi,tk+∑i∈HY∑tQiuϖi,tk+Qiuρi,tk-Vilτi,tk+Viuυi,tk-∑i∈HY∑t=tfViEφi,tk∀k∈O,(54)Θ⩽∑tλtptsell,k-ptbuy,k-∑i∈TH∑tBipi,tk,∀t,k,(55)∑i∈THpi,tk+∑i∈HYptbi,tk-ppi,tk-ptsell,k+ptbuy,k=∑f∑jff,jsell-ff,jbuy-wtk,∀t,k,(56)pi,tk⩽Piuui,t,∀i∈TH,t,k,(57)-pi,tk⩽-Pilui,t,∀i∈TH,t,k,(58)pi,tk⩽P0i+RUiU0i+SUiui,tup,∀i∈TH,t=1,k,(59)pi,tk-pi,t-1k⩽RUiui,t-1+SUiui,tup,∀i∈TH,t>1,k,(60)pi,t-1k-pi,tk⩽RDiui,t+SDiui,tdn,∀i∈TH,t>1,k,(61)vi,tk-G(-qi,tk+qpi,tk)=V0i+GQiin,∀i∈HY,t=1,k,(62)vi,tk-vi,t-1k-G-qi,tk+qpi,tk=GQiin,∀i∈HY,t>1,k,(63)ptbi,tk-Kitqi,tkHi=0,∀i∈HY,t,k,(64)ppi,tk-Kipqpi,tkHi=0,∀i∈HY,t,k,(65)qi,tk⩽Qiu,∀i∈HY,t,k,(66)qpi,tk⩽Qiu,∀i∈HY,t,k,(67)-vi,tk⩽-Vi,tl,∀i∈HY,t,k,(68)vi,tk⩽Vi,tu,∀i∈HY,t,k,(69)-vi,tk⩽-ViE,∀i∈HY,t=tf,k,where the optimality cut is given by (53), and (54)–(69) are the constraints that characterize the master problem in the primal constraint generation algorithm, which are based on the constraints of the primal inner problem of the recourse problem. Note that the dual variables, and variables that represent the wind and wind power are fixed in the master. While, the variables that are copies of the primal variables,pi,tk,ptsell,k,ptbuy,k,ptbi,tk,ppi,tk,qi,tk,qpi,tk,vi,tkare free.1.Both master and subproblem are MILP problems. Note that the inner problem of the recourse problem is a linear programming problem, but when it is merged with the outer problem and linearized, the subproblem becomes an MILP problem.The subproblem of this case study is always bounded for any first stage decisions if the option to buy energy from the pool is considered.(a)(Primal analysis) The first stage decision variablesff,jsellandff,jbuyare linked with the variables of the subproblem through the energy balance:(70)∑i∈THpi,t+∑i∈HYptbi,t-∑i∈HYppi,t+ptbuy-ptsell+wt=∑f∑jff,jsell-∑f∑jff,jbuy,∀t,and therefore, the values offf,jsellandff,jbuymust allow the subproblem to satisfy the energy balance. If there is no option to buy electricity from the pool the adaptive actions to meet the energy balance are limited by the operating constraints of the production units, which may result in an infeasible subproblem. This means that the master problem suggests the signing of contracts to sell energy that is above the generation capacity of the producer. However, with the option to buy electricity from the pool, the energy balance can always be verified by adapting the electricity bought in the pool.(Dual analysis)αtandγi,tare the only variables that have coefficients in the objective function that may be nonpositive, and depend on the first stage variables. However,αtis bounded by-αt⩾λtandαt⩾-λt, and therefore, the lower bound prevents the subproblem to be unbounded, while the inequalities involvingαtandγi,thelp the problem to remain bounded.If the MILP subproblem is not solved to optimality (because of a maximum CPU time restriction) then the lower bound should not be computed with the best solution of the subproblem found, but with the best lower bound found at the maximum CPU time. Thus, the lower bound of the problem is given byLB≔max{LB,cxTxk+czTzk+LDR‾(xk,zk)}, whereLDR‾(xk,zk)is the best possible bound.If the subproblem is not solved to optimality, the solution obtained is still a valid bound for the variable Θ, sinceΘ⩽LDR(xk,zk)⩽LDR̲(xk,zk), whereLDR̲(xk,zk)is the value of the integer solution at the maximum CPU time.In this section, the adaptive robust optimization model and the constraint generation algorithms are used to solve two case studies characterized by the following generation systems:•Case 1 – 1 thermal unit named G1, 1 pumped-storage hydro unit, and 1 wind farm.Case 2 – 1 thermal unit named G2, 1 pumped-storage hydro unit, and 1 wind farm.These two cases differ only on the thermal units characteristics, which have significant differences in the operating limits and costs, while the pumped-storage hydro unit and wind farm are identical. The data related with these units is presented in Tables 1 and 2. The electricity prices are expected to have an important impact on the scheduling of the system, and on the market transactions, and therefore, three different instances of the electricity prices forecasts are considered. These forecasts are based on real data collected from the Iberian Electricity Market (MIBEL) (OMIE, 2013). The first instance corresponds to the day-ahead electricity prices for the 4th week of February of 2012, the second to the 1st week of July 2012, and the last one to the 3rd week of April 2013. The electricity prices forecasts for each of the instances, labeled as EP1, EP2, and EP3, are shown in Fig. 2. The electricity price forecasts of EP 1 and EP2 represent typical situations, while EP3 illustrates a scenario where the weather forecast predicts rainy and windy days that drive the electricity prices close to zero. The format of the forward contracts is based on the framework proposed in Conejo, Garcia-Bertrand, Carrion, Caballero, and de Andres (2008), where each contract can be defined as a forward selling or buying contract. For each instance of the electricity price forecast, it is considered one curve representing one contract. Each contract consists of three buying blocks and three selling blocks, and each block corresponds to a constant power of 50megawatt. Fig. 3illustrates the curves for each price instance.The uncertainty associated with the wind power generation and electricity prices is described by convex uncertainty sets parameterized by a forecast value, and a lower and upper bound for each time period. The wind power uncertainty parameters are presented in Fig. 4, and the uncertainty set for the electricity price forecast EP1 is shown in Fig. 5.In this section the computational performance of the dual and the primal constraint generation algorithms is evaluated for several instances of the two case studies described. The performance of the algorithms is assessed in terms of number of iterations, CPU time, and the relative gap obtained, where the relative gap is given by(UB-LB)/LB, and LB and UB correspond to the bounds calculated during the constraint generation algorithm. The stop criteria are set to a maximum CPU time of 1500seconds, and a relative gap of 0.1% for the constraint generation algorithms. For the solution of the MILP master and MILP subproblem, a maximum CPU time of 200seconds and 50seconds, respectively. The models and the constraint generation algorithm are implemented in GAMS (Brooke, Kendrick, Meeraus, & Raman, 1998) and solved on a computer with an Intel Core i7@3.07gigahertz CPU, 64 bits, and 8gigabytes of RAM. The MILP problems are solved with CPLEX 12.5.The results obtained show that both dual and primal constraint generation algorithms have a similar performance when applied to the instances that use the electricity price forecasts EP1 and EP2, see Table 3. In general, both algorithms require one iteration to solve all instances with EP1 and EP2, and therefore, no significant differences arise between the two algorithms’ performance. The electricity price forecast EP3 forces both algorithms to perform some more iterations to close the 0.1%, but only requiring a maximum CPU time of 30 and 33seconds for the dual and primal constraint generation algorithms, respectively. This set of electricity prices, EP3, raises some differences in the performance of the two algorithms. The dual constraint generation algorithm requires more iterations, but less CPU time to close the gap than the primal version, for example for EP3 withΓ=168the dual requires 18 iterations and 27seconds, while the primal needs 8 iterations and 30seconds. The column on the far right of Table 3 indicates the relative CPU time reductions obtained with the primal constraint generation algorithm.Note that the profile of the electricity prices EP3 is significantly different from those of EP1 and EP2. First, for profile EP3 the electricity prices are comparatively low in the first half of the week, and in the second half the prices drop close to zero in several time periods (Fig. 2). This type of price profile forces the thermal unit to shutdown in the second half of the week, (Fig. 9(a) and (b)), which has an impact on the number of iterations required by both algorithms (Fig. 1). For the specific problem addressed in this paper, the first stage binary variables related with the status of the thermal unit are initialized asui,t=1,∀i,t, for all optimization runs, and thus, the algorithms for EP3 require some additional iterations to converge to a solution where the thermal unit is shutdown and remains off during the second half of the week, meaningui,t=0for some periods in the second half of the week.Regarding EP3, the differences between the two algorithms, in terms of iterations and CPU time, is explained by the fact that the primal decomposition approach generally provides a stronger link between the master problem and the subprolems, which generally results in a reduced number of iterations. However, this is achieved at the cost of increasing the computational burden of the master problem, whose solution generally requires comparatively higher time. Therefore, there is a trade-off that, depending on the application, resolves in one direction or the other. Case 2, which is presented next, provides some additional insights regarding the computational performance of both algorithms.The results obtained for this Case show that in general both constraint generation algorithms have difficulties to reduce the relative gap to 0.1% within the maximum CPU time set, see Table 4. The dual constraint generation algorithm is able to solve the instances with EP1 and EP2 withΓ={0,10}, but fails to close the gap for the remaining values of Γ, independently of the electricity price forecast used. In general, the primal constraint generation algorithm exhibits a better performance than the dual version in terms of minimum relative gap obtained, but it also fails to reduce the relative gap to 0.1% for the instances with EP1 and EP2 withΓ={100,150,168}. However, the primal constraint generation algorithm is successful in solving all instances with EP3, with a considerable better performance than the dual version. Fig. 6presents an example of the convergence profile of these two algorithms.A deeper analysis of the performance of both algorithms, reveals that some subproblems are solved to optimality in a short time, while for other subproblems it is difficult to close the optimality gap. Examples of the former situation are the subproblems of instances EP3 solved with the dual constraint generation algorithm, which in approximately 1500seconds, more than 145 subproblems forΓ={0,10}are solved, and more than 64 forΓ={100,150,168}. On the other hand, for the instances EP2 solved with the primal constraint generation algorithm, the difficulties in solving the subproblem limit the number of iterations to{25,28,28}forΓ={100,150,168}, for approximately the same CPU time. Note that a similar performance occurs for the dual constraint generation algorithm. This is the result of a very loose relaxation of the MILP subproblem that occurs for some fixed first decision variables in the subproblem. Analyzing the convergence of some instances, it suggests that at a given iteration, the subproblem has reached the optimal LB of the constraint generation algorithm, although it cannot prove the LB because the MILP subproblem does not converge to optimality. For example, the convergence profile of the primal constraint generation algorithm presented in Fig. 7(a) and (b) is an example of a constraint generation gap that seems not to close because of the subproblem.In Case 2, the coefficient costBiof the thermal unit is greater than the same coefficient for the thermal unit of Case 1, which means that the thermal generation unit in Case 2 has a higher marginal cost. This marginal cost of the unit G2 in combination with the electricity prices forecast and also the drive to maximize sales through contracts, available to the master, may introduce some difficulties to the dual constraint generation algorithm in terms of convergence. This is explained by the fact that the algorithm is divided in two levels, where in the first, the master problem neither accounts for all cost information of the thermal unit nor for the prices in the pool. Therefore, the master may try to drive the search for selling contracts and/or commitments that in the subproblem are not profitable taking into account the variable generation cost and prices of the pool.An important issue in robust optimization is the trade-off between protection against worst case situations and prevent very conservative solutions. This issue can be addressed either during the construction of the uncertainty set, or by considering the so-called budget constraints and budget parameters. In the context of this work, the values of the budget parameter are associated with the level of risk that the producer is able to assume regarding the outcomes of the wind power and electricity prices. Here, a more conservative approach corresponds to higher values of the budget parameter, Γ, and a more risk prone attitude to lower values of Γ. A conservative approach considers that a large number of time periods may lead to significant deviations from the wind power and electricity prices forecast, while a more risk prone approach is comfortable with the forecasts, assuming that fewer periods of time will have wind power and electricity prices deviations from the forecast values. Clearly, the relation between Γ and the profit is based on the impact that Γ has on the deviations of wind power and electricity prices from the forecast values. Therefore, the choice of the Γ value has a considerable impact on the results obtained from the point of view of profit, scheduling, contracts settings, and market offering.The results presented in Tables 3 and 4 clearly show that the profit decreases with the increase of Γ. For example for Case 1 withΓ=10the profit is 4,936,002, while forΓ=168the profit decreases to 2,935,271.The influence of the budget parameter over the power generated, and power sold and bought is shown in Figs. 8 and 9for Case 1, using the electricity price forecasts EP1 and EP3, respectively. In these figures on the left are presented the results obtained withΓ=10and on the right withΓ=100. In Fig. 8, the commitment and dispatch of the thermal unit is independent of the budget parameter. However, the wind power produced withΓ=10is considerable greater than the one generated forΓ=100, since the latter reflects a more conservative approach on the wind power forecast. As expected the pumped-storage hydro plant operates in pump mode during the wind power peaks, see Fig. 8(a) and (b). In terms of market, the budget parameter has a considerable impact over the energy sold through the contracts and in the pool. ForΓ=10, which represents a more risk prone approach, 100megawatt of electricity are sold by contract, and the power being sold in the pool is above 400megawatt, see Fig. 8(c). On the other hand,Γ=100establishes a more conservative perspective and now 300megawatt of electricity are sold by contract and around 200megawatt in the pool.Fig. 9 shows the results obtained with the electricity price forecast EP3 for Case 1. This set of prices are relatively lower than EP1 and EP2, and thus, force the thermal unit and the pumped-storage hydro unit to generate power only during the periods with higher electricity prices, and shutdown during the lower electricity prices. In addition, the pumped-storage hydro unit operates in pump mode during the periods of lower electricity prices as it would be expected, see Fig. 9(a) and (b). In terms of market, the more risk prone approach sells most of the energy in the pool during the high price periods with hourly offers of more than 500megawatt, while the power sold by contracts remains on 100megawatt, see Fig. 9(c). The conservative approach decides to sell 200megawatt of electricity through contracts during the week, and no more than 300megawatt in the pool. In addition, the conservative approach buys electricity from the pool in the second half of the week when the prices are close to zero, see Fig. 9(d). These results are aligned with the expected purpose of the forward contracts, which are used to hedge against the risk of the price volatility in the pool, returning a certain revenue.Fig. 10shows the results obtained for Case 2 with the electricity price forecast EP1. The power generation schedule obtained for both values of Γ exhibit an expected trend, with the thermal unit being off during the beginning of the week when the prices are lower, and then ramping up to the maximum power output, while the wind power generated is correlated with the Γ value. Regarding the market results, two interesting aspects should be highlighted: (1) forΓ=10there are 100megawatt sold through contracts, while forΓ=168there are only 82megawatt; (2) forΓ=168the system needs to buy electricity from the pool during several periods of time, see Fig. 10(c) and (d). Note that the classical result “the higher the risk the higher the pool involvement” does not hold for some of the above results. This is clarified in the following. Tables 5 and 6present for each case and instance of the electricity price forecast, the power sold through contracts, and the total energy sold and bought in the pool as a function of the budget parameter, for the whole week. These results correspond to the primal constraint generation algorithm. For Case 1 there is a clear relationship between the conservatism level and the power sold through contracts and in the pool, showing that conservative views result in selling less in the pool and more through contracts. However, for Case 2 a similar trend is not observed for instances considering EP1 and EP2, where the more conservative approaches, contrarily to the more risk prone ones, result in selling comparatively less energy through contracts and buying comparatively more energy in the pool. In general, the two-stage adaptive robust optimization framework finds the optimal contract form (price and energy) that hedges the electricity producer against the worst case realizations of the electricity prices. In this optimization framework, a high value of the budget parameter means a high number of periods with deviations from the forecast values, while a low number of the budget parameter implies a low number of periods of time with deviations from the forecast values, as explained in Section 6. Therefore, a given producer considering a high or a low budget parameter is assuming a comparatively low electricity price or a comparatively high electricity price. Consequently, the optimization framework allocates more energy through contracts when the conservative approach is used, in order to protect against the lowest electricity prices. However, since different levels of wind power are assumed by both the conservative approach and the more risk prone, the relationship between contracts and the pool may be distorted. In this optimization framework, a given producer considering a high or a low budget parameter is considering a comparatively low wind power (conservative approach) or a comparatively high wind power (risk prone approach). In short, with a high budget parameter the producer assumes lower wind power available than with a low budget parameter.The production capacity is equal to the capacity of the thermal unit plus the wind capacity plus the pump-storage capacity (generation mode). This capacity depends on several variables: (a) the wind power, which has uncertain deviations from the forecast values; (b) the power output of the hydro plant, which may not be able to operate at maximum power during all periods due to water usage limits; and (c) the power output of the thermal plant, which is known, but costly. Therefore, the power sold by contract is bounded by the sum of two variables: (1) the minimum power output over all time periods, see Fig. 11(a) and (2) the power that the producer can buy in the pool to sell through contracts with an overall profit.For Case 1 and profiles with EP1 and EP2, if the electricity prices are high, the thermal unit generates power during all time periods, and the power sold through contract is always lower than the power output of the thermal unit (see Fig. 8). In this case, the wind power difference between the conservative and risk prone approaches does not affect the power generation that supports the contract. With price profile EP3 and comparatively high prices, the power sold through contracts is also below the power generated by the thermal unit (provided that it is on), while for comparatively low electricity prices in the pool, the thermal unit is off, and the contract is satisfied with electricity bought in the pool (see Fig. 9).For Case 2 and price profile EP3, similar results are obtained, since the producer can buy electricity in the pool at low prices during the second half of the week. However, with price profiles EP1 and EP2, a similar trend is not observed. Note that in Case 2, the capacity of the thermal unit is lower than that in Case 1, and it may be smaller than the wind power available. Furthermore, the variable generation cost of the thermal unit in Case 2 is higher than that in Case 1 (see Table 1), which may favor buying electricity in the pool during periods when prices are comparatively low and there are negative deviations from the wind power forecasts, as can be observed in Table 6 forΓ={100,150,168}. Fig. 11 provides some additional insights for Case 2 and price profile EP1. Particularly, Fig. 11(a) shows forΓ=10that the 100megawatt sold through the contract are lower than the minimum power generation of 110megawatt that occurs in time period 94. However, the 100megawatt are above the capacity of the thermal unit, which results in the wind power contributing to meet the contract settled. While forΓ=168, a more conservative approach which considers comparatively lower wind power, the power sold through the contract is only 82megawatt, which in some periods of time is above the power generation (Fig. 11(b)). Therefore, with a comparatively lower wind power available, the optimization framework determines a lower level of power allocated to the contract. In addition, the latter contract forces the producer to buy electricity in the pool to satisfy the contract, as shown in Fig. 11(c). In this figure, the white area corresponds to the electricity bought in the pool, which moves the minimum power generation plus the electricity bought to the level of the line of the contract for all time periods.In order to support the above conclusions and to further analyze the relationship between the conservatism level and the market involvement, additional results from optimization runs considering perfect wind power information, but uncertain electricity prices are presented below. In this situation, perfect wind power information ensures that the wind power generation does not influence the market involvement for different conservatism levels. The results obtained show that for both Cases 1 and 2, that the higher the risk the higher the pool involvement, as shown in Tables 7 and 8. These results follow the expected trend, and help to understand that considering wind power uncertainty and different levels of conservatism, which imply deviations on the assumed wind power forecast, may distort the traditional trade-off between contracts and pool involvement.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a two stage adaptive robust optimization approach is used to tackle the optimal self-scheduling, forward contracting, and pool involvement of an electricity producer. The generation portfolio of the producer involves thermal, pumped-storage hydro, and wind power units, with the electricity prices and wind power being subject to uncertainty. The solution approach used relies on a constraint generation algorithm based on Benders’ Decomposition. Two variants of this algorithm are tested: a dual and a primal approach. The derivation of the subproblem of the algorithm and the linearization of bilinear terms establishes a relation between the dual variables associated with the energy balance and the uncertainty convex set defined for the electricity. This derivation also shows that the subproblem has full recourse given that for the producer the option to buy electricity from the pool remains open.The results obtained indicate that the two variants of the constraint generation algorithm have similar and efficient performances for most of the cases, but there are instances for which the primal constraint generation algorithm is clearly superior in terms of convergence rate and computational time. A careful analysis of the constraint generation algorithm performance shows that some subproblems cannot be solved to optimality within a reasonable CPU time, therefore, suggesting the use of a lower bound calculation based on the best possible solution of the MILP subproblem, instead of the integer solution. This difficulty to close the gap of the subproblem is propagated to the gap of the constraint generation algorithm, and therefore, the algorithms have difficulties to converge. However, the constraint generation algorithm seems to have converged if in the calculation of the gap, it is considered the integer solution of the subproblem.The coordination of the thermal and pumped-storage hydro units present a clear relation with the price of electricity, showing the correct adaptation of the thermal unit to high prices, with the pump mode of the pumped-storage unit being activated when the prices are low.The control of the conservatism level is analyzed through several instances solved for different values of the budget parameter. The results obtained show that the most conservative approaches lead to lower profits than those that are more risk prone, as it would be expected. The former corresponds to the selection of forward contracts to hedge against the volatility of the electricity prices of the pool, while for the latter this is not verified for all instances.As it is found that, for Case 2 for two instances of the electricity pool prices, contrarily to the more risk prone, the more conservative approach will tend to sell less energy through forward contracts, and rely more on the pool to buy electricity. This illustrates the fact that uncertainty of wind power gives rise to a situation, where it is difficult to foresee and isolate the relation between the conservatism level and both the contract selection and pool involvement.The work presented suggests that future work should include a comparison between stochastic programming and robust optimization in terms of computational performance, and an assessment based on an out of sample simulation.