@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid stock trading system using genetic network programming and mean conditional value-at-risk

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We combine the advantages of evolutionary algorithms and statistical model.The system has generated effective trading strategies for different risk-attitudes.We propose a method to forecast the stock prices in two opposite environments.Model based on maximum Sharpe Ratio portfolio performs the best in bull market.Model based on the global minimum risk portfolio performs the best in bear market.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolutionary computations,Investment analysis,Risk management,Conditional Value-at-Risk,Portfolio optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper describes a hybrid stock trading system based on Genetic Network Programming (GNP) and Mean Conditional Value-at-Risk Model (GNP–CVaR). The proposed method, combining the advantages of evolutionary algorithms and statistical model, has provided useful tools to construct portfolios and generate effective stock trading strategies for investors with different risk-attitudes. Simulation results on five stock indices show that model based on GNP and maximum Sharpe Ratio portfolio performs the best in bull market, and that based on GNP and the global minimum risk portfolio performs the best in bear market. The portfolios constructed by Markowitz’s mean–variance model performs the same as mean-CVaR model. It is clarified that the proposed system significantly improves the function and efficiency of original GNP, which can help investors make profitable decisions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper describes an advanced stock trading strategy using Genetic Network Programming with Mean Conditional Value-at-Risk Model (GNP–CVaR), which combines the advantages of evolutionary algorithms and statistical models, i.e., mean–variance and mean-CVaR models, has made a good performance on the finance market. In the proposed system, technical indices and candlestick charts are used as judgment functions of GNP to decide buying and selling points, while mean-CVaR model is used to distribute the weight of capitals to different stock indices in the portfolio at each time point. Efficient frontier is used to verify the expected return and risk under different distributions of capital. Finally, the performances of the proposed model are compared with original GNP as well as buy-and-hold strategy.The paper contributes to the existing finance and computing literatures in several ways. First of all, forecasting of stock prices has always been a hot topic, however, the hybrid research of evolutionary computation and statistical model is little. This is the first time to combine GNP with risk measurement models. Secondly, the weight distribution of capital in original GNP model is fixed and takes no consideration of risk, while the mean–variance and mean-CVaR models provide a measurement of risk and construct a variety of portfolios by allocating different capital to each asset. Thus, GNP–CVaR may trade off the expected return and risks in a special way. Thirdly, most methods evaluate the stock prices at one time period in the simple market environment, however, we propose a new method to forecast the stock prices in two opposite environments, i.e., bull market and bear market. At last, sliding window is used in the testing of model performances.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information and a literature review in this field. In Section 3, we explain the portfolio optimization algorithm and stock trading strategy. Section 4 presents experimental environments, conditions and simulation results. The proposed method is compared with some traditional methods, and its efficiency has been confirmed. Finally, Section 5 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has proposed a new approach to improve the efficiency of traditional GNP, while portfolio optimization models are used to measure the risk and distribute the weights of capital to different stock indices within each portfolio. Compared with conventional GNP, the new method has a clear definition of risk and is able to construct different portfolios according to the market environment and traders’ preference to risk. We carry out the simulations by using stock indices from different countries or regions. Experimental results show that portfolios aimed to maximize the reward-to-volatility ratio can get more profit in the bull market, and they outperform the buy&hold method as well as other portfolios. However, in the bear market where more risk emerges, portfolios that aimed to minimize the global risk get better performance. In total, the differences between mean–variance model and mean-CVaR model are not significant in our research. The efficient frontier of mean-CVaR model is depicted and the weights distribution is changing with the increasing of expected return or CVaR.There remain some further studies in the future. This includes, but not restricted to:•First, one-step-forward forecasting CVaR could be used in the dynamic GNP.Second, more technical indices, financial situations and macroeconomic variables that might effect the stock price could be deeply explored.Third, the combination of GNP with time series methods might create a new method to predict the direction or fluctuate range of the stock price more accurately.The last but not the least, the algorithm and structure of GNP could be further improved to evolve better individuals.