@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The aircraft ground routing problem: Analysis of industry punctuality indicators in a sustainable perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We formulate the ground routing problem as a mixed integer program with single path or alternate paths.The industry punctuality indicators are in contradiction with the objective of reducing pollution.We propose more sustainable and relevant punctuality indicators for airports and airlines.Alternate paths cannot significantly reduce taxi times.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ground routing,Airport operations management,Mixed Integer Programming,Sustainable development,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The ground routing problem consists in scheduling the movements of aircraft on the ground between runways and parking positions while respecting operational and safety requirements in the most efficient way. We present a Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) formulation for routing aircraft along a predetermined path. This formulation is generalized to allow several possible paths. Our model takes into account the classical performance indicators of the literature (the average taxi and completion times) but also the main punctuality indicators of the air traffic industry (the average delay and the on time performance). Then we investigate their relationship through experiments based on real data from Copenhagen Airport (CPH). We show that the industry punctuality indicators are in contradiction with the objective of reducing taxi times and therefore pollution emissions. We propose new indicators that are more sustainable, but also more relevant for stakeholders. We also show that alternate path cannot improve the performance indicators.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the last years, the European air traffic kept growing and Eurocontrol (2012b) predicts an annual increase of the number of flights of 3 percent between 2014 and 2018. The traffic is expected to double between 2010 and 2030 (Eurocontrol, 2010). Due to this ceaseless increase of the number of flights in Europe, airports are becoming an important bottleneck of air traffic. Hence, using decision support systems and optimization tools is more and more critical.The aircraft ground movements play an important role in the airport emissions. London Heathrow (2008–09) airport estimates that 54 percent of the airport NOxemissions are produced by aircraft on the ground. The ground routing is also key component of the airports carbon footprint. Eurocontrol (2009) estimates that 475,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions could be earned if only one minute of taxi time per flight could be earned in 50 major European airports. It also represents a non-negligible part of airlines fuel cost. Ravizza, Atkin, and Burke (2014) demonstrate that a better routing optimization allows to earn 9.6 million dollars of fuel a year in Zurich airport.The Ground Routing Problem (GRP) consists in scheduling the movements of aircraft between airport facilities without conflicts and in the most effective way. An arriving aircraft has to be routed from its landing runway to its stand or hangar. A departing aircraft has to be routed from its current parking position to its departure runway. The ground movements occur on a network of roads called taxiways which link airport facilities (see Fig. 1). In practice this problem is issued by Air Traffic Controllers (ATCs) on an operational window of typically 10–40 minutes.The main constraints of the problem are related to the safety of aircraft: as in airspace, aircraft have to be separated from each other to avoid collisions. Several other routing constraints must also be taken into account such as taxi speeds and acceleration for passengers comfort, turning angle and aircraft/taxiway segment compatibility due to weight or width.The quality of a routing schedule is defined by several Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). In this paper, we focus on four of them: the average taxi time, the average completion time, the average delay and the On Time Performance (OTP).The taxi time measures the time an aircraft spends on the ground with engines on, between push back (i.e. leaving the parking position) and take-off for departures and between landing and park-in for arrivals. It includes any waiting time (e.g. runway queuing time) and not just the time spent moving, as engines cannot be turned off once started up. Pollution emission is directly related to the fuel consumption. The aircraft fuel consumption is not accurately known for the taxi process nowadays, but various statistical studies conclude that it mainly depends on the taxi time (see e.g. Khadilkar and Balakrishnan, 2011; Nikoleris, Gupta, and Kistler, 2011; Ravizza, Chen, Atkin, Burke, and Stewart, 2012). Other influencing factors have been identified, such as the number of stops, turns and accelerations but their effects are less clear and of minor importance in comparison to the taxi time.We are also interested in minimizing the completion times, i.e. the take-off times for departing flights and the park-in times for arriving flights. In peak hours, the runway is often the main bottleneck of the airport (Idris et al., 1998). Minimizing take-off times reduces the risk of runway starving and ensures a good use of its capacity. Minimizing park-in times reduces the starting time of passenger debarkation, which increases the quality of service.In the air traffic industry, the main indicators of punctuality are the average delay per flight and the OTP (see Eurocontrol, 2012a; 2013). The delay is measured with respect to the scheduled times of park-in and push back, which are both printed on passenger tickets. For example, an arriving flight is 5 minutes late if the aircraft arrives at the stand 5 minutes after the scheduled time and a departing flight is 5 minutes late if the aircraft is pushed back from its stand 5 minutes after the scheduled time. The OTP L is the percentage of flights having a delay less than L minutes. The most common value of L in the industry is 15 minutes and OTP 15 is simply called OTP.A common practice in airports is to push back aircraft as soon as possible and to taxi to the runway (see Atkin, Burke, and Greenwood (2011a) for London Heathrow airport (LHR) and Smeltink, Soomer, de Waal, and Mei (2004) for Amsterdam Schiphol airport (AMS)). It reduces the risk of runway starving and is beneficial for the departure delay and OTP. However, especially during peak hours, the runway capacity is often exceeded and a push back as soon as possible policy results in a take-off queue (see Fig. 2) in which aircraft engines remain turned on. Pollution emissions can be reduced by transferring the runway queuing time (with engines on) to the stand (with engines off). This process is called stand holding. Nevertheless, if an aircraft is held too long, it may not reach the runway in time for take-off and some runway capacity can be wasted. It may also prevent an arriving aircraft from using the stand (stand blockage).Accurate estimations of aircraft ready times and taxi times are required to schedule push back adequately, i.e. holding stand as much as possible in order to reduce taxi times, but without wasting the runway capacity. Accurate estimations of ready times are not always available in airports: ATCs are often informed of an aircraft ready time only when the pilot calls the control tower for push back and start up approval. That is why Eurocontrol designed the Airport Collaborative Decision Making (A-CDM) project. The main goal of A-CDM project is precisely to improve predictability and information sharing between all stakeholders. In a A-CDM airport, airlines and ground handlers are required to communicate and update an accurate ready time (typically 30–40 minutes in advance). The ready time is called the Target Off-Block Time (TOBT) and corresponds to an estimation of the time at which the aircraft will be ready to push back (all doors closed, boarding bridge removed, etc.). In the air traffic industry, the push back scheduling is called often the pre-departure sequencing.In the literature, it has been shown that stand holding can reduce taxi times significantly without impacting the runway capacity (see Section 2). Nevertheless, the impact of stand holding on the KPIs of the industry (OTP and delay) has not been investigated. In this paper, we propose a model including the OTP and delay indicators. Our model allows several possible paths in the taxiways. We then address the following questions through a numerical study based on realistic instances from Copenhagen Airport (CPH). How do the performance indicators compete? Are the key indicators of the industry consistent with a sustainable development? Can we propose better indicators? Can we reduce taxi times by considering alternate paths? What is the bottleneck in ground routing operations? This work is the result of a collaboration with Amadeus company.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A review of the literature and a summary of our contributions are presented in Section 2. In Section 3, we propose a model for the GRP and formulate it as a Mixed Integer Program (MIP). We provide details on the data set and instances from CPH in Section 4. Then the results of our numerical study are given in Section 5. Finally, a conclusion and discussion of our results are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
