@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Critical rationalism in practice: Strategies to manage subjectivity in OR investigations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Subjectivity, inescapable in decision choice, is not satisfactorily addressed by critical rationalism (CR).Three strategies for coping with subjectivity are observed in managerial, administrative and policy development practice.A CR for Practice (CRP) approach is envisaged that embodies a deliberated application of the three practice strategies.OR consulting competences have developed historically to support the application of the three CRP strategies.The concepts embedded in the CRP concept are explored and laid bare for critique.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Practice of OR,Philosophy of OR,Critical rationalism,Critical systems thinking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The philosophical position referred to as critical rationalism (CR) is potentially important to OR because it holds out the possibility of supporting OR’s claim to offer managers a scientifically ‘rational’ approach. However, as developed by Karl Popper, and subsequently extended by David Miller, CR can only support practice (deciding what to do, how to act) in a very limited way; concentrating on the critical application of deductive logic, the crucial role of subjective judgements in making technical and moral choices are ignored or are at least left underdeveloped. By reflecting on the way that managers, engineers, administrators and other professionals take decisions in practice, three strategies are identified for handling the inevitable subjectivity in practical decision-making. It is argued that these three strategies can be understood as attempts to emulate the scientific process of achieving intersubjective consensus, a process inherent in CR. The perspective developed in the paper provides practitioners with a way of understanding their clients’ approach to decision-making and holds out the possibility of making coherent the claim that they are offering advice on how to apply a scientific approach to decision-making; it presents academics with some philosophical challenges and some new avenues for research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
And truly, I too speak as one who knows not – only guesses. But there is a difference in kind between right opinion and knowledge, this, it seems to me, I do not guess; but of the few things, if any, that I would claim to know, this is one.Plato, Meno. (As quoted in Hare, 1951)Most OR practitioners think of themselves as offering clients a rational, objective approach to decision-making undertaken within the ethos of science; as Ulrich puts it ‘OR is obviously still associated with a scientific attitude of objectivity and rigor and in a general sense remains an applied science’ (Ulrich, 2012a, p. 1232). It is generally assumed by most OR practitioners that there is a linkage between the scientific method and the OR approach. One prominent methodology, which proposes a rationale for the scientific method, is considered here as a basis for developing a methodology for management decision-making, the focus of OR interventions. Critical rationalism (CR), originally developed by Popper (1959, 1963, 1972), offered a philosophy of science (a methodology of the scientific method) based on rationality defined in terms of deductive logic. Popper’s approach is ‘based on the naturalistic idea that society has developed through a process of solving problems using trial and error’ (Ormerod, 2009). In the last century, discussion of Popper’s approach (involving conjectures and refutations) dominated debate about the philosophy of science; however, it has been strongly attacked by philosophers, sociologists and others (see for instance, Ulrich, 1983, 2006a; for other references to critical views see Ormerod, 2009). Nevertheless, CR continues to influence scientists and some philosophers continue to defend it (see for instance, Miller, 1994, 2006: Notturno, 2000). In addition, scholars in a variety of practice fields have considered CR to be of relevance; see for instance, Gambrill (1999), Macdonald and Carnevale (2008), and Rudnick (2003, 2012) for social work and health care; Duggan (2010) for law; Lindsay (1993) for accounting; Bailey (2000), Perkinson (1984), and Swann (1999, 2012) for education and learning; and Dias (2007) and Blockley (1995) for engineering.For OR practitioners, CR is of interest because it holds out the possibility of supporting those that seek to help clients take a ‘rational’, ‘objective’, ‘scientific’ approach to decision-making. The philosopher David Miller has been engaged in a research programme that seeks to apply critical rationalism, originally developed for science (theorizing about the natural world), to practice (deciding what to do) (Miller, 1994, 2005, 2006, 2009a,b, 2010). The progress to date in developing a CR approach to practice and the possibility of applying it to OR have been considered in a recently published paper (Ormerod, 2013a). The paper noted that one of the key aims of critical rationalism is to eliminate, avoid, or at least ‘tame’ subjectivity. Nevertheless, subjectivity is a central feature of decision-making; however much logical thought and scientific research have gone into a decision, decisions depend on the subjective views (on technical and normative issues) of the people involved. As a consequence, the paper concluded that CR needed to address subjectivity (and by implication intersubjectivity) directly if it is to inform practice in general and OR in particular.This paper picks up that challenge and explores how the critical rationalist could address subjectivity as it is met in practice. Although philosophy provides the point of departure, no attempt is made here to make and defend a philosophical position; rather it is an exercise in OR investigation. At first sight the prospects of attempting such a task do not seem inviting; the very nature of subjectivity is everything that critical rationalists abhor; subjective views can be, and often are, self-serving, emotional, arbitrary, capricious, inconsistent and can appear to be at odds with rational thinking. However, for our purposes subjectivity has some redeeming features. For all its potential faults and foibles, subjectivity is inter alia the vehicle for knowledge, expertise, judgement and wisdom; it reflects the repository of personal experience that we may wish to harness in our quest to promote rational decision-making. Subjectivity is thus as contradictory and multi-faceted as the humans from which it emanates.Research into the handling of subjectivity in the context of managerial decision-making could be approached as an exercise in applied psychology. However, Popper was determined to avoid psychology. As a young man he was a social worker in Vienna working with neglected children and he chose psychology as the subject of his doctoral studies. He noted that each time new psychological evidence entered the debate all the participants claimed that it supported their mutually contradictory theories: no-one would admit that their particular theory had been falsified or even diminished. Popper concluded that psychology could not (at that time) claim scientific status. As a consequence, he considered psychology to be a bottomless pit of speculation and determined that when developing critical rationalism (as applied to science) he would avoid it. He referred to this strategy as avoiding the trap of ‘psychologism’. By bracketing psychology he was able to concentrate on epistemology (how we know things). This paper will follow Popper in seeking to avoid psychological speculation as far as possible; but as the attention of CR moves to practice (how we decide what to do), this becomes more problematic as in the end a decision-maker has to reconcile technical judgements, personal (ethical) preferences, societal values, and (normative) role expectations. Despite his aversion to all things psychological, Popper’s scheme for science did in fact rely heavily on both subjective activities (coming up with hypotheses) and psychological assumptions (that the community of scientists was made up of scientists who share an understanding of the aims of science and can agree when a conjecture has been refuted). Thus psychology is circumscribed rather than avoided and subjectivity is harnessed by seeking to utilize intersubjective consensus by one mechanism or another. It is this reassessment of the role of subjectivity in CR that provides the key to developing a CR approach to practice such that we can speak of a CR-for-Practice (CRP).Much has been written about subjectivity by psychologists, anthropologists, sociologists, philosophers and others (see for instance, Biehl, Good, & Kleinman, 2007; Burkill, 2008; Ortner, 2005). At the same time OR academics have drawn on these disciplines to develop new orientations to, and methods of, OR intervention (see for instance, Brans & Vincke, 1985; Checkland, 1981; Churchman, 1971; Eden, 1988; Friend & Jessop, 1969, Jackson and Keys, 1987; Midgley, 2000; Mingers, 1997; Ormerod, 1997a; Roy, 1991; Saaty, 1977; Ulrich, 1983). In the light of the CR approach to science, the aim here is to approach subjectivity by starting with an examination as to how subjectivity is both managed and made use of in managerial and administrative practice in general and in OR practice in particular. In the first instance the paper is an empirical account based on personal observation and the management literature. However, something more needs to be said about the theoretical stance taken here.In this paper the possibility of developing critical rationalism in order to support a pragmatic process of intervention is explored. It is argued that (i) the CR emphasis on critique requires subjective judgements to provide the basis for critique in terms of both factual judgements and normative preferences; (ii) management and administrative practices have developed strategies to handle the subjectivity inherent in decision-making; (iii) OR has developed competencies to help managers apply such strategies; and (iv) as developed here CRP does not look so different from other critical approaches but may be preferred by many operational researchers given their roots in mathematics, science and technology from which the ideas of critical rationalism derive.From the academic perspective the paper contributes to discussion about the nature and process of OR. It also gives rise to a number of research questions: for instance, how can a CRP approach to competence and expertise be developed to support the three strategies; how can existing case description be reinterpreted in terms of the three CRP strategies, and how can CRP be understood in terms of the philosophical theorizing of instrumental, strategic and communicative action as proposed by Habermas (1984, 1987, 1990, 1993) and further developed by Ulrich (2009a,b, 2010a,b, 2013)?In addressing practice (deciding what to do) CR places the emphasis on criticism. Proposals for action are criticized; those that are flawed or unlikely to succeed are eliminated. Decision-makers can then choose from the remaining proposals and act accordingly. Because in making a decision a final (technical and ethical) subjective judgement has had to be made, the decision itself cannot be claimed to be rational in terms of deductive logic. However, the process of reaching the decision can be described as logical or rational in the sense that it has exhaustively sought proposals and criticized them for their technical and ethical content. Inherent in the notion of criticism is that there is some agreed or accepted basis on which to criticize, some aims, some theoretical and moral preferences. These preferences can be thought of as formalized criteria reflecting values or principles, stated or implicit.In the case of science Popper focused on the key decision as to whether a particular hypothesis (or theory) has been convincingly falsified by the observational or experimental evidence; if so, it can be rejected (Popper, 1959, 1963, 1972). The assumption is that the individual members of the community of scientists are so imbued with a common view of the nature and logic of science that, despite all their individual characteristics, they can reach an intersubjective consensus as to whether a theory should be taken to be rejected or not; education, publication and open critique play crucial roles. Thus subjectivity is firmly embedded in and a necessary part of the method of science. Science involves a large body of scientists (in practice a subset of scientists who are interested in a particular subject area) engaged in research and interacting with each other over extended periods of time. In a mature area of science there will be a set of theories that, for the time being, are accepted as describing the real-world phenomena of interest. All such theories, however widely supported, are destined to be falsified eventually.Science is a human activity with all that this implies. Popper’s theories came under attack by other philosophers and notably by Kuhn, a physicist turned historian and philosopher of science (Kuhn, 1962). A number of schools have been prominent in studying science as a social activity; see for instance, the sociology of scientific knowledge school (Barnes, 1974, 1977, 1982; Bloor, 1991; Collins 1992; MacKenzie 1981; Shapin, 1982, 1991) and the network theory school (Callon, 1994; Latour, 1987; Law, 1993; Rouse, 1987). They have concluded that the actual activities of scientists are much more complex and varied than Popper’s characterization implies. Nevertheless, most scientists brush aside the complexities of their own behavior and hold onto the simple ideal that scientific research relies on the community of scientists sharing the aims and ethos of science to arrive at intersubjective judgments. The results they agree are fallible but the approach has been found to work in practice.Although some of Popper’s writing is relevant to practice (as opposed to theory), for instance his defense of the ‘open society’ and his preference for ‘trial and error’ in public policy, he did not develop a coherent position to support an understanding of practice, deciding what to do; in other words, decision-making. Where he has commented on ‘practice’ his emphasis on theory (in the Kantian sense of what we can know) has been found to lead to his handling of normative issues being undeveloped and at times absent. In brief, while Popper emphasizes that all aspects of discussing and deciding are theory-laden (in itself a valuable insight), he fails to appreciate that they are also always value-laden (Ulrich, 1983, 2006a,b, 2007).In contemplating whether CR can provide an approach to practical decision-making, one has to conclude that Popper left CR in a cul-de-sac. By equating rationality with deductive logic and objectivity, the ‘logic’ of CR does nothing to help the development of a ‘rational’ way of deciding what to do; decision-making requires subjectivity at its center. Subjectivity involves psychology and is therefore taken by Popper to be inherently ‘irrational’; this leaves little or no room for developing a rational (as defined by Popper) approach to decision-making.In examining the case of practice, Miller, a philosopher, seeks to apply to practice the same strictures as CR applies to science: (i) avoid induction, instead use deduction and criticism to eliminate; (ii) argue logically (critically eliminating options rather than positively emphasizing their merits) but make no claim of justification for any conclusions reached or choices made: and (iii) avoid, eliminate, or at least ‘tame’ subjectivity (Miller, 2006; Ormerod, 2013a). If induction is to be avoided as (i) suggests, theories based on analysis of the past cannot be assumed to hold in the future. This potentially blocks any analysis (or even thought) about what the consequences of any action might be. In an important move Miller suggests that although no appeal can be made to a general (transcendental) principle of induction, it is perfectly acceptable to include in a particular theory the assumption that the relationship under scrutiny, that held in the past, will hold in the future (Miller, 2006, p. 115). To comply with (ii), with care, positive and justificatory claims can be avoided. The repercussions of (iii) are the subject of this paper.Miller suggests that the key mechanism in deciding what to do is the relentless criticism of proposals. Proposals are blind guesses (in the sense that it cannot be certain what the outturn will be). Decision-makers are then free to choose an action after those that have not stood up to criticism have been eliminated. Miller’s analysis stops there. What Miller has done in effect is to elaborate and carefully explore Popper’s position and put the position into sharper focus; CR has been taken deeper into the cul-de-sac but he has not attempted to find a way out. The way out suggested in this paper involves utilizing that aspect of CR that does involve psychology, namely the activities of the community of scientists in deciding which hypotheses should be rejected and which, for the time being accepted. Having reviewed Miller’s developments, Ormerod (2013a) concluded that if CR is to support OR, it is necessary to address three questions:(1)How are proposals developed and selected for criticism?On what basis are proposals to be criticized and rejected?On what basis should the choice be made between surviving proposals?Putting it another way, how should managers and administrators make technical and normative judgements in taking decisions?In deciding what to do, whether we are talking about everyday engineering, managerial and administrative decisions, or long-term policy decisions, a multitude of different values (epistemic, pragmatic, ethical) demand attention. The position is further complicated by the fact that each actor involved in, or affected by, the decision will have his or her own view as to where the emphasis should lie (Boothroyd, 1978; Ulrich, 1983); they will view putative facts and stated aims from their own particular perspective.Consider the decision, commonly faced by engineers, of whether to choose option A or option B on the basis of cost. The implication is that:(i)there are only two choices (namely options A and B);cost is the only relevant criterion;cost can be defined and predicted on a comparable basis.All three assumptions are, of course, subjective; it could not immediately be claimed that the adoption of these particular assumptions is rational. Churchman points out that even data such as costs are both theory and value laden in that there is a ‘process’ of measurement involved and a ‘commitment’ to that particular measurement (Churchman, 1979, p. 14). As the comparison is considered, other options may enter the picture and additional criteria may be suggested. To make a choice, the decision-maker has to determine (implicitly): (a) how many and which options to consider; (b) how each option might perform (qualitatively or quantitatively) against each criterion (in absolute or relative terms); and (c) how much weight to give to each criterion in the decision process. Despite the seeming rationality of this conceptualization of a simple choice process, even if it is conducted explicitly and subjected to criticism, the option generating, scoring and weighting process is partly or completely subjective and therefore the resulting choice is subjective. Engineers would generally consider that a rational approach has been taken and the result is as objective as you can reasonably get; it is in any case sufficient for the purpose in hand (a pragmatic perspective). It is clear that objectivity can only be approached via subjectivity. Engineers are generally sufficiently confident in their conclusions to act on them. How does such confidence arise? The answer must surely lie in the different strategies that have evolved to deal with the problem of the inevitable subjectivity in decision-making in practice areas such as engineering and, by extension, managerial decision-making, and governmental policy formulation. To see how subjectivity can be dealt with in practice, the strategies and mechanisms used by various professional practices to handle these issues are now considered.This section draws on the practice of managers, administrators, engineers, accountants, market developers and other specialists in a wide range of national and international enterprises. Based on personal observation and literature in the management domain, it describes in general terms three strategies adopted by decision-makers in relation to the inherent subjectivity in decision choice. The proposition is that the three strategies, applied as appropriate in a variety of circumstances, have evolved to help managers and professionals cope with taking decisions in the face of inevitable subjectivity. The assumption is that these strategies will continue to be found useful in the future.One strategy prominent in engineering and accounting functions within firms is to adopt a two-tier strategy for questions of fact, procedure and causal relationships. In the upper tier a small number of ‘experts’ determine the rules, the values to be adopted and the theory to be preferred. Increasingly those formulating in-house technical and administrative rules have been able to draw on external national and international standard setting bodies for each discipline. For instance, in my own discipline, civil engineering, UK standards are set by the British Standards Institution (BSI). Both internal and external standard writing bodies in effect try to emulate the scientific community in that a consensus is reached between the participating experts, the results are published, and the guidance can be challenged as experience is gained in the use of the guidance and new evidence from practice or research is obtained. In the lower tier, practicing professionals use, interpret and perhaps adapt the guidance according to local circumstances. Their freedom to stray from the rules may be curtailed by legal obligations as in the case of accountancy. The professional institutions also provide guidance on ethical behavior and how to address moral dilemmas. Thus guidance is given on both epistemic and normative issues. Within the firm or organization the center exercises discipline to ensure compliance with the standards adopted.National and transnational multi-divisional companies also use a two-tier managerial strategy, developing a general ethos at the center, while allowing local management some autonomy in conducting their affairs but always within the company ethos and way of doing things (Campbell & Tawadey, 1990; Chandler, Hagström, & Sölvell, 1999; Collins & Porras, 1994; Kanter, 1990). The two-tier strategy is in effect a division of labor: a small body of standard setters codifying knowledge and experience in order to simplify the work of the much larger body of practicing professionals. It is both an efficiency and an effectiveness measure. The implication of the two-tier strategy for managerial and administrative practice is that professional bodies and corporate centers need to consider whether their members would derive a benefit from the development of standard setting, standard maintaining and ‘policing’ processes (Bartlett & Ghoshal, 1989). For professional advisors, such as OR consultants, the challenge is to understand the role that the two-tier strategy plays in the clients’ decision making. This often extends to multiple tiers. For instance, Fincham et al (1994) report a case in which the Bank of Scotland had set up a committee to report on the whole area of customer service automation. In 1981 this Customer Services Committee supported the initiation of a systems project to be overseen by a steering committee, called the Policy Committee. Having taken some early decisions, the Policy Committee set up a Working Party to control implementation. The Working Party was split into subcommittees that reported to it. The real work of designing and implementing the proposed system went on in these subcommittees (Fincham et al., 1994 p. 51). The issue for those considering a two-tier (or multi-tier strategy) is how to differentiate between high-level and low-level activities and how to ensure inter-level communication. The same considerations apply to commercial and non-commercial considerations.A second strategy, the competence-based judgement strategy or judgement strategy for short, is to make use of the explicit and tacit knowledge (Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1999; Polanyi, 1966) of individuals to select which options should be considered, to anticipate the likely outcomes, and to provide an initial view of the importance such outcomes are likely to play in the final decision. The essential idea is to tap into all the experience that has been gained by individuals in solving problems and dealing with conflicts in the organizational environment concerned (Coriat & Dosi, 1999). The dangers of untamed subjectivity in decision-making are mitigated by ensuring that the decisions involve (a) those with experience of the consequences of not-too-dissimilar decisions in not-too-dissimilar circumstances and (b) ensuring that those who will be responsible for the implementation of the decision (and preferably those who actually carry out the implementation) are involved in the decision process. Issue (a) concerns having people involved who can exercise judgement because they have the relevant knowledge and experience and can be relied on to anticipate consequences (including the reaction of other parties). The second issue (b) concerns accountability, ownership (in the psychological rather than legal sense) and commitment. The assumption is that the limited number of people involved in making a decision share an understanding of what it means to be accountable for and committed to a successful outcome. The implication of this strategy is that any particular organization has to ensure that managers and professionals are receiving relevant training, are being exposed to a variety of increasingly demanding situations, and are aware of the wider issues (both technical and normative). This may involve education (at university or elsewhere) and engagement with professional bodies, but primarily it is a matter of gaining relevant experience. People with experience are valuable resources; they need to be nurtured, retained and deployed effectively (Hendry, 1995; Pettigrew & Whipp, 1991). The issue for those offering help and advice is how to locate where (and in whom) the experience and expertise lies.A third strategy, the wide-participation strategy or participation strategy for short, is to involve relevant people to represent as wide a set of interests as possible in developing an intersubjective view. Such an approach is prominent in policy analysis. Relevant people include those who are responsible for taking the decision, those who have to implement it, those affected by it but are not involved, and those who can offer expertise on some aspect or other (Ulrich, 1987). Sometimes this strategy is described as democratic, the intention being that the process will take into account a wide variety of views and will thus be better informed and more in tune with the organization’s and society’s needs. In the context of managerial decision-making the emphasis is more often placed on the instrumental advantages of a participative approach: participation encourages the sharing of knowledge and knowhow, ownership of the resulting decision, and the motivation of those who participated to put their efforts into implementing the decision (Ackoff, 1979; Ormerod, 1995). Essentially this strategy taps into both organization-specific knowledge and motivational interests. The implication is that those orchestrating a decision-making process should consider carefully whom to involve (in every stage) and in what capacity (Ulrich, 2012a,b).All three strategies represent from a CR point of view second-best ways of emulating science in minimizing the negative aspects of subjectivity (the source of ill-informed, emotive, and self-serving bias in the making of epistemic and normative judgements) while promoting the relevant positive aspects (repository of understanding and good sense based on learning and experience). Managers, engineers and other professionals do not have the time or the resources to orchestrate the (epistemic and normative) consensus of a large group of others in deciding what to do on a day-to-day basis. Nor in practice can decision-makers countenance evaluating an infinite number of proposals against all possible criteria in order to reach decisions, large or small. The ideal of a scientific approach based on a community of scientists is in the long term very nearly achieved by science; but in the realm of practice, decision-makers can only attempt to emulate the ideal by the adoption of second-best solutions described here as the three strategies for managing subjectivity.Managers, administrators, engineers, and other specialists, in effect, deploy different mixes of the three strategies to achieve their different pragmatic ends. For instance, engineers, faced with having to make many decisions with limited resources, work within an engineering ethos, but place heavy emphasis on the judgement of experienced engineers and on a two-tier system of codes of practice. Similarly, managers in industry, commerce or government will not, for many decisions, be able to rely on a body of like-minded people slowly engaging in a process of experimentation, publication and critique, and there will not be relevant universal codes of practice to draw on. Organizations therefore develop their own policies and standards and emphasis is placed on creating the ethos, culture and expertise appropriate for the business in hand. For instance, based on their research into the way that transnational organizations operate, Bartlett and Ghoshal (1989) observe that ‘the coordination process in American-based companies was based largely on formal systems, policies and standards’ (p. 161) and that for Europe-based companies ‘the dominant coordination process relied on the careful recruitment, development and acculturation of key decision makers’ (p. 163). In fact most organizational collectivities (government departments; company divisions; task forces; criminal gangs) put a good deal of effort into developing formal systems, to ensuring that suitable expertise is nurtured or acquired, to promoting the aims and ethos of the collectivity, and to encouraging the morale and motivation required to energize action. These attempts are not always successful and at times break down or fail, but it is important to recognize that decision-making in practice is not and cannot be an isolated ‘cognitive’ activity; it is also a ‘political’ act involving ethical belief and moral choice embedded in a particular organizational culture (Morley & Ormerod, 1996). Organizational, behavior, structure and change has been the subject of intensive research in the management literature from the early work of, for instance, March and Simon (1958), Chandler (1962) and Schein (1965) to the current work in disciplines such as psychology, organizational behavior and strategic management (see for instance, Buchanan & Huczynski, 2010).Bearing in mind the three strategies used to deal with subjectivity in practice (two-tier, competence-based judgement, wide-participation), the questions posed earlier in the paper can now be addressed:(1)How are proposals for action developed and selected for criticism? Proposals for consideration can come from many directions. But the choice of which should be selected as candidates to be criticized in detail, is a matter of (epistemic and normative) judgement by those who have a reasonable grasp of the possibilities, the restrictions (from the upper tier, for instance) and likely attractiveness (to the ultimate decision-makers). It should be noted that the exercise of judgement as to the number of proposals that should be considered at this point is necessarily pragmatic; resources are limited. For a very important decision it may be worth considerable effort (research, analysis, consultation and so on) just to draw up a short list for consideration. For example, the process that ultimately led to the Channel Tunnel (between the UK and Continental Europe) started by selecting a limited set of rail/road, tunnel/bridge options which had been worked up and proposed by various groups of engineers and interested parties. The overall aim of improving transportation links was at this stage ill-defined in terms of the nature and volumes of traffic to be catered for. The process was therefore essentially a creative one as different combinations of aims and means could be offered (for instance, one proposal was for a multi-span road bridge; another was for a rail tunnel).On what basis are proposals to be criticized and rejected? The process of criticism involves a choice of criteria and an assessment of facts to provide the basis for the criticism. As the idea at this stage is to eliminate rather than choose, some notion of what is unacceptable for any criterion might be invoked. This is the approach taken in the evaluation stage of the Strategic Choice Approach (Friend & Hickling, 2005, pp. 51–53). More complex notions of what is an acceptable performance for a group of criteria might also be developed. One approach might be to retain those options that are the best against one of the criteria and at least satisfy the others. Thus a tunnel option may be retained because it involves no threat to shipping; a multi-span bridge option might be retained because it offers the lowest cost. A two-tier approach is invoked to determine that any engineering decisions meet international standards and to ensure that the projected costs are calculated on some common basis. The process is made transparent and the views of many experts, interest groups and politicians are sought in a consultative process, bringing into play the experience and judgement of all concerned. The choice of criteria is likely to change as the possibilities and difficulties are considered, but judgement has to be exercised as to what the criteria should be and which will ultimately be considered to be more important than others. Cost, safety, traffic capacity, protection of sea-lanes, connections to other modes of transport, speed of crossing, environmental impact, aesthetic considerations, and control of migration, are likely to come into the picture. Perhaps the first five of these would be judged by those in charge of the process to be the most important in the first instance. But the emphasis often changes: note how the debate about wind farms in the UK has shifted from the desirability and feasibility of renewable, non-polluting sources of energy to concerns about the cost and local environmental impact (visual, noise, wild life).On what basis should the choice be made between surviving proposals? The final choice is based on the quantitative and qualitative information that is available and the weight that the decision-maker implicitly places on each criterion, the risks perceived and so on. Decision-maker(s) will be influenced by their advisors, colleagues and those to whom they are responsible. In the case of an entrepreneur or a dominant CEO this comes down to an individual making up his or her mind. More generally, a number of people will be involved in collective decision-making; each player will either act as an individual with a particular point of view (the finance director, for instance), or as a representative (a union leader, for instance). Those involved will engage in a ‘political’ process of negotiation, with compromises made and deals struck between players. In such a situation the three strategies may be challenged: Does application of the accounting rules make sense here? Shouldn’t X also be involved in this decision? Couldn’t we investigate this aspect a bit further instead of relying on judgement? Is our organizational ethos constraining our thinking? In practice the process is often messy and not necessarily rigorous but it results in action (Brunsson, 1982).From these answers, a CRP decision process as a four-step routine deploying the three strategies can be followed:(I)Generate options. This involves a wide and innovative search for possible options with a few selected for further consideration. Use of the participative and judgement strategies may help.Identify possible grounds for criticism. This step involves eliciting the interests and views of relevant parties: the involved, the affected, the experts, and the representatives (of the environment, of future generations, of animals, of the infirm and so on). Participation is the crucial issue. Selectivity will be required.Critique the options. As much as possible should be learnt about the relationships between the characteristics of each option and the likely outcome against the criteria identified. The two-tier and judgement strategies could be deployed here. Again participation is a crucial issue.Identify and critique subjective assumptions and judgements. This should be applied to beliefs about the relationship between options and consequences, the selection of aims and the basis of criticism. All three strategies may apply.Given the resource implications of applying these four steps (and any looping back that may be required) there is a need to design the decision process; process design is a pragmatic approach to allocating the effort put into each stage of a decision process. The three strategies for managing subjectivity in decision-making (the two-tier strategy, the judgement strategy, the wide-participative strategy) can be combined in various ways; for instance, a code provided by an upper tier could specify that there should be a process of public consultation in certain circumstances; a participative strategy could be organized in two-tiers (a committee of experts, meetings of those involved and affected); a participative approach could seek the advice on an expert. In designing the intervention process account needs to be taken of the current decision-making practice in the particular organization concerned. It may be desirable to go with the grain or it could be seen as an opportunity to ‘break the mold’. If it is decided to go against the grain it is better to do so consistently in each step so that a new routine, a new ‘way of doing things’, is established and reinforced.Any approach that seeks to guide OR consultants in helping decision-makers in their quest to harness the subjective talents in their organization (and beyond) needs to have associated with it an understanding of the way that OR consulting competences (Ormerod, 2013b) are developed and deployed. This issue is addressed in the next section.The question addressed here is whether CRP can provide a rationale for a concept of managerial decision-making based on a rigorous, rational, objective approach and thus whether OR can support a decision process based on such a rationale provided by CRP. In the 1950s, following successes in the military field, the mission of OR was to bring some rationality in the form of rigor and objectivity into decision-making in commerce and industry. In the UK at least, much managerial decision-making at that time could be characterized as rooted in intuition and emotion or, in more pejorative terms, seat-of-the-pants muddling through. There was thus an opportunity to apply logical thinking and research to decisions to make them better informed. The quality of management thinking has improved over time (for all sorts of reasons) but most OR practitioners (and consultants from other backgrounds) retain the basic aim of seeking to offer a rigorous and objective approach. In the 1970s there was a bout of introspection about the nature of OR and, at about the same time, alternative approaches, which drew on the social sciences (rapidly developing fields of research at that time), were advanced (later gathered together in Rosenhead, 1989). Essentially these approaches promoted a more qualitative, participative, process-orientated orientation, with the practitioner acting as facilitator rather than investigator. In this alternative way of looking at things the subjective views of those involved were taken as a source of knowledge (or intelligence) and normative disposition to be engaged rather than to be displaced or corrected.Despite these developments, the majority of OR practitioners rightly or wrongly continue to consider themselves to be helping managers develop a rigorous, rational, objective approach to decision-making (Ormerod, 2010c; Ulrich, 2012a,b). Very often managerial decisions do not directly concern widely important societal issues but address some more narrowly defined organizational issue (which may of course have societal implications). OR help can come about in many ways and can be offered in many forms. Many OR projects involve modeling; others place the emphasis on investigation and process facilitation. OR competences have developed accordingly (Ormerod, 2013b).Algorithmic models (sometimes now referred to as analytics) either allow repetitive decisions to be taken automatically (for instance, scheduling, re-ordering, pricing) on some pre-agreed basis, or they offer suggestions to decision-makers in the form of decision support (for instance, credit analysis, critical path analysis, sales analysis). What…if models (for instance, strategy, sales planning or financial forecasting models) bring together what is known and what needs to be assumed about a choice or some aspect of it, in a structured way (see for instance, Ormerod & McLeod, 1984; Plackett, Ormerod, & Toft, 1982). Uncertainty can be explored by changing assumptions and noting the consequences. As…if models on the other hand start with a big, usually theoretical, assumption and explore the rational consequences. For instance, such models can be used to explore the implications of assuming consumers act as if they are economically rational and have perfect information, or a service can be modeled as if customers arrive at random intervals. Simulation models try to capture the underlying logic of some chain of events in order to explore the possible effect of changing the capacities or operating rules. Such models generally assume that the aims and objectives can be fairly simply represented and effort is concentrated on representing, or provide some insight into, some relevant aspect of the human activity under scrutiny. All these analytical models take advantage of deductive logic wherever possible but also require some assumptions about the facts, aims and normative values. The advantage of modeling is that these and other assumptions, which will inevitably include some element of (subjective) judgement, are made transparent; the sensitivity of the model outcomes to changes in assumptions can be explored. OR has documented many models of this type and practitioners frequently deploy them.A second class of models treats the determination of objectives as problematic. Multiple criteria decision analysis (MCDA) helps decision-makers define their criteria (objectives) and explore the consequences in the evaluation of options (Belton & Stewart, 2002). Such models elicit the criteria from those involved in the decision-making and explore the trade-offs by making use of multi-attribute value (or utility) theory, or pairwise comparisons (for instance the Analytical Hierarchy Process) or outranking methods (for instance PROMETHEE). Belton and Stewart explain that:MCDA is an aid to decision making, a process which seeks to:•Integrate objective measurement with value judgement.Make explicit and manage subjectivity (p. 3).A number of tried and tested MCDA approaches are now available (see for instance, Belton & Stewart, 2002; Brans & Vincke, 1985; Saaty, 1994). MCDA places the emphasis on helping decision makers ‘learn about the problem situation, about their own and others values and judgements and through organization, synthesis and appropriate presentation of information to guide them in identifying, often through extensive discussion, a preferred course of action’ (Belton & Stewart, 2002, p. 5). Such an orientation could equally place MCDA in the category of OR help considered next.The importance of process design, facilitation, and process management, has been long recognized as a core OR competence (see, for instance, Ackoff, 1974; Boothroyd, 1978; Churchman, 1971; Eden, Jones, & Sims 1983; Jackson, 2000, 2003; Jackson & Keys, 1987; Lawrence, 1966; Midgley, 2000; Mingers & Gill, 1997; Miser & Quade 1988; Mitchell, 1993; Ormerod, 1997a,b, 1998, 2002, 2008, 2013b; Rosenhead 1989; Tomlinson & Kiss, 1984; Ulrich, 1983, 2012a,b).On reflecting on his experience as a practitioner Boothroyd concluded that:OR is the practice of intervening in action programmes to address any significant problem of articulate reflection before action, and by any conceivable method examining and adding to and modifying the theories, proposals and repertoire of actions for the entered programmes and other programmes with which it interacts, so as to permit a clearer understanding of reality, and a more reliable and timely choice of action. (Boothroyd, 1978, pp. 122–123; see also Ormerod, 2010b, p. 1080)For UK practitioners, Boothroyd provided the first convincing description of OR practice, an account that was endorsed by the US scholars Miser and Quade (1988). Boothroyd’s concept of articulate-reflection-before-action envisages OR as a consultant’s ‘action programme’ intervening in (or engaging in) a clients ‘action programme’. The result can be conceived as a joint action programme involving both consultant(s) and client(s). The setting up of such a joint action programme requires that both consultant and client reach some level of understanding of the other’s aims and capabilities. Such an understanding is needed before it is possible to define the aims and ambitions of the joint programme, the roles that consultants, clients and other participants could play, and how the whole can be orchestrated to achieve some desired result. Often OR is initiated when an individual consultant (or team) is invited to investigate a problem or issue. This might trigger the use of problem structuring methods (PSMs), but it might not, and in any case there would need to be some exploration of the issues before a PSM is engaged. OR investigators try to understand something about the problem, think about what a contribution might be and then, if invited or contracted to do so by the client, design and manage an intervention process.Although OR has come to be associated with its modeling capability, clients often emphasize the value of the intervention process itself, the learning that occurred, the clarification of issues, and the skill that the consultant demonstrated in designing and managing the process. This process competence relies on the accumulation of craft skills (Miser & Quade, 1988). Attempts to codify these skills have resulted in the development of soft OR methods (Rosenhead & Mingers, 2001). Although practitioners have been slow to deploy these methods (Munro & Mingers, 2004; O’Brien, 2011), their very existence has undoubtedly drawn attention to the importance of designing, managing and facilitating interventions. Whether used for the purpose of problem structuring or for supporting substantive decisions, soft methods have provided a focus for much reflection, discussion and research into the process of OR, facilitation and process management.Complementing the analytical (model building) and process (design, facilitation and management) competences, the OR consultant requires a third competence, namely the context competence, an ability to understand the inner and outer context of the client (Ormerod, 2002, 2013b). Many OR consultants may gain some understanding of context through education (for instance, at a business school) but generally the competence builds over time from the experience of interacting with clients. The inner context refers to what companies do, how they do it, and the various roles that have to be performed. For instance, to work with a bank it is helpful to have some understanding of bank services and operations, and the roles performed by people working in the treasury, compliance and trading departments and so on. More generally the consultant develops an understanding of the way that individuals present themselves, interact with others and take decisions, individually or collectively. An understanding of how different organizations and individuals think about things, how they take decisions, and how they get things done is obviously crucial for any OR consultant.As important as the inner context is the outer context. Any organization is both enabled and constrained by factors largely (but not entirely) outside its control: by its legal, economic, social and governmental context. For banking, the outer context is provided by the legislative constraints specifically on banking and more generally on all employers and legal enterprises, the national banking institutions, the structure of the national and international banking market, the current state of the economy and the general societal conditions that pertain. In some organizations environmental and geo-political issues will be a major concern. Some knowledge of these circumstances helps the consultant–client interaction and the process of getting an intervention agreed and up and running. Once the intervention is underway the consultant needs to be skilled at rapidly developing an appreciation of a client’s particular context.At the outset it was noted that in order to apply CR in the practice arena many subjective judgements are necessary. How subjectivity is handled in professional practice was therefore examined; as a result three strategies for handling subjectivity in practice were identified. The next step was to characterize the three core competences of OR (conducting analysis, managing process, understanding context). The relationship between these competences and the three CR strategies for managing subjectivity (two-tier, judgement, and participative) is now considered.The OR competence ‘conducting analysis’ supports a two-tier managerial process through the introduction of models; those who provide the judgements on which the algorithms and models are based, are engaged in upper tier activities while those who use the model occupy the lower tier (any one individual may participate in one or both tiers). However, unlike standards and codes in disciplines such as engineering, accountancy and law, which can be applied nationally and sometimes internationally, OR models are generally designed for specific clients in specific situations. OR model building also makes use of judgement (particularly in upper tier activities), may involve wide participation (for instance, in an MCDA application), and will require process management. However, it is the implementation of a two-tier managerial strategy that is often the striking thing about modelling.It is clear that the OR competence ‘managing process’ makes use of two of the three CR strategies for managing subjectivity: (i) the use of the ‘judgement strategy’ by involving people with relevant experience and (ii) the ‘participative strategy’ by considering who might be also be brought into the process including those who will be involved in implementation and those affected by the decision. Less obviously, the OR competence managing process may also support a ‘two-tier strategy’ by differentiating between the roles of different groups of people in the design of the intervention; for instance, the business improvement project at PowerGen involved a lower tier consisting of a project team and several task forces to do the investigation, and an upper tier consisting of the General Manager and his management team (Ormerod, 1999) to make definitive judgements. Similarly the Strategic Choice Approach envisages a ‘twin-track’ approach involving a policy stream of work interacting with a technical one (Friend & Hickling, 2005, pp. 259–261).Finally, the OR competence ‘understanding context’ enables the consultant to engage with clients and participants and quickly grasp the implications of what is being said; armed with a general understanding of internal and external contexts, the consultant can more quickly gain an understanding (i) of the internal workings of the client organization – how it makes strategy, runs operations and introduces change and (ii) of the external environment – the market, the competition, regulatory framework, environmental concerns and so on. Understanding the context, or the ability to quickly gain an understanding and appreciation of the clients’ particular circumstances helps build confidence and trust between consultant and client, the key to any rewarding joint enterprise (Eden, 1987). This competence thus supports all three strategies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An earlier paper (Ormerod, 2013a) examined the claim by the philosopher David Miller that rationality and objectivity could be maintained in decision-making (practice) by adopting a strictly objectivist approach. The conclusion reached was that to provide an overall framework for practice (deciding what to do) CR has to address subjectivity; objectivity can only be approached via subjectivity. In this paper the question of handling subjectivity within a CR approach is addressed.If the process used by science for handling subjectivity (publication of results, critique and consensus forming) can be emulated for practice and applied to action choices, we can still claim that a scientific approach to decision-making is being taken. The problem is that, within the time and resource constraints typically available in practice, this is usually difficult and often impossible to achieve. Three strategies (two-tier, competence-based judgement, and participation) have been identified that are used in organizations to address this problem; it is suggested that these strategies can form the basis of a critical rationalism for practice (CRP). Using these three strategies, managerial, administrative and specialists in effect emulate the virtues of a scientific community, albeit imperfectly. As with science the results cannot be justified but can be seen to be practically useful. The three strategies provide OR with one way of understanding how clients take decisions and how their organizations function. OR’s role is to help clients improve and implement these strategies within their particular organization. CRP as envisioned here provides a framework that has some things in common with other critical approaches and can be seen as complementing them. The approach may be attractive to some operational researchers given their mathematical, scientific and technical backgrounds. More work is required to articulate and defend the approach proposed, a task primarily for philosophers. Nevertheless from an operational research perspective, perhaps surprisingly, a critical rationalist approach to managerial, administrative and specialist decision-making does seem possible.