@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pricing and timing of consolidated deliveries in the presence of an express alternative: Financial and environmental analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate consolidated transport solutions with a common shipment frequency.We investigate the optimal pricing and timing and its environmental implications.The optimal policy is largely driven by customer heterogeneity.There may, in practice, be a mismatch between heterogeneity and consolidation policy.The environmental impact from implementing consolidation is not clear-cut.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in environment and climate change,Shipment consolidation,Incentives,Supply chain management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Shipment consolidation has been advocated by researchers and politicians as a means to reduce cost and improve environmental performance of logistics activities. This paper investigates consolidated transport solutions with a common shipment frequency. When a service provider designs such a solution for its customers, she faces a trade-off: to have the most time-sensitive customers join the consolidated solution, the frequency must be high, which makes it difficult to gather enough demand to reach the scale economies of the solution; but by not having the most time-sensitive customers join, there will be less demand per time unit, which also makes it difficult to reach the scale economies. In this paper we investigate the service provider’s pricing and timing problem and the environmental implications of the optimal policy. The service provider is responsible for multiple customers’ transports, and offers all customers two long-term contracts at two different prices: direct express delivery with immediate dispatch at full cost, or consolidated delivery at a given frequency at a reduced cost. It is shown that the optimal policy is largely driven by customer heterogeneity: limited heterogeneity in customers’ costs leads to very different optimal policies compared to large heterogeneity. We argue that the reason so many consolidation projects fail may be due to a strategic mismatch between heterogeneity and consolidation policy. We also show that even if the consolidated solution is implemented, it may lead to a larger environmental impact than direct deliveries due to inventory build-up or a higher-than-optimal frequency of the consolidated transport.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Freight transportation is, on the operational level, characterized by strong economies of scale: larger shipment volumes lead to significantly lower transport costs per unit. However, for an individual shipper it is costly to realize these scale economies. Normally, two options exist: either, the shipper can purchase a less-than-truckload service (LTL), with longer transit time due to terminal handling; or he can purchase a full truck load service (FTL), but at a lower frequency. In both cases, the reduced flexibility leads to higher inventory costs. Since those costs are generally higher than the savings in transportation costs, scale economies often go unrealized, leading to operational and environmental inefficiencies. For instance, the EEA (2006) reports that the average vehicle load factor in Europe is below 50 percent.Globally, freight transports account for approximately 8 percent of all energy-related GHG-emissions (IPCC, 2014). By increasing the vehicle load factor, the external costs associated with these emissions can be significantly reduced. Consequently, researchers and politicians have advocated different consolidation schemes, where shipments from several shippers are consolidated without the time consuming terminal handling of LTL-transports (see e.g. Arvidsson, 2013). In this paper we investigate one type of efforts: those where a common shipment frequency is used for all shippers who use the consolidated transport alternative. There are several examples of consolidation efforts where this is the case. Co-loading with set “sailing dates” (Taherian, 2014), time-based consolidation in distribution systems (Marklund, 2011), and intermodal truck-train transports (Eng-Larsson & Kohn, 2012) all dispatch consolidated shipments at a certain frequency. Because such efforts would lead to larger volumes per shipment, they are often claimed to not just improve environmental performance but also reduce costs (e.g. Ülkü, 2012). For instance, according to the Executive Vice President of DHL Solutions & Innovations, “increasing the load factor of trucks is an attractive way to achieve more sustainability, as it not only improves the carbon footprint, but is also very appealing from an economic perspective” (Ehrhart, 2010).In practice, most consolidation projects are initiated by a third party logistics service provider. One example is Volvo Logistics, a service provider, who set up an intermodal truck–train solution between Sweden and Germany in 2008, called Viking Rail (see e.g. Eng-Larsson, 2012). The solution was set up to accommodate a request from a large customer to become more “climate-smart”. One objective of the new solution was therefore to reduce GHG-emission; the other was to avoid road tolls and traffic taxes in Central Europe. To initiate the project, a full train was contracted from DB Schenker. The train was to depart with 36 trailers in both directions. Owing to this, it would take several days for the demand from the customer who initiated the solution to reach the scale necessary for a profitable departure, so other customers were needed. But when choosing which customers to include in the solution, the service provider faces a trade-off: If she decides to offer a high frequency service, it is more likely that time-sensitive customers join. However, the high frequency may make it difficult to gather enough demand per departure to reach the necessary scale. If instead she decides to offer a low frequency service, there is plenty of time between departures to consolidate demand. This may however mean that few customers are willing to join, which also makes it difficult to reach the necessary scale. So what customers should be included in the consolidated solution? At what frequency should the solution dispatch? And what is the optimal price of the new service? In this paper we analyze this problem, and evaluate the environmental implications of the optimal policy.Shipment consolidation policies have been well researched before. But despite the fact that most transports are outsourced to service providers (Hong, Chin, & Liu, 2004; Jaafar & Rafiq, 2005; Mellin & Sorkina, 2013), previous research largely ignores the fact that service providers interact strategically with their customers in these situations. In this research we make an attempt in capturing this by explicitly considering the contracting dynamics of a shipment consolidation setting. We investigate the problem, by considering a non-asset service provider responsible for N customers’ deliveries from one region to another. In our model, the service provider offers two long-term contracts at two different prices to each customer: direct express delivery with immediate dispatch at full cost, or consolidated delivery at a given dispatch frequency at a reduced cost. A customer then chooses the contract that leads to the lowest total expected cost. We consider two different pricing strategies: individual prices by which the service provider has the power to price discriminate customers based on their willingness-to-pay; and standard prices, by which the service provider offers the same price to all customers.Although researchers and politicians seem confident in consolidation projects as a means to reduce GHG-emissions, projects are rare in practice and often fail. For instance, there have been 150 consolidation projects in urban settings in Europe over the last 25 years, but only 5 of these have survived after subsidies were withdrawn (SUGAR, 2011). The Viking Rail project initiated by Volvo Logistics was discontinued after 5 years of operation,11http://www.gp.se/ekonomi/1.2339085-volvo-lagger-ner-taget.and service providers in similar situations have reported difficulties in making their consolidation projects profitable, despite low operating costs on scale (see e.g. Lammgård, 2012). In solving the service provider’s problem, we see that the optimal policy may be to not offer a consolidated solution, particularly if a standard price is used. This indicates something about the incentives to offer and use consolidated transports; in many instances there are simply no financial incentives to do so. In cases where it is optimal to offer a consolidated solution, we show that the optimal policy depends on customer heterogeneity, and is either one with frequent shipments that includes many customers or one with infrequent shipments that includes only the most time-insensitive customers. This implies that to run a successful consolidated solution, the service provider must accurately match customer heterogeneity with the right policy. We argue that this may shed some light on why consolidation projects are rare in practice and often fail. First, it may be difficult to match heterogeneity with the right policy; second, it may be difficult to adjust the policy to changes in heterogeneity once the policy is in place.Lastly, we show that even if the consolidated solution is implemented, its environmental implications are not clear-cut. Consolidation may, in fact, lead to more environmental impact than direct deliveries, due to inventory build-up and a higher-than-optimal frequency of the consolidated transport.The paper is structured in the following way. In the next section, related literature is reviewed, before our model is described in more detail in Section 3. In Section 4 we analyze the simultaneous pricing-timing decision of the service provider, and prove some underlying properties in three cases: (1) when customers are identical; (2) when customers are heterogeneous and can be charged individual prices; and (3) when customers are heterogeneous but are charged the same price. We show that in all cases, the underlying properties ensure that optimization can be done through a simple search procedure. The optimal policy’s sensitivity to costs and customer heterogeneity are then investigated in Section 5. Next, in Section 6, we analyze the environmental implications of the optimal policy, and illustrate the difficulties of implementing freight consolidation with an example using realistic figures from a European context. Section 7 concludes the paper. Appendices A–D provide the last proofs.By investigating the pricing and timing of a consolidated transport service, this paper relates to literature on (1) transport pricing, (2) the timing of consolidated shipments, and (3) cost allocation in joint replenishment.Since standard transport services are sold in a Bertrand-like fashion, with strong price competition, the price can often be seen as exogenous to the individual service provider. This is reflected in the transport planning literature. For instance, Kim and Van Wee (2011), Euchi, Chabchoub, and Yassine (2011), and Bolduc, Renaud, and Boctor (2007) all consider transport planning problems where the price of the transport services offered by service providers is assumed to be exogenous. We follow this literature and let the price for the direct delivery be exogenous to the service provider.However, although the service provider has limited pricing power for standard services, there is more room to adjust the price for a customized or differentiated service. This is reflected in research on both cost-based pricing and relationship-specific pricing on the transport market. Cost-based pricing is discussed in Spasovic and Morlok (1993) and Yan, Bernstein, and Sheffi (1995). Spasovic and Morlok (1993) use a framework to determine marginal costs, which are then used to evaluate drayage rates in rail-truck intermodal services. Yan et al. (1995) use network flow models to estimate the alternative costs of intermodal transports to guide the pricing decisions of the service. Relationship-specific pricing, where the price is determined by a powerful customer, is discussed in Henig, Gerchak, Ernst, and Pyke (1997) and Alp, Erkip, and Güllü (2003), who analyze a buying firm’s problem of how to simultaneously determine inventory policy and transport contract parameters in a periodic review inventory model. Ülkü and Bookbinder (2012a,b)) consider the pricing problem for a 3PL or manufacturer that differentiates its price to the customer based on the delivery time promised and the customers’ sensitivity to time to maximize its profit. They do not consider a long-term contract between the customers and the 3PL/manufacturer; instead the price can, and should, be adjusted each time a demand occurs. Brusset and Temme (2005) and Berling and Eng-Larsson (2014) analyze the transport contract choice in a situation where the final prices of the contracts are outcomes of a game between the service provider and a single customer. The pricing mechanism for the consolidated solution in our model is most similar to the last perspective. We assume an exogenous price for the standard service (direct delivery), and based on this price, the service provider determines a long-term contract with a discount associated with the differentiated service (consolidated delivery) to cover any increase in expected cost at the customers. However, in contrast to previous research, we consider several heterogeneous customers. The service provider must thus set the price and design the service, while simultaneously deciding which customers to offer which transport service to.Apart from the pricing decision, the service provider must also determine the timing of the consolidated delivery. In the inventory control literature, shipment consolidation has been investigated with focus on finding optimal policies for inventory and vehicle dispatch in systems of one or several echelons. Çetinkaya and Lee (2000), Çetinkaya and Bookbinder (2003) and Ülkü (2012) consider coordination of inventory and transportation in single-stage systems, including time-based and quantity-based consolidation policies. In multi-stage inventory systems, quantity-based consolidation has been analyzed by Cheung and Lee (2002) and Kiesmüller and de Kok (2005). More closely related to our research is that on time-based shipment consolidation. This is considered in Marklund (2011), who analyzes a divergent supply chain with time-based consolidation. He provides an exact recursive procedure to determine the costs of the system, and two heuristics for calculating the optimal dispatch frequency when a first-come-first-serve allocation policy is used. Howard and Marklund (2011) extend this to also consider state-dependent myopic allocation policies, where allocation is determined some time after the order has arrived at the central warehouse. While this paper also considers a system where a firm is responsible for deliveries to downstream stocking points, we extend this literature by assuming that the upstream firm (the service provider) and the downstream stocking points (the customers) are different decision-makers. This implies that an optimal policy for the entire system cannot be implemented by one player directly, and that the final decisions are the outcome of a game. This complicates the problem significantly, which calls for a more stylized model. We therefore do not model inventory dynamics explicitly, but handle this implicitly through a general cost function, seen in the next section, that captures the increase in cost due to longer lead-times.Lastly, a related stream of literature that does analyze shipment consolidation from a decentralized perspective is the literature on joint replenishment. Dror and Hartman (2007), Anily and Haviv (2007), and Zhang (2009) use concepts from cooperative game theory to analyze the allocation of the cost reduction from joint replenishment among retailers. They consider slightly different versions of the same infinite horizon problem, and show that the core of the game is nonempty. That is, there is a possible “fair” allocation of costs. It is implied with that approach that the final allocation rule is enforceable by some benevolent party. In our research, however, we assume that the upstream firm (the service provider) dictates which transport alternatives that are available on the market, and acts strategically. Based on our observations, we believe that this captures several transport markets well.We consider two regions (see Fig. 1) where N companies (from here on referred to as customers or “he”) have a transport need which they have chosen to outsource to a third-party-logistics service provider (from here on referred to as service provider, or “she”). The service provider offers two long-term contracts that the customers can choose from: direct transports with immediate dispatch, or consolidated transports that depart at a given dispatch frequency, 1/τ (to simplify notation, we will for the most part consider its inverse, the shipment interval τ). Each customer faces the problem of choosing the contract that minimizes his expected long-run cost. The service provider’s problem is to design the contracts and transportation solution so that her expected long-run profit is maximized. We assume that all players have a cost/profit focus but that they choose the alternative that is perceived to be the more environmentally friendly (i.e. the consolidated solution) if the cost/profit is the same across the alternatives.The average transport need per time unit for customer i is denoted μiand goods are shipped in full units, e.g. a full truck load, a trailer, or a pallet, and is independent of τ. This implies that a customer that chooses the consolidated alternative will not require a unit in each period unless the interval τ is long. A customer may thus not be included in all shipments.The service provider offers two contracts to each customer: a direct delivery contract, and a consolidated delivery contract.If customer i chooses the direct delivery contract, the service provider will provide the customer with direct transports between the two regions. The service is sold at the exogenous price p per unit. We assume that one “service unit” corresponds to the transport of one “goods unit” from the first region to the second. Such a service unit – e.g. the transport of a full truck load, a pallet, or a parcel – incurs a unit cost of cDfor the service provider. The lead time of this solution is the transportation time l. To simplify the notation, we let price, cost, and lead-time be the same for all customers. This should capture practice well, since the transport between the two regions likely make up the bulk of the cost and time. However, it is straightforward to extend the model to include customer-specific prices, pi, costs, cD,i, and lead-times, li.If any customer i chooses the consolidated delivery contract, the service provider sets up a consolidated transport solution between the two regions. The vehicle(s) of the consolidated solution runs at every τ time units. The customer’s lead-time with this solution is the transportation time l plus the time he has to wait for the common transport to be dispatched, [0, τ). Thus, this alternative reduces the customer’s flexibility, typically increases his lead-time, and leads to an additional cost, e.g. a cost for the additional safety stock needed to cope with the longer and more uncertain lead-times. Due to this additional cost, the contract is offered at a lower price. We refer to the difference in the price between the two contracts as the discount, ri. The service provider’s revenue for customer i will therefore only bep−riper unit. However, she can reduce her cost by consolidating the transports from several customers on the same consolidated solution. The cost for the consolidated transport, e.g. the cost to reserve and run the train-leg of an intermodal truck-train solution, is cCin each period of length τ, which includes the cost for back-hauls if applicable. We thus assume that there is no variable cost linked to the consolidated transport as it will not lead to any additional insights (but again it is straight forward to extend the model to incorporate this).The service provider must decide on the length of the shipment interval, τ, as well as what discount, ri, to offer each of the customers simultaneously. The expected profit is linked to both of these decisions. A longer time between the consolidated transports reduces the service provider’s cost for these transports, but leads to a need for larger discounts to keep customers in this solution, or more direct transports at a cost cDeach for the customers that leave the solution. Note also that the choice of using direct or consolidated transports as well as the frequency of the consolidated solution influences the environmental performance of the system. This is further developed in later sections.The customers face a choice between two contracts. The first contract provides direct transports at price p. The second contract provides consolidated transports at a lower price,p−ri,but leads to a (stochastic) additional cost per time unit due to the lower flexibility. It is assumed that customers are rational in the sense that they will always choose the lowest expected cost alternative; switching from a direct to a consolidated transport solution is just a matter of cost. To make the exposition more clear and to facilitate the calculations, we will make the following assumption regarding the expected value of the additional cost that a customer has to be compensated for.Assumption 1A1The expected additional cost per time unit for customer i if he chooses the consolidated alternative, ACi(τ), isi.concave increasing in τ, withlimτ→0ACi(τ)=0,and limτ→∞ACi(τ) > cDμi, andtwice differentiable withd2ACi(τ)dτ2τ>−2dACi(τ)dτ.These are all reasonable assumptions.22Assumption 1 is fulfilled in many systems. Consider, for instance, a customer that uses the transport to replenish a warehouse monitored through a traditional continuous review (R, Q)-policy. In this case, ACi(τ) consists of the holding cost for the additional safety stock needed, plus the cost for additional shortages due to the longer and more uncertain lead-time. If the service level is high, the former dominates and is approximately equal to the holding cost, hi, times the safety-stock. If the safety stock is determined using an α-service level (i.e. probability of no stock-outs during an order cycle), and the demand is normally distributed, then the safety stock will be a safety factor,Φ−1(αi),times the standard deviation of the lead-time. If l is negligible, then the lead-time is uniformly distributed on [0, τ] which renders a standard deviation of the lead-time demand ofσi2τ/2+μi2τ2/12,where σiis the standard deviation and μithe expected value of the demand over one time period (see e.g. Axsäter, 2006 p. 97 and 122). The resulting additional cost isACi(τ)=hiΦ−1(αi)σi2τ/2+μi2τ2/12,a function that is concave increasing and twice differentiable in τ with the limits 0 and ∞ respectively and thus fulfills the assumption in its entirety. Note however that this general representation also captures switching costs and/or inertia to reduce transport frequency, as indicated by Eng-Larsson and Kohn (2012) to exist in these situations.It is also reasonable that a service provider is able to extract this information based on past orders, in contrast to more detailed information about customers’ inventory policies. Since τ is directly linked to the lead-time, the first point in the assumption entails a concave increasing cost in the lead-time for the customer. The first limit,limτ→0ACi(τ)=0,ensures that the additional cost ACi(τ) is continuous in τ as ACi(0) by definition is 0. This assumption along with the last condition ensures unimodality of the service provider’s profit function for τ > 0 and homogeneous customers (see Lemma 1 in Section 4) which simplifies the search procedure significantly in other cases as well. The structural results derived later hold even if ACi(τ) is not twice differentiable as long as it is continuous. If ACi(τ) is discontinuous, that is, it shifts at certain τ-values, the results hold in between these points of discontinuity. The second limit limτ→∞ACi(τ) > cDμiensures that the trivial solutionτ=∞,that is, to never ship, is not optimal. In fact, it is likely thatlimτ→∞ACi(τ)=∞as it entails an infinite safety stock or shortages.The solution to the customer’s problem is then straightforward. The customer should choose the first contract if the discount, ri, is such that he doesnotget adequately compensated for the expected additional cost ACiassociated with the consolidated solution.The contract game is a one-period game, with full information, where the service provider is the price leader, and the contract is binding for an infinite future. The costs used during the contracting game are thus based on expectations in the long-run, assuming stationary inventory policies at the customers. First, the service provider observes the demand and all costs, and presents two contract alternatives to each customer simultaneously. The first contract is for direct transports and specifies just the price, p, per service unit. The second contract is for the consolidated solution and specifies a discount, ri, and a shipment interval, τ. Each customer then, individually, chooses the alternative that minimizes his expected long-run costs. While the customer has a choice, clearly, the service provider is the leader and can set the price so that it is rational for a given customer to choose a given contract. The service provider then builds the consolidated solution if the profit of doing so is greater than serving all customers with direct transports.In this section we derive the optimal discount and shipment interval for the service provider’s consolidated delivery-contract in three different scenarios. First we investigate the case of homogeneous customers, that is, when all customers face the same expected demand and has the same cost structure. We then turn to the case of heterogeneous customers. First with individual prices where each customer is offered a unique discount, and then with standard prices where the same discount is offered to all customers using the consolidated delivery option.Independently of pricing scheme, a customer’s participation constraint for using the consolidated delivery option is(1)ACi(τ)−μiri≤0.That is, the additional cost of using the consolidated delivery must be completely covered by the offered discount. We assume that a customer prefers consolidated delivery as soon as the additional costs are covered. For the service provider, the participation constraint for offering a consolidated delivery is given by(2)∑i∈IC(ri(τ)−cD)μi+cCτ<0,where IC is the set of customers using the consolidated delivery option. The constraint simply ensures that the total costs from consolidating customers in IC are not larger than the costs of using direct delivery for the same customers. Note here that it is assumed that the fixed cost cCis paid in each period (once for every shipment) and that there is no capacity constraint on the consolidated alternative. Though simplifying, this corresponds well with practice, where problems in overshooting upper capacity limits with contracted customers are rare (see e.g. Eng-Larsson, 2012).Before moving on, we note from (1) that there exists a unique “accept discount”, that is, a lowest unit discount that ensures customer i’s participation in the consolidated delivery at any shipment interval τ. This is given by(3)ri̲(τ)=ACi(τ)/μi.A larger discount thanri(τ) will reduce the service provider’s profit but not change customer behavior. However, if a standard price is used (as in Section 4.3) some customers might receive a larger discount thanri(τ). A smaller discount thanri(τ) will be offered if it is optimal for the service provider to not include the customer in the consolidated solution but rather have him choose the contract with direct deliveries.When the service provider faces homogeneous customers, her problem can be reduced to a one-dimensional optimization problem over τ (for notational convenience index i is therefore dropped throughout this section). This is because the optimal discount is the same for all customers (if the consolidated delivery option maximizes the expected profit). Offering a larger discount is feasible, but will lead to an unnecessary decrease in the expected profit for the service provider. Offering a lower discount will mean that the customer does not recover all costs and therefore prefers direct delivery. The service provider’s long run expected profit per time unit is thus given by(4)π(τ)={N·(p−cD)μτ=0,N·(p−r̲(τ))μ−cCτ,τ>0,with the following property expressed as a lemma. All proofs are found in Appendices A–D.Lemma 1When customers are homogeneous and Assumption1holds, then the service provider’s long-run expected profit per time unit, π(τ), is uni-modal increasing-decreasing in τ > 0.Owing to the lemma, it is straightforward to find the service provider’s optimal solution. First find the τ that fulfillscC−N·AC′(τ)·τ2=0and the corresponding profit from (4), and then compare this to the profit whenτ=0. Choose the τ that provides the largest profit and the discounts according to (3).Although having homogeneous customers may be unlikely, this simple situation still provides some insights about the mechanisms that govern a decentralized consolidation scheme and its environmental impact. This is illustrated in Fig. 2. The AC(τ)-curve shows the minimum loss in revenue necessary to achieve the customers’ participation, as a function of τ. The(μcD−cC/Nτ)-curve shows the cost savings associated with consolidated rather than direct transports. The profit is the difference between the cost-savings curve and the loss-in-profit curve. The left limit in Fig. 2 is the most flexible solution (the shortest shipment interval) for which the service provider can make a profit, whereas the right limit is the most efficient solution (the longest shipment interval) for which the service provider can make a profit. Clearly, all feasible solutions are within this interval. Simple comparative statics then show that the cost-savings are increasing in cD, N, and μ and decreasing in cC. The profit, and the distance between the lowest and highest τ for which the consolidated solution is more profitable than direct shipment, are affected in the same way. If cCwas to increase or any of the other parameters were to decrease, e.g. because of a loss in the customer base or due to lower fuel prices, the limits would quickly approach each other. Eventually, this would lead to a situation where it is impossible for the service provider to run a consolidated solution with a profit.We now consider the case of N heterogeneous customers with a common shipment interval for all customers using the consolidated solution, with a discount that can be varied between the customers. That is, the service provider has the possibility to price discriminate customers. The service provider’s long run expected profit per time unit is in this case given by(5)π(τ,IC)={∑i=1N(p−cD)μi,τ=0,∑i∈IC(p−ri̲(τ))μi+∑i∉IC(p−cD)μi−cCτ,τ>0,where IC is the participation set. As before, it is apparent that the service provider should never offer a larger discount than necessary, sori=ri̲(τ)for all customers in the participation set. From (5) we can see that if the accept discount is greater than the cost of direct delivery, it is better to not include customer i in the participation set, which is achieved by offering an unacceptably low discount, e.g. by lettingri=cD. Combined, this means thatri*(τ)=min{ri̲(τ),cD}is an optimal discount scheme (of course any discount scheme withri(τ)=ri̲(τ)whenri(τ) ≤ cDand ri(τ) <ri(τ) otherwise will be optimal).The increasing property of ACi(τ), with limτ→∞ACi(τ) > cDμi, implies that there for each customer i exists a break-point τi, above which it is not optimal to include him in the participation set. Let us enumerate the customers so thatτ1<τ2<…<τN. This implies thatLemma 2With individual prices, there are N plausible optimal participation sets. The size of the optimal participation set, ∣IC*∣, is decreasing in τ > 0.The lemma can be understood in the following way. The optimal participation set at low values of τ is the complete set of customers. That is, as long as the frequency of the consolidated service is sufficiently high, all customers should be in the consolidated solution. As τ increases, Customer 1 will eventually depart from the participation set, followed by Customer 2, Customer 3 and so forth, until τ is so large that only customer N uses the consolidated solution. The lemma thus builds on the intuition that when the service quality (i.e. the frequency of consolidated shipments) decreases, it becomes increasingly costly to keep customers, which means that it is optimal to have fewer customers using the consolidated solution.The lemma also implies that the sum of the customer-specific costs, ∑∀imin{ri(τ), cD}μi, is concave increasing in τ. While this provides some structure to the problem, the concavity is kinked at those points where a customer leaves the participation set, so unlike the case of homogeneous customers, the service provider’s maximum expected profit is not necessarily unimodal increasing-decreasing in τ > 0. However, we can prove the following important property for each participation set.Lemma 3If Assumption1holds for all i ∈ IC, then, for a given participation set IC, the service provider’s long-run expected profit per time unit, π(τ, IC), is unimodal increasing-decreasing in τ > 0. The optimal solution for a given participation set isτIC*(and since there are N plausible optimal participation sets we denote theseτ1*,τ2*,…,τN*). The optimal solution, τ*, will coincide with one of these, i.e.τ*∈{0,τ1*,τ2*,…,τN*}.As implied by these lemmas, a simple search can be performed over plausible optimal participation sets to find the service provider’s global optimum τ*. As a result, any customer with τi≥ τ* will use the consolidated delivery at discountri(τ). Since customers with higher coefficient of variation, service levels, and holding costs normally have lower τi, the interpretation is intuitive; customers with lower valued products and more stable demand are more likely to be on the consolidated delivery.33See previous footnote.Finally, we consider the case of N heterogeneous customers with a common shipment interval and standard discount for all customers using the consolidated delivery. The service provider’s long run expected profit per time unit is in this case given by(6)π(τ,IC)={∑i=1N(p−cD)μi,τ=0,∑i∈IC(p−rIC^(τ))μi+∑i∉IC(p−cD)μi−cCττ>0,where IC is the participation set, andrIC^(τ)is the lowest discount that ensures that all i ∈ IC prefer the consolidated solution. This makes the situation more complicated than when individual prices can be used. For instance, since ri(τ) is a customer-specific function of τ, it is not necessarily the case that the same customer i that dictatesrIC^(τ)for all τ. Moreover, it might be optimal to set a discount that is less than the cost for direct transports, cD, even though a larger discount would lead to a larger participation set. This as the savings in transportation cost that can be achieved by extending the participation set from IC to IC ∪ j can be outweighed by the loss in revenue from all customers in the current IC. Consequently, the service provider’s profit when including j in the participation set will only increase if(7)(cD−rj̲(τ))μj−∑i∈IC(rj̲(τ)−rIC^(τ))μi≥0.To proceed, we first report the following important result regarding the number of potential participation sets.Lemma 4With standard prices, the number of plausible participation setsN^are not greater thanN+Υ,where ϒ is the total number of crossings of “acceptable discount” curves (ri(τ)-curves).To prove the lemma and identify the plausible participation sets let us start by defining the points where two “acceptable discount” curves cross asτx1≤τx2≤...≤τxυwithτx0=0andτxΥ+1=∞. If we in each region,(τxυ−1,τxυ],enumerate the customers as1υ,2υ,…,Nυin increasing order based on the discount they require to join the consolidated solution the plausible participation sets in the region will be{1υ},{1υ,2υ},…,{1υ,2υ,…,Nυ}. That is, N sets with one to N customers. Most of these participation sets will not change as one move from one region to the next, but one will. To see this let us consider the pointτxυwhere the “acceptable discount” curve of customerj=nυ=(n+1)υ+1andk=(n+1)υ=nυ+1cross. The participation sets with one ton−1customers will be the same in(τxυ−1,τxυ)and(τxυ,τxυ+1)as the “acceptable discount” curves of thesen−1customers do not cross in the two regions considered and hence not the order in which they are enumerated. The participation set with n customer will include customer j but not k in(τxυ−1,τxυ]and vice versa in(τxυ,τxυ+1]and will thus differ. Ifn+1or more customers are included in the participation set they will again coincide in the two regions for the same reason as mentioned above. For the case withn+1customers the customer that sets the discount will differ though with k setting the discount in(τxυ−1,τxυ]and customer j in(τxυ,τxυ+1]. We thus have N plausible participation sets in(τx0,τx1]and each crossing of two “acceptable discount” curves has the potential to create an additional plausible participation set.Next, we can show that, as in the case of individual prices, there are in fact certain unimodal properties that facilitate the search procedure.Lemma 5If Assumption1holds for all i ∈ IC, then, for a given participation set IC, the service provider’s long-run expected profit per time unit, π(τ, IC) is unimodal increasing-decreasing in τ > 0. The optimal solution for a given participation set is τIC (and since there areN^plausible participation sets we denote theseτ1*,τ2*,…,τN^*). The optimal solution, τ*, will coincide with one of these, i.e.τ*∈{0,τ1*,τ2*,…,τN^*}.Based on these observations, a search can be conducted to solve the service provider’s problem, similar to the search performed with individual prices (but over a larger set of plausible participation sets).Based on this, it can be easily verified that except in the case of just one type of customer, individual prices lead to a higher long-run expected profit for the service provider than standard prices, and never to a smaller optimal participation set (but possibly to a shorter shipment interval). The fact that individual prices lead to higher service provider profits is intuitively straightforward. With price discrimination the service provider can charge each customer the maximum price he is willing to pay for a consolidated delivery. This means that the full benefit of using the consolidated delivery is rewarded to the service provider. Despite the fact that all customers face a higher (or the same) price when the service provider price discriminates, more customers will use the consolidated delivery under price discrimination, as any participation set with more than one customer will be more expensive for the service provider to reimburse with standard prices than with individual prices. This also implies that standard prices work as a type of cost-sharing mechanism, where some of the benefit of the consolidated delivery is rewarded to the customers. The most time-insensitive customers receives the largest benefit. However, since any given set becomes more expensive (or costs the same) with standard prices, it is never optimal for the service provider to cater to a larger set with standard prices than with individual prices.In this section we focus on how the customers’ expected additional costs from waiting, ACi(τ), impacts the service provider’s problem. In practice, these costs differ among customers depending on downstream characteristics such as the value of the transported goods, the demand uncertainty, service levels at the customer, and the perishability of the goods. For some service providers, customers are rather homogenous. A service provider catering to, for instance, the wood and forestry industry is one such example. For other service providers, customers may show a large spread in their expected additional costs. In this section we investigate how this heterogeneity influences the optimal solution. That is, for a service provider with several somewhat different customers, what does the optimal solution look like? Is it better for the service provider to aim for volume through the inclusion of several customers, or should she instead focus on just one or two of the customers and tailor the solution to them?For this analysis, we let the customers’ alternative costs be given on the formACi(τ)=Kiτβi,which is a flexible function that can be fitted to most real cost functions through the scale parameter, Ki> 0, and shape parameter, βi∈ (0, 1). The scale parameter depends on the customer’s cost of holding inventory, his optimal service level, as well as his demand volatility. The shape parameter captures the time-multiplier, that is, the “factor” that determines how quickly costs increase as the shipment interval increases. This parameter depends on the inventory policy implemented and the auto-correlation of demand over time, where a positive correlation typically leads to a higher βivalue.We let the Ki’s and theβi′s be uniformly distributed among customers. First we vary Kiaccording toKi=K¯+ΔK(i−(N+1)/2),withK¯=3000,andβ=0.5; then we letβi=β¯+Δβ(i−(N+1)/2),withβ¯=0.5,andK=3000. The spread, Δj, wherej={K,β}is used to capture the level of customer heterogeneity. Although we are aware that the results for customer populations with non-uniform distributions may differ significantly, proceeding in this way is motivated by the fact that it allows us to make a rough assessment of the impact of customer heterogeneity on the results: larger Δjsimply means a greater spread in the parameter and thus larger heterogeneity.Fig. 3a–f shows the optimal shipment interval, the optimal participation set, and the service provider’s profit as a function of the spread in Kiand βi. Since this paper is inspired by the situation faced by a service provider setting up an intermodal link between two regions in Europe, the figures are based on cost parameters similar to those in Berling and Eng-Larsson (2014), who present a similar situation. Consequently, we letp=cD=1750,andcC=45,000,which means the break-even in terms of transport costs is at a shipment size of 25 intermodal trailers. Note however that this is the break-even for the service provider only if customers accept to join the intermodal solution without any discount. Judging from Lammgård (2012) and Eng-Larsson (2012) this seem to be a plausible construction.From Fig. 3a–f it can be seen that two very different types of consolidation policies can be profitable for the service provider. For intuition, we refer to these extremes as consolidation over “space”, where several customers’ demand is consolidated on a solution with a short shipment interval, and consolidation over “time”, where only one or a few customers’ demand is consolidated on a solution with a long shipment interval. The first type of policy strives to produce a high-frequency transport service, suitable for many. This is profitable when several customers exhibit similar sensitivity to time, i.e. similar ACi(τ)/μi. The second type of policy produces a transport service with sufficiently high frequency for one or a few time-insensitive customers. This is profitable when customers are not homogeneous, but when there instead are one or a few very time-insensitive customers.When individual prices can be used, the pure space and time policies are extremes on a continuum: as customers become more heterogeneous, the solution should be adjusted to fit the less time-sensitive customers. In Fig. 3a, it is seen that as long as the optimal participation set IC is the full set of N customers, an increase in the spread of Kiwill not increase the optimal shipment interval. However, once it is optimal to exclude some customers from the participation set, there is a slow increase in τ*, with distinct shifts upwards when the optimal participation set is reduced. That is, the transport frequency of the consolidated solution is adjusted to the less time-sensitive customers, while the more time sensitive customers are excluded. This follows directly from (4.2), where an optimization of the shipment interval renders(8)τ*=(cC/β∑i∈ICKi)1/(β+1),where∑i∈ICKiis constant if IC is the complete set, and decreasing otherwise, with distinct shifts downwards when IC is reduced. This shows that the possibility to use individual prices provide some flexibility for the service provider. Changes in customer heterogeneity can, in many cases, be met by only adjusting the customers’ individual prices. In other words, setting a shipment interval to fit as many customers as possible is usually not a bad idea – the individual prices can be used to “fine-tune” the solution.The story is not that straightforward when the customers differ in the shape parameter β as the average value as well as the spread of β influence the optimal shipment interval. For τ* > 1 a decrease in the average β-value for the customers in a participation set will lead to an increase of the optimal intershipment interval (and vice versa if τ* < 1). This can be seen in the left part of Fig. 3b where the optimal participation set is non-complete and increase in Δβwill lead to a decrease of the average β-value. If the average β-value for a participation set remains constant then an increase in spread will lead to a decrease in the optimal intershipment interval (again vice versa if τ* < 1), this shift can also be observed in Fig. 3b. Similar to the case of heterogeneity in the scale parameter K we can see distinct jumps upwards when the participation set is reduced.When standard prices are used, it is clear from Fig. 3a that there are many instances when the optimal policy is to not offer any consolidated solution. When it is, the optimal policy is usually of an either-or-character: either all customers or a selected few should be on the consolidated solution. To see why, remember that it is the largest K-value among customers in the participation set,KIC^,that determines the optimal shipment interval, i.e.(9)τ*=(cC/β∑i∈ICKIC^)1/(β+1).As long as all customers are included in the participation set,KIC^is increasing in the spread of K. This leads to a gradual reduction in τ*, as seen in Fig. 3a: That is, when heterogeneity increases, the frequency of the solution should be increased to avoid paying the higher alternative cost of the most time-sensitive customer. Eventually, controlling the frequency and the standard price based on the most time-sensitive customer becomes too expensive, and the optimal participation set is reduced. This leads to a shift up asKIC^,and the number of customers over which the summation is carried out, is reduced, unless the consolidated solution is abandoned, which leads toτ*=0. If the participation set is smaller than N/2, thenKIC^is decreasing and τ* is increasing with the spread, with distinct shifts up when the set is reduced.For the β-parameter, the same arguments apply to standard prices as for individual prices, although it is the β-value of the most time sensitive customer that determines the optimal shipment interval rather than the average β-value. Which customer that is the most time-sensitive will differ with τ. If τ > 1, the most time sensitive customer is the customer in IC with the largest β-value, and if τ < 1 it is the customer with the smallest β-value. The optimal shipment interval can thus be either increasing or decreasing in the spread of β. This explains the gradual decrease in τ* seen in Fig. 3b. Distinctive shifts up occur when the participation set is reduced as the β-value of the most time sensitive customer as well as∑i∈ICKiis reduced.For both pricing strategies, the general implications are the same independently of which parameter controls heterogeneity: the service provider must accurately match consolidation policy with customer heterogeneity. As heterogeneity changes, the optimal policy may change incrementally or drastically depending on the pricing strategy. When individual prices are possible, the service provider has more flexibility and can meet changes in heterogeneity through price-changes. This is however, very difficult when standard prices are used.With a consolidated solution, the service provider’s customer specific cost for customer i is min {ri(τ), cD}. That is, if customer i is in the participation set IC, the cost is ri(τ); if he is not, the cost is cD. The option to include customer i in the set or not creates an added value for the service provider. One would therefore expect the value of the option to be non-decreasing in the variability of the customers’ cost parameters. This is also observed under individual prices in Fig. 3e, i.e. when the customers differ in Ki. However, it is not seen for any of the other cases. In fact Fig. 3e and f reveals that the optimal profit is initially decreasing with the spread of the customers’ cost parameters in the other cases. This can be explained by the fact that, in all the other cases, a larger spread implies a larger cost on average due to larger discounts, a decreasing participation set and/or more frequent shipments. This is most apparent when a standard price is used, since the most time-sensitive customer dictates the discount in these cases. An increase in the spread then increases the price-setting customer’s additional cost for a given τ, and hence the required discount,rIC^– if the number of customers in the participation set is larger than N/2. For a participation set smaller than N/2, an increase in the spread will instead lead to a reduction in the discount and an increase in the optimal profit.For a smaller participation set, the shipment interval must be longer to consolidate a sufficient number of transports over time to recover the cost of setting up the system. The consolidated solution will thus only be offered when the Ki-values and βi-values of the customers in the smaller participation set are sufficiently low. This is seen in Fig. 3c and e: in the intermediate range, there is no consolidated solution set up, but for larger values of Δ one is set up for the less time-sensitive customers. The shipment interval for the smaller set of customers is much longer than for the larger set that contains all or almost all customers. In the examples considered where the customers differ in β, no such intermediate range exists but for others it may. In these examples a distinct shift can be seen when the service provider stops including all customers and starts to include only the least time-sensitive customers. The fact that the average discount must be higher, or the shipment interval shorter, to keep all customers in the solution when the spread of the β-values is increasing (and τ ≠ 1) even under individual prices are less apparent. It is however straightforward to show, and is due to the fact that∑i∈ICACibecomes more concave if the spread of the β-values increases. This explains the initial decrease in the optimal profit seen in Fig. 3f even under individual prices.The previous sections focused on the profit/cost and how different cost parameters, customer heterogeneity, and the possibility to price discriminate influence the optimal solution. In this section we investigate how the environmental implications of the policy depends on the cost structure.From the previous analyses it is apparent that the consolidated alternative is more likely to be a viable solution if the cost of the direct delivery, cD, is high and/or the cost of the consolidated delivery solution, cC, is low. Further, a reduction in cCwill typically reduce the optimal shipment interval τ*. From an environmental perspective, changes in transport costs is of interest to investigate in greater detail, since a regulator can influence these costs directly through taxes, fees or subsidies. It shall be noted that we assume that the players’ decisions are made based on cost/profit considerations, and that any environmental effect is an outcome of these decisions.To analyze the environmental implications we consider the environmental cost of the policy. We consider three such cost components: The environmental cost for the direct transport; the environmental cost for the consolidated transport; and the environmental cost for the additional environmental impact caused by the reduced flexibility of the consolidated solution, e.g. the environmental cost for the additional safety stock. We will denote these costs eD(direct transports), eC(consolidated transports) and AEi(τ) (reduced flexibility), respectively. These are the external cost faced by society per transport (eDand eC) or per time unit (AEi(τ)), but can also be thought of as an arbitrary measure of environmental impact reported by either player, e.g. greenhouse gas emissions.The transport-related environmental costs are increasing in the number of transports. Consequently, one would expect that the more customers that choose the consolidated solution and the more infrequently it runs the better – this indeed would lead to fewer transports. However, from an environmental perspective, this is only true as long deliveries are not too infrequent. Because of the systemic link between the transport-related environmental costs and the flexibility-related environmental costs, the reduction in the former may not compensate for the increase in the latter. This is especially the case in situations where carrying inventory is energy-intensive.44That the environmental cost associated with reduced flexibility can be substantial is indicated by the report by WEF (2009), which estimates that warehousing accounts for roughly 10 percent of all logistics-related emissions; or McKinnon, Browne, and Whiteing (2012) who report that warehousing accounts for 2–3 percent of the world’s total energy related emissions.This problem taken aside, though, a more infrequent consolidated solution means that fewer customers will use the consolidated solution. So not only may flexibility-related environmental costs increase, few customers may actually switch. Therefore, from an environmental perspective, it may be better to abolish the consolidated solution altogether if it is not designed with a high-enough frequency to attract a sufficient number of customers. Similarly, there is an upper bound on frequency from an environmental perspective; the solution is better abolished if the frequency is set so high that the transport-related environmental costs are not reduced significantly compared to direct transports.The discussion above is illustrated in Fig. 4, which shows the total environmental costs for a customer using the consolidated solution in a system with homogeneous customers. Three types of environmental costs are depicted: (1) environmental costs from the consolidated transports (Econ), (2) environmental costs from the reduced flexibility (Einv), and (3) the sum of the two types of costs within the interval where consolidation is possible, and the environmental costs from direct transports outside of this interval (Etot). The interval where consolidation is possible is marked by the vertical, dashed, lines. The minimum environmental cost is given by the shipping intervalτe*. The corresponding cost/profit curves for this example can be seen in Fig. 2. We see that ifτ*>τe*,as in the figure, then the solution is designed with a – from an environmental perspective – too long shipment interval, leading to inventory build-up that offsets the reduction in transport emissions. If insteadτ*<τe*the consolidated solution is designed with a too short shipment interval (once again from an environmental perspective), leading to too many consolidated deliveries with too low utilization to reduce environmental costs sufficiently. In fact, environmental costs in this case might even be higher than when direct transports are used.For the special case of homogeneous customers it is straightforward to see how the cost structure can be manipulated so the optimal solution from an environmental perspective coincides with the solution preferred from a cost/profit perspective. When the customers are not homogeneous, the problem becomes significantly more complicated. The intuition might be that an improvement in environmental performance is simply achieved by increasing the cost of direct deliveries, cD, and/or decreasing the cost of the consolidated delivery solution, cC. Carbon taxes would achieve the former, whereas subsidies such as the EU’s Marco Polo project would achieve the latter. However, the answer is not trivially found, as the impact of a change in the cost structure is not apparent, and an environmental cost structure adds an additional layer of complexity.In the following, we first provide some insights regarding how cDand cCinfluence the system, and why it is difficult to predict how a change in any of these will change the optimal solution. We will then numerically investigate the issue, based on the same base line parameters as in previous section.Proposition 1Changes in transport costs have the following effects.i.Under individual prices the size of the optimal participation set, ∣IC*∣, is non-decreasing in cD and the optimal shipment interval, τ*, is non-increasing. For standard prices, the total demand of the optimal participation set,∑i∈IC*μi,is non-decreasing in cD.Under individual prices, the optimal shipment interval τ*for the consolidated solution is increasing with cC; under standard prices, the optimal shipment interval is non-decreasing in cC.From the proposition it is clear that taxation to increase the price of normal truck transport, cD, leads to a situation where it is optimal to have more customers using consolidated transports. If it possible to use individual prices, these transports will be performed at a higher frequency. One can expect that this is often the case also when standard prices are used, but it depends on the how the “accept discount” for the added customer, ACj(τ)/μj, evolves compared to the one for the customer that set the discount in the smaller set, ACi(τ)/μi. While the situation is similar when subsidies are used to reduce the cost for consolidated transports, cC, more mechanisms are at play, which makes the situation more difficult to analyze. What could be said is that as long as individual prices are used, subsidies have the same qualitative effect as taxes: more, and more frequent, consolidated transports.However, as discussed above, Proposition 1 does not necessarily imply that an increase in cDor a decrease in cCleads to better environmental performance. To find the environmental impact of these adjustments, another level of complexity must be added; there is no simple relationship between τ* and the environmental performance. In fact, even if one unit of consolidated transport is environmentally better than one unit of regular transport, that is, if eC≤ eD, it cannot be ascertained that regulation through taxes or subsidies will improve the environmental performance (i.e. reduce the environmental cost).In Fig. 5, the environmental cost is depicted for individual prices and standard prices as functions of the transport costs, for a group of heterogeneous customers also considered in Section 5. The environmental costs for transports between the two regions are based on the NTM-calc tool.55http://www.ntmcalc.com.We approximate and normalize these costs for the intermodal case toeC=7.5andeD=1. Note that these costs are expressed per transport and not per unit, which means that the expected environmental cost per unit from using the consolidated transport depends on the shipment interval, τ. The environmental cost of the reduced flexibility is assumed to be proportional to the alternative cost, and given byAEi(τ)=0.001·ACi(τ).Fig. 5 illustrates what we know from Proposition 1, and depicts the environmental implication of this. Starting with Fig. 5a, we see the effect of changes in the cost of the direct delivery, which, for example, would increase if a heavier carbon tax was implemented. In the figure we see that this leads to a situation where the service provider goes from no consolidated transports, to offering a consolidated solution at a price that makes it attractive for all customers. That is, it becomes optimal for the service provider to offer a consolidated delivery solution of the first type – to consolidate over “space”. But, even though this leads to more consolidated transports (as predicted by Proposition 1) with higher vehicle load factors, we actually see an increase in the environmental cost. This occurs since the frequency of the consolidated solution is not high enough for the reductions in transport related environmental costs to offset the increase in environmental costs from the reduced flexibility of all customers.Fig. 5 b depicts changes in the consolidated transport cost. Note that the shipment interval of the consolidated delivery depends on the consolidated transport cost. Consequently, as seen in Fig. 5b, when this cost is reduced, the transports run more frequently, which means that less inventory is needed and the environmental costs decrease. As the cost of the consolidated solution keeps decreasing, so do environmental costs, until a point where the consolidated transports depart at such a high frequency that there are more transports than environmentally optimal, leading to quick increases in total environmental costs. As seen in the figure, the same dynamics exist independently of pricing strategy, although break-points and actual values differ between the two.The figures also illustrate the fact that when the cost of direct deliveries increases, the total environmental impact increases or decreases in discrete steps, whereas when the cost of the consolidated transport decreases, total environmental impact increases or decreases continuously, with discrete shifts at certain points. This means that the marginal impact of a subsidy is, often, larger. The figures also clearly indicate that introducing intermodal transports does not always lead to an environmental improvement. For this to happen, the shipment interval cannot be too short nor too large. Clearly, in the situation depicted in this small study, this is only achieved under very peculiar circumstances, which may or may not be feasible in practice due to regulations regarding e.g. vehicle length.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
