@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new elementary geometric approach to option pricing bounds in discrete time models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new geometric approach to determine the option pricing bounds is provided.The methodology reduces to a (sequence of) convex hull problem.Barycentric coordinates play the role of a martingale measure that needs however not be equivalent to the historical one.We show how to obtain barycentric coordinates that play the role of an equivalent measure in a multi-asset framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finance,Incomplete markets,Option pricing bounds,Convex hulls,Barycentric coordinates,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this paper is to provide a new straightforward measure-free methodology based on convex hulls to determine the no-arbitrage pricing bounds of an option (European or American). The pedagogical interest of our methodology is also briefly discussed. The central result, which is elementary, is presented for a one period model and is subsequently used for multiperiod models. It shows that a certain point, called the forward point, must lie inside a convex polygon. Multiperiod models are then considered and the pricing bounds of a put option (European and American) are explicitly computed. We then show that the barycentric coordinates of the forward point can be interpreted as a martingale pricing measure. An application is provided for the trinomial model where the pricing measure has a simple geometric interpretation in terms of areas of triangles. Finally, we consider the case of entropic barycentric coordinates in a multi asset framework.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
What are the no-arbitrage bounds of a European or American put option when a two-period trinomial model is used? What can be said about the evolution of the option pricing bounds as a function of the parameters of the model? Is there any difference between the trinomial and a more general multinomial model? What are the option pricing bounds of a put option if the set of prices is a compact subset of the real line? What are the no-arbitrage bounds of a European digital option when a general continuous-time model is used?It is the aim of the present paper to develop a straightforward, pricing measure-free approach to answer these questions at the level of difficulty comparable to the popular textbook of Hull (2011). The reason why our approach is straightforward comes from the fact that we derive the pricing bounds of a given option. In particular, we don’t make any use of the general theory of arbitrage and its consequences, the real difficult part of the story.In the standard approach to option pricing, that will be called “universal”, one derives the consequences of no-arbitrage before envisaging the valuation of a given derivative such as an option. As is well-known, no-arbitrage means that if one can design an investment strategy (by taking positions on the existing traded financial securities) whose initial value is equal to zero at the current time, its future cash-flows can not be a positive random variable. No-arbitrage thus excludes the situation in which it is possible to make money with positive probability with a costless investment strategy. The consequences of this seemingly simple no-arbitrage condition turns out to be a very difficult mathematical problem in general because one must show that it is possible to separate the set of costless self-financing strategies from the set of positive random variables. Invoking a separation theorem when the conditions are satisfied11In continuous time models, no-arbitrage becomes no-free lunch to apply a separation theorem., it is shown that no-arbitrage is equivalent to the existence (but not uniqueness) of a linear functional, interpreted as a pricing probability measureQ,which is such that the discounted value of a financial security such as a stock (the discount rate is the risk-free rate) is aQ-martingale, i.e.,EQ(e−rTST|S0)=S0. However, once this measure is known (or chosen in case it is not unique), the valuation of a derivative such as a European option is a rather straightforward problem since it reduces to the computation of an expected value. For instance, if one uses a one period binomial model to price a derivative, when the pricing measureQ=(q,1−q)is known, one can value any derivative written on the underlying asset such as a stock. In this sense, this general approach to no-arbitrage is universal because the pricing measureQcan be used to price any derivative written on the underlying asset. This approach is presented in most (more mathematically inclined) textbooks such as Bjork (2004), Elliott and Kopp (2005), Lamberton and Lapeyre (2008), Musiela and Rutkowski (1998). When we work with a finite market model (see e.g., Elliot & Kopp 2005 or Pliska 1997), as pioneered by Ritchken (1985) and Taqqu and Willinger (1987), the determination of the option pricing bounds can be done by using linear programming (Ritchken & Kuo, 1988; Musiela & Rutkowski, 1998; King, 2002; Van der Hoek & Elliott, 2006; Antonelli, Mancini, & Pinar, 2013; Camci & Pinar, 2009).From a practical point of view, the problem is not, in general, to price any conceivable derivatives written on an underlying asset such as a stock, but to price a given derivative or a small subset of derivatives. Thus, if the difficult part is to derive the consequence of no-arbitrage in general, why not directly focus on the consequences of no-arbitrage for a given option? This is the approach which is followed in the present paper.We consider here the case of a given option (or a linear combination of options with the same maturity), and we show that the determination of the set of arbitrage-free prices reduces to a well-known convex hull problem. In particular, the determination of the option pricing bounds does not require to use a pricing measure. Within our approach, no-arbitrage simply means that a certain point, called the forward point, must belong to the convex hull spanned by a set of points, which is either a convex polygon (incomplete market situation) or a segment (complete market situation). For a single period option pricing problem, i.e., with two dates, 0 and T > 0, the forward price is defined by the two dimensional vector (erTS0; erTΠ0), where S0 and Π0 are respectively the stock price and the option price at the current time, and the convex hull is spanned by the set of points (ST(ω); ΠT(ω)), where ω ∈ Ω is a state of the world (or scenario). An interesting aspect of our approach is that the underlying set of (stock) prices needs not be a finite set. For instance, if this set is a compact subset of the real line, the convex hull (of the graph of the option payoff) is still a convex polygon or a segment, and nothing is changed.22We make the implicit assumption that ΠT(ω) is finite for each ω.What matters is thus not the characteristics of the set of prices, but the number of vertices of the convex hull. When this number is equal to two, the option price is unique and the market is complete. On the contrary, when it is greater (or equal) than three, the option price is not unique and the market is incomplete. For European options valued with a continuous time model (pure diffusion, jump-diffusion, infinite activity Levy), things are slightly more complex since the convex hull (of the graph of the option payoff) is not anymore a polygon, but, as we shall see, the European option pricing bounds can still be easily determined.In a multiperiod model, the determination of the option pricing bounds requires to determine a final convex polygon (possibly a segment) which is obtained via a sequence of convex hulls. This (backward induction) process applies both to European and American options with finite maturity and never requires to use a pricing measure. While straightforward, the case of many periods can be tedious from a computational point of view. As a result, we illustrate our geometric approach using a two period model, where all the computation can be easily done without a computer. For simplicity, as in Boyle (1988) or Broadie and Detemple (2004), we consider the case of a trinomial model to value European but also American options. We are able to explicitly compute the pricing bounds as a function of the parameters of the trinomial model. As already said, this entails to determine a sequence of convex hulls, and thus does not make any use of a pricing measure. Since we end up with a convex polygon (possibly a segment) the forward point can be expressed as a convex combination of its vertices. The non-negative coefficients of such a combination, although generally not unique, define a local system of coordinates with respect to the vertices, and are called the barycentric coordinates.33Cartesian coordinates is a system of coordinates for the representation of a point in an n-dimensional space in terms of its distance, measured along a set of mutually axes, from a given origin. On the other hand, barycentric coordinates locate points relative to a set of existing points rather than an origin. For this reason, they are called local coordinates. See for instance the textbook of Vince (2010) and more specifically chapter 11 devoted to barycentric coordinates.Let us denote byQthe barycentric coordinates of the forward point. It becomes elementary to show that the discounted stock price, but also the discounted value of the option, areQ-martingales, which means that the barycentric coordinatesQcan be interpreted as a martingale measure. Illustrations are provided for the case of a single period trinomial model for which the barycentric coordinates of a point inside a convex polygon are unique, which does of course not mean that the option price is unique. It is important to realize that within our approach, the pricing measureQcritically depends on the derivative (call, put digital etc.) under consideration and is, in general, not equivalent to the underlying statistical measurePdue to the fact that many points are not relevant. However, it turns out that there are barycentric coordinates (that maximize an entropy function) for whichQbecomes equivalent toP. This more technical material is presented in the last section of this paper in a multi assets framework.The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows. The first section is devoted to the assumptions. The second and third section are respectively devoted to the determination of the option pricing bounds and to the barycentric coordinates, interpreted as martingale measures. Since we offer a new elementary geometric approach, we made the choice to present the main results as propositions, and all the other elementary results as facts. Twenty facts are presented.Two basic types of financial securities will be considered here, the stock S of a given company, and a (default) risk-free bond that pays a constant interest rate r > 0. ThroughoutÂ this paper, continuous compounding will beÂ  assumed. The discount factor thus ise−rtbut all the results hold for deterministic interests rates. Throughout the paper,t=0denotes the current time and T > 0 the maturity of the derivative contract written on the underlying asset S.Dupačovà, Consigli, and Wallace (2000) introduced a framework intended for multistage stochastic programs (see also King, 2002 for an option pricing application) called scenario tree which encompasses recombining and non-recombining trees. It is used by Antonelli et al. (2013), Camci and Pinar (2009) and King (2002) for option pricing and they all consider the case in which the tree is non-recombining, i.e., in which each node at each time has a unique parent. In this paper, we consider the case in which the tree is recombining, i.e., in which each node may have more than one parent. This allows us to consider for instance a multiplicative multinomial stochastic process but it should be clear that our methodology holds indeed for any type of trees, recombining or not.LetT={1,2,…,T}be a set of dates, with T ≥ 1, and let(mi,t)i=1Nbe N ≥ 2 ordered positive numbers for all t, wherem1,t=dtandmN,t=ut. Let ζsbe a random variable whose realization denoted mswill be revealed at time s. LetΞs:={ds,m2,s,…,mN−1,s,us}be the set of possible realizations44We mean the support of the underlying probability measureP.of ζsfor alls∈T. The multiplicative multinomial (possibly time-dependent, i.e., Ξ may depend on time s) stochastic process is modeled, for t ≥ 1, by setting(1)St=S0∏s=1tζst≤Twhere S0 is the initial condition, i.e., the observed stock price at timet=0. WhenN=2,that is, when the random variable ζstakes only two values at each time s (i.e., dsor us) this correspond to the binomial model (allowing d and u to be time-dependent). WhenN=3,ζstakes three values at each time s (i.e., ds, ms, or us) and this correspond to the trinomial model and so on and so forth. In principle, the numbers(mi,t)i=1Nare chosen by the modeler to match the observed statistical characteristics of the stock price (e.g., mean, standard deviation, skewness.). For a given initial stock price S0, a sample path of the processS=(St)t∈Tis given by a T-dimensional vectorωT:=ω=(m1,m2,…,mT),whereΩ=∏t=1TΞtis a finite set. The unique assumption which is made in this paper is that each sample path has a strictly positive probability, which means that the underlying probability measurePis such thatP(ω)>0for all ω ∈ Ω. We make no other probabilistic assumptions about the stochastic processS=(St)t∈T. In particular, the increments of S need not be stationary and/or independent, and S need not be a Markovian process. Actually, it is even not necessary to consider explicitly a stochastic process. The only features which need to be specified are the tree and the way information is revealed over time. Once again, the multiplicative model we consider is for the sake of simplicity only. While the contribution of our paper is theoretical (or methodological), there is also an important empirical literature on “implied trees”, see for instance the paper by Moriggia, Muzzioli, and Torricelli (2009).Since it is our aim to provide a straightforward self-contained approach to derive the no-arbitrage option pricing bounds, we recall the definition of an arbitrage. LetVtPbe the value of the portfolioPat time t ∈ {0, T}.Definition 1It is said thatPis an arbitrage portfolio if it satisfies the two conditions.•V0P≤0VTP(ω)≥0,where the inequality is strict for at least one ω ∈ Ω.The above definition says that in the worst scenario in whichV0P=0(i.e., it is costless to form the portfolioP) the value of the portfolio at time T > 0 is positive with positive probability and zero with the complementary probability. It is important to realize that a situation in which there is no arbitrage opportunity can still be consistent with the existence of a “statistical arbitrage”. To see this, assume thatV0P=0and thatE(VTP)>0is (very) large. The fact that the expected value of the portfolio is very high is consistent with no-arbitrage as long as there is a positive probability thatVTPwill be negative. For instance, if there is a single state of natureω∈Ω such thatP(ω̲)>0andVTP(ω̲)<0,no matter how small are these two quantities,Pis not an arbitrage but can be interpreted as a statistical arbitrage.55See for instance the recent paper of Geyer, Hanke, and Weissensteiner (2014) in which they construct scenarios of financial assets returns (for portfolios) which are arbitrage-free.Consider the case of a single-period model in whichT={0,T},where T > 0 is the maturity of the option. LetST=ζTS0be the stock price at time T, where ζTis a positive random variable. For simplicity, we drop the time subscript T and thus write ζ. To fix idea, one may assume thatζ=eσTZ,where Z is a discrete random variable whose realization ziwill be known at time T, wheremi=eσTzi. In what follows, we shall denote the stock price at time T in state miby Sito simplify the notation but it should be clear that it should be denoted by ST(mi). Using a similar notation, let f be the payoff of the option, i.e.,Πi=f(Si)and letvi:=(Si,Πi)∈R+2,i=1,…,Nbe a set of N points, i.e.,(vi)i=1Nform a planar set of points. LetΓTf(S0):=Γ=Conv{v1,v2,…,vN}be the convex hull spanned by the set of N points v1, v2,…, vN. Note that the convex hull Γ is simply a convex polygon and that the number of vertices is at least equal to two and at most equal to N. We shall see later on that for call and put options, when N ≥ 5, i.e., the stock price can take at least five different values, the number of vertices of the convex polygon Γ is at most equal to four. In what follows, we shall denote byInt(Γ)⊂R2the interior of Γ and ∂Γ its boundary.Definition 2The set of indices i ∈ {1, 2,…, N} such that viis a vertex of Γ is denoted by Hf≔ H.When one considers the so-called binomial model to value an option (call, put), Γ always reduces to a segment. However, when one considers say a trinomial model to value the option, Γ may be a convex polygon, indeed a triangle. We now define the forward point, which will be of critical importance in the rest of this paper. Let Π0 be the price of the option under consideration at timet=0.Definition 3The pointF0=(erTS0,erTΠ0)is called the forward point.Since r, T, and S0 are known, the only unknown is Π0. The next proposition, although elementary to prove, is the core of our approach and will be applied to multi-period models.Proposition 1No arbitrage opportunities is equivalent to F0 ∈ Int(Γ).See the Appendix.□It would have been possible to consider the set of discounted points, defined ase−rTvi=(e−rTSi,e−rTΠi)). No-arbitrage thus would be equivalent to the fact (S0, Π0) must belong to the convex hull spanned by the set of discounted points.Fig. 1 considers the case of an option which could be thought of as a “generalized” bull spread while Fig. 2 shows, among other things, the convex hull of the graph of that option (there are five vertices). When F0 lies outside the (interior) of Γ, from Proposition 1, there must exist an arbitrage opportunity. To see how this arbitrage can be implemented, note that when F0 ∉ Int(Γ), there exists a lineD(indeed many) that separates the forward point F0 from Int(Γ). On Fig. 2, the equation of this lineDis denoted byVT=δST+b. By lettingb=erTβ,sinceF0∈D,we thus obtain thaterTΠ0=δerTS0+erTβwhich is equivalent toδS0+β−Π0=0. Financially, this line gives the composition of a portfolio at timet=0. By being long δ units of stocks, long (or short)β:=Π0−δS0units of currency (i.e., cash), and short the option, we obtain a portfolio whose value is equal to zero at timet=0. At time T, the value of this portfolio is equal toVi−Πi,whereVi:=δSi+erTβ. Fig. 2 depicts the situation in which the option is over-priced (at timet=0) since the forward point is located “above” the interior of Γ. One can clearly see from Fig. 2 thatVi−Πi>0for each i (we prove this algebraically in appendix) and this is clearly an arbitrage opportunity since the portfolio had no value at timet=0. No arbitrage would mean that for some i,Vi−Πi>0while for some j ≠ i,Vj−Πj<0. But this is equivalent to F0 ∈ Int(Γ).In Ritchken (1985), Ritchken and Kuo (1988) and Taqqu and Willinger (1987) Section 5, (see also the Appendix B in the textbook of Van der Hoek & Elliott, 2006), the option pricing bounds are derived using linear programming. Compared to Ritchken (1985) and the subsequent literature that rely on stochastic programming (e.g., King, 2002, Camci & Pinar, 2009), we use an approach which is based on convex hulls rather than on optimization. It offers the main advantage that one can also consider the case in which the set of prices has the cardinality of the continuum. It must however be noted that, in Proposition 2 (iii) p. 1225, by passing to the limit of continuous states, Ritchken (1985) is able to determine the lower bound for the particular case of a call option.Note that from Proposition 1, we know that the forward price must lie in the interior of the convex hull. As a result, it must be the case erT∈ (d; u).Fact 1WhenT=1,if there are no arbitrage opportunities, then, d < er< u.We now discuss the two situations one can have, i.e., Γ is a segment and Γ is a polygon.The special case in whichΓis a segment. For a given option f, as long as|H|=2,no matter the value of N ≥ 2, from Proposition 1, the option price must be unique. Consider the valuation of an at-the-money call option (i.e., such that the strikeK=S0) using the standard binomial model in whichΞ={d,u},so that|H|=2. The two vertices arevu=(uS0;(u−1)S0)andvd=(dS0;0). Let Π0 be the value of the call option at timet=0. From Proposition 1, the forward point (S0erT; Π0erT) must be located on the line formed by the two vertices vdand vu, and it is not difficult to show that the unique price is equal toΠ0=(1−e−rTdu−d)S0(u−1). Consider now the valuation of the following portfolio of options using a multinomial model (with N ≥ 3); long one call with strike K and short one put with the same strike. At maturity, the value of this portfolio is always equal toST−K. Independently of the multinomial model which is used to value this portfolio, all the pointsvi=(Si,Πi)are located on the lineST−K. As a result, Γ has only two vertices, i.e.,vd=(dS0;dS0−K)andvu=(uS0;uS0−K)so that the option price is unique. Since the forward pointF0=(erTS0,erTΠ0)must lie on this line, it is not difficult to show that the unique option price is equal toΠ0=S0−e−rTK. In both cases, the sole no-arbitrage argument allows one to obtain uniqueness of the option price. At this stage, it is not so clear why we get a unique price when|H|=2. As is now well-known, the option price is unique because the payoff of the option can be perfectly replicated using the basic traded assets. Consider once again our last example and the following portfolio; long one stock and short cash for an amount equal toe−rK. The value of the portfolio at timet=0is equalΠ0=S0−e−rTKand toST−Kat time T, but this means that this portfolio perfectly replicates the option’s payoff (i.e., long one call, short one put). Note that a similar analysis can be conducted for a forward contract, it suffices to replace the strike by the forward price (Fig. 3).The general case in whichΓis a convex polygon. Since the forward point must belong to the interior of Γ, there is clearly more than one price Π0 such that this is true. Consider two arbitrary option prices,Π0−andΠ0+,such that their associated forward pointF0−andF0+belong to the interior of Γ, i.e.,Π0−andΠ0+are arbitrage-free prices. LetF0α=(erTS0;erTΠ0α),whereΠ0α=αΠ0−+(1−α)Π0+,with α ∈ [0, 1]. Since Γ is convex,F0αalso belongs to the interior of Γ.Fact 2IfΠ0−andΠ0+are two arbitrage-free prices, then, any convex combination of these two arbitrage-free prices is also an arbitrage-free price.From the above fact, there must exist a lower bound for the option price denotedΠ0 ∈ ∂Γ and an upper bound denotedΠ¯0∈∂Γsuch that, for allΠ0∈(Π̲0;Π¯0),the forward point F0 lies in the interior of Γ.Fact 3When|H|=2,the arbitrage-free price of the option is unique, while when |H| ≥ 3, the set of arbitrage-free prices of the option is the open interval(Π̲0;Π¯0).For calls and puts, it is always the case that |H| ∈ {2; 3; 4}. Consider say the valuation of a put option with strike price K using a binomial model, i.e.,Ξ={d,u},i.e., the price is unique so that the interval is reduced to a singleton. Assume now we want to consider a multinomial model, i.e.,Ξ={d,m2,…,mN−1,u}with N ≥ 3, where the extreme pointsm1=dandmN=uare given. How should one choose the parameters(mi)i=2N−1to maximize the (area of) convex hull Γ? Fig. 4represents the convex hull of the graph of a put option when a quadrinomial is used, i.e., there are two intermediate values m2 and m3. From Fig. 4, it should be clear that the area of the convex hull Γ is maximized if there is an intermediate value m such thatm=KS0. In such a case, from the put option pricing bounds point of view, the three points(dS0;K−dS0),(mS0 ≔ K; 0) and (uS0; 0) are the vertices of the convex polygon Γ, i.e., all the other points are irrelevant.Fact 4Consider an European option f (put or a call) with strike price K > 0 using a multinomial model (with N ≥ 3) such that eitherf(dS0,K)=0and f(uS0, K) > 0 or f(dS0, K) > 0 andf(uS0,K)=0. If there exists an intermediate value m ∈ (d, u) such thatm=KS0,from an option pricing bounds point of view, the multinominal model can be reduced to a trinomial one, i.e.,Ξ={d,m,u}.From the above fact, it should be clear that when one uses the trinomial modelΞ={0,m,u},withm=KS0,if we set u high enough, then, the determination of the set of arbitrage-free prices is not subject to any model risk.66See for instance Barrieux and Scandolo (2015) for a general approach on model risk.Consider now the trinomial modelΞ={d,m,u},with d ≥ 0, and letI0:=Π¯0−Π̲0,whereI0may be thought as a measure of incompleteness of the market (or a measure of uncertainty of the price) for a given option. WhenI0=0,the market is complete, and there is thus no uncertainty since the price is unique.Fact 5Consider the trinomial modelΞ={d,m,u},withm=KS0to determine the set of arbitrage-free price of a put (or call) option with strike price K. The quantityI0:=Π¯0−Π̲0(i.e., the measure of incompleteness for the put option with strike K) is maximized whenS0erT=K.Note, interestingly that for a call and a put option, the upper boundΠ¯0depends only on d ≥ 0 and u > 0 since these two vertices vuand vdare always connected. This needs however not be true in general see e.g., Fig. 2. As a simple consequence of the above fact, for calls and puts,I0is close to zero when erTis close to d or close to u. Put it differently, when the option is deeply in (or deeply out of) the money, everything is as if the market was (almost) complete for that option.What happens if the set of prices has the cardinality of thecontinuum? For the discussion, we assume that(2)ST=ζS0where ζ is a positive random variable whose realization will be known at time T. Assume now that the set of possible realizations of the random variable ζ is the compact subsetΞ=[d,u]. Put it differently, the highest possible value of ζ is u and the lowest is d. LetK=mS0be the strike price of the option f, where m is a positive constant. Whether the option f is a call or a put, from Fact 4, it is easy to see that the vertices of the convex hull Γ are (dS0, f(dS0)), (mS0, f(mS0)) and (uS0, f(uS0)) if Γ is a polygon (see Fig. 5for the case of a call option), and (dS0, f(dS0)), and (uS0, f(uS0)) if Γ is a segment. In such a situation, while the set of prices has the cardinality of the continuum, everything is as if, from an option pricing bounds point of view, we were working with a binomial or a trinomial model.Fact 6Assume that the set of possible realizations of ζ is the compact subsetΞ=[d,u]⊂R+. To find the option pricing bounds of a call or put option with strike priceK=mS0,one can restrict the model to a trinomial one, i.e.,Ξ={d,m,u}.The above fact and the previous discussion highlight the fact that, from an option pricing bounds point of view, what matters is not per se the properties of the set of prices (i.e., finite, denumerable, with cardinality of the continuum) but the number of vertices of the convex polygon Γ. Since the number of vertices of a (convex) polygon is finite, considering a set of prices which is a compact subset ofR+is irrelevant from an option pricing bounds point of view.Consider now the case set of possible realizations of ζ isR+,i.e., there is no upper bound to the stock price. This case is a slightly more difficult because the convex hull of the graph of the payoff of a European option is not anymore a polygon. But one can still determine the pricing bounds by using exactly the same methodology. To see this, let us consider the case of a put, call, and a binary option. Recall that the payoff of a European digital (i.e., binary) option is simply equal to the indicator function1ST≥K,that is, zero if the stock price is lower than the strike, and one on the other case. The following fact provides the lower and the upper option pricing bounds by using Proposition 1. The aim of the following fact is not necessarily to provide new results but to show how Proposition 1 can be used when the convex hull is not anymore a polygon.Fact 7Assume that the set of possible realizations of ζ isΞ=R+. Consider the case of a digital, call, and put option. Their bounds are respectively equal to(3)Π̲0Dig=0Π¯0Dig=min{(S0/K);e−rT}(4)Π̲0Call=max{S0−e−rTK;0}Π¯0Call=S0(5)Π̲0Put=max{e−rTK−S0;0}Π¯0Put=Ke−rT.Note that, as one may expect, the pricing bounds of a call and a put option are identical to the classical bounds known in the literature.77See for instance the textbook of Hull (2011), chapter 10 or the textbook of Sundaram and Das (2011), chapter 9. From the above fact, one can immediately deduce that the pricing bounds of a call (put) option is a non-decreasing (non-increasing) function of the risk-free rate rAs far as we know, the pricing bounds of the digital option is new.It is however important to note that the option pricing bounds given in Fact 7 are model-free because the unique obvious assumption which is made is that the stock price is positive (possibly zero) at maturity, i.e.,ST∈R+. Actually, we don’t even need to assume that the stock price follows a stochastic process. If one explicitly assumes thatS=(St)t∈[0,T]is a stochastic process, as is well-known, the option pricing bounds can be reduced if we specialize the stochastic process. For instance, when S is a log-normal stochastic process (i.e., for a given T > 0, ζ is log-normally distributed88That is, ifζ=eμT+σTZ,where Z is a standard Gaussian random variable and μ and σ two parameters.), we then obtain the so-called Black–Scholes model and we know that the option price is unique. The Black-Scholes price thus must lie somewhere between the model-free option pricing bounds and it is an easy exercise to show that this is indeed the case. There is however no contradiction between the no-arbitrage bounds found in the above fact and the uniqueness of the Black–Scholes price. Our approach only considers the set of realizations of the random variable ζ (i.e., only the support of the underlying probability measurePplays a role, and not all the other characteristics ofP). As a consequence, whether ζ is log-normally distributed or not is simply irrelevant since our approach is unable to make a distinction between two (probability) models as long as the set of realizations of ζ isR+,i.e., ST≥ 0. Our (geometric) approach of no-arbitrage thus does not allow us to prove uniqueness of an (European) option price in the particular case in which ζ is log-normally distributed.99Actually, what is fundamental in the Black-Scholes model is the notions of dynamic replication and self-financing strategies. These two notions play no role in this paper.However, if the set of realizations of ζ is a compact subset of the real line, then, as we shall now see, the option pricing bounds can be reduced.Recall that most (not to say all) continuous-time stochastic processesS=(St)t∈R+considered in the option pricing literature in finance are such that, given S0 > 0, for anys∈R+,there is a positive probability (possibly very small) that STwill be greater than s. As a result, the support of the underling probability measure isR+. To see the implication of this for option pricing, consider for instance a three month call option. SinceST=ζS0,assuming that the support (of the underlying probability measure) isR+implies thatP(ST>10,000S0)>0,which obviously makes no financial sense. Consider now the case in which the set of possible realizations of ζ is the compact subset [d; u]. Once d and u are specified, since S0 is the current observed price, one can determine the option pricing bounds. For instance, if one assumes thatd=0(i.e., the default of the issuer of the stock is not excluded), and u > 0, i.e., the set of realizations of ζ is [0, u], this may considerably reduce the bounds of the option. To see this, consider for example an at-the-money call option with maturity one year, i.e.,S0=KandT=1. From the above fact 7, when one uses a standard continuous time model (e.g., Black-Scholes, jump-diffusion, Levy etc.), the lower and the upper bound of that call option are respectively equal toK(1−e−r)and to K. From Fact 6, we know that when the set of realizations is the compact subsetΞ=[0,u]for some u > 0, from an option pricing point of view, Ξ can be reduced to a binomial or a trinomial model. In the present case, it reduces to a trinomial model, i.e.,Ξ={0;1;u}. It is not difficult to show that the lower bound remains equal toK(1−e−r)while the upper bound is now equal tou−1uK. Whenu=3,this means that the (annual log) return of the stock can not be greater than 300%, which is a rather optimistic bound. In such a case, the upper bound of the call is now equal to23Kinstead of K, i.e., the decrease of the upper bound is important.Teaching implications. Most if not all (finance) textbooks begin option pricing in discrete time models using the binomial model and then turn to the so-called continuous-time Black–Scholes model in which the underlying stochastic process is log-normal. In both cases, the option price is unique. While this approach allows students to understand the basics of option pricing, it fails to deliver the important message that the no-arbitrage option price is rarely unique because markets are in reality incomplete for various financial reasons (e.g., volatility risk, jumps risk, trading constraints on the underlying asset). However, since the general treatment of incomplete markets is too complex to be taught at an introductory level, one focuses on complete markets and consider only the binomial model.1010The excellent textbook of Van der Hoek and Elliot 2006 is an exception since it is devoted to the binomial model but in appendix B, it also contains a general approach to incomplete markets within single period set-up. As has been shown by Ritchken (1985), (see also Taqqu & Willinger, 1987), the determination of the option pricing bounds for a single period model requires to use the duality theorem of linear programming and this is probably too advanced for an undergraduate first course on option pricing.Only few textbooks even mentioned the trinomial model, but when this is done, the treatment is word of caution rather than a general analysis.1111Consider for instance the case of two excellent textbooks. Back (2005) considers the trinomial model and shows that the problem is more complex since one can not, in general, perfectly replicate the payoff of the option when using a trinomial model. Sundaram and Das (2011) mention the trinomial model in an exercise (p. 248) and only remark that this is difficult.We claim that our new methodological approach allows to directly start within an incomplete markets framework since there is no “gap of difficulty” between the binomial, the trinomial or even a multinomial model. By starting option pricing using the no-arbitrage principle within the geometric approach proposed in this paper, one may start with a trinomial model, use Proposition 1, and shows the students that the option price (e.g., call or put) is in general not unique. Moreover, one can easily shows the students how the difference between the upper and the lower bound vary with the parameters, i.e., d, m, u but also with the strike K. It is only in the particular case in which the convex polygon is a segment, as is the case for a binomial model, that the price is unique. From a pedagogical point of view, in such a situation, this provides a very natural opportunity to introduce a new concept, namely perfect replication. In the particular case in which the arbitrage-free price of the option is unique, then, the payoff (of the option) can be perfectly replicated with the traded assets. Note that, all this can be done without using the notion of a risk-neutral probability measure.In the single-period case, to obtain the option pricing boundsΠ0 andΠ¯0,we had to construct the convex hull Γ spanned by the set of points v1,…, vNand then to check that the forward point lies in the interior of Γ. In a two period model, i.e.,T={0,1,2},the logic is similar, we now have to determine a sequence of convex hulls.Whether the option is of European or American type, we work backwards to determine the option pricing bounds. SinceT={0,1,2},we thus start the algorithm at timet=1in a given state of the world m1, or equivalently, at a given node m1S0. The recursion algorithm for more than two periods is similar.European option. Conditional on the state of the world m1 ∈ Ξ1 at timet=1,we have to determine the convex hull Γ(m1). When there is no-arbitrage, from Proposition 1, we know that the forward price (erm1S0, erΠ1(m1S0)) must lie in the interior of Γ(m1). This thus leads to two forward pricesF̲1(m1S0)=(erm1S0;erΠ̲1(m1S0))andF¯1(m1S0)=(erm1S0;erΠ¯1(m1S0)of Γ(m1) if Γ(m1) is a polygon and to a unique forward priceF1(m1S0)=(erm1S0;erΠ1(m1S0)if Γ(m1) is a segment. Since|Ξ1|=N≥2,one must thus repeat this operation N times. Once we get the set of forward points (a subset of them may be unique), one must now once again construct the convex hull spanned by this set of forward points, and this provides the “final” convex polygon denoted Γ. Applying once again Proposition 1 but now seen from timet=0,this leads toF̲1=(e2rS0;e2rΠ̲0(S0))and toF¯1=(e2rS0;e2rΠ¯0(S0)). To obtain the two option pricing bounds, it suffices to multiply bye−2r.American option. From the European case, assume now that the lower and the upper bound of the option is known at each node at timet=1. Let us denote these values byΠ̲1Eur(m1S0)andΠ¯1Eur(m1S0)for each m1 ∈ Ξ1. LetΠ1Ex(m1S0)be the exercise value of the American option at timet=1at node m1S0. There are now three cases to consider.1.If the exercise value of the American option is equal (or lower) to the lower bound of the European option, then, the American pricing bounds remain identical to the European one.If the exercise value of the American option is between the lower and the upper bound of the European option, then, only the lower pricing bound increases.If the exercise value of the American option is higher than the upper bound of the European option, then, the option pricing bound reduces to one point, the exercise value.The following fact summarizes the above discussion and also covers the situation in which the price of the European option is unique.Fact 8At timet=1,in a given state of the world m1 ∈ Ξ1, the pricing bounds of the American option are equal to(max{Π1Ex(m1S0);Π̲1Eur(m1S0)};max{Π1Ex(m1S0);Π¯1Eur(m1S0))}).In the particular case in which the European option price is unique and equal toΠ1Eur(m1S0)),the pricing bounds reduce tomax{Π1Ex(m1S0);Π1Eur(m1S0)}.We shall now provide an illustration of how the recursion algorithm works. For notational simplicity, we shall assume thatS0=1and for the sake of interest, we shall consider at-the-money put option, i.e., with strike priceK=1. As a result, it is never optimal to exercise the option at timet=0. In Chockalingam and Muthuraman (2015), they also consider the pricing problem of an American option (i.e., they present a method to solve the free boundary problem) but they focus on continuous time models while we focus on discrete models.)At-the-money European put option. Let us first consider the case of the classical binomial model, i.e., with two states of the world u > 1 and d < 1, withu=1d. Recall thatS0=K=1. One must consider at timet=1the case in whichS1=uand the case in whichS1=d.•WhenS1=u,we have to consider the convex hull spanned by the two points (u2; 0) and (1; 0). Since the value of the put is equal to zero, the forward point thus is unique, equal toF1Eur(u)=(eru;0).WhenS1=d,we have to consider the convex hull spanned by the two points (1; 0) and(d2;1−d2). Since it is a segment, the option price is once again unique. The forward pointF1Eur(d)=(erd;erΠ1(d))must lie on the lineΠ=K−S,and this leads to the unique valueΠ1Eur(d))=e−r−d>0. The positivity ofe−r−dfollows from the fact that er< u.At timet=0,the forward pointF0Eur=(e2r;e2rΠ0)must lie on the convex hull spanned by the two forward points (eru; 0) and(erd;1−erd),which is once again a segment and this leads to the unique price of the put equal toΠ0Eur=erd−1er(u−d)+(e−2r−e−rdu−d)u. It can be checked that this price is equal to the one we obtain using the so-called martingale approach.1212Recall that in this binomial framework, the unique equivalent martingale measure, i.e., the risk-neutral probability, is equal toQ=(q;1−q),withq=er−du−d>0. The no-arbitrage price of this put is equal toΠ0Eur=e−2r(1−q)2(1−d2). To see that the two prices are equal, it suffices to note that(1−d2)=u−du=u2−1u2sinceu=1d.Consider now, as in Boyle (1988) or Broadie and Detemple (1996) among others, a trinomial model such that, for allt∈T(6)ζt∈{d,1,u},u=1d,S0=1.This is indeed the natural extension of the so-called binomial recombining model (see Fig. 6) in which there is now a possibility for the price to remain constant at each time. As opposed to the binomial model, we now have three convex hulls to determine at timet=1.•WhenS1=u,the value of the put is always equal to zero at timeT=2so that the forward point is equal toF1Eur(u)=(eru;0).WhenS1=d,the unique current value of the put is equal toΠ1Eur(d)=e−r−dso that the forward point isF1Eur(d)=(erd;1−erd).WhenS1=1,the convex hull now forms a triangle. In such a case, we know from Fact 2 that the set of arbitrage-free option prices form an interval(Π̲1Eur(1);Π¯1Eur(1)). It is easy to see that the lower boundΠ̲1Eur=0,which givesF̲1Eur(1)=(er;0). In the same vein, it is not difficult to show thatF¯1Eur(1)=(er;1−du−d(u−er)).At timet=0,the forward pointF0Eur=(e2r;e2rΠ0)must lie on the final convex hull Γ formed by the four pointsF1Eur(d)=(erd;1−erd),F̲1Eur(1)=(er;0),F¯1Eur(1)=(er;1−du−d(u−er)),andF1Eur(u)=(eru;0). The following fact provides the two pricing bounds of the put at timet=0.Fact 9Consider the valuation problem of a European put with strike priceK=1using a trinomial model as given in Eq (6). The lower and the upper bound at timet=0whenS0=1are equal to(7)Π̲0Eur=0andΠ¯0Eur=(1−erd)(e−ru−1)er(u−d)As one may expect,Π¯0Euris a decreasing function of d. Note that sinceu=1d,the upper bound could be written as a function of r and d only.At-the-money American put option. Regarding the American option, the recursion algorithm is the same. We only have to check whether or not the put is exercised at timet=1. WhenS1=u,the value of the American put is equal to zero and nothing is thus changed compared to the European one. WhenS1=1,the option pricing bounds are still identical to the European option since the exercise value of the American put is equal to zero. WhenS1=d,we know thatΠ1Eur(d)=e−r−d. SinceΠ1Ex(d)=1−d,it is thus valuable to exercise the American option. As a result, the upper bound of the put option will increase since we now useΠ1Ex(d)=1−dand notΠ1Eur(d)=e−r−dto determine the convex hull. One clearly see that the interest rate for the American put plays a role which is identical to the dividend rate for the American call. Using the same methodology, it is now easy to obtain the following result.Fact 10Consider the valuation problem of a American put with strike priceK=1using a trinomial model as given in Eq. (6). The lower and upper bound at timet=0whenS0=1are respectively equal to(8)Π̲0Am=0andΠ¯0Am=(1−d)(e−ru−1)(u−d).Once again,Π¯0Amis a decreasing function of d. From Eqs. (7) and (8), it is clear that as long as r > 0,Π¯0Am>Π¯0Eur. However, whenr=0,Π¯0Am=Π¯0Eurso that it is never optimal to exercise the put option before maturity.Fact 11The functionϕ(d,r):=Π¯0AmΠ¯0Eur=er(1−d)(1−erd)is an increasing function of r and d.Note that since bothΠ¯0EurandΠ¯0Amare decreasing function of d, the sign of∂ϕ(d,r)∂dis a priori unclear. The above fact shows indeed that∂ϕ(d,r)∂dis positive.LetT={0,1,…,T},with T ≥ 3. To determine the option pricing bounds, it suffices to use a recursion algorithm similar to the one used for the two-period case. One reiterate this analysis for each node of the tree, starting from time T to time 0, and this entails to determining a sequence of convex hulls. As in the two-period case, this backward induction process leads to a final convex polygon denoted Γ, and the forward point (erTS0; erTΠ0) must lies once again in the interior of Γ. Unless Γ is a segment, this leads to the lower and the upper bound. As has been said, since our methodology holds for any types of trees, we don’t precise the tree used, recombining or not etc.Fact 12Consider the valuation of an option using a tree. Using the recursion algorithm, there exists a convex polygon Γ such thatF0=(erTS0;erTΠ0)∈Int(Γ). The determination of the option pricing bounds requires thus to determine a sequence of convex hulls.In a finite market model, following the approach pioneered in Ritchken (1985) and in Ritchken and Kuo (1988), it is common to determine the option pricing bounds using linear programming (e.g., Antonelli et al., 2013, Camci & Pinar, 2009, Flȧm 2008, King, 2002, Musiela and Rutkowski, 1998, pp. 90–93, Pinar, Salih, & Camci, 2010). As in the general continuous time models, one is lead to take the infinum and the supremum over the set of martingale measures to find the lower and the upper bound respectively (Π0andΠ0¯), also called the buyer and the seller’s price. Within our approach, not only we don’t need to introduce the buyer and the seller’s price, and the determination ofΠ0andΠ0¯never requires to use a probability measure.Fact 13The determination of the option pricing bounds never requires to use a pricing measure nor does it require to make a distinction between the seller’s price or the buyer’s price.It is important to point out once again that the price paid for this (conceptual) simplicity is that we derive the no-arbitrage bounds of a given option only. Our approach does not allow to derive the consequence of no-arbitrage in general.From Fact 12, it should be clear that the number of vertices of the (final) polygon Γ (obtained by backward induction) is not known ex ante. Given a tree, the convex hull Γ will most likely be a polygon, i.e., with at least three vertices. However, if we consider the case of a recombining tree in which each node (for any date) generates only two children, we obtain the so-called multiplicative binomial model. In such a case, as is well-known, Γ reduces to a segment and the option price is unique. Within our framework, from an option pricing point of view, what counts is not per se the number of children of a given node of the tree, but the number of vertices of the convex hull. The characterization of complete market for a given option can be given as follows.Fact 14For a given option, the price is unique if and only if, at each node of the tree, the convex hull reduces to a segment, i.e., if the number of vertices of the convex hull is equal to two.There are various algorithms to determine the convex hull of a set of points and it is well-known that if there are m ≥ 2 points ofR2,the computation time to determine the convex hull is O(mln (m)), see e.g., chapter 3 of the textbook of O’Rourke (2004) for a presentation of various algorithms (e.g., the so-called divide and conquer algorithm) or the paper of Graham and Yao (1983). However, for basic options such as call and put, the determination of the convex hull is trivial and thus does not require any algorithm. Consider the specific case of a recombining trinomial model in which ζt∈ {d, 1, u} for allt∈Tand letC=1be the normalized cost associated to the determination of one convex hull (and the two option pricing bounds at a given time t for a given node).Fact 15Consider the valuation of an option using a trinomial model. Let n ≥ 3 be the number of periods. The computation time to determine the option pricing bounds is O(n2).So far, we have shown how to determine the lower and the upper bound of a European or American option without introducing a pricing measure. The aim of this section is now to show how a pricing measure can naturally be introduced within our approach. We have already seen that the sequence of convex hulls leads to a final convex polygon Γ, whether the option is European or American style. It turns out that a point P0 that lies inside the convex polygon Γ can be expressed as a convex combination of its vertices vi, where the weights qi(P0), for i ∈ H are called barycentric coordinates. Recall that H is the set of indices such that viis a vertex of Γ. As we shall now see, the barycentric coordinates will play the role of a pricing (martingale) measure.The fundamental feature of barycentric coordinates is that they locate points relative to an existing set of points rather than to an origin, as it is the case for Cartesian or polar coordinates. For this reason, barycentric coordinates are sometimes called local coordinates. The following definition of barycentric coordinates is adapted from Floater, Hormann, and Kos (2006).Definition 4Let Γ be a convex polygon with N ≥ 3 vertices denoted by v1, v2,…, vN, withvi∈R+2. Any set of functionsqi:Γ→R,i=1,.,2,…,Nis called barycentric coordinates if they satisfy, for all P0 ∈ Γ, the three following properties(9)qi(P0)≥0i=1,2,…,N(10)∑i=1Nqi(P0)=1(11)∑1=1Nqi(P0)vi=P0.From the non-negativity of the barycentric coordinates, Properties 10 and 11 just mean that any point P0 that lies in the convex polygon Γ can be expressed as a convex combination of the vertices v1, v2,…, vN. WhenN=3,the polygon reduces to a triangle, and the barycentric coordinates of a given point P0 in the triangle are unique. When N ≥ 4, the barycentric coordinates are not anymore unique, which means that, for a given point P0 in the convex polygon, there is not a unique set of functionsqi:Γ→R,i=1,.,2,…,Nsuch that the three properties of Definition 4 hold. A well-known example of barycentric coordinates are the Wachpress coordinates but this (Wachpress) system of barycentric coordinates is far from being unique. Quite recently, Floater et al. (2006) have developed a general construction of barycentric coordinates over convex polygons. The choice of a system of barycentric coordinates can be compared with the choice of a numéraire or a currency. A point in a polygon can be expressed by using different system of barycentric coordinates but they all represent the same thing.Consider an option such as a European (or American) put (or call) option with finite maturity T, whereT={0,1,2,…,T}is the set of dates. We know that to prevent arbitrage, the option price Π0 must be such that (erTS0, erTΠ0) ∈ Int(Γ), where Γ is the final convex hull Γ. Once Γ is known, the option pricing boundsΠ0 andΠ¯0can easily be computed. Let(12)Qf:=Q=(q1(F0),q2(F0),…,qN(F0))be a vector of barycentric coordinates of the forward point F0, where the subscript f indicates the contract that we now omit. Note that if one consider a multiperiod model, a sample path is denoted by ωi∈ Ω and|Ω|=N. Since the scalars qi(F0) ≥ 0 for alli=1,2,…,N,and sum to one,Qmay naturally be interpreted as a probability measure.Proposition 1 bisFor a given option contract denoted by f, there are no arbitrage opportunities if and only if there are barycentric coordinatesQ=(q1(F0),q2(F0),…,qN(F0))such thatqi(F0)>0∀i∈Handqi(F0)=0∀i∉H.Proposition 1 bis is nothing but a reformulation of proposition 1 in terms of barycentric coordinates. Quite interestingly, in Floater et al. (2006), they provide an explicit construction of the barycentric coordinates envisaged in proposition 1 bis.Fact 16The following equations follow from Definition 4 and Proposition 1 bis.(13)S0=e−rT∑i∈Hqi(F0)Si(14)Π0=e−rT∑i∈Hqi(F0)Πi(15)∑i∈Hqi(F0)=1.Eqs. (13) and (14) just reflect the so-called martingality of the (discounted) stock price but also of the (discounted) option price, which means thatQcan thus be interpreted as a martingale measure. Note interestingly that our geometric approach yields the so-called linear pricing rule as a result. The following definition has been borrowed from Musiela and Rutkowski (1998).Definition 5It is said that the pricing measureQis a generalized martingale measure ifP({ω})>0impliesQ({ω})≥0. In the particular case in whichP({ω})>0is equivalent toQ({ω})>0for all ω ∈ Ω, then,Qis said to be equivalent toP.Proposition 1 bis provides a very simple way, for a given option, to prove the equivalence between the absence of arbitrage and the existence of a generalized martingale measure. This contrasts with the universal (no-arbitrage) approach in which no arbitrage is equivalent to the existence of an equivalent martingale measure. The reason why we obtain a generalized martingale measure is easy to understand. When we consider a single option, we have seen that say for call or put, in general, some prices Siare simply irrelevant. For such points,vi=(Si,Πi)is not a vertex of the convex polygon (i.e., i ∉ H) and is such that its weight is equal to zero.1313In the next sub-section, we shall show that one can still find a system of barycentric coordinates, called entropic barycentric coordinates, which is such thatQis equivalent toP. We do this for a single period model in a general framework with d ≥ 2 stocks.Within our approach, since we consider a single option, the pricing measure consistent with no-arbitrage is (in general) a generalized martingale measure and not an equivalent martingale measure. In the classical approach to no-arbitrage (called universal in this paper), since any conceivable options written on the underlying asset can be valued, it is clear that ifQis not an equivalent martingale measure, one can design simple options for which there will be an arbitrage strategy.This is the simplest case one can consider since the convex polygon Γ (i.e., the convex hull of the graph of the payoff) is either a segment or a triangle. For the sake of interest, we shall consider the case in which Γ is a triangle.LetΩ={ω1,ω2,ω3}and assume thatST(ω1)=dS0,ST(ω2)=mS0and finallyST(ω3)=uS0. As usual, let us assume that the option under consideration is an at-the-money put with strike K ∈ (mS0; uS0) (see Fig. 7) and maturity T > 0, withT={0,T}. As a result, the three vertices arev1=(dS0;K−dS0),v2=(mS0;K−mS0),v3=(uS0;0).Since the convex polygon Γ is a triangle, we know that the barycentric coordinates of a point inside the triangle are unique. In such a case, it turns out that the barycentric coordinates (which is also the martingale pricing measureQ) has a very simple geometric interpretation as areas of triangles. Let Γ be the triangle (v1, v2, v3) (see Figs. 7 and 8).Fact 17The unique barycentric coordinates of the forward pointF0=(erTS0,erTΠ0)located inside the triangle are given by(16)Q({ωi}):=qi(F0)=Areaofthetriangle(F0,vj,vk)Areaofthetriangle(v1,v2,v3)j,k∈{1,2,3}∖i,fori∈{1,2,3}and are such that, for all i, qi(F0) > 0 as long as F0 ∈ Int(Γ).This result in which the barycentric coordinates is related to the areas of triangles can be found in the book of Vince (2010), chapter 11, Section 11.7. IfQdenotes a pricing measure andM(Q)the set of generalized martingale measures, the put option pricing bounds can be determined by taking the infinum and the supremum ofΠ0(Q),withQ∈M(Q).Fact 18If the market quotes an option price Π0 (e.g., put option), from uniqueness of the barycentric coordinates,Qbecomes unique, and the market is thus complete.From a financial point of view, this simply means that we now have an additional asset, the option. As a result, we have three states of the world and three traded assets; the market is complete, and the pricing measureQis unique.In the previous section, we have shown that barycentric coordinates can play the role of a martingale measure. However, in general, the martingale measure is not equivalent to the statistical measure. We now show that one can indeed design barycentric coordinates to obtain an equivalent martingale measure. This Section is probably less elementary than the previous ones. We now explicitly consider the case in which there is a finite number d ≥ 1 stocks denoted byS=(S1,…,Sd)but we shall maintain the assumption of a finite sample space, i.e.,Ω={ω1,…,ωN}such thatP({ωi})>0for eachi=1,…,N. In what follows, we make no assumption about the existence of a risk free asset and we work inRdseen as a vector space. To simplify, we consider two periodst=0andt=T. By a non-arbitrage argument together with a separation theorem (Farkas Lemma), it can be shown that the vectorS0:=(S01,…,S0d)∈Rdat timet=0lies inside the convex cone spanned by the N vectorsST(ωi):=(ST1(ωi),…,STd(ωi)),i=1,…,N. Therefore, there are scalars λi≥ 0 such that(17)∀j∈{1,…,d},S0j=∑i=1NλiSTj(ωi)The problem of finding(λi)i=1,…,Nsubject to (17) that maximizes the Shannon entropy H (used here even if ∑λi≠ 1) defined by(18)H(λ1,…,λN):=−∑i=1Nλilnλileads to a solution (λi) such that(19)λi>0foreachi=1,…,NIn a non financial framework, Sukumar (2004) uses classical optimization methods to characterize (19). We then deduce that for any asset X (a linear combination of Sj), one has also:(20)X0=∑i=1NλiXT(ωi)Therefore, for any numeraire1414Recall that a numeraire L is an asset such that ∀i ∈ {1,…, N}, LT(ωi) > 0.L,(21)X0L0=∑i=1NqiLXT(ωi)LT(ωi)with(22)qiL:=λiLT(ωi)L0>0and(23)∑i=1NqiL=1The following fact follows from the discussion.Fact 19For any numéraire L (i.e., not necessarily the risk-free asset), there exists an equivalent martingale measureQLsuch that(24)EQL[XTLT]=X0L0that is,XTLTis aQL-martingale.Let(25)QM(ωi):=qiM=λiMT(ωi)M0and assume that M is another numéraire. The following fact shows that the (classical) formula of change of numéraire holds.Fact 20If M and N are two numéraires, then, the formula of change of numéraire is given by(26)(dQMdQL)T(ωi)=MT(ωi)LT(ωi)L0M0It is interesting to note that solving Eq. (21) subject to (22) and (23) is a well known problem in image processing, which addresses the following question. Given colored points Mi(i=1,…,N), what colour should we use to color a point M in the convex hull spanned by the Mi? Here,M=(S01L0,…,S0dL0)andMi=(ST1(ωi)LT(ωi),…,STd(ωi)LT(ωi)). A possible solution to this (color) problem consists in using entropic barycentric coordinates, as defined in Sukumar (2004). If one looks at the proof given in Sukumar (2004), which is based on the notion of entropy, one must realize that it is nothing but a « revival » of one of the most influent article of the 20th century, namely Jaynes1515Jaynes, E. T, (1957), ‘Information Theory and Statistical Mechanics,’ Phys. Rev., 106, 620.(1957). In other words, the proof of the fundamental theorem of asset pricing (in the discrete case) which asserts the existence of a martingale measure in a market with no arbitrage is already contained in the founding article of Jaynes (1957) which establishes a link between information theory and thermodynamics.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
