@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analytical debiasing of corporate cash flow forecasts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze the quality of cash flow forecasts of an international corporation.We find rectifiable biases for all business divisions (covering 34 subsidiaries).Debiasing using selected statistical correction models improves forecast accuracy.Learned parameters provide decision support for corporate financial controllers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Analytics,Judgmental forecasting,Forecast bias correction,Cash flow forecasting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose and empirically test statistical approaches to debiasing judgmental corporate cash flow forecasts. Accuracy of cash flow forecasts plays a pivotal role in corporate planning as liquidity and foreign exchange risk management are based on such forecasts. Surprisingly, to our knowledge there is no previous empirical work on the identification, statistical correction, and interpretation of prediction biases in large enterprise financial forecast data in general, and cash flow forecasting in particular. Employing a unique set of empirical forecasts delivered by 34 legal entities of a multinational corporation over a multi-year period, we compare different forecast correction techniques such as Theil’s method and approaches employing robust regression, both with various discount factors. Our findings indicate that rectifiable mean as well as regression biases exist for all business divisions of the company and that statistical correction increases forecast accuracy significantly. We show that the parameters estimated by the models for different business divisions can also be related to the characteristics of the business environment and provide valuable insights for corporate financial controllers to better understand, quantify, and feedback the biases to the forecasters aiming to systematically improve predictive accuracy over time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cash flow forecasts play a pivotal role in corporate financial management tasks. For instance, the forecasts are used in liquidity management to ensure solvency and in foreign-exchange risk management to identify and hedge exposures resulting from foreign business activities. Inaccurate forecasts are an unreliable basis for corporation-wide financial plans and can lead to liquidity shortages, uncovered currency risks or increased hedging costs. In large multinational companies, cash flow forecasts are prepared for individual subsidiaries from different countries and distinct business divisions. The cash flows are predicted by local financial managers who report the forecasts to the corporation’s central finance department, where corporation-wide financial plans are derived from all delivered forecasts.Since the cash flow forecasts are typically generated by human experts with different backgrounds, attitudes and individual forecasting procedures, the forecasts are likely to be biased by behavioral or political dimensions, overall leading to reduced forecast accuracy. Biased judgmental forecasting and decision-making are phenomena observed in many contexts. In numerous studies and laboratory experiments significant biases are found regularly in various forecasts, decreasing the accuracy and negatively influencing business performance (Leitner and Leopold-Wildburger, 2011). For instance, in a study by Lawrence, O’Connor, and Edmundson (2000), errors in sales forecasts of three manufacturing-based companies were attributed mainly to inefficiencies and biases. In another study, Enns (2002) analyzed the influence of biased and uncertain demand forecasts on production scheduling and found that biases significantly influence lateness of the delivery to the customer.There are several empirical studies providing further strong evidence for the existence of cognitive biases in expert forecasting, such as the well-known anchoring and adjustment. Hogarth and Makridakis (1981) and Lawrence, Goodwin, O’Connor, and Oenkal (2006) provide extensive overviews of judgmental forecasting and its heuristics and biases. Although the effect can be mitigated and reduced with adequate decision support systems (George, Duffy, and Ahuja, 2000; Remus and Kottemann, 1995), it is regularly observed that information provided by decision support systems is undervalued and biases can therefore only be partly removed (Bhandari, Hassanein and Deaves, 2008; Lim and O’Connor, 1996). Overall, it is likely that corporate cash flow forecasts in multinational companies are also biased and that these biases influence decision models.For instance, Gormley and Meade (2007) consider the problem of corporate-wide cash balance management using short-term cash flow forecasts. Based on data from a large international company, the authors show that transactional costs strongly depend on the accuracy of the cash flow forecasts used as input for financial planning.Unfortunately, while in general there is awareness of the importance of accurate financial forecasts for corporate planning and control (Graham and Harvey, 2001; Kim, Mauer, and Sherman, 1998), there is practically no research available that empirically analyzes corporate cash flow forecasts. This is particularly true regarding the identification, interpretation, and finally mitigation of judgmental biases in forecasts. Hence, corporate financial controllers have little guidance on how to assess and improve the quality of their heterogeneous cash flow forecasts. In our context, identification and removal of biases before the forecasts are used in corporation-wide planning activities could lead to increased financial efficacy.In this paper we conduct an empirical analysis of statistical approaches to debiasing cash flow forecasts using a unique set of corporate cash flow forecasts with different horizons. The data are provided by a large international corporation and generated by experts from 34 legal entities in various countries over a period of six years and for several currencies. We analyze and discuss the impact of statistical correction methods for different estimation techniques and parameters.To our knowledge, this is the first work to decompose, quantify, and correct cash flow forecast biases in corporate settings. More generally, we are not aware of any empirical work analyzing biases in large sets of heterogeneous enterprise financial forecast data. More important, we are not aware of scientific publications that analyze the parameters learned by correction models, although these might provide valuable insights.Our research makes several contributions to the literature. First, we find that different types of biases exist in the empirical cash flow forecast data of our sample company. Second, we find that substantial improvements of forecast accuracy can be achieved by debiasing forecasts using statistical techniques. Third, we analyze and compare the parameters learned by the correction models and find significant differences between the respective parameters learned in different business environments. We show that the learned parameters can be related to the characteristics of the business the forecast has been generated in and argue that the parameters provide valuable insights for corporate financial controllers to better understand, quantify, feedback, and systematically mitigate biases over time.Many studies report successful debiasing of expert forecasts with statistical correction techniques. The most common approach is Theil’s method (Theil, 1966), which is based on a decomposition of the mean squared error (MSE). For a time series of length T with actuals A1, …, ATand corresponding forecasts F1, …, FT, the metric is defined asMSE=1T∑(At−Ft)2.With meansF¯,A¯and standard deviations sF, sAof the forecasts and actuals, and r as the correlation between forecasts and actuals, the MSE can be decomposed toMSE=(A¯−F¯)2+(sF−rsA)2+(1−r2)sA2The three terms of this decomposition are commonly called mean bias, regression bias and random (unsystematic) error. The mean bias corresponds to a systematic under- or overestimation of the actual value. The regression bias covers a component of the forecasts which is (linearly) correlated to the actuals but nevertheless does not scale perfectly with actual values. For instance, a regression bias exists if small values are slightly and high values are substantially underestimated (or overestimated). The unsystematic part of the error results from an uncorrelated component which cannot be corrected using linear techniques. Both biases are illustrated in Fig. 1where variations of a short time series with different combinations of biases are depicted.The parameters for the debiasing of forecasts can be estimated by regressing the actuals on the forecasts: At= α + βFt+ εtwith residuals εt. α and β are estimated as a and b; the debiased forecast can then be calculated as Ct= a + bFt. In the literature, different approaches to estimating a and b for forecast correction have been proposed and evaluated.In Theil’s method (Theil, 1966), ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation is used by solving:min∑(At−Ct)2=min∑[At−(a+bFt)]2Theil’s method has been evaluated in numerous studies and for various applications. In an early study Moriarty (1985) corrected one single sales time series spanning six years. The author found mean biases in four of the six years and additional significant regression biases. Correction of biases led to a significant reduction of the mean squared error for two of the years. In contrast to the years for which the correction was advantageous, the other two years primarily exhibited a much lower mean bias. In a broader study, Elgers, Lo, and Murray (1995) corrected 6302 yearly earnings forecasts generated by analysts. The mean squared error of the forecasts could be reduced significantly. In an exploratory study, Shaffer (1998) analyzed 33 one-quarter-ahead forecasts of a macro-economical indicator generated by one expert and also found the forecasts to be biased. As a result of the correction, the mean squared error was reduced by nearly 25 percent.Extensive experiments were conducted by Goodwin (1996); 2000), both in a laboratory setting and on empirical data. In the laboratory experiment, students generated one-period-ahead forecasts for which statistical correction using Theil’s method led to increased accuracy. Special periods in the form of promotional events were included in order to check for robustness against sporadic events. The empirical experiments were based on forecasts from three companies from different industries covering up to 42 months of sales data. Statistical correction using Theil’s method outperforms expert forecasts for two of the companies, while improvements where significant for one of the companies under study. Additionally, the business impact of forecast correction was evaluated using a loss function with asymmetrical penalties for too high or too low production. It was shown that using corrected forecasts could have reduced costs by 26–54 percent, depending on the assumed ratio between costs of over- and underproduction.As an alternative to Theil’s method, Goodwin (1997) proposes to use discounted weights of errors for the estimation. Technically, the errors in the minimization problem in this model are weighted geometrically; descending weights γtare given to more ancient observations. The decay of weights over time is controlled by a discount factor γ ≥ 1:min∑γt(At−Ct)2=min∑γt[At−(a+bFt)]2We refer to this weighted approach as weighted sum of least squares (WLS). Since OLS estimation corresponds to WLS with γ = 1 we treat Theil’s method as a special case of WLS.Correction using the weighted method was evaluated in a laboratory experiment by Goodwin (1997). The authors found that the usage of discounted error-weights led to lower mean absolute errors for several types of time series. Significant improvements over Theil’s method are observed for low-noise time series. For high-noise time series both approaches exhibit comparable performance, except for time series with a trend reversal where the weighted approach performed better and a time series with a linear trend, where Theil’s method led to lower errors.As a third approach, Utley (2011) proposes using least absolute deviation (LAD) estimation to increase the robustness against outliers in actuals. LAD estimation uses minimization of the (weighted or unweighted) sum of absolute deviations to reduce the weight of outliers:min∑γt|At−Ct|=min∑γt|At−(a+bFt)|In a case study employing demand forecasts of a cell phone company, the authors show that LAD can result in higher performance compared to Theil’s method. Robust regression methods were also applied successfully for detecting (and predicting) errors in analysts’ earnings forecasts (Boudt, Goeij, Thewissen, and Van Campenhout, 2014).It is worthwhile to mention that LAD regression is robust to outliers in the actuals (unusually high actual values) but not against leverage points (unusually high forecast volumes). Even with LAD, the learned regression line will move closer to the outlier with increasing forecast volume (Giloni, Simonoff, and Sengupta, 2006; Rousseeuw and Leroy, 2005).In summary, several approaches to forecast correction have been introduced and evaluated in the literature. The individual methods exhibit different strengths and shortcomings. As correction models employing the WLS criterion use squared deviations between actuals and forecasts, the models are more prone to extreme actual values. LAD may exhibit better performance in these cases. Furthermore, equal weighting of past errors implicitly assumes time-invariant biases. Although this assumption is valid in the example presented in Fig. 1, it is a strong assumption that may generally not be justified because of increasing experience, labor turnover and other influences such as structural breaks in time series or the organization. Weighted approaches may be appropriate in these cases. Potentially more robust methods using weighting or LAD regression may however lead to a suboptimal fit of the parameters in cases without structural breaks or outliers. Furthermore, LAD may better reflect a non-quadratic loss function of forecasters, which has been shown to be likely for instance for financial analysts (Basu and Markov, 2004).Overall, results obtained with different correction models and parameterizations depend on the particular actual and forecast time series, which makes the selection of an appropriate model challenging. This is illustrated in Fig. 2with artificially generated example time series. The figure shows four different time series (TS1–TS4) with 12 observations each. For each time series, the first eight observations are used by the correction models for parameter estimation. The models are then applied at time t to correct the forecasts for the last four actuals. We depict the corrected forecasts when applying Theil’s method, WLS11In the example a high γ of 1.5 is chosen as discount factor to better illustrate the principal differences in the behavior of weighted and unweighted correction approaches.and LAD.As illustrated in the figure, different correction techniques are appropriate for individual time series and the optimal model choice can in principle only be determined ex-post. Unfortunately, so far there is no comprehensive comparison and discussion of estimation approaches and parameter settings. Accordingly, as of yet no guidelines for practitioners exist regarding the application of statistical debiasing methods and appropriate discount factors. Also, there is little evidence whether WLS or LAD estimation might be more beneficial in a particular context as both approaches have only been evaluated in one study and only in comparison to Theil’s method. In addition, use cases were mainly limited to sales and analyst forecasts and mostly conducted on smaller datasets compared to the one analyzed in this work. Finally, so far the correction models and the estimated parameters are treated as black boxes in previous studies.In this paper, we apply statistical correction to a large enterprise forecast dataset and quantify the impact of different methods. We use OLS as well as LAD estimation employing different weights for a comprehensive comparison, and provide an extensive discussion of the learned parameters and the insights we can gain from the parameters with respect to the characteristics of the business where the forecasts are conducted.In this section, we characterize our sample company and the available dataset before we describe the design of our empirical analysis. Results are presented subsequently in Section 4.The data used in our analysis are based on a unique dataset of real-world cash flow forecasts and corresponding cash flow realizations provided by our sample company, a large multinational corporation. Our sample company is headquartered in Germany, but has worldwide operations. It is a diversified group with three large and relatively independent business divisions that are very different in terms of products and markets. With over 100,000 employees, the company generates annual revenues in the medium double-digit billion Euro range. About 40 percent of the revenues come from Europe, about 20 percent from North America and the Asia/Pacific region each, around 10 percent from Latin America, and the remaining portion from the Middle East and Africa. Annual operating cash flows lie in the medium single-digit billion Euro range. The company has a legal structure with over 300 separate legal entities (parent company, subsidiaries). However, financial management is centralized with local financial managers at the subsidiaries reporting to the company’s central finance department. One important task of the finance department is the management of financial risks, in particular future foreign exchange risks. For this purpose, cash flow forecasts of expected foreign currency denominated accounts receivables and accounts payables generated worldwide by the partner company’s subsidiaries are delivered to the finance department. Accounts receivables result mainly from sales invoices expected to be issued, the accounts payables from invoices expected to be received from suppliers and other counterparties.22Taken literally, accounts receivables and accounts payables are accruals rather than cash flows. As in most companies, historical data and forecasts of cash-ins and cash-outs are not available since our partner company’s reporting systems are oriented toward revenues and expenses. The accounts receivables and accounts payables we used in our analysis are however, for all practical purposes, comparable to cash-ins and cash-outs. For the sake of simplicity, we continue to refer to our data as cash flows.The forecasts cover monthly intervals with differing forecasting horizons of up to at least 12 months. As a schematic illustration, Table 1shows the temporal structure of forecast deliveries for cash flows in 2012, with the months of forecast delivery (labeled F) and the month of the realization of the corresponding cash flows (labeled A). For instance, the forecasts for cash flows from January till March 2012 are delivered in March 2011 (with a horizon of four quarters), June 2011 (with a horizon of three quarters), and so on. As forecasts are produced and delivered only in some months of a year, only forecasts with specific horizons exist for individual cash flows. For instance, novel (revised) forecasts for January 2012 were delivered 10, 7, 4, and 2 months in advance. Forecasts are unchanged between forecast deliveries, i.e., forecasts 8 or 9 months in advance do not differ from the forecasts submitted 10 months ahead.The forecasts and cash flow data are available for invoices issued and invoices received. The dataset comprises actual cash flow volumes from January 2008 to December 2013. The corresponding forecasts were delivered from November 2006 to September 2013 by the 34 largest subsidiaries on a quarterly basis. In total, 25 currencies are considered, while each subsidiary generates forecasts for an individual subset of currencies in which it issues and receives invoices. Overall, the raw dataset consists of 10,656 monthly cash flow volumes with 12 associated forecasts (with different horizon) from different subsidiaries, with (internal or external) partners, in specific currencies, with different forecast horizons. An individual actual time series contains 72 values (one per month in the period of available data).The subsidiaries are grouped into three business divisions with fundamentally different business characteristics. Based on their business portfolios, we name the divisions “agricultural products” (AP), “health and pharmaceutics” (HP) and “industrial materials” (IM). Data statistics per division are summarized in Table 2.Companies in AP are producing a broad spectrum of agricultural supplies and therefore largely depend on agricultural cycles, i.e., a yearly cycle of seeding, pest and insect protection, and harvesting. In contrast, IM develops and produces industrial materials. IM consequently depends on orders of manufacturing companies which again depend on the global economy and therefore on macro-economic uncertainties. HP researches and produces health related products and pharmaceuticals. According to the financial management of the sample company, sales of most of these products in HP do not (or only weakly) depend on the economy or annual cycles.Differences regarding dependencies of the business divisions’ cash flows on seasonality and macro-economic developments are presented in Fig. 3. The plot on the left-hand side of the figure shows the distribution of the autocorrelation of cash flow time series with a lag of 12 months (seasonality) by business division. One boxplot shows the distribution of seasonality in one division, where one observation corresponds to the seasonality of one actual time series from an entity belonging to that division. AP exhibits the largest autocorrelation (in turn leading to high volatility) in its cash flows, while the two other divisions overall show little autocorrelation. The boxplots on the right-hand side of the figure show the correlation of the forecast errors (logarithmized absolute percentage errors) and the volatility of the Dow Jones index, which is often used as a proxy for macro-economic uncertainty. A strong relation of forecast error with macro-economic uncertainty is found only for cash flows in division IM but not in other divisions. The different business characteristics are important to our work as we will later relate the biases determined and parameters learned by different correction mechanisms to the specifics of a business line.For a thorough cross-validation of forecast correction methods, parameters are estimated from a training dataset and applied to an evaluation dataset where the performance of the individual methods is measured. From our dataset, we use actuals (and associated forecasts) of the last 24 months (01/2012–12/2013) as evaluation period for which forecasts are corrected. We always use the whole history of available forecast-actual deviations prior to the month a (corrected) forecast is generated as training data since correction can be assumed to heavily rely on the incorporation of current biases.Corrections are applied to forecasts with horizons of up to 12 months, the look-ahead required by the financial controlling of our sample company. Reconsidering that we have actual data and associated forecasts from 01/2008 to 12/2013, long 12-month forecasts for actuals in 01/2012 (first month of the evaluation period) take place in the first quarter of 2011, which basically means that around three years are left to learn the parameterization, namely the period from 01/2008 until the month a forecast is generated. As three years are already a very short time series (for instance to consider seasonal behavior) and we want to evaluate correction capabilities over all relevant forecast horizons, our available data do not allow for a longer evaluation period and therefore suggest the splitting we used in the evaluation.It should be noted that we learn one dedicated correction model for each time series individually and not for groups of time series. However, we will then provide detailed analysis on parameter distributions in various subsamples. Furthermore, it should be noted that biases may vary over different forecasts horizons. Consequently, we learned 12 correction models (parameters) for each actual time series, one per forecast horizon where only forecasts with a particular horizon are considered.33As depicted in Table 1, forecasts are produced once every quarter in an irregular manner, and basically there are forecasts for individual actual items with 5 particular horizons only. As done in practice, we consider forecasts as up-to-date as long as a new forecast is available, i.e., we fill not existing forecast horizons with the latest available forecast.In our experiments, we apply statistical correction using WLS and LAD with different discount factors to our empirical expert forecasts and quantify and compare their performance. We apply both techniques with 15 different discount factors to various subsamples as shown in Table 3.Reasonable choices of discount factors depend on specific time series and so far no recommendations based on a comprehensive evaluation have been proposed in other studies. Goodwin (1997) uses discount factors ranging from 1.0 to 1.2 with increments of 0.01. We also focus on discount factors in the range 1.0–1.2. However, we additionally include higher discount factors up to 2.0 to provide further empirical insights regarding the range of reasonable discount factors. In order to limit the parameter-space considered in our analysis to a manageable set, we use increments of 0.02 in the range from 1.0 to 1.2 and increments of 0.2 otherwise.We conduct the analysis for the whole dataset and for invoices received and invoices issued separately, over all invoices and for specific forecast horizons. In addition, we compare correction methods with data split into the three divisions and analyze whether the individual business divisions’ different characteristics are reflected by the correction capabilities of the models and their learned parameters.As a basis for our performance criterion, we use the absolute percentage error (APE). With Atas the actual realization, and Ftas the associated forecast, APE is defined as|At−FtAt|. APE is a common forecast performance measure for forecasts with widely differing volumes (and widely differing error volumes, respectively). In this case, errors cannot be compared in a meaningful fashion using metrics based on error volume or (root) mean squared error because few large errors would outweigh the majority of all other errors.44In our dataset cash flows can vary by orders of magnitude from one entity to another, from one month to another, and also between currencies.Furthermore, absolute error volumes cannot be reported for reasons of confidentiality. We choose the absolute value of the percentage error to ensure that positive and negative errors do not randomly cancel each other out when aggregating errors.We calculate the error of the original expert as well as the corrected forecast. We then calculate the relative APE improvement over the error of the expert forecast:ΔAPE=APEExpert−APECorrectedAPEExpert.55Expert APE itself is considered confidential by our partner company.Based on the recommendation by Armstrong and Collopy (1992), for sets of errors we use the median ΔAPE (instead of the mean value) as it is less prone to extreme values.We furthermore introduce a transformed version of the ΔAPE defined asΔTAPE=ln(1−ΔAPE). The transformed version of the metric exhibits an approximately symmetric distribution and is therefore much more appropriate for standard significance testing methods and for testing group differences. Both distributions, derived over all cash flow forecasts for 2012 and 2013 with WLS and a discount of 1.1 are presented in Fig. 4. We observe similarly-shaped distributions also with other models and in most subsamples.Experiments are conducted using R(R Core Team, 2013) and the provided tools for (weighted) linear regression and hypothesis testing. For LAD the quantreg package (Koenker, 2013) is used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
