@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-agent optimization formulation of earthquake disaster prevention and management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model three different agencies involved in disaster management through OR.We coordinate agencies responsible for different phases of disaster management.Coordination indicates an average improvement of 7.5–24% in the death toll.Through multi-agent optimization, connections between the agencies are observed.Efficiency of relief operations is dependent on transportation network reliability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in societal problem analysis,Disaster management,Multi-agent optimization,Emergency response,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Natural earthquake disasters are unprecedented incidents which take many lives as a consequence and cause major damages to lifeline infrastructures. Various agencies in a country are responsible for reducing such adverse impacts within specific budgets. These responsibilities range from before to after the incident, targeting one of the main phases of disaster management (mitigation, preparedness, and response). Use of OR in disaster management and coordination of its phases has been mostly ignored and highly recommended in former reviews. This paper presents a formulation to coordinate three main agencies and proposes a heuristic approach to solve the different introduced sub-problems. The results show an improvement of 7.5–24% when the agencies are coordinated.entire population of sub-region r in region lvulnerable population ratio of sub-region r in region lvulnerable population of sub-region r in region l (=Prl·qrl)The CiTy Disaster Level (death toll)improvement ratio of sub-region r in region l (between 0 and 1)budget for investment in the building renovation sectorexisting emergency supplies in region kinventory cost of one unit of humanitarian goodsadditional level of humanitarian goodslevel of relief supplies sent from sub-region kto sub-region rlbudget for investment in the emergency response sectortravel time from sub-region k to sub-region rlsurvival function which describes the efficiency of goods mobilityfull cost of retrofitting link (i,j)∈Lfailure probability of link (i,j)∈Lretrofitting ratio of link (i,j)∈Lbudget for investment in the transportation sector

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Major earthquakes shake various parts of the world every few years, claiming major losses in human lives and belongings. They are devastating, particularly in developing countries, because of poor housing construction materials and technologies. Lifelines, specifically transportation networks, are also vital in earthquakes because they provide a platform for humanitarian goods (e.g., water, food, medical goods and survival equipments) to be dispatched. Therefore, retrofitting certain transportation links assures their functionality in earthquakes. Location and allocation of humanitarian goods is the final responsibility of crisis managers to save more lives. Lack of efficient integration between the mentioned sectors has intensified casualties in some recent earthquakes such as Bam (located in Kerman province of southeastern Iran) where use of mud brick, high response time, and lack of relief supplies increased the death toll to 26,271 people (USGS, 2006).Three main actors that play major roles in contributing to more earthquake resilient communities, before and right after the incident, are the building renovation sector, the emergency response sector, and the transportation sector. The building renovation sector is responsible for renovation of aging and deteriorated structures and buildings. The emergency response sector is in charge of locating emergency aid centers and allocating appropriate potential to them to reach the affected population. And the transportation sector is accountable for retrofitting transportation facilities, such as bridges and highways, to make sure they are up-right to carry emergency supplies.Building renovation is usually a very extensive task, which is too expensive to be assigned to any governmental budget. Mobilization of private investors by local governmental bodies, along with central government ordinance and jurisdictional assistance, may handle such heavy operations and create a perpetual momentum to put an end to this operation in a specific plan. Transportation infrastructure reinforcement to withstand high impact earthquakes is an operation under the auspices of local governments, such as municipalities. Location planning for emergency aid centers along with allocation planning for constructing various facility levels and relief resource storages at these centers is usually assigned to central governments. Although all the mentioned operations are under the jurisdiction of separate agencies, the impact of communication and coordination between the different actors is usually ignored.Disaster management is a process composed of four phases: namely mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery (Waugh and Hy, 1990). Mitigation is a set of strategic measures taken to reduce, or eliminate the disaster impacts. Preparedness activities are (tactical) measures aimed to lessen or avoid disaster consequences by preparing the community for hazards. Response includes acting according to emergency plans to preserve lives, properties, the environment, and the community’s social, economical, and political structures. Finally, recovery involves long-term actions that will restore normalcy to the affected areas. Altay and Green (2006) identify potential research directions in future OR/MS applications to the problem. They acknowledge the above four phases of disaster operations management and list typical activities involved in each phase. They point out that about 44%, 21%, 24%, and 11% of the reviewed papers address mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery, respectively. They observe that little attention is paid to both (a) the recovery phase of the process, and (b) more importantly, the integration of these phases, and thereby the collaboration of the agencies involved in this process.This paper presents a formulation to model three main actors participating in disasters and emphasizes the importance of coordination between the actors. Every actor presented in this paper is in charge of one of the four phases, integrating all the phases in disaster management except recovery. The building renovation sector and the transportation sector mitigate the impact of the disaster by stabilizing certain structures and transportation facilities. The residents of these structures are not in danger because their dwellings are no longer vulnerable to collapsing. The emergency response sector on the other hand, is responsible for both the preparedness and response phases. By locating and allocating relief supplies to aid centers, prior to the earthquake, the community is prepared and by distribution of these supplies at the onset of the earthquake the community responds. In other words, this paper is a study of disaster management from a multi-agent, multi-phase point of view.In general, the above multi-agent problem is a problem of security threats. The general problem is defined as follows. There are some vulnerable areas in the study region; and some vulnerable infrastructure facilities (transportation facilities) which are used before the incident, and are access tools for the emergency response centers after the incident to reach the inflicted areas. The problem is how to plan for (a) strengthening structures of the vulnerable areas (b) retrofitting transportation links to ease access to the affected areas and (c) locating and equipping emergency response centers to reach the inflicted areas in a reasonable time span for help.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
There are generally two forms of research that build the humanitarian literature: network link rehabilitation and relief supply inventory. However, no research attempts to integrate these two. Therefore the aim of this research was not to build a better relief inventory model or a more advanced network rehabilitation model, but to present the effect that each of these sectors can have on each other and highlight the efficiency of working together in order to save more lives (e.g., Section 5.1, Fig. 8).This study focuses on the problem of minimizing the level of casualties after a major earthquake. Renovation of deteriorated and low quality buildings and developments, strengthening the existing transportation infrastructures, and locating/allocating emergency aid levels are three main activities involved in this problem. One of the main advantages of this research is that it quantitatively captures the efficiency of such coordination and highlights the major loss in lack of it. However, this model does not focus on how an initial budget should be divided between the associated parties to minimize the death toll. Such formulation is perhaps of priority concern before the issue of agency coordination.The exact algorithm for the problem takes a relatively longer time (100 times more) than the approximated method. The main difference between the two is that the approximate method takes a maximum of two link failure scenarios whereas the exact method considers all possible scenarios (2number of links). The computation time for the exact method will therefore increase exponentially with the number of links to the point of computation infeasibility. The approximate method, however, solves this problem and can be implemented on networks with a high number of links.Furthermore, in this paper, the problem for each independent actor is formulated and solved independently. Then, a unified multi-agent optimization problem is formulated, and a heuristic solution method is proposed. Two example problems are considered and solved independently and in the unified manner, as a multi-agent optimization problem. The results show considerable improvement of 7.5–24% in the death toll in the solution of the multi-agent optimization. Finally, we make the following related suggestions for further research:1.A question that is unfortunately usually posed after a disaster strikes is how to allocate a lump sum of money between associated agencies to minimize the impact of future disasters. The proposed model in this paper can perhaps be modified and presented in a bi-level programming nature to discover which budget scheme is most logical. Sensitivity analysis for the modified model would be significant to capture how the CTDL is affected when money is transferred between agents.During times of chaos and disaster, network users are more inclined to react intuitively and not choose the shortest routes between their origin (home, work, etc.) and destination (shelter). The link travel times that are consequently obtained from such stochastic behavior of evacuees can become an input to the emergency vehicle routing problem so the relief units select the shortest possible routes. It is important to modify the model to capture the effect of such probabilistic behavior.The last phase of disaster management which was not considered in this research is recovery. This phase can be added to the proposed model by accounting for the costs that would be borne by the community in case a disaster strikes. Such post-disaster costs can be incorporated in the model by weighing zone vulnerability ratios. For example, if a certain zone is more expensive to rebuild, it would obtain a higher vulnerability ratio. However, extensive research is needed to forecast these post-disaster costs.This research proposes final aggregate output values for each of the involved parties. However, a modified dynamic version of the model can be proposed to capture the differences in time of operation for each of the parties. For example, building renovation operations is done in stages and takes a longer time than road retrofitting and building relief inventory warehouses.