@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal selection of IT security safeguards from an existing knowledge base

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel approach to optimally select effective IT security safeguards.Practical applicability is ensured by using extensive real-world security knowledge.The knowledge base covers 80 system components, 518 threats, and 1244 safeguards.An abstract criticality concept is used to utilize automatically extracted knowledge.The new MILP model optimally selects safeguards for realistic instances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knowledge-based systems,Information security,Decision support model,Combinatorial optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a combinatorial optimization model is proposed to efficiently select security safeguards in order to protect IT infrastructures and systems. The approach is designed to provide very concrete decision support for an organization as a whole or separately for specific systems. It can be applied in practice without requiring the decision maker himself to collect extensive input data. This is accomplished by using an existing comprehensive and highly accepted knowledge base as a basis for decision making. For our analysis, we use the publicly available IT baseline protection catalogues of the German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI). The catalogues contain more than 500 threats and over 1200 safeguard alternatives to choose from. Applying our model, it is possible to make use of this knowledge and determine optimal selections of safeguards according to given security requirements. The approach supports the decision maker in establishing an effective baseline security strategy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Information technology (IT) is constantly spreading into more and more areas of organizations and it is a critical factor to be successful in the global economy. The loss, manipulation, disclosure, or simply the unavailability of information caused by IT security incidents may lead to expenses, missed profits, or even legal consequences. Incidents originate from different actors with different motives. Professional and amateur hackers, malicious employees, industrial spies, or even terrorists try to hack into systems to gain access to information or simply to create damage. They search for vulnerabilities and will use any weak link in the security chain of an organization. In the constant struggle to make systems more secure, organizations are always trying to find new ways to adequately address security issues. If too little is done, security is weak and attackers will probably succeed at some point. On the other hand, if the wrong measures are taken, the organization may be wasting precious resources that could have been used elsewhere.It has become evident that making systems more secure is a difficult task due to the high complexity of IT infrastructures and the large amount of data required to make informed decisions. To address this problem, a considerable amount of research has been done to find ideal IT security budgets and to determine how to invest based on risk and financial measures. The problem is that existing approaches require the decision maker of an organization to provide a lot of exact input data like exact threat and vulnerability probabilities, asset valuations and other fine-grained parameters. However, these values are very difficult to obtain in practice and, in addition, are very critical to the quality of proposed solutions. Such approaches are intended to accurately address the problem but are often impractical when it comes to real-life applications. On the other hand, approaches that require less information often remain vague in their results and require the decision maker to fill in the gaps himself.To address these issues, an approach is needed that requires an organization to provide as less data as possible but still produces very concrete investment recommendations. To achieve this, we propose to treat the problem on a different layer of abstraction than existing models and to utilize existing IT security knowledge. In fact, both aspects are closely related: instead of developing a model first and forcing the decision maker to gather required input data, we took a reversed approach: we established an extensive knowledge base first, extracted relevant information, and built a model on top of it. The data required can be obtained from common IT security practices and standards which are available from various sources including, but not limited to, International Organization for Standardization (ISO), National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI). These practices help organizations by guiding them on how to establish an effective basis for security. The information is mostly available in form of catalogues, guidelines, recommendations, or standards which have to be followed more or less strictly.When analyzing existing data, it becomes evident that exact probabilities, financial impacts, etc. are not available, not even for the past. But the data still provide a valuable basis for decision making, although on a different level. The question is: is it really necessary to know a threat’s exact probability of occurrence? Is it necessary to know the exact financial impact in case of a security incident? If the goal is, for example, to accurately estimate expected losses, the answer is “yes”. But if the objective is to protect an IT system or infrastructure, we propose an alternative to facilitate the establishment of effective security safeguards without requiring this information. By abstracting the problem further and using highly aggregated “criticality coefficients”, we eliminate the dependence on exact parameters like probabilities and financial evaluations. The aggregated parameters are generated based on an extensive knowledge base with real-world security data. The idea is that exact threat probabilities or expected financial losses are not required to decide which safeguards should be implemented. Knowing which threats are more critical relative to each other is sufficient to allocate safeguards effectively. Effective, in this context, means that safeguards are selected such that their combined impact on the reduction of security threats is maximized.For our analysis we focused on the IT baseline protection catalogues (or IT-Grundschutz catalogues) (Federal Office for Information Security, 2013b) which are part of a standard security practice provided by the BSI. We chose the IT baseline protection catalogues because they are publicly available free of charge and offer an extensive repository of technical, organizational, personnel, and infrastructural information security knowledge to protect IT systems. The catalogues are in line with the ISO 27000 series and, in addition to custom BSI certificates, it is possible to obtain an ISO 27001 certification based on safeguards listed in the baseline protection catalogues.Organizations applying these practices to improve the state of their IT security practices can be divided into basically two groups: one group strictly follows the guideline of a standard of their choice and tries to obtain a valid certificate. The other group is not necessarily interested in a certificate, but nonetheless wants to achieve a sufficiently high security level of its IT infrastructure and systems. Certifications fulfill their purpose for the first group of organizations but have only limited value for organizations of the second group. Organizations trying to improve security without a certification face the challenge of selecting appropriate safeguards from the given catalogues. In the following, we mainly address the second group and demonstrate how they can benefit from existing IT security knowledge.This paper is a first approach to make the large amount of available information security knowledge contained in the IT baseline protection catalogues usable for organizations. For this purpose, we propose a combinatorial optimization model which makes use of the entire baseline protection catalogues. The model is also applicable to an arbitrary subset of components which makes it usable for any use case covered by the knowledge base of the catalogues. It is possible to integrate our approach into an existing risk management process to automate and support the selection of safeguards and thus guide the decision maker in creating an effective risk mitigation plan.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines literature related to decision making in IT security. Section 3 introduces the source of data which we used as basis for our evaluation and illustrates the data extraction process. Section 4 presents our mathematical model and shows how available data are utilized to support automatic decision making in IT security. In Section 5 we conceive a realistic case study to demonstrate the application of our model and discuss the results and computational performance. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
