@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrating deterioration and lifetime constraints in production and supply chain planning: A survey

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We discuss depreciation and item lifetimes in production and supply chain planning.We consider aspects of closed loop supply chain management.Lifetime constraints to avoid wastage and spoilage are rarely considered.Approaches with multiple products and related setup times and costs are rare.We highlight further aspects where more research is needed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Review,Deterioration,Perishability,Lifetime constraints,(Green) Supply chain management,Production planning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Items with short lifetimes that are subject to deterioration are important in the business world. Research has a long tradition in integrating deterioration and value loss effects into mathematical models for inventory planning and control where such effects are understood as a general loss or shrinkage of inventory. However, there has been little work in the modeling of lifetime restrictions of items to prevent wastage and disposals, especially in a dynamic planning context. Globalization and other trends extend the consideration of single companies to whole supply chains, implying increased coordination and information needs. This is important as planning decisions impact lead times and thus the quality of items in the whole supply chain. Products that exceed their useful lifetime can impose high costs due to inventory loss or the need to rework them. This implies increased utilization of (scarce) resources, e.g., machine time, metals, and/or energy, thereby increasingCO2-levels. We survey the state-of-the-art regarding depreciation effects and the modeling of lifetime constraints as well as a classification of models following business planning functions of the value chain. A critical evaluation of approaches and their limitations is provided, highlighting directions for future research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Constraints on the lifetime of items force organizations to carefully plan their production in cooperation with their supply chain partners. Significant waiting times imply increased work in process (WIP) inventories that might lead to longer lead times and, thus, increase the likelihood of deterioration (Pahl, Voß, & Woodruff, 2011), imposing additional costs on the supply chain. In the worst case, such items cannot be used for their original purpose and need to be disposed. This is particularly problematic in the food industry where significant losses occur during handling, processing, and distribution (Gustavsson, Cederberg, Sonesson, van Otterdijk, & Meybeck, 2011). A study conducted for the International Congress “Save Food!” states that 1.3 billion tons of food per year are wasted on a global scale: around one-third of all food produced worldwide for human consumption is wasted (Gustavsson et al., 2011). This is particularly relevant in developing countries, where more than 40% of food losses relate to processing problems. In industrialized countries more than 40% of food waste occurs at the retailer and consumer level (Gustavsson et al., 2011). Increased supply chain costs are only one problem; other challenges include loss of valuable resources, increased energy consumption, and relatedCO2emissions.Deterioration has a great influence on inventory management and also on all other elements of the production process where items are stocked or forced to wait due to uncertain demand, technical matters, variabilities, or disruptions of the production process (Pahl, Voß, & Woodruff, 2007).In this paper, we provide a comprehensive survey on how deterioration and lifetime constraints are integrated in production and supply chain planning. We explore this integration following different business functions (see Fig. 1) that are closely related but not limited to inventory management. In this sense we also complement reviews that focus on deterioration in inventory management (Karmakar & Choudhuri, 2010; Li, Lan, & Mawhinney, 2010) and extended settings (Karaesmen, Scheller-Wolf, & Deniz, 2011, chap. 15). An earlier review is given in Pahl et al. (2007) and a special industrial focus on agri-food supply chains is treated in Ahumada and Villalobos (2009). Specifically, we discuss how these issues are integrated in mathematical modeling.The general question that we pursue is how losses due to spillage or degradation of items in the (industrial) process can be prevented. Apart from engineering issues to enhance the production process, related coordinated planning throughout the overall supply chain is a starting point. Despite a long stream of operations research literature attempting to integrate deterioration effects in models for planning beginning in 1960 (see, e.g., Barankin & Denny, 1963; Ghare & Schrader, 1963) with a significant increase until today (Pahl & Voß, 2013), there are only a few models that integrate lifetime constraints of products, e.g., (Ahuja, Huang, Romeijn, & Romero-Morales, 2007; Amorim, Antunes, & Almada-Lobo, 2011; Caserta & Voß, 2013; Förster, Haase, & Tönnies, 2006; Pahl & Voß, 2010).The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we provide general thoughts on the classification of models including depreciation effects and lifetime constraints. We present mathematical formulations and discuss the role of demand. Section 3 reviews the literature regarding important business planning functions and identifies research gaps. The structure of the paper follows the business functions given in Fig. 1.Specifically, Section 3.1 reviews inventory control and procurement/replenishment models including marketing issues whereas Section 3.2 is devoted to aggregate and operational production-inventory and lot sizing. Section 3.3 presents available research concerning final goods inventory and their delivery (outbound logistics). Extensions like multiple warehouses and rework options are discussed in Sections 3.4 and 3.5, respectively. Section 3.6 broadens the perspective by integrating the models over the supply chain.The operations research community began studying the deterioration of items by modeling inventory management in blood banks (see Dumas & Rabinowitz, 1977; Jennings, 1973; Naddor, 1966; Prastacos, 1984) and the distribution of blood from transfusion centers to hospitals (Brodheim & Prastacos, 1979; Hemmelmayr, Doerner, Hartl, & Savelsbergh, 2009; Katasaliaki & Brailsford, 2007; Sapountzis, 1989); see Belien and Forcé (2012) for a literature review of blood products in supply chain management (SCM). Other products have also been examined; e.g., radioactive elements, chemicals, food, fashion clothes, technical components, and newspapers (Dave, 1986; Emmons, 1968a, 1968b; Shah & Jaiswal, 1977).Most products deteriorate within a certain interval of time. If the observed time horizon is sufficiently short relative to the deterioration rate, there is little need to consider this product characteristic. The time horizon for aggregate planning is sufficiently long so that deterioration starts to play an important role. Deterioration and lifetime restrictions render the planning process complex due to restrictions on inventory holding (Pahl, 2011). Inventory holding refers to producing ahead of demand and sales realizations to hedge against uncertainties (e.g., employing over-production), exploit volume discounts, or harness in-house setup-sequence advantages (Nahmias, 2009; Pahl & Voß, 2010).Deterioration of goods is the process of decay, damage or spoilage of items in such a way that they can no longer be used for their original purpose; i.e., they undergo changes while stored (Dave, 1986) and continuously lose their utility (Darlington & Rahimifard, 2006; Ferguson & Koenigsberg, 2007; Shah, Shah, & Shah, 2005; Wee, 1993; Zhao, 2007). Perishable goods are considered as items with a fixed, maximum lifetime (Ketzenberg & Ferguson, 2005). This holds for products that become obsolete at some point in time because of their nature or due to external factors, e.g., legal constraints and regulations that predetermine their shelflives (Boukas & Liu, 2001; Jaju, 2003). The literature referenced in this paper reveals that most authors working in the field of deterioration and perishability use these terms interchangeably; see also Teunter and Flapper (2003).A classification basis is the utility of an item presenting two distinct subcategories: first, products whose functionalities deteriorate over time, e.g., fruits, vegetables or milk (Ferguson & Koenigsberg, 2004; Ghare & Schrader, 1963); second, products whose functionality does not degrade, but where demand deteriorates over time as customers’ perceived utility decreases, e.g., fashion items, high technology products with a short life cycle, or items whose information content deteriorates (e.g., newspapers) (Ferguson & Koenigsberg, 2004). For example, it has empirically been demonstrated that the willingness of consumers to pay for a product continuously decreases with its perceived actuality (Tsiros & Heilman, 2005a). This is similar to defining deterioration as a process of continuously reduced usefulness of the commodity to the customer (Tsiros & Heilman, 2005b; Wee, 1993). Other products encounter value losses induced by demand that drops when a new version or generation is introduced (Leung & Ng, 2007) accompanied by price reductions in order to motivate demand (Elmaghraby & Keskinocak, 2003; Shah et al., 2005), e.g., for computers, mobile phones, high fashion wear, Christmas gifts, or calendars. Such value loss is indirectly integrated into mathematical models by making assumptions concerning the products’ demand patterns; e.g., time-dependent demand that is used to describe sales in different product lifetime phases in the market (Mehta & Shah, 2005). A similar effect is observed regarding fresh food where demand drops over the lifetime of a product and particularly close to its expiration or best-before date. In that case, price reductions or quantity increases of the product displayed in the shop are used to motivate demand (Pal, Bhunia, & Mukherjee, 2006). The examination of effects of stochastic demand rates on deterioration includes stochastic processes that may have independent increments (e.g., compound Poisson processes) or not, compound renewal processes or known/arbitrary probability distributions (Bradford & Sugrue, 1990; Kalpakam & Sapna, 1996; Kalpakam & Shanthi, 2006; Ravichandran, 1995). As a result, we characterize depreciation regarding different aspects (see also Ghare & Schrader (1963)): 1. physical degradation or depletion (e.g., fresh food or gasoline), 2. loss of efficacy or functional loss (e.g., medicine), and 3. perceived value loss (e.g., fashion clothes or high technology) where it is difficult to distinguish between the first two categories. A further distinction can be made in the products’ lifetime, as this may be either time-independent implying a pre-specified lifetime where the utility is given over a specific time period, or time-dependent, expressing deterioration over time (Nahmias, 1982) that can also be related to seasonality. For instance, researchers have discovered that many products (e.g., refrigerated meat, roasted/ground coffee, breakfast cereals, cottage cheese, cassava flour, corn seeds, frozen food, and/or ice cream) have a deterioration rate best described by a Weibull distribution; see Al-Khedhairi and Tadj (2007) and the references therein or Covert and Philip (1973), Jalan, Giri, and Chaudhuri (1996), Chakrabarty, Giri, and Chaudhuri (1998), Wu, Lin, Tan, and Lee (2000), Wu (2001, 2002a, 2002b), Giri, Jalan, and Chaudhuri (2003), Ghosh and Chaudhuri (2004), Mukhopadhyay, Mukherjee, and Chaudhuri (2005), Lo, Wee, and Huang (2007), Skouri, Konstantaras, Papachristos, and Ganas (2009), Wee, Law, and Yu (2007), and Zhao (2007).We make a clear distinction between perishable goods that cannot be used anymore and lose all their utility at once after a certain point in time and items subject to deterioration that lose their utility gradually. Fig. 2depicts three functional relationships and one specification of item quality; see also Pahl and Voß (2010). The leftmost graph shows the abruptness of perishability in contrast to the gradual discrete treatment of deterioration and in the third the possible courses of continuous deterioration. The fourth graph gives three possible time intervals regarding the quality decrease of items that can be reworked: the first interval presents a regular quality of items until the moment where items need rework. The third interval describes the time where items have passed their lifetime, at which point they may only be sold on a secondary market or disposed.These definitions of deterioration, perishability, and lifetime constraints remain somewhat ambiguous as it clearly depends on the physical state/fitness, behavior of items over time, customers’ opinions expressed in demand functions, and on the production planner or the quality controller who must decide whether to use items or components that have passed a certain age; see also Pahl and Voß (2010, 2013) and Pahl (2011). Items that lose their functional characteristics and quality in inventory often cannot (or should not) be kept in inventory. For instance, food that deteriorates and develops biological toxins should be separated from fresh inventory and disposed off immediately. However, other items that lose perceived utility can be kept in inventory without such problems and may be sold on a secondary market. It becomes clear that functional deterioration and depreciation due to value loss pertains to the same problem, but requires different actions. In this paper, we focus on the integration of functional deterioration, perishability, and lifetime constraints.Generally, different methods are employed in the literature to integrate deterioration, perishability and lifetime constraints into mathematical models depending on the model type (deterministic or stochastic) and the considered time horizon (infinite or finite). For instance, one method assumes the loss of a certain fraction or part of inventory fixed by input parameters stated as follows:(1)dI(t)dt=-Θ·I(t)-D(t)tj⩽t⩽TjwhereΘis the shrinkage factor due to perishability,I(t)the inventory holding in time t, andD(t)the time-dependent demand defined for a time interval(tj,Tj). Models integrating this formulation assume an exponential shrinkage of inventory that becomes clear when regarding the solution of Eq. (1):(2)I(t)=-e-Θt∫tTjeΘuD(u)dutj⩽t⩽TjSuch a formulation is mainly used in infinite time deterministic and/or stochastic settings for replenishment and inventory control; see, e.g., Balkhi and Benkherouf (1996a, 1996b), Benkherouf (1997), and Kao and Hsu (2002). For use in (discrete) dynamic deterministic settings, the following formulation can be employed:(3)It=(1-αΘ)·It-1+Xt∀t=1,…,TwhereαΘis the percentage of inventory that is lost due to perishability,ItandIt-1are the inventory of periods t andt-1, respectively, for a planning horizon of T periods, andXtis the amount of production in period t. For the remainder of this paper, we address these two modeling approaches as fraction formulation (FF). They are mainly used in optimization models that aim to derive optimal replenishment quantities and time lengths between orders assuming that all products in inventory undergo the same transformation independent of their age or their production period; see, e.g., Hsu (2000), Waterer (2007), Bai, Xu, and Zhang (2008). This may be a good approximation in case of general deterioration studies (Waterer, 2007).However, the assumption of general inventory shrinkage is limiting if we want to create planning models that are supposed to avoid deterioration in the first place. Therefore, we need formulations that restrict products’ lifetimes. LetXtandDtdenote the amount of production and demand in period t, respectively. A lifetime restriction is stated as follows:(4)∑τ=1tXτ⩽∑τ=1t+ΘtLDτ∀t=1,…,T-ΘtLInequalities (4) state that the sum of production until time period t must be less than or equal to the sum of demands that do not exceed time period t and the length of the variable lifetime of the productΘtLwhere the superscript L denotes lifetimes instead of deterioration or perishability which is denoted byΘtandΘ, respectively. We name this method index transformation (IT) as it restricts the considered time periods by the lifetime of items. Such formulations are used in inventory and lot size (I&L, Stadtler, 1996) or transportation formulations; see Alfieri, Brandimarte, and D’Orazio (2002). However, this approach excludes perishability by limiting and prohibiting periods in inventory. Moreover, it does not allow for minimal lot sizes, because such constraints can violate Restrictions (4). These critiques are remedied by the following constraints that require a modification of the inventory balance equation of related optimization models. This is achieved by subtracting items that pass their useful lifetime denoted byGt:(5)Gt⩾∑τ=1t-ΘtLXτ-∑τ=1tDτ-∑τ=1t-1Gτ,∀t⩾ΘtLThis amount is calculated by the sum of produced itemsXτin the time interval(τ,t-ΘtL), thus the production from the beginning of the planning horizon until period t reduced by the length of item lifetimeΘtL, less those items that are used to satisfy demand until period t and items that have already been disposed in previous periods up tot-1. Constraint (5) can be used in all classical discrete deterministic lot sizing (and scheduling) approaches using I&L formulations. However, such models become quickly computationally intractable using practical input data sets. For example, the capacitated lot sizing problem (CLSP) is NP-hard (Bitran, Haas, & Hax, 1982; Florian, Lenstra, & Rinnooy Kan, 1980) and so are its extensions (Millar & Yang, 1994). Therefore, there is a trend to use network flow or transportation models to describe production-inventory and/or lot sizing and scheduling problems that show promising results to find optimal solutions in acceptable time; e.g., Alfieri et al. (2002) and Pahl and Seipl (2011). A study regarding the effectiveness of different formulations for production and lot sizing models without accounting for depreciation is provided in Alfieri et al. (2002).Another type of index transformation can be adopted especially for use in stochastic models to integrate lifetime restrictions. This transformation considers the periods of lifetimes from the time an item is produced until its lifetime elapses:(6)TΘL-(n-1)·t⩾TΘEorn⩽TΘL-TΘEt+1whereTΘLdenotes the lifetime of an item,TΘEthe estimated or expected lifetime of an item, n an integer variable denoting the frequency of product shipments in a period, and t the current time period. Such formulations have been applied, e.g., by Wang, Li, and O’Brien (2009). Other stochastic methods to integrate shrinkage assume that the age values of ordered items arriving in inventory are given by a vector of age classes of items and defined to be independent and identically distributed random variables (Ferguson & Ketzenberg, 2006). Besides, the shrinkage of inventory might be assumed as a virtual outdating process similar to the virtual waiting time process in queuing theory (Nahmias, Perry, & Stadje, 2004).The most frequent formulation used to integrate deterioration is FF which is mainly employed in static models where the effects of demand patterns are added to study the influence of deterioration. The I&L formulation was recently developed and used in Pahl and Voß (2010) and Pahl et al. (2011) whereas IT-integrated lifetime constraints are mostly used in deterministic as well as stochastic dynamic approaches; e.g., Alfieri et al. (2002), Förster et al. (2006), and Ahuja et al. (2007).We review the literature of the last decade, but make exceptions whenever appropriate. Related references are selected based on our evaluation of their contribution to science and include journal publications, proceedings, technical reports, and working papers. The presentation of models incorporating functional depreciation is in line with Fig. 1. It considers the different areas of planning and extended perspectives. We distinguish approaches by their assumptions regarding (un)certainty in deterministic and stochastic models. These categories are further separated into infinite and finite time horizon approaches. Interesting features that might be integrated into mathematical models with the aim of rendering them more realistic and applicable to real-world problems include the planning of multiple resources with or without capacity constraints that produce a single or multiple product(s) adhering to multi-level product structures. In the case of multiple products, setup times and costs that can be sequence-dependent play an important role especially regarding capacity utilization. This is also valid for positive lead times that can either be assumed for replenishment or inter-production processes treated as exogenous or endogenous input data. We find positive replenishment lead times mainly in stochastic dynamic replenishment models. Most of the reviewed publications assume lead times to be negligible; see also Jaju (2003). Recent trends examine the possibilities and willingness of customers to wait for their ordered products. Early work includes the integration of complete backlogging which is extended to partial backlogging assuming some customers are impatient. Further fine-tuning includes partial backlogging which decreases with the length of the waiting time. We highlight such extensions in the following sections. Due to space limitations, we state references and extensions in the provided tables, but might not refer to them in the text. For ease of presentation, we use the abbreviations given in Tables 1 and 2sorted by the columns for the tables presenting the models with their characteristics.The production process is initialized by the need for raw materials which is derived from the forecasted demand for finished goods. The aim is to obtain a sufficient quantity of raw materials of the desired quality for production at the right time at minimal ordering costs. Marketing issues like discounting, allowances of credits together with lot sizing are important as raw materials are generally ordered in batches, taking advantage of price and volume discounts, further minimizing transportation costs. Nevertheless, large order batches give rise to increased inventory costs and the risk of deterioration (Pahl et al., 2007). In the case of order contracts like vendor management inventory (VMI) or just in time (JIT) agreements, the manufacturer avoids such problems and passes them to suppliers who are responsible for their partners’ inventory level, and thus the planning of replenishment batches; see, e.g., Hemmelmayr et al. (2009) for a VMI concept for blood bank management and Yang and Wee (2002, 2003), Rau, Wu, and Wee (2004), Chung and Wee (2007), Wee, Yu, and Wang (2006), Wee and Chung (2009), and Ghasimi and Gohdsi (2009) for models considering JIT logistics in supply chain planning. A review on dynamic pricing and inventory management is given in Elmaghraby and Keskinocak (2003). Additionally, the consideration of inflation and the time value of money plays an important role in inventory control (Balkhi, 2004a; Hou & Lin, 2006), as risks of financial losses increase with inventory levels. We refer to these as marketing issues, too, because they are frequently considered in conjunction with pricing, replenishment, and inventory control decisions.This stream of literature is dominated by economic order quantity (EOQ) and economic production quantity (EPQ) models emphasizing marketing aspects like pricing/discounting, payment delays, inflation scenarios or time value of money, and study different demand patterns; see Table 4. Table 3lists models for inventory control with the trend towards incorporating backlogging dependent on waiting times. In this section, EOQ models prevail due to our distinction of replenishment and production-inventory approaches. All considered approaches integrate a general shrinkage of inventory using FF given in Eq. (1), so that we do not add a column in the related tables.Despite the work of Zhang and Wang (2011), the majority of approaches in this section assume single products and thus avoid complications arising from consideration of (sequence-dependent) setup times and costs or multi-level product structures. Table 3 shows the trend towards the combined incorporation of shortages and backlogging effects together with different demand patterns; e.g., stock-dependent demand (Dye & Ouyang, 2005; Wu, Ouyang, & Yang, 2006), general time-varying demand (Balkhi & Tadj, 2008; Chern, Chan, & Teng, 2005; Skouri & Papachristos, 2003a; Wang, 2002, 2003; Wu, 2002a), price-dependent demand (Dye, Hsieh, & Ouyang, 2007a), or ramp-type demand (Giri et al., 2003; Panda, Senapati, & Basu, 2008; Roy, Bhunia, & Mukhopadhyay, 2005a; Skouri et al., 2009). We highlight a study that examines the impact of deterioration on postponement strategies in a replenishment scenario (Li, Cheng, & Wang, 2007). Postponement is the process to delaying product differentiation decisions downstream the supply chain or “as late as possible” in order to enhance flexibility regarding demand (Li et al., 2007). Such strategies are most successful in industries with highly differentiated products; e.g., the high tech, fashion, or food industry (Li et al., 2007). The main advantages arise within JIT principles and reductions of finished goods inventory and increasing flexibility in forecasting and risk pooling whereas a disadvantage is the redesign of manufacturing components (Li et al., 2007). Postponement is defined in Li et al. (2007) as the possibility of a retailer to order either finished perishable products or product parts, so that the final product is assembled later according to customer requirements or a combination of both finished and unfinished products. A simple bill of materials (BOM) is assumed where the final products subject to constant demand are produced from the same raw material in a ratio of 1:1. Perishability is modeled as general shrinkage of inventory (see Eq. (1)). Results show that the postponement strategy outperforms the independent strategy without postponement where only final products are ordered. Differences between these strategies become greater with an increase in the shrinkage rate. The study is based on theoretical considerations as are most of these references; applications of results to practical cases are generally very rare due to the practical difficulties of accessing the required data.Table 4shows approaches sorted by their consideration of marketing issues, demand patterns, and incorporation of deterioration/perishability where the latter varies between the use of perishability given as shrinkage rates (Chang, Goyal, & Teng, 2006; Liao, 2008; Ouyang, Teng, Goyal, & Yang, 2009b; Ouyang, Yang, & Yen, 2009a; Pal et al., 2006; Sabahno, 2008; Sugapriya & Jeyaraman, 2008), time-varying shrinkage (Balkhi, 2004a, 2004b, 2009; Balkhi et al., 2009; Chern, Yang, Teng, & Papachristos, 2008; Dye, 2007; Dye, Ouyang, & Hsieh, 2007b; Mondal, Ondal, Dey, & Maiti, 2007; Moon, Giri, & Ko, 2005), and (two-parameter) Weibull distributions (Bhunia & Shaikh, 2011; Chang, 2004a; Chang & Dye, 2001; Chang, Hung, & Dye, 2001; Jolai, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, Rabbani, & Sadoughian, 2006; Papachristos & Skouri, 2003; Shah et al., 2005) that are combined with demand patterns ranging from constant demand (Liao, 2008; Ouyang et al., 2009b; Ouyang et al., 2009a; Shah et al., 2005; Sugapriya & Jeyaraman, 2008) to price (Bhunia & Shaikh, 2011; Chern et al., 2008; Dye et al., 2007b; Dye, 2007; Mondal et al., 2007; Sabahno, 2008; Tsao & Sheen, 2007) or stock-dependent demand (Bhunia & Shaikh, 2011; Jolai et al., 2006; Pal et al., 2006). Some authors consider demand dependent on the displayed quantity of products in the shop (Bhunia & Shaikh, 2011; Pal et al., 2006). For instance, lot sizes for a perishable product further subject to the item selling price, and backlogging dependent on the waiting time for the product are determined by Pal et al. (2006). Strategies of selling age-advanced items in a secondary shop at a lower price to maximize profits are analyzed in Mondal et al. (2007) and capacity restrictions are added in Chang et al. (2006), Zhang and Wang (2011), and Bhunia and Shaikh (2011). Surprisingly, the reviewed references in this section include partial, but not complete backlogging. Effects of temporary price discounts on inventory and deterioration are explored with advantages and disadvantages made explicit together with a two-parameter Weibull distribution for the deterioration rate in an EOQ setting (Shah et al., 2005). The authors analyze the trade-off of large order sizes with the concomitant increase in inventory holding costs and the risk of deterioration versus small orders that do not benefit from volume discounts. Their results show that the model is sensitive to the discount as well as the deterioration rate. Permissible delays are incorporated in Liao (2008), Sugapriya and Jeyaraman (2008), Ouyang et al. (2009b), Tsao and Sheen (2007), Balkhi (2009), Balkhi et al. (2009), Chang and Dye (2001), Chang et al. (2001), and Chang (2004a) together with features like pricing options, time value of money, and backlogging dependent on the waiting time. The link between decisions regarding raw materials and final products is also taken into account in Balkhi (2009) and Balkhi et al. (2009). Deterioration of items is captured for raw materials as well as for on-hand inventory (WIP). An exact formulation of the integrated model and mathematical methods are proposed to find an optimal solution for stopping and restarting the production of final products in a single production cycle. Nevertheless, the effects of the deterioration rate on the solution and/or the process of finding the solution are not explored further.Models can be extended to a dynamic setting by replicating the assumed procurement-inventory cycles n times, so that we name them EOQ-based or EPQ-based approaches. Models that concentrate on the analysis of different demand patterns are mainly formulated as EOQ-based approaches (Dye, Chang, & Teng, 2006; He, Wang, & Lai, 2010; Kang, 2008; Mehta & Shah, 2005; Teng & Yang, 2004; Zhao, 2007; Zhou, Lau, & Yang, 2003) or economic lot scheduling problem (ELSP) formulations (Bai et al., 2008; Chu, Hsu, & Shen, 2005; Hsu, 2003) using FF to integrate shrinkage due to deterioration and/or perishability. These are listed in Table 5whereas Table 6includes approaches with a marketing focus. ELSPs extend EOQ or EPQ models to multiple products produced on a single production resource (Lin, Kroll, & Lin, 2006; Maxwell, 1964) usually assuming an infinite planning horizon; see Silver, Pyke, and Peterson (1998) for an ELSP review. Opportunities presented by geographically dispersed sales markets with different selling seasons (thus different demand rates) for a manufacturer dealing with deteriorating products are examined in He et al. (2010). The authors provide mathematical formulations to determine the optimal production and inventory plan as well as a sensitivity analysis, accounting for a constant shrinkage rate (FF). A decrease in this rate decreases overall costs if the manufacturer reduces the production quantity of items. Age-dependent inventory and age-dependent partial backordering are analyzed in Hsu (2003) using an ELSP and a modified FF where the inventoryIτtis given as the difference between the age-dependent shrinkage of inventory of periodτand the previous periodt-1given by(1-ατ,t-1)·Iτ,t-1and production in periodτand the current time period t, denoted byXτt, i.e.:(7)Iτt=(1-ατ,t-1)·Iτ,t-1-Xτt∀1⩽τ<t⩽TEq. (7) is also used in Chu et al. (2005) together with economies of scale cost functions. Complete backlogging is integrated in Bai et al. (2008). These references provide approximation solutions for these NP-hard problems. The formulation of age-dependent shrinkage is interesting as it implies a reduction of item quality dependent on the time that items remain in stock. The model accounts for this fact and minimizes related quality loss, so that it has a degree of freedom to avoid quality reductions.Recent dynamic marketing-related approaches provided in the literature are frequently formulated as periodic review (PR) models (Chen & Chen, 2004) or EOQ-based approaches including pricing/discounting (Ouyang, Hsieh, Dye, & Chang, 2003), time value of money (Hou, 2006; Hou & Lin, 2006; Lin & Lin, 2006; Shah, 2006; Wee, Lo, Yu, & Chen, 2008), or permissible delay in payments (Chang, 2004b; Dye & Chang, 2003; Liao & Chen, 2003); see Table 6. In PR models, inventory levels are measured and adjusted only at specific points in time whereas in continuous review (CR) systems inventory levels are known at any point in time. A dynamic PR replenishment model with price-dependent demand for a lifetime-dependent deterioration rate is proposed in Chen and Chen (2004) with the objective to determine periodic prices and replenishment lot sizes maximizing profits. Additionally included aspects encompass complete backlogging and selling-price-dependent inventory holding. The authors highlight the benefits of an integrated planning and pricing approach. Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods are used in Wee et al. (2008) where the amelioration rate accounts for the possibility of gains in inventory value over time such as possibly experienced by farmers purchasing and rearing livestock (e.g., fish, turkeys, or chickens) while deterioration refers to the possible loss of livestock due to sickness. Both parameters are modeled as two-parameter Weibull distributions. The amelioration rate is assumed to be greater than the deterioration rate, so that the value of inventory increases. The authors derive the optimal solution for minimizing the net present value of total costs per time unit for the planning horizon and use sensitivity analysis to examine influencing parameters. Decision variables are, among others, the number of order cycles during the planning horizon and the order quantity. Results show that the system is highly sensitive to demand values, but less sensitive to ordering costs. Deterioration does not seem to highly influence purchasing or inventory decisions.Recent stochastic replenishment models that include deterioration of products are mainly formulated as stochastic EOQ models. These frequently serve as a starting point for more complex formulations. In contrast to the previous references, different integration methods for deterioration or perishability are used; see Tables 7,8. Besides, we find significantly more references including positive lead times (static models: Kalpakam & Shanthi, 2006; Manuel, Sivakumar, & Arivarignan, 2007; Sivakumar & Arivarignan, 2008; Williams & Patuwo, 2004, dynamic models: Manuel et al., 2007; Sivakumar & Arivarignan, 2005, 2006; Yadavalli, van Schoor, Strasheim, & Udayabaskaran, 2004) than in deterministic approaches; see also Sabahno (2008). There is far less recent work on marketing issues regarding stochastic approaches than deterministic ones, so these are mentioned in the comment section of Table 7 rather than in a dedicated table.In this category, some marketing issues are addressed including permissible delays of payments (Mahata & Goswami, 2007) and discounting (Ouyang, Wu, & Yang, 2008; Roy, Kar, & Maiti, 2005b). The reviewed papers include deterioration as well as perishability effects of products subject to demand functions modeled, e.g., as Markovian arrival processes (MAP) (Kalpakam & Shanthi, 2006; Manuel et al., 2007; Sivakumar & Arivarignan, 2005, 2006, 2008), fuzzy numbers (Mahata & Goswami, 2007), Poisson distributions (Lawrence, Sivakumar, & Arivarignan, 2006; Sivakumar & Arivarignan, 2005, 2006), stock- and/or price-dependent (Ouyang et al., 2008; Roy et al., 2005b), or as various stochastic distributions (Deniz & Scheller-Wolf, 2004; Ferguson & Ketzenberg, 2006; Kopach, Balcioglu, & Carter, 2008; Li, Tao, & Sun, 2011; Lian, Liu, & Neuts, 2005; Nahmias et al., 2004; Williams & Patuwo, 2004; Yadavalli et al., 2004). We frequently find CR and PR models as well as stochastic versions of EOQ models in this classification category. CR models employ the classical(Q,r)ordering policy where a quantity of items Q is reordered at time r and takes a fixed arrival lead time that is often assumed to be negligible. Decision variables are the quantity and the reorder point whereas in PR models, the reorder point is fixed. Positive replenishment lead times in CR approaches are considered, e.g., in Yadavalli et al. (2004), Sivakumar and Arivarignan (2005, 2006), Kalpakam and Shanthi (2006), Manuel et al. (2007), and Sivakumar and Arivarignan (2008) and impatient customers are assumed as negative demand in Manuel et al. (2007) and Lawrence et al. (2006). PR models are proposed in Ferguson and Ketzenberg (2006), Williams and Patuwo (2004), Deniz and Scheller-Wolf (2004), and Li et al. (2011). The value of information regarding the age of ordered items used in replenishment decision-making is analyzed in Ferguson and Ketzenberg (2006) where the lifetime of an item is fixed, but the age upon arrival is uncertain. The benefit of information sharing seems highest when the variability of demand is significant, products’ lifetimes are short, and products’ prices elevated. These benefits are not necessarily shared with upstream supply chain partners. Investments in equipment to maintain or extend the quality/freshness of items, and thus increase products’ lifetimes, are compared to the benefits of information sharing. Results show that lifetime-enhancing investments mostly outperform information sharing for certain lifetimes. Similar results are found in Kopach et al. (2008) exploring effects of lifetime extensions for blood products. The substitution of aged items with new products to satisfy random demand in a PR setting is studied in Deniz and Scheller-Wolf (2004) where items have a lifetime of two periods. The authors assume that demand for an item of a specific age can only be satisfied with items of that characteristic, so that no substitution is allowed. Excess demand for old items can also be satisfied with new items (downward substitution) or excess demand for new items can be satisfied with old items (upward substitution). A fourth setting allows downward as well as upward substitution. The remaining lifetime of items is included using the IT formulation. Similar characteristics for infinite and finite time models including a seasonable good is proposed by Li et al. (2011) and positive replenishment lead times are added in Yadavalli et al. (2004). As in previous classification categories we note the absence of multi-level approaches regarding the production process as well as the consideration of multiple products including setup times and costs.The literature regarding stochastic finite model formulations including depreciation is rather limited; see Table 8. It is notable that these few references show an enhanced inclusion of (high quality) data collected from radio frequency identification (RFID) technology that serves to keep track of the age of inventory which is surprisingly different to deterministic cases; see, e.g., Chande, Dhekane, Hemachandra, and Rangaraj (2005), Broeckmeulen and van Donselaar (2007), Liu, Tang, and Huang (2008). In fact, the traceability of items, especially food, is a highly important operations management function (Wang et al., 2009). More recently, item traceability has been considered rather separately from SCM strategies as stated in Wang et al. (2009), but there is an emerging trend where this is changing due to the use of better information, particularly in inventory management. For instance, RFID-controlled inventory subject to stochastic, seasonal demands is studied in Broeckmeulen and van Donselaar (2007) in a PR model where demand depends on remaining lifetimes and thus the freshness of items; see also Lu, Song, and Zhu (2008). Dynamic pricing for deteriorating (food) products subject to price- and freshness-dependent demand is examined in Liu et al. (2008). The authors use the practical case of supermarkets where price adjustments based on demand forecasting gained via RFID are used to automatically mark down items near their expiration date in order to stimulate demand. Results regarding the optimal pricing and ordering strategy show that the deterioration rate has a significant influence on pricing as well as the order quantity. Additional marketing issues such as pricing, time value of money, or inflation in EOQ-based approaches are covered in Liao and Xie (2005), Maity and Maiti (2008), Chande et al. (2005), and Liu et al. (2008) where multiple items are considered in Maity and Maiti (2008), but without accounting for setup times or costs. As stated before, multi-level approaches for production processes or more complex BOMs are absent until this point. In this section, the same is valid for backlogging that is rarely considered in stochastic time infinite replenishment approaches or not at all in finite time approaches; see Table 8.Tactical production planning deals with questions concerning the implementation of decisions from the strategic level. They are translated into mid-range decisions regarding, e.g., the production network design and layout, the arrangement and number of machines, and the product mix (Pahl & Voß, 2013). Lot sizing is an important determinant of lead times and, consequently, the quality of items, especially in case of multiple products enforcing (machine) setups and thus additional time. This is because lot sizing decisions determine the frequency of setup times necessary to switch from the production of one product to the production of another and, in some cases, the time that items wait for lot completion before moving. Capacity is increasingly consumed that would otherwise be available for production. Accordingly, setup times affect lead times of products due to induced waiting times (Asmundsson, Rardin, & Uzsoy, 2002, 2003; Hwang & Uzsoy, 2004). Lead times increase with the number (and duration) of setups and so does the number of products that deteriorate while waiting in line to be processed (Pahl, 2011). Accordingly, sequence-dependent setup times and costs might aggravate deterioration necessitating the consideration of scheduling information at this planning stage (Haase, 1996; Pahl et al., 2011).Lot sizing decisions are generally made at the tactical planning stage, so that aggregate production inventory models are used. Section 3.1 addresses the cases where marketing issues are important parameters while here, other parameters of major interest are addressed, including the possibility of adapting production rates to various situations to meet increased demand or accommodate ad hoc priority orders.In this section, the most frequently employed approaches found in the literature are related to EPQ or one reference including an ELSP and thus multiple products (Lin et al., 2006). Except for the work in Wang et al. (2009) where perishability is integrated using the IT formulation, all reviewed approaches include perishability and deterioration as shrinkage; see Table 9. We find only one reference presenting an ELSP and thus accounting for multiple products including setup times and costs (Lin et al., 2006). The authors assume different perishability and demand rates including a finite production rate operating to ensure that demand can be met for all products. Due to the assumption of a common production inventory cycle policy, there is exactly one setup per product produced in the same sequence in each production cycle. Results show that in case of increasing deterioration rates the production cycle times decrease, leading to a reduction in deteriorating products. As in the previous sections, it is notable that the consideration of multiple products and thus setup times and costs is rare in this classification category.Production-inventory models for single items subject to perishability with and without shortages and partial backlogging dependent on the waiting time are examined in Skouri and Papachristos (2003b) and Teng, Ouyang, and Chen (2007). Time-varying demand in such setting finds consideration in Goyal and Giri (2003) and Balkhi (2003), where the latter analyzes the effects of learning on the optimal production lot size. Learning as well as forgetting may influence the production rate but complicates decision making; see Alamri and Balkhi (2007). Variable production rates are also decision variables in Tadj, Bounkhel, and Benhadid (2006) and Sana and Chaudhuri (2003) where the latter assumes production rate-dependent production costs; see also Manna et al. (2006) assuming ramp-type demand. We conclude for these previous sections that depreciation effects are considered, but are not the central focus of interest. Furthermore, their inclusion as shrinkage does not prevent deterioration and there are no plans to avoid such (quality) losses.This category includes different mathematical formulations presented in the reviewed literature ranging from EPQ-based approaches to mixed-integer programming (MIP) models. The literature on MIPs for lot sizing as well as scheduling problems without depreciation considerations is very rich; see e.g., literature reviews regarding single item lot sizing problems (Brahimi, Dauzere-Peres, Najid, & Nordli, 2006), capacitated lot sizing problems and extensions (Quadt & Kuhn, 2008; Karimi, Ghomi, & Wilson, 2003) or multi-stage problems (Buschkühl, Sahling, Helber, & Tempelmeier, 2010). We further find two EPQ-based approaches (Chen & Chen, 2006; Sana & Chaudhuri, 2004; see Table 10). The first reference considers the perishability of an item subject to time-varying demand that can be completely backlogged. The second reference studies a similar EPQ-based model taking into account pricing together with capacity restrictions.In an early reference (Hsu, 2000) a MIP formulation is proposed that assumes shrinkage (perishability) as given in Eq. (3). In Förster et al. (2006), a CLSP with lifetime constraints of perishable products integrated using IT constraints, minimal lot size constraints, and sequence-dependent setup times and costs is presented. The idea of accounting for blocks in production planning is proposed by Entrup, Günther, van Beek, Grunow, and Seiler (2005) with the objective of determining the optimal pricing strategy, dependent on the quality of the item on the day of sales. A block is defined as the production of products based on the same BOM. Capacity restrictions and minimum batch sizes add complexity. Multiple products are considered, but only products of different blocks require setup operations of the production resource. The integration of lifetime constraints in classical lot sizing models is studied in Pahl and Voß (2010). The authors develop the Constraints (5) to restrict products’ lifetimes. In Pahl et al. (2011), Constraint (5) is used in hybrid lot sizing models, including a micro–macro period structure as well as sequence-dependent setup times and costs. Results show that lifetime restrictions limit the solution space in a way that solutions are harder to be computed when lifetimes are greater than one time period. For instance, if the lifetime of items is exactly one period, the model employs a lot-for-lot policy (i.e., lot sizes match demands of products in that period), so that no inventory is built and the machine is set up for every requested product in that period, and no aggregation of lot sizes takes place. If lifetimes are greater than one period, an evaluation process of different lot sizing possibilities causes longer calculation times. As a result, there are larger optimality gaps when there is a limit on calculation times (Pahl et al., 2011). A multi-criteria lot sizing and scheduling model with the food industry (yoghurt) as an example is proposed by Amorim et al. (2011) incorporating the IT formulation (4). Despite the work provided in this classification category, there are different aspects that have not received sufficient attention. As mentioned before, there has not been an extensive examination of multi-level structures of production processes accounting for depreciation and lifetime constraints where products may have a multi-level or complex BOM. The same is valid for industry-specific problems and (the application to) practical cases; e.g., chemical industries where WIP is subject to deterioration effects as well as real-world problem instances. A reason might be the difficulty of solving the MIPs, but the same critique regarding application to practical cases holds for the previously presented classification categories. One can argue that empirical studies need extensive data that is difficult to collect and/or not unreservedly provided by companies/industries, but is instead subject to non-disclosure agreements that prevent publication of results. Additionally, company data sets are usually very large, so that the use of MIPs becomes difficult and heuristic methods are needed to find solutions in acceptable computational times. In many cases companies may be more interested in generating solutions quickly rather than in modeling issues of depreciation and lifetime constraints; similarly, they prefer developing instruments and tools that are easily understandable and which provide effective support (e.g., “what-if” features including fast calculation of solutions) rather than “black-box” solutions from MIPs/optimization. However, mathematical models that provide general mechanisms to understand the influences of depreciation and lifetime effects can be a starting point for integrating or developing more sophisticated instruments and software. Some studies are already available on this subject, e.g., Lütke Entrup (2005), but more research is needed.As in the previous stochastic section, most stochastic production-inventory control approaches that we find in this category can be divided into CR and PR models. Recent literature is very limited and encompasses five recent approaches that account for shrinkage of inventory due to deterioration and perishability (see Table 11).The work of Al-Khedhairi and Tadj (2007) and Halim, Giri, and Chaudhuri (2009) includes recent infinite and finite time stochastic approaches for production-inventory planning while stochastic CR and PR models for single products are analyzed by Al-Khedhairi and Tadj (2007). The latter includes a two-parameter Weibull distribution for the deterioration rate assumed as shrinkage using FF. The Weibull distribution function includes the probability for deviations or expected values. The work of Al-Khedhairi and Tadj (2007) and Halim et al. (2009) includes recent infinite and finite time stochastic approaches for production-inventory planning while stochastic CR and PR models for single products are analyzed by Al-Khedhairi and Tadj (2007). The latter includes a two-parameter Weibull distribution for the deterioration rate assumed as shrinkage using FF. The Weibull distribution function includes the probability for deviations or expected values. A stochastic EPQ formulation reflecting an unreliable production system that might produce defective items subject to perishability in inventory is proposed by Halim et al. (2009). The production system shifts from an in-control state to an out-of-control state, where produced defective items are characterized by fuzzy numbers or random variables that follow an exponential distribution with fuzzy parameters. Inventory shrinkage due to perishability is expressed via FF.We find stochastic finite time horizon approaches in the work of Bounkhel, Tadj, and Hedjar (2008), Mahapatra and Maiti (2006), Akkerman, van Donk, and Gaalman (2007) formulated as CR as well as PR models with perishability. Variable production rates are studied in Bounkhel et al. (2008). The work of Mahapatra and Maiti (2006) includes uncertain production preparation times modeled as fuzzy numbers, as well as related setup costs depending on the preparation time. Despite the inclusion of setup costs, a single item is taken into account by Mahapatra and Maiti (2006), so that the setup costs are cycle-dependent, but not product-related. The approach regards cost minimization as well as multi-objective functions together with marketing investments to enhance demand. One of the few references including multiple production stages is provided by Akkerman et al. (2007). The authors present a simulation study of a two-stage production planning and scheduling system including capacity and lifetime restrictions of items in intermediate storage (WIP). They define different performance criteria, i.e., flow times, makespan, unfinished orders, and the amount of waste. Wastage is defined by calculating the difference between the current point in the cycle less the fill date of a storage place (e.g. a tank). It needs to be greater than a maximum time interval in order to present disposals. As expected, results show that the setup frequency of items has an effect on the amount of waste.The final assembly of orders/jobs, their packaging, distribution to different warehouses is the task of the outbound logistics system; see Fig. 1. The physical distribution to distribution centers, wholesalers, or customers is a complex problem spanning all planning levels from strategic to operational planning. Decisions range from where to place warehouses to transshipment decisions to satisfy ad hoc demand. In case of multiple shops, transshipments of items subject to perishability can be effective in avoiding shortages as well as preventing inventory becoming outdated while maintaining predefined inventory levels. Additionally, if transportation of transshipments is integrated in regular deliveries, no increased transportation costs occur. Problems that might arise encompass excess inventories, flawed inventory transshipments, shortages due to incorrect inventory data, and/or ad hoc priority orders. Technologies like RFID may support the monitoring problem by providing real-time data of inventories (Kärkkäinen, 2003). Therefore, distribution logistics involving inventory management is closely related to the consideration of multiple warehouses and supply chain design. Accordingly, the examination of JIT deliveries is mainly studied in supply chain contexts and thus discussed in Section 3.6. Section 3.4 deals with multiple warehouses and can be considered a part of final inventory, assembly, and delivery. For the sake of clarity, we dedicate a separate section to it.Generally and as stated by Bilgen and Günther (2010), the first step to integrate production and distribution planning is to account for transportation volumes between locations and to determine the number of vehicles needed to deliver assigned volumes. MIP approaches in that sense are proposed by Özdamar and Yazgac (1999) and heuristics for solution finding by Boudia, Louly, and Prins (2008). A fairly recent review on production–distribution models is provided by Chen (2004), but without the consideration of limited lifetimes or depreciation. The integration of depreciation or lifetime constraints of items is very scarce in this classification category. Issues of managing the distribution of deteriorating items such as food regarding safety, quality, and sustainability are highlighted by Akkerman, Farahani, and Grunow (2010) and Rong, Akkerman, and Grunow (2011). The inclusion of storage tanks as buffers for WIP is examined in a simulation study provided by Akkerman et al. (2007) with stochastic influences as described in the previous section. Integrated planning regarding consumer goods is taken into account by Bilgen and Günther (2010), however, without explicitly accounting for depreciation or lifetime constraints of items. The authors propose a block planning approach that includes the scheduling of blocks in a cyclical pattern where the blocks have a predetermined sequence of orders, but can have variable sizes; see also Entrup et al. (2005) for a block planning approach. A lifetime-dependent pricing component is incorporated in the multi-objective function of the block planning approach proposed by Lütke Entrup (2005). In the work of Rong et al. (2011), the product quality dependent on storage and transportation characteristics, e.g., duration and temperature is examined. Nevertheless, the authors limit their study to a single product, so that effects of capacity restrictions and/or sequencing are not accounted for. Due to the supply chain setting, we also consider this work in Section 3.6. Despite the references regarding multiple warehouses and supply chain planning, we note that we did not find references accounting for integrated production–distribution planning including lifetime constraints.Final assembly and delivery become more complex in case of more than one storage facility with different environmental conditions; e.g., diverse depreciation rates. In the literature, the prevailing practice is to consider two warehouses, the own warehouse (OW) with limited capacity and a rented warehouse (RW) that generally charges higher inventory costs. Items are first stored at the OW. Overflows go to the RW where they are retrieved with priority in order to keep renting costs reduced. Generally, a per unit rent cost for each batch of items stored is taken into account. But different assumptions might be true in practice; e.g., RWs with specialized services could achieve and offer lower inventory charges due to learning effects of trained personnel and economies of scale deriving from high volumes or high(er) overall competition in the market.The integration of positive logistic times and costs are rare in recent modeling approaches considered in this section. The same is valid for multi-level approaches and multiple product types. Because literature on this issue together with depreciation and lifetime restriction is very rare, we do not include subsections for infinite/finite and deterministic/stochastic approaches, but instead mention them in Table 12and in the text.Marketing or financial aspects like discounting and time value of money (e.g., Hsieh, Dye, & Ouyang, 2008; Yang, 2004) in a two warehouse setting are important issues, as they influence replenishment from partners down the supply chain and, therefore, might contribute to the bullwhip effect (Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997). However, depreciation can degrade related price advantages (e.g., Dye, Ouyang, & Hsieh, 2007c), so that ordering increased quantities to ensure discounts cease to be attractive. Effects of discounting in a two-warehouse infinite-time deterministic setting are examined by Hsieh et al. (2008), allowing for complete backlogging. Different perishability rates with major rates for the RW are assumed. Exponentially distributed deterioration rates as well as permissible delay in payments are studied by Chung and Huang (2006). We are aware of a single work providing dynamic settings, i.e. Yang (2004). The authors account for shortages that are completely backlogged assuming that each cycle begins with shortages, but ends without. Effects of inflation are considered together with superior inventory costs in the RW in comparison to the OW. The model gives less expensive plans if the inflation rate is greater than zero. Partial backlogging allowed in all cycles is included by Pal, Das, Panda, and Bhunia (2005). The authors account for positive transportation costs of items from the RW to the OW, but do not take into account positive transportation times. One recent stochastic approach is considering two warehouses given by a set-covering location model for a deteriorating, as well as an ameliorating item, including positive transportation costs (Hwang, 2004). The aim of the model is to determine the number of warehouses, so that the probability that each customer is covered is below a certain value.The work reviewed so far abstracts the handling of spoiled items such that these can be repaired instead of being disposed. In many situations, it is economically reasonable to rework deteriorated products in order to reuse them for production, e.g., if rework times are significantly smaller than regular production times or raw materials are relatively expensive. Many companies are concerned about their responsibilities with respect to sustainability driven by different factors, e.g., reactive regulatory reasons and/or proactive strategic and competitive advantages. Besides, legislation in an increasing number of countries places the responsibility for environmentally safe disposal of end-of-life products primarily on the producer. Moreover, governments tend to increase taxes on raw materials to motivate companies to enhance recycling activities. We distinguish external and internal reverse logistics (see also Fig. 1): the external reverse logistics system deals with used items returning from external sources (customers or retailers), whereas the internal reverse logistics system treats parts and products that deteriorate while waiting. Items can be reworked either on machines of the regular production system which is named in-line processing or on other machines parallel to the production system named off-line processing. The majority of models in the literature including deterioration or perishability assume in-line processing together with a one-by-one policy where a batch of regular production follows a batch of rework. For a review on rework see Flapper, Fransoo, Broekmeulen, and Inderfurth (2002). An overview on research on green SCM is made available by Srivastava (2007).In the literature, actions regarding item recovery are frequently discussed under the headline of the broad field of reverse logistics. Many terms are used in this context, e.g., rework, remanufacturing, and recycling. For instance, the term rework includes recovery actions required to transform products that do not meet pre-specified quality standards (anymore) in a way that they fulfill the quality requirements (Inderfurth, Lindner, & Rachaniotis, 2005; Teunter & Flapper, 2003). In general, rework activities take place before items are distributed to the customer. Reasons for rework include unreliable production processes, where out-of-control production systems produce defective items (Flapper et al., 2002). On the other hand, the term remanufacturing encompasses industrial processes where worn-out products that are returned from the customer are restored to like-new conditions through a series of actions; e.g., disassembly, cleaning, and refurbishment (Clegg, Williams, & Uzsoy, 1995; Guide & Spencer, 1997). In contrast, the term recycling is used for the recovery of (raw) materials from used products, e.g., the copper or electronic components. For that purpose, returned products are disassembled to regain useful materials. Hence, recycling and remanufacturing pertain rather to the external reverse logistics system whereas rework can be seen as an internal process within a company. Certainly, the definitions and use of these terms is not consistent in the literature which is also true for the definitions of external and internal reverse logistics systems. We use the definitions given above in this review and exclude external reverse logistic models treating recycling options that are extensively studied in the literature and are worthy of separate examination. Thus, we refer the interested reader to Dekker, Inderfurth, van Wassenhove, and Fleischmann (2004), Fandel and Reese (2005), and Tibben-Lembke (2002) while we focus on the work that assumes deterioration on waiting items that might, but need not acquire a defect in the production system due to an out-of-control situation. While waiting in the rework inventory, they are subject to deterioration. We consider remanufacturing with the assumption that the flow of returned items may be worth reworking or need to be disposed. This flow increases the storage of reworkable items that are subject to deterioration. Assumptions considering the point of origin of reworkable inventory relates to the complexity of the system, especially when the volume of the return flows is unpredictable or subject to uncertainty (Toktay, Wein, & Zenios, 2000). Besides, returns may increase inventory costs and machine utilization, but decrease replenishment of new items and thus might be desirable; see, e.g., Pahl (2011).Generally, many models assume that a constant fraction of items in a production batch acquire a defect and can be adjusted by rework. After rework, items are assumed to regain an as-good-as-new quality so that demand may generally be satisfied either by newly produced or reworked items. Such extensions to the classical EOQ model are provided by several authors.Recent work on deterministic as well as stochastic rework with deterioration or perishability is rare which is why we do not provide separate sections for these models. The same is valid for time infinite and finite models. The distinctions are given in Table 13. However, we did not find recent literature on finite time and/or dynamic rework models, so research in this direction is necessary.Defectives that are subject to the perishability of reworkable items of a batch are modeled in an EPQ setting by Inderfurth et al. (2005) and Inderfurth, Kovalyov, Ng, and Werner (2007). The authors employ an average waiting time approach which is frequently used to avoid the monitoring of individual items, resulting in less complex formulations and solution approaches. Defective items occuring uniformly with the same percentage in each production lot are subject to perishability, so that they increase rework times and costs due to increased amounts of items waiting to be reworked. Disposal of items is not permitted. Therefore, the lifetime of items is not restricted in a sense that after passing a certain amount of time, deteriorated items cannot be reworked anymore and have to be disposed as depicted; e.g., in the fourth graph of Fig. 2. This assumption is relaxed by Inderfurth, Janiak, Kovalyov, and Werner (2006). Multiple parallel machines are taken into account by Al-Anzi, Allahverdi, and Kovalyov (2007) and multiple products including scheduling are discussed by Inderfurth et al. (2007). The authors of the latter reference assume that the same product types or groups form a lot and the problem is to find a schedule that satisfies all deadlines and minimizes overall costs.Recent models regarding stochastic rework approaches with depreciation are very rare. Recent work has been given by Teunter and Flapper (2003) where the authors propose a stochastic EPQ model with similar assumptions as in the deterministic case (Inderfurth et al., 2005; Inderfurth et al., 2007). Probabilities for the occurrence of defectives and stochastic times and cost values are assumed. The system is triggered by the necessity to rework items rather than by demand functions. Production batches are assumed to be of a fixed size, so that the aim is to find an optimal production-rework switching policy and optimal rework batch sizes, so that average profits are maximized. The disposal of non-reworkable items is allowed. The authors derive a closed-form expression for expected profits in order to calculate optimal rework batches.The objective of SCM is the effective and efficient coordination of information, material, and financial flows to minimize overall system costs or maximizing overall profits in terms of reactivity, flexibility, time constraints, and quality with the aim of satisfying final customers. We define a supply chain as a relation of at least two companies or legally independent actors that exchange materials, information and financial goods in order to add value to a product or service.Since collaboration of supply chain partners is vital in order to reduce overall supply chain costs, joint strategies are increasingly studied. Integrated production-inventory models considering the perspective of suppliers, producers and buyers show that reduced joint costs are obtained. In recent literature, the prevailing majority of approaches link EOQ and EPQ approaches. We refer to such integrated models as related EOQ or EPQ models, e.g., Tables 14 and 15. However, it frequently occurs that the costs of one supply chain partner are higher than those of another. Consequently, incentives must be incorporated into the system to share the benefits of collaborative planning. The role of revenue-sharing contracts in supply chains is discussed by Krishnan and Winter (2011) analyzing dynamic settings especially regarding downstream competition.Recent supply chain approaches mainly consider shrinkage of inventoried items due to deterioration or perishability employing FF; see Table 14. Different supply chain settings are studied encompassing 1. single suppliers and producers or single producers and buyers (Chen & Chen, 2005; Chung & Wee, 2007; Lin & Lin, 2004, 2007; Mahapatra, Das, & Maiti, 2007; Shah, Gor, & Wee, 2008; Wang, 2007; Wee & Chung, 2009), 2. single suppliers with multiple buyers (Yang & Wee, 2002, 2003), 3. multiple producers and buyers (Ahuja et al., 2007; Ekşioğlu & Jin, 2006), or three parties (Ghasimi & Gohdsi, 2009; Rau, Wu, & Wee, 2003). As shown in Table 14, the most frequent setting contains two parties: a producer and a buyer.Integrated and non-integrated approaches are studied by Mahapatra et al. (2007) considering a single-producer single-buyer supply chain where the buyer decides upon the number of replenishment quantities, so that the average replenishment costs are minimized, but which need not lead to the vendors’ optimal average production costs. The problem is formulated regarding multiple objectives. The supplier’s perspective in an infinite time horizon setting is integrated by Rau et al. (2003). The authors derive an optimal number of predetermined volumes of deliveries and order lot sizes while minimizing joint total costs. However, lead times are assumed to be negligible as well as transportation lead times and costs. JIT lot splitting in a related EPQ-supply chain model is examined by Yang and Wee (2002). The idea is to split a single order into multiple deliveries where the number of deliveries is inversely proportional to the lot size. Results show that the delivery quantity increases when the perishability rate decreases; see also Yang and Wee (2003). The costs of perishability are assumed to be constant but vary for raw materials and finished goods inventory. Shortages are not allowed, but are instead considered together with JIT deliveries and backlogging effects on downstream members of the supply chain by Rau et al. (2004); see also Yang and Wee (2003) and Lin and Lin (2004, 2007) for the integration of shortages and partial or complete backlogging.Green component-value design and remanufacturing options in a related EPQ approach with JIT deliveries are proposed by Wee and Chung (2009). Multiple products subject to perishability, quantity discounts, and time-proportional demand are studied by Chen and Chen (2005) where major and minor setup costs in a production/ordering cycle are examined. The latter can be interpreted as fixed freight fees. It is assumed that the supplier is a make-to-order producer thus using a lot-for-lot policy. Different replenishment situations with and without coordination are studied. Results show that a centralized policy together with joint replenishment is always better than any decentralized or individual policy. Effects of supply chain coordination are examined by Wang (2007), but for stock-dependent demand rates of a deteriorating item. A centralized supply chain policy is shown to be superior to decentralized planning in terms of increased profit which seems to be especially true for highly significant deterioration rates. Quality control inspections for final products that are delivered assuming JIT and positive transportation costs are treated by Chung and Wee (2007). As shown in Table 14, all cited references assume perishability modeled as shrinkage except for the work of Lin and Lin (2004).We find three recent approaches including supply chain settings in this classification category; see Table 14. An integrated distribution management system linking the tactical and the operational production level is presented by Ekşioğlu and Jin (2006). The authors assume a multi-stage supply chain for a perishable product integrated by IT (Eq. (4)) produced at multiple facilities; see also Ahuja et al. (2007) for a similar approach. Facilities have the same production capabilities, but different time-variable setups, production, inventory holding, and transportation costs. Transshipments of products between facilities/vendors or inventory holding at the retailer are not allowed which is a typical restriction in food industries where retailers are supermarkets or restaurants with limited storage space. The problem is first formulated as a MIP assuming demand to be known and, second, as a network flow model based on the multi-period single source assignment property. Small test instances are solved using CPLEX. For large test instances, a primal–dual algorithm is proposed to solve this NP-hard problem. A three level approach of a supply chain including multiple producers, warehouses, and buyers is presented by Ghasimi and Gohdsi (2009). Further features considered in the approach are JIT deliveries executed by different transportation means and related costs as well as pricing of a perishable item with a restricted lifetime. Transportation times are assumed to be negligible. As in the work of Ahuja et al. (2007), small test instances are solved using CPLEX and large ones by genetic algorithms.When demand flows are uncertain, the challenge of supply chain partners is to determine replenishment orders so as to minimize excess inventory while avoiding shortages. In this section, single-producer single-buyer supply chains are prevailing assuming continuous time horizons (Das, Roy, & Maiti, 2004; Hahn, Hwang, & Shinn, 2004; Ketzenberg & Ferguson, 2005; Shen, Lai, Leung, & Liang, 2010; Wee et al., 2006). As we did not find references examining dynamic supply chain approaches, we did not add a related column to Table 15.Fuzzy inventory control expressed in a multi-objective nonlinear problem (MONLP) is studied by Das et al. (2004) as well as the effects of encouraging buyers via price discounts on item perishability. Price-dependent and stock-dependent demand for a lifetime restricted item is investigated by Hahn et al. (2004). The value of information sharing in supply chains examining centralized and decentralized control is studied by Ketzenberg and Ferguson (2005) assuming fixed replenishment lot sizes for an item with lifetime constraints modeled via IT. Results show that supply chains accrue the greatest benefit from centralized control or information sharing if product lifetimes are short, batch sizes large, demand uncertainty rather high, and penalty costs for deviations in demand and supply increased. Perishability considerations together with imperfect quality expressed via defectives are given by Wee et al. (2006) using an infinite time model approach that spans lot sizing, production, inventory, JIT delivery, and the customer perspective. Perishability is integrated by FF as described in Eq. (1). Shen et al. (2010) cover considerations of collaborative planning, forecasting and replenishment (CPFR) in a single supplier single buyer supply chain with positive replenishment lead times. They provide mathematical formulations for the optimal replenishment policy that minimizes total costs.As we examine the business functions (Fig. 3) we see that the number of references steadily decreases with the exception of supply chain approaches. Deterministic models prevail over stochastic as well as static over dynamic approaches. We visualize the number of recent approaches in Fig. 3 that clearly shows research gaps, e.g., deterministic finite as well as stochastic infinite and finite final inventory and distribution management, deterministic or stochastic finite rework, stochastic finite approaches considering multiple warehouses, or stochastic finite supply chain approaches.The major critiques, research gaps and related challenges for future research include the following issues:1.Static approaches: The major part considers static approaches, i.e., no time-dynamic effects of planning are taken into consideration,Shrinkage rates: The major part of approaches study static deterministic cases including related mathematical formulations (EOQ, EPQ) deriving the optimal lot size and replenishment time. Deterioration or perishability frequently integrated using a (fixed) shrinkage rate is incorporated as a further constraint, but not the focus of examination. Most work provides some sensitivity analysis, but does not study different shrinkage rates and their influences on resulting plans, so that managerial insights, if provided, remain somewhat fuzzy. The major part of the considered literature integrates shrinkage due to deterioration or perishability into their models. Lifetime constraints are rarely incorporated. Few approaches explicitly include the shelf life of products (e.g., agri-food) in their models (Ahumada & Villalobos, 2009).Lack of setup times and costs: Most references regard a single product, i.e., effects of setup times and costs that might be sequence-dependent are not taken into account. We note that there is generally not much research on multiple items considering setup times and costs, particularly in dynamic settings. This might be due to the significant complexity observed in discrete dynamic settings. As such situations prevail in practice, future research should include multiple items and related problems such as sequence-dependent setup times and costs, and/or multi-level production structures.Industrial/Empirical studies: There is little work on industrial cases, i.e., to the best of our knowledge industrial (empirical) studies including related data are rare. Furthermore, only few references include real-world applications or problems and thus do not consider related industrial specifications.Combined time levels: Most references regard the tactical planning level thus abstracting from the operational level, but time components such as waiting times, setup times, processing rates/times, and transportation times are not explicitly considered. How to optimize plans for supply chains regarding replenishment or transportation times? How to change plans if unexpected events happen? How does the industry deal with such problems and how do they react to unpredicted situations? These are questions that are not responded by or included in related mathematical models, so that they cannot provide answers to planners or help to enhance supporting planning tools.We found only few models considering positive replenishment lead times. In this regard, most references provide stochastic infinite as well as finite time approaches. Surprisingly, positive lead times due to waiting in the production process are not examined. Queuing theory that provides formulations for situations with more than one production resource might be employed to address this gap. We find approaches determining optimal production rates for perishable or deteriorating items incorporated via FF in infinite time settings. Nevertheless, it might be useful to consider production rates that are adjusted in case of high workloads (e.g., due to demand or bottlenecks) or short product lifetimes in dynamic settings in order to avoid disposals. Recent references on such considerations are not yet available.Combined business functions: Most reviewed models regard a specific business function. Models linking business functions are very rare. The combination of functions (e.g., production–distribution models) has been inadequately developed over the last decade; see Ahumada and Villalobos (2009) for a review regarding the agri-food supply chain.Collaborative planning: Research on supply chains shows enhanced attention including a variety of settings regarding multiple up- and downstream partners. EOQ and EPQ-related approaches mainly examine different joint replenishment policies employing the effects of pricing or JIT. Dynamic approaches are furthermore available formulated as network flow or multi-period single sourcing (MPSS) problems. However, positive lead times are not considered for simplifying reasons. Collaborative and joint supply chain planning regarding global partners and locations might include such important issues on timing in order to enhance plans and avoid wastage due to deterioration, perishability, and lifetime constraints on items.Effects of resource utilization through the rework of deteriorated/perished items is not extensively explored. If rework is executed on the same machines as regular production, it could be expected that more items deteriorate due to waiting time effects in front of production resources. Queuing approaches in this regard might be a good help to provide some (theoretical) answers.Effects of disruptive events especially regarding transportation between supply chain partners has not received sufficient attention especially when goods are subject to depreciation. Port-of-entries such as container seaports or airport hubs are vulnerable transportation nodes. Their closures resulting from unexpected events such as natural desasters, labor disruptions, shortages, or security incidents (Lewis, Erera, Nowak, & White, 2013), severely affect the quality of transported items. Such events, their effects on item quality, and strategic contingency plans for such events are rarely provided in the literature; see, e.g., Lewis et al. (2013) and the literature therein.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we provided an extensive discussion on depreciation effects and lifetime constraints including a classification scheme of approaches that grouped mathematical models regarding the quality of information and with respect to the assumed time horizon. We considered relevant company and supply chain functions. Further interest was directed to rework or remanufacturing of items that might acquire a defect in production and deteriorate over time while waiting to be reworked. We extended our scope to strategies for supply chain planning in regard to deterioration, perishability, and lifetime constraints of items.The critical evaluation shows research gaps that need to be filled regarding aspects like sequence-dependent setup times and costs or multi-level structures of products that deteriorate on internal processing levels. Such aspects are important in many industries like the chemical processing industry and food industries where depreciation effects significantly influence the business outcomes.