@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interior analysis of the green product mix solution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Interior analysis (IA) attributes cause/effect to loss in profit due to emission controls.IA identifies least detrimental step-by-step one-at-a-time accommodation of controls.IA reveals aspects of the product mix solution set that are not otherwise evident.IA results assist the framing of implementation strategies for restricting emissions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Linear programming,Product mix problem,Implementation strategy,Sustainability,0/1 Mixed integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When modeling optimal product mix under emission restrictions produces a solution with unacceptable level of profit, analyst is moved to investigate the cause(s). Interior analysis (IA) is proposed for this purpose. With IA, analyst can investigate the impact of accommodating emission controls in step-by-step one-at-a-time manner and in doing so track how profit and other important features of product mix degrade and to which emission control enforcements its diminution may be attributed. In this way, analyst can assist manager in identifying implementation strategies. Although IA is presented within context of a linear programming formulation of the green product mix problem, its methodology may be applied to other modeling frameworks. Quantity dependent penalty rates and transformations of emissions to forms with or without economic value are included in the modeling and illustrations of IA.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Let greening product mix refer to the manner in which the environmental impact (e.g., carbon footprint or volume of CO2 emissions) of production is incorporated within the mathematical modeling of what, how, and how much to produce. It should reflect the organization’s intention to (i) restrict or eliminate the impact quantities and (ii) account for their economic consequences. In the modeling, the greening may take form in a variety of ways. It may appear as restrictions on the volume of certain emissions and other by-products of production; restrictions that relate to energy consumption or a preferred mix of energy sources, e.g., coal-fired, hydro, nuclear, etc.; charges that reflect penalties associated with emission generation and disposal; costs associated with emission treatment; and a representation that reflects the organization’s participation in the trading of unused amounts of a regulated emission allowance. The exchange is known as cap-and-trade and in some situations a trading forum exists, see Galbraith (2013), Jaehn and Letmathe (2010), and Letmathe and Balakrishnan (2005). Modeling green product mix may also include the transformation of the impact quantities to environmentally less harmful and possibly marketable commodities and products. The transformations may occur within the operations environment in which the mix products are produced and may compete for use of the resources therein.Modeling product mix under emission restrictions and a single measure or objective of what is best is generally straightforward. However, the optimal product mix that accommodates all sought after emission controls may exclude flagship product(s); result in product volumes that may challenge maintenance of market share or be so disparate that it creates problems in moving product through the various fabrication processes; upset product/process fit; call for underutilization of expensive resources; or most importantly result in a prohibitive reduction in the optimizing objective. Clearly, the value of the objective under emission restrictions cannot be better than the value of the unrestricted product mix solution.When the modeling produces a green product mix solution with prohibitive results, the following is proposed for assessing cause. Suppose information was available that would allow the analyst to identify the results of successive one-at-a-time accommodations of the emission restrictions within the green product mix model of interest. By stepping through the greening in this manner, the analyst can track and attribute cause and effect to the diminution in the objective (e.g., profitability) with each accommodation. At some point, a prohibitive reduction in the objective will emerge and the causative emission restriction identified. This is referred to as the tipping point. Assuming the restrictions do not uniformly impact the objective, a reasonable way to begin the investigation is the identification of the single least detrimental emission restriction to incorporate in the model, followed by the least detrimental pair that includes the least detrimental single emission restriction, and to proceed similarly until all emission restrictions are accounted for. The necessary information for proceeding in this manner is found among the solutions to all subproblems of the green product mix problem in which the emission restrictions are accommodated one at a time, in pairs, triples, etc. Each subproblem represents a scenario of specified inclusions and exclusions among the set of emission restrictions under study, a subset scenario. The generation and use of the subproblem scenarios constitute interior analysis (IA), the subject of this paper. In the literature of green product mix modeling, this method of investigation is not well developed.The results of IA may be useful in a variety of ways. For example, emergence of the tipping point may move the decision maker to consider alternate implementation scenarios. The merit of scenarios without the offending emission restriction and its combination with restrictions that compound the loss in the objective may be considered in formulating a strategy of partial implementation. Although some emission controls would not be explicitly enforced in these scenarios, their proximity to desired targets may be acceptable. Or the identified emission restriction(s) may be voluntary not mandated and as such postponable and eliminated from current consideration. The identification of the tipping point may also help the analyst assess the magnitude of needed offsets to the loss in the objective due to imposition of the emission restrictions.In other ways, examination of all subsets of emission controls using IA has analytical value. They may reveal features of the green solution set that would not otherwise be evident. For example, the subproblem results provide insight to the manner in which the product mix quantities vary with the emission restrictions. Enforcement of some emission controls individually or in combination with others may eliminate some products from the mix and drive others to their upper bounds. In other situations, the values of certain product mix quantities may be invariant in any scenario of emission control. They are robust with respect to the greening.In this paper, IA is illustrated within the framework of a linear programming (LP) formulation of a green product mix problem. Although the LP form of a green product mix model is not the totality of representations, it is the form of many mix models discussed in the literature. Its form is easily understood and amenable to the editing that is required for streaming all possible scenarios of emission control. A procedure for streaming the scenarios and organizing the results for IA is presented in this article.Without loss of generality, emissions will refer collectively to the gases, solid wastes, effluents, scrap, etc. that result from production and whose return to the environment in untreated state would be harmful, illegal, or perceived as poor citizenship. Transformed emissions include recycled materials, recovered compounds, treated effluents, composited by-products, and other forms.The rest of the paper is organized in the following manner. Literature relating to greening, its place in product mix determination, and strategies for implementation are reviewed in the next section. The formal presentation of the methodology of IA appears in Section 3 and illustrated with examples in Section 4. The paper concludes with summary and remarks in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
When the green product mix solution produces adverse outcomes, interior analysis provides means for investigating the cause. Interior analysis was presented as a tool of analysis and illustrated with green product mix models that incorporated several contemporary formulation innovations. Through the illustrations, demonstration was given to the manner in which the step-by-step one-at-a-time accommodation of emission controls allows the analyst to track how the product mix feature(s) of interest degrades and to which emission control enforcements it may be attributed. Based on the results of IA for the examples, suggested implementation strategies were discussed. For ease of illustration and without loss of applicability, IA was illustrated with LP formulations of a real green product mix problem.Given the environment of emission regulation, to have one restriction such as (1.12) represent emission control is too limiting. As shown with (1) and (2), product mix modeling has the capacity to accommodate emission control in a variety of forms in addition to volume restrictions. Among others, they include a scheme for selling and procuring emission allowance in an emission trading forum, incorporation of penalties and costs based on volume, as well as converting/treating emissions within the product mix production environment. Whatever the forms of control incorporated in the modeling, IA provides means for investigating their individual impact on mix determination as well as the effect of their interactions in pairs, triples, etc. This approach to post-optimality investigation of product mix modeling has not been well developed in the literature. Interior analysis is proposed as a tool of analysis to complement the methodology of product mix determination.Further research should be devoted to identifying the feasibility of implicitly eliminating inferior scenarios in the enumeration scheme; use of IA for green product mix models with multiple objectives and fuzzy modeling features; and the applicability of IA to other allocation models.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.02.029.Accommodation of quantity dependent piecewise linear emission penalties.Subset enumeration scheme.