@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
How should process capabilities be combined to leverage supplier relationships competitively?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Theorizes the balancing and complementing effects of process alignment and partnering flexibility.Examines the impacts on both competitive performance and performance risks.Survey data from 318 manufacturing firms in the U.S.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Process capabilities,Competitive performance,Performance risk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Two process capabilities have been identified in the operations management literature to leverage supplier relationships for competitive performance: the ability to continuously improve processes with suppliers (process alignment) and the ability to make changes to these relationships (partnering flexibility). While firms may need both capabilities to be successful, it is unclear what strategy should be used to combine these two seemingly contradictory process capabilities. Using data collected from 318 manufacturing firms on a focal firm’s process capabilities to manage supplier relationships, we examine the performance impacts of two dimensions of a particular strategy: balancing (focusing on achieving a close match between the two process capabilities) and complementing (focusing on creating synergy between the two process capabilities). Our results indicate that the balancing dimension has a much stronger effect on a firm’s competitive performance than the complementing dimension. Also, when a firm pursues a high balance and strong complements strategy (combining high levels of both process capabilities), it is able to reduce its competitive performance risks more than when it pursues a high balance and weak complements strategy (combining low levels of both capabilities) or when it implements unbalanced strategies that emphasize either process alignment or partnering flexibility (combining low levels of one capability with high levels of the other). We conclude by discussing the theoretical contributions and practical guidelines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Global competition, the ability to integrate information technology and process resources across firms, availability of information in supplier and customer markets, customer-focused marketplaces, and shortened product life cycles have led to a major change in competition from firm versus firm to supply chain versus supply chain (Grieger, 2003; Gunasekaran & Ngai, 2004). As firms like Wal-Mart, Cisco, and Apple have emerged as dominant leaders in their respective industries through effective supplier management, there are calls in both practice and the operations research community to understand what capabilities firms need to derive competitive advantages through supplier management (Grieger, 2003; Otto & Kotzab, 2003; Samaddar, Nargundkar, & Daley, 2006). In contemporary markets, firms usually need to interact simultaneously with a group of suppliers to achieve their strategic goals (Lavie, 2007). For example, Apple’s iPod consists of more than 400 components, all of which are developed, manufactured, and assembled through a global network of suppliers (Linden, Kraemer, & Dedrick, 2009). Firms also need to be able to exploit and explore supplier relationships to access complementary resources and capabilities (Burke, Carrillo, & Vakharia, 2007; Iida, 2012). Continuing with the Apple example, the company has dynamically managed supplier relationships for its iPod product line to access component innovations (e.g., color LCD displays, wireless networks, and solid state drives), introduce 110 model variants between 2001 and 2009, and excel in supply chain execution. The required dynamism to exploit and explore supplier relationships makes developing process capabilities to manage supplier relationships a pivotal challenge for a firm’s operations strategy.Past research on exploiting and exploring supplier capabilities has identified two key process capabilities to leverage supplier relationships: (1) process alignment, which is defined as a firm’s ability to coordinate interdependent activities and optimize operations with its suppliers (Clark & Stoddard, 1996; Jarvenpaa & Stoddard, 1998; Tang & Rai, 2012) and (2) partnering flexibility, which is defined as a firm’s ability to adjust its supplier portfolio for a product line (Shapiro & Varian, 1999). Aligning processes with suppliers promotes supply chain integration, reduces information asymmetries, and enhances economies of scale and scope (Frohlich & Westbrook, 2001; Gulati, Nohria, & Zaheer, 2000). Partnering flexibility provides firms with access to new information, complementary expertise, new markets, and innovative technologies (Shapiro & Varian, 1999). While the performance consequences of both process alignment and partnering flexibility have been examined individually (Rosenzweig, Roth, & Dean, 2003; Zhao, Huo, Flynn, & Yeung, 2008), very few empirical studies have simultaneously examined these two seemingly contradictory process capabilities in terms of supplier management. One notable exception is Kristal et al.’s (2010) study, which investigates the performance implications of the simultaneous pursuit of explorative and exploitative supply chain practices. However, to the best of our knowledge, different strategies to combine process alignment and partnering flexibility and the resulting competitive performance implications have not been examined in previous work. To address this void in our understanding, we identify the following two dimensions of an operations strategy that can be used to combine process alignment and partnering flexibility: (1) the balancing dimension (a firm’s orientation to maintain a close relative match between process alignment and partnering flexibility) and (2) the complementing dimension (a firm’s orientation to focus on the synergy between the two process capabilities)2Our conceptualization of the “balancing” and “complementing” dimensions of a firm’s operations strategy to combine process alignment and partnering flexibility is based on the fit concepts proposed by Venkatraman (1989). As fit can have multiple meanings and functional forms (Venkatraman, 1989), we focus on (1) fit as moderation or complements (where the influence of a given variable on an outcome variable is a function of a third variable) and (2) fit as balance or match (where the difference in the levels of the two variables influences an outcome variable). A similar conceptualization was adopted by Cao, Gedajlovic, and Zhang (2009) to examine the effects of “balancing” and “complementing” a firm’s exploitative and explorative activities on its performance.2(Cao et al., 2009). We evaluate the impact of these two dimensions of a firm’s process capability strategy on competitive performance, which is defined as a firm’s achievement of its objectives in relation to the external environment (Ferrier, 2001; Porter, 1980b). We also explore how performance risk—defined as the variation in competitive performance while adjusting for the mean (March & Shapira, 1987)—is impacted by the different combinations of the balancing and complementing dimensions (high balance and weak complements, unbalanced relationship with emphasis on either process alignment or partnering flexibility, and high balance and strong complements).By focusing on the two dimensions of a firm’s operations strategy to combine process alignment and partnering flexibility and investigating the causal mechanisms of each of these dimensions that influence competitive performance, we contribute to our understanding of how supplier relationships can be leveraged for competitive performance (Kouvelis, Chambers, & Wang, 2006; Swink, Narasimhan, & Kim, 2005). Using data collected on a firm’s management of supplier relationships for a major product line, we identify the competitive performance consequences of balancing and complementing process alignment and partnering flexibility. We develop a rich picture of the implications of strategies to combine process alignment and partnering flexibility by considering not only the means but also the risks of competitive performance. Not only do our findings surface the competitive implications of developing individual process capabilities, but they also highlight the strategies used to combine process capabilities, raising important managerial implications for supplier management.Firms function as systems of interlinked processes whose capabilities have a significant impact on strategy formation and competitive performance (Benner & Tushman, 2003). While intra-firm processes have received significant attention for some time, the importance of inter-firm processes to manage relationships has grown rapidly as of late due to globalization, intense competition, and dynamic environments. In fact, supplier relationships have increasingly been considered strategic assets that considerably influence a firm’s performance (Hult, Ketchen, & Nichols, 2002; Johnson, Sohi, & Grewal, 2004).We draw on the process management literature to understand the process capabilities required to effectively manage supplier relationships. The literature provides insights into approaches to reduce the variation and increase the efficiency of inter-firm processes with suppliers (e.g., Ittner & Larcker, 1997). It also cautions that a singular focus on process improvement can constrain a firm’s innovation and flexibility. Two distinct process capabilities—process alignment and partnering flexibility—have been considered to be important for the effective management of supplier relationships (Krajewski & Wei, 2001; Shapiro & Varian, 1999). We describe these two process capabilities below.Process alignment aims to improve business-to-business exchange processes by facilitating collaboration with partners. For example, higher levels of process alignment with partners should enable firms to improve the coordination of material movement (Srinivasan, Kekre, & Mukhopadhyay, 1994), which can reduce transaction costs, lower lead times, reduce order fulfillment errors, and increase inventory turnover rates (Malone & Crowston, 1994; Rai, Patnayakuni, & Seth, 2006; Simchi-Levi, Kaminsky, & Simchi-Levi, 2007). Additionally, improved process alignment with partners should reduce the cycle time for cash conversion (Magretta, 1998) and enhance profitability. Indeed, best-practice firms, such as Cisco, have fine-tuned processes with their supplier networks to increase productivity and reduce costs (Kraemer & Dedrick, 2002).With the increasing prevalence of modular design in product development, supply chains are shifting to a more flexible and disaggregated form (Schilling & Steensma, 2001; Zenger & Hesterly, 1997). Partnering flexibility refers to a firm’s ability to terminate, add, or replace existing partners with new partners in its supplier portfolio for a major product line (Tang & Rai, 2012). In a dynamic environment, changing customer preferences and shorter product lifecycles require firms to deliver new services or customer-specific add-ons and to modify standard products within short periods of time and at reasonable costs. To achieve these objectives, firms frequently need to adapt their supplier portfolios by adding, replacing or terminating partners to bring in fresh ideas, valuable knowledge, and innovative technologies that they themselves cannot replicate in a timely manner or obtain from existing partners (Burke et al., 2007; Rai & Tang, 2010; Shapiro & Varian, 1999). This market responsiveness also requires them to have the process capability to source the same resources and capabilities at better market prices when competition drives costs down (Hoetker, 2006; Wagner & Friedl, 2007). As such, partnering flexibility enables a firm to overcome the resource rigidities that develop when its relationship portfolio is not renewed and when a firm is over-embedded in long-term relationships (Uzzi, 1997).While the performance impacts of each of these two process capabilities have been examined in the literature (Koufteros, Vonderembse, & Jayaram, 2005; Rosenzweig et al., 2003), we know little about the competitive performance implications when these capabilities are pursued together. Even less is known about the different strategies to combine these two process capabilities. We address this void by (1) examining how different strategies to combine these two process capabilities affect a firm’s competitive performance (Fig. 1) and (2) comparing the competitive performance risk of firms that adopt different combination strategies (Fig. 2).While process alignment and partnering flexibility can be sources of competitive advantage, it is challenging for a firm to simultaneously develop and maintain both capabilities due to their differing strategic focuses and contradicting resource requirements (Boyer & Lewis, 2002). However, research on interrelated but conflicting capabilities (e.g., exploitation and exploration in organizational learning (March, 1991) and efficiency and flexibility in supply chain practice (Kristal, Huang, & Roth, 2010)) suggests that firms enjoy long-term competitive performance if they can manage the trade-offs between the conflicting capabilities and maintain a dual focus. Extending this logic, we argue that firms should not only pursue both process alignment and partnering flexibility together but should also carefully design strategies to combine these two process capabilities to competitively benefit from supplier relationships. We draw on Cao et al. (2009) to identify balancing and complementing as the two dimensions of the strategy that can be used to combine the two process capabilities and examine the impacts on competitive performance.The balancing dimension focuses on achieving a close match in process alignment and partnering flexibility. The underlying logic for the balancing dimension is to mitigate the potential risks in relationship management. Specifically, when a firm emphasizes process alignment over partnering flexibility, it faces the risk of being over-embedded in existing relationships in the long run. By focusing on process alignment, the firm creates strong bonds with its suppliers (Zaheer & Venkatraman, 1994). The close coordination achieved through process alignment helps the focal firm to effectively bundle resources and develop joint capabilities with its suppliers to create competitive advantage (Uzzi & Lancaster, 2003). However, to facilitate the exchange of idiosyncratic resources and to achieve the tight coordination of processes with suppliers, firms often need to invest in relationship-specific assets (Carter & Hodgson, 2006). As firms increase relationship-specific investments to align processes with existing suppliers to a greater extent, they also become less flexible to enter new relationships, or they become locked into current supplier relationships (Narasimhan, Nair, Griffith, Arlbjørn, & Bendoly, 2009; Shapiro & Varian, 1999).Conversely, when a firm emphasizes partnering flexibility over process alignment, it risks failing to appropriate returns from relationships with suppliers. In dynamic environments, the focal firm needs to be able to add new relationships, replace suppliers that no longer meet needs, and exit relationships with diminishing value (Harrigan & Newman, 1990). Cultivating partnering flexibility allows firms to make such adjustments with relative ease. However, searching for suppliers and establishing relationships consume valuable resources, and continuously changing suppliers without aligning processes with others makes it difficult for the focal firm to reap the benefits of close collaboration (Dyer & Singh, 1998). Indeed, failure to exploit the competencies of relationships negatively influences competitive performance (Das, Narasimhan, & Talluri, 2006; Dyer, 1996).Thus, balancing process alignment and partnering flexibility enables a firm to mitigate the risks associated with each of the two capabilities, leading to higher competitive performance. We then hypothesize.H1aThe extent of balance between process alignment and partnering flexibility in a firm has a positive effect on its competitive performance.Unlike the balancing dimension that focuses on the tension between process alignment and partnering flexibility, the complementing dimension emphasizes that process alignment and partnering flexibility can be supportive of one another and that each may help leverage the effects of the other (Kristal et al., 2010). Specifically, high process alignment can develop a firm’s effectiveness in exploring new relationships and in developing resources to support changes in relationships. As suggested by the literature on absorptive capacity, the reinforcing effect of process alignment on the competitive benefits of partnering flexibility can be attributed to organizational renewal and the distribution of production know-how among relationships (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Ferdows, 2006). Aligning processes with existing suppliers enables a firm to learn how to leverage suppliers’ resources and capabilities, which equips it to initiate various configurations of these resources and capabilities and to improve collaboration with new partners.Similarly, proficiency in partnering flexibility can enhance the performance gains from process alignment. The new knowledge and complementary resources that a firm accesses from new partnerships can be applied to improve collaboration with existing suppliers. Furthermore, the firm’s ability to switch partners as necessary can also serve as a control mechanism for existing partners so they can be more cooperative in collaboration (Bae & Gargiulo, 2004). In summary, we propose that firms can achieve enhanced competitive performance by leveraging the synergy process alignment and partnering flexibility. Thus, we posit.H1bThe extent of complementarity between process alignment and partnering flexibility in a firm has a positive effect on its competitive performance.We now examine how strategic choices to combine process alignment and partnering flexibility affect the risk of competitive performance. We conceptualize the risk of competitive performance as the variation in competitive performance adjusted for the mean (March & Shapira, 1987).3To remove the effect of scale of competitive performance, we use the variance-to-mean ratio so that the intra-group variations in competitive performance are comparable; this approach is similar to He and Wong (2004) and Im and Rai (2008).3Specifically, we consider four strategic choices: (1) high balance and weak complements (low levels of both process capabilities), (2) unbalanced capabilities with high process alignment, (3) unbalanced capabilities with high partnering flexibility, and (4) high balance and strong complements (high levels of both process capabilities).Previous research suggests that continuously improving processes increases efficiency, reduces costs, and usually results in higher profits (Hammer & Stanton, 1999; Harry & Schroeder, 2000). In our context, higher process alignment with suppliers enables firms to reduce transaction costs, lower lead times, decrease order fulfillment errors, and increase inventory turnover (Malone & Crowston, 1994), which, in turn, leads to competitive performance.Compared to the reliable returns from process alignment, the returns from partnering flexibility should have a more diffused effect because of the greater uncertainty involved in searching for and establishing new relationships (March, 1991). First, uncertainty arises from the market due to incomplete information and lack of verifiable information about potential partners, which makes the process of finding potential partners and initiating relationships more complex. When partners are selected, changes in the marketplace may reduce the value of these newly established relationships or may even make them obsolete. Second, uncertainty can arise from the relationship itself, as the focal firm has little previous experience with how to cooperate with the new partner to obtain key resources and capabilities from the new partner. These uncertainties associated with adapting a supplier portfolio diffuse the returns that can be derived from partnering flexibility. Following this logic, we expect firms that emphasize partnering flexibility to experience higher performance risk than those that emphasize process alignment. Thus, we hypothesize.H2Firms that adopt an unbalanced strategy with emphasis on process alignment exhibit lower competitive performance risk than firms that adopt an unbalanced strategy with emphasis on partnering flexibility.As we discussed in the previous section, balancing or complementing can provide synergistic benefits to competitive performance that go beyond the effects of individual process alignment and partnering flexibility and can mitigate risks embedded in each supplier management capability. Since the balancing dimension and the complementing dimension generate different benefits in supplier management, we expect that firms can obtain better competitive performance with limited risks if they achieve both high balance and strong complements when combining process alignment and partnering flexibility. A similar logic has recently been put forth in two organizational contexts: (1) in the context of new product development, He and Wong (2004) found that firms maintaining high balance and strong complements of exploitation and exploration activities in technological innovation exhibited a lower performance risk for sales and (2) in the context of logistics sourcing, Im and Rai (2008) found that buyers and suppliers who adopted high balance and strong complements of exploratory and exploitative knowledge sharing exhibited lower performance risks in terms of the benefits realized from the dyadic relationship. The core argument in these two studies is that the seemingly contradictory activities underlying local search (exploitation) and global search (exploration) are in fact reinforcing, and when pursued together, they generate synergistic effects that reduce performance risk.Similarly, a process closely aligned with business partners can create efficiency benefits in a stable environment, while partnering flexibility enables a firm to cope with market shifts and changes in customer preferences (Shapiro & Varian, 1999; Uzzi & Lancaster, 2003). As it takes time for firms to develop these two process capabilities, only those firms that balance and complement process alignment and partnering flexibility can capture emerging opportunities and mitigate risk. For instance, in the 1980s, Hewlett–Packard (HP) set up a well aligned supply chain in Vancouver when the firm started its ink-jet printer business. When demand for these printers grew in other parts of the world, HP had the capability to swiftly partner with local suppliers in Spain and Singapore to cater to new markets. By balancing and complementing process alignment and partnering flexibility to manage supplier relationships, HP remained the leader in the highly competitive printer business by capturing emerging opportunities and controlling costs with reduced fluctuation in performance (Lee, 2004). The above discussion suggests that balancing and complementing process alignment and partnering flexibility should enable firms to lower the risk of competitive performance to a greater extent than firms that only emphasize partnering flexibility, leading us to hypothesize.H3Firms that adopt a high balance and strong complements strategy to combine process alignment with partnering flexibility exhibit lower competitive performance risk than firms that adopt an unbalanced strategy with an emphasis on partnering flexibility.We include control variables to account for alternative explanations that a firm’s competitive performance can be affected by the firm’s dominance (proxy by firm size) (Zaheer & Venkatraman, 1994), environment (proxy by environmental turbulence) (Aldrich & Auster, 1986), and industry structure (proxy by industry type) (Porter, 1980a). Since a firm’s competitive performance may also be affected by its supplier relationship management strategy, we control for supplier concentration (defined as the density of a focal firm’s supplier portfolio in terms of the number and relative importance of major suppliers for a product line (Rai & Tang, 2010)) and average relationship length with suppliers (Ganesan, 1994).To address the research question and provide survey respondents with a clear boundary for the supplier relationships, we used the group of supplier relationships for a major product line in a business unit as the unit of analysis. We defined a major product line as a line that accounts for a significant portion of the firm’s total sales/revenue. Due to the importance of a major product line for a firm’s revenue, a firm may be willing to invest in process capabilities to effectively manage its supplier relationships for that product line.We developed measures to collect survey data on a firm’s competitive performance for a major product line and on its process capabilities to manage its supplier relationships. Where possible, existing scales were adopted or adapted to fit our research context. All items except those specified are anchored on a seven-point Likert scale. The measurement items and scale formats for each construct are presented in Appendix A.Competitive performance is defined as a firm’s achievement of its objectives in relation to the external environment (Ferrier, 2001; Porter, 1980b). Drawing on existing literature on competitive performance and consultation with five industry practitioners, we measure competitive performance as the focal firm’s ability to capture market share, remain profitable, keep growing, and be innovative and cost-efficient relative to its major competitors (Drew, 1997; Lee, 2003). Respondents evaluated their major product line’s performance as compared with their chief competitors in terms of five aspects: market share, profitability, growth, innovativeness, and cost leadership. Their responses were obtained on an 11-point percentage scale with anchors from low (0%) to high (100%).Four items were developed for process alignment to capture the focal firm’s capability to coordinate interdependence across partners, bring visibility to and jointly optimize processes, and handle exceptions and errors in a timely manner (Malone & Crowston, 1994). Three items were adopted from the inter-firm relationship management literature to measure partnering flexibility; a firm’s capability (1) to establish new relationships, (2) to replace a current relationship with new ones, and (3) to exit relationships when necessary (Gosain, Malhotra, & El Sawy, 2004; Young-Ybarra & Wiersema, 1999).Relationship concentration was measured using the Herfindahl Index,4The Herfindahl index is calculated asH=∑i=1nSi2, where Sirepresents the percentage of goods purchased from/sold to a major partner and n is the number of major partners. The index ranges from 1/n to 1.4which is based on the percentage of purchases from the firm’s top four suppliers. A four-item perceptual measure from Selnes and Sallis (2003) was adapted to measure environmental turbulence and captured the pace of customer and competitor changes, the difficulty of forecasting demand, and the intensity of technological breakthroughs at the major product-line level.Three steps were taken to refine the initial questionnaire: (1) two-stage Q-sorting, as suggested by Moore and Benbasat (1991), for content validity and face validity; (2) peer review by a panel of eight academics and five practitioners with expertise in inter-firm relationships to evaluate content validity, format, organization, and clarity of instructions; and (3) a pilot test to assess the construct variances captured by the measures. The questionnaire was modified and improved based on the feedback received from these processes.Survey data were collected from firms in the automotive equipment, chemicals, electronic equipment, and industrial equipment industries—four industries that reflect a broad presence in the U.S. economy. We obtained information about a firm by collecting data from one key informant, the procurement professional at each firm, as executives in this role were most likely to be knowledgeable about our survey questions (Phillips & Bagozzi, 1986). The respondents were first asked to identify the major product line (the one that accounts for a significant portion of their firm’s total sales/revenue) and then to answer questions about it.To ensure data quality, we contracted e-Rewards,5www.e-rewards.com.5a professional marketing research institution, to access its pre-qualified base of business panel members. The profile of the e-Rewards’ business panel6The U.S. business panel of e-Rewards (http://www.e-rewardsresearch.com/downloads/US_Business_Panels.pdf, accessed on January 25, 2009).6is comparable to the membership profile of professional institutes, such as the Institute of Supply Management (ISM), in terms of industry representation.7Source: http://www.ism.ws/files/membership/MemDemReport2006.pdf (accessed on January 25, 2009).7E-mail invitations stating the purpose of the research were sent by e-Rewards to its panel members.8The U.S. business panel of e-Rewards (http://www.e-rewards.com/researchers/downloads/US_Business_Panels.pdf, accessed on January 25, 2009).8Among the 964 procurement professionals who received the invitation, 318 completed surveys (response rate=33.0%) were generated. Over 70% of the respondents had a job title of procurement or mid-level manager. On average, the procurement professionals were in their position for 7.3years (SD=5.1) and spent over 55% (SD=23%) of their time daily on supplier-related activities. Table 1presents the distribution of the sample on firm size and industry.After data collection, we conducted two tests to assess non-response bias. First, using ANOVA, respondents who did not complete the survey were compared with those who did based on the number of employees in their firm and on their firm’s annual revenue (Armstrong & Overton, 1977). Second, we measured the difference between the expected and observed number of respondents across industries using a chi-square test. Both tests showed that non-response bias was not evident in our dataset.To safeguard against common method bias, we incorporated procedural safeguards as suggested by Podasakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, and Podsakoff (2003) when designing the questionnaire. After data collection, we assessed the possible impact of common method bias by incorporating a method factor into the measurement model (Podasakoff et al., 2003). On average, the method factor explained 0.004 of the variance in the dataset, and most method factor loadings were insignificant, suggesting that common method bias was not a significant issue in this study.Table 2presents the correlations and descriptive statistics of the variables. None of the correlations exceeded acceptable thresholds, with the highest correlation being 0.40 and well below the 0.8 threshold suggested by Bagozzi, Yi, and Phillips (1991).We adopted standard procedures to ensure the content validity and construct validity of the measures and to evaluate their psychometric properties (Bagozzi et al., 1991; Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994). We applied confirmatory factor analysis to evaluate the validity of the constructs, and we observed significant loadings of the measurement items on their respective constructs (see Table 3). The overall fit of the measurement model was also good (Hu & Bentler, 1999) (χ2/df=1.84, NNFI=.97, CFI=.97, RMSEA=.05, SRMR=.04). We evaluated the discriminant validity among the constructs by comparing the fit of the baseline measurement model (with unconstrained correlations between constructs) with the fit of all alternative models that constrained the correlation between a pair of constructs to unity. The baseline model exhibited a significantly better fit than all of the models that restricted the correlations between constructs to unity (as evaluated by Δχ2/Δdf as well as other measures of goodness and badness of fit). Cumulatively, the results suggest that our measures exhibit satisfactory validity. Following the validation of the measures, we computed the unit means of the items for each construct and used them as construct scores for hypothesis testing.We used the absolute difference between process alignment and partnering flexibility to measure the balancing dimension of the strategy to combine the two process capabilities. The absolute difference varies from 0.01 to 4.99. To facilitate interpretation, we reversed this measure by subtracting the difference score from 7 so that a higher value indicates greater balance between process alignment and partnering flexibility. Following the literature, we operationalized the complementing dimension as the interaction of process alignment and partnering flexibility (Gibson & Birkinshaw, 2004; He & Wong, 2004). We mean-centered each of the two process capabilities and then computed the interaction term to avoid multicollinearity problems (Aiken & West, 1991). To evaluate the competitive performance impacts of balancing and complementing strategies, we employed a series of ordinary least squares hierarchical regression models. We first entered our control variables (number of employees, environmental turbulence, dummy variables for the industries, relationship concentration, and average relationship length) (Model 1) followed by the direct effects of process alignment and partnering flexibility (Model 2). We then tested H1a and H1b by first separately entering the absolute difference and the cross-product terms of the two process capabilities (Models 3 and 4) and then including both terms in the same model (Model 5). This approach enabled us to detect the effects of interest by excluding the linear effects of the explanatory variables.Table 4reports the results from the hierarchical regressions. Models 3 and 4 show that when entered separately, both the absolute difference term and the interaction term were significant and positive given the presence of direct effects, suggesting the existence of additional effects that extend beyond the influence of the individual effects of process alignment and partnering flexibility. These findings support both H1a and H1b, which predict that combining these two process capabilities by balancing or complementing them significantly contributes to competitive performance for a major product line. However, when entered simultaneously, only the absolute difference term (the balancing dimension) remained significant (Model 5). Though the interaction term (the complementing dimension) retained its positive sign, it did not remain significant. As such, the results based on the most conservative model (Model 5) provide support for H1A but not for H1B.H2 and H3 relate to how performance risk differs across different strategies to combine process capabilities. To test these hypotheses, we used the standard deviation-to-mean ratio as a proxy for competitive performance risk and adopted a similar approach to that used by He and Wong (2004) and Im and Rai (2008). We created four groups to test these hypotheses (See Fig. 2). We used the following criteria for the grouping: (a) firms for whom both process alignment and partnering flexibility are greater than 2 and less than 4 (on a scale of 7) were assigned to the high balance and weak complements strategy,9We tried to select cases with values below 2 for both process alignment and partnering flexibility to form the group of high balance and low complements strategy. However, we could only find two cases for this group. Considering the increasing importance of supply chain management in operations strategy and, therefore, of the two process capabilities, this result is not surprising. Accordingly, we used values between 2 and 4 as the cut-off values to identify cases for the high balance and weak complements strategy group.9(b) firms for whom process alignment is greater than 5.95 (the mean value plus one standard deviation) and partnering flexibility is below 4 were assigned to the unbalanced with high process alignment strategy, (c) firms for whom partnering flexibility is greater than 6.05 (the mean value plus one standard deviation) and process alignment is below 4 were assigned to the unbalanced with high partnering flexibility strategy, and (d) firms for whom both process alignment and partnering flexibility are higher than the respective mean values plus one standard deviation were assigned to the high balance and strong complements strategy.The following pattern emerged after the classification (Table 5): the high balance and weak complements group exhibited the highest standard deviation-to-mean ratio for competitive performance followed by the two groups with unbalanced strategies and the high balance and strong complements group exhibiting the lowest ratio. We then regressed the four standard deviation values against the four mean competitive performances weighted by group size. For the group that has an unbalanced strategy with emphasis on process alignment, the actual standard deviation was below the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval, implying a smaller variation relative to its mean value. For the group that has an unbalanced strategy with an emphasis on partnering flexibility, the actual standard deviation was above the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval, implying a larger variation. The actual standard deviation of the high balance and strong complements group was within the 95% confidence interval, implying normal variation. Therefore, both H2 and H3 are supported—that is, firms focusing on partnering flexibility exhibit higher performance risk than those focusing on process alignment or those adopting a high balance and strong complements strategy to combine these two process capabilities (see Fig. 3).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Globalization, intense competition, and dynamic environments require firms to continuously integrate and reconfigure resources and capabilities across partners, thereby making supplier relationships strategic for firms. These relationships need to be managed as a dynamic portfolio of resources. To competitively leverage supplier relationships for major product lines, firms need to effectively combine process alignment and partnering flexibility. Our empirical analysis using data on supplier relationships in four industries indicates that a high balance and strong complements strategy of combining process alignment and partnering flexibility leads to higher competitive performance while reducing performance risk relative to other strategies to combine these two process capabilities. Our findings highlight the competitive performance implications of the various strategies to combine process alignment and partnering flexibility for supplier relationship management.(Seven-point Likert Scale, 1=Strongly Disagree, 7=Strongly Agree.)ALIGN1: We closely coordinate interdependent processes with our suppliers.ALIGN2: The interdependent operating procedures and routines (e.g., manufacturing, bar-coding, packaging, shipping, etc.) are highly visible among our suppliers and us.ALIGN3: Related operating processes are jointly optimized with our suppliers.ALIGN4: Exceptions and errors that occur during daily operations are shared with our suppliers in a timely manner.(Seven-point Likert Scale, 1=Extremely Difficult, 7=Extremely Easy.)In terms of making the required process changes, how easy would it be for your company to do the following?PART1: Terminate a relationship with a supplier for this product line when the market changes.PART2: Add an eligible new supplier that you want to do business with for this product line.PART3: Replace a current supplier with a new one for this product line.(Eleven-point Scale with Percentage Anchors.)Please compare the performance of your primary product line with that of your competitors and indicate your performance on the following aspects.COMPE1: Market shareCOMPE2: ProfitabilityCOMPE3: GrowthCOMPE4: InnovativenessCOMPE5: Cost leadership(Seven-point Likert Scale, 1=Strongly Disagree, 7=Strongly Agree.)ENV1: Customer preferences change rapidly for this product market.ENV2: There is intense competition for market share in this product market.ENV3: Forecasting demand for this product is very difficult.ENV4: Technological innovations have brought many new product ideas to this product market in the recent past.