@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Balancing pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster relief

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A two-stage dynamic model for balancing preparedness and relief is proposed.Analytic and numerical solutions of the two-stage dynamic model are presented.The trade-offs between preparedness and relief are studied.Relief first increases then eventually decreases in preparedness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Disaster,Preparedness,Relief,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Challenges associated with resource allocation to mitigate and recover from natural and man-made disasters inspire new theoretical questions for decision making in the intertwined natural and human world. Disaster loss is determined not only by post-disaster relief but also the pre-disaster mitigation and preparedness. To examine the decision making process at ex ante and ex post disaster stages, we develop a two-stage dynamic programming model that optimally allocates preparedness and relief expenditures. We analytically and numerically solve the model and provide new insights by sensitivity analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Natural disasters have caused enormous damage to human beings and the economy. After Hurricane Katrina, the US government sought 105 billion dollars for repairs and reconstruction, and the total economic losses were about 250 billion dollars (King, 2005). Global natural disasters caused 350 billion dollars in losses in 2011 (Holm & Scism, 2011).Disaster management is usually decomposed into four phases: mitigation, preparedness, relief, and recovery (Lindsay, 2012). Mitigation is the effort to reduce loss of life and property by lessening the impact of disasters. Typical efforts of mitigation are organizing resources, identifying the characteristics and potential consequences of hazards, and insurance. Preparedness refers to measures taken to prepare for and reduce the effects of disasters. Preparedness efforts include improving the effectiveness of emergency response by developing a preparedness plan in strategic, operational, and tactical tiers, early warning systems, and public training for disaster risks and responses. Relief refers to the process of responding to a catastrophic situation, providing humanitarian aid to persons and communities who have suffered from some form of disaster. Typical efforts of relief are saving lives, protecting property and environment such as the search and rescue of human beings, and repairing and reconstructing houses. Losses caused by disasters can be reduced by not only post-disaster relief and recovery but also pre-disaster mitigation and preparedness.The mitigation and preparedness for disasters are studied in social (Messias, Barrington, & Lacy, 2012), political (Gerber, 2007) and legal (Command, 2008) contexts, such as improving the national preparedness for citizens (Conroy, 2008), integrating community/individual behaviors for disaster preparedness (Campasano, 2010), and the derivation of preparedness measurement (Covington & Simpson, 2006). Jongejan, Helsloot, Beerens, and Vrijling (2011) conduct a cost-benefit analysis to the worthiness of preparedness. Preparedness is defined in terms of the probability of capacity exceedance to account for the response effectiveness in both densely and sparsely populated regions. Kunreuther, Grossi, Cyr, and Tao (2001), Chang (2003) and Ganderton (2005) use cost-benefit analysis to investigate the worthiness and effectiveness of mitigation via comparing the cost of mitigation and the reduction of loss and business interruption time. King (2005) and Bank and Gruber (2009) report a lack of preparedness in private sectors such as small businesses. Coffrin, Hentenryck, and Bent (2011) study how to store power system supplies in the pre-disaster stage to maximize the expected power flow across all the disaster scenarios.FEMA (2014) provides a platform to guide the public and private sectors on preparing for and recovering from disasters. There are many types of natural disasters, such as floods, tornadoes, hurricanes, thunderstorms and lightning, winter storms and extreme cold, drought, extreme heat, severe weather, space weather, earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides and debris flow, tsunamis, and wildfires. The mitigation and preparedness for each type of disaster could be different. For example, flooding may be caused by torrential rains, and lead to high reservoir water levels. Correspondingly, the preparedness for flooding includes the prediction of the weather, the warning system of the water level, and the reinforcement of the dam.Disaster relief is also studied. For example, Chia (2006) analyzes disaster relief from the perspective of large-scale system engineering. Cagnan, Davidson, and Guikema (2006) study how the joint probability distribution of post-earthquake electric power restoration for a certain number of customers in a certain time window varies throughout the Los Angeles area. Altay and Green (2006) summarize the applications of operations research and management science to disaster management. Karlaftis, Kepaptsoglou, and Lambropoulos (2007) investigate the fund allocation strategy for bridge network recovery after natural disasters by maximizing bridge improvement and minimizing the cost. Stephenson and Bonabeau (2007) suggest that the government could capitalize the technology of communication devices and networks to partner with citizens to efficiently prevent and respond to disasters. Yushimito, Jaller, and Ukkusuri (2012) propose a Voronoi diagram approach to locate the post-disaster distribution centers. The objective is to minimize the social cost which is a function of the population size and the distance from demand points to distribution centers. Haghani and Afshar (2009) propose a mathematical model to describe the integrated logistics operations in response to natural disasters.Most research focuses on minimizing fatality or monetary loss by considering relief only, especially in a logistics perspective (Fiedrich, Gehbauer, & Rickers, 2000; Rawls & Turnquist, 2010). There is limited research on both preparedness and relief. El-adaway and El-Anwar (2010) propose a comprehensive decision support system for natural disaster investment strategy incorporating stochastic hazards models for disaster losses, multi-agent simulation models, multi-objective optimization models and multi-attribute utility models to minimize cost and maximize equity. Kramer (1995) summarizes various risk modified cost-benefit analysis for disaster mitigation such as game-theoretic analysis, safety-first analysis, mean-variance analysis, and stochastic dominance analysis. Elbakidze and McCarl (2006) study the tradeoff of economic investment on pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster relief for the potential introduction of infectious animal disease by minimizing the total loss of investment and disease damage. The disease damage is a function of preparedness, relief, and a constant incident severity parameter, while in our paper, the disaster magnitude is generally modeled as a random variable. Tean (2006) proposes a two-stage stochastic programming model to maximize the total expected number of survivors and delivery of required goods, without providing the solution of the model. Dodo, Xu, Davidson, and Nozick (2005) propose a linear model to obtain the optimal earthquake mitigation (preparedness) effort on each square footage of the region during each discrete time period, in order to minimize total costs of the mitigation and expected post-earthquake reconstruction investments. The annual probability of the occurrence of each earthquake is a constant parameter while in this paper the disaster magnitude follows a discrete or continuous distribution. Mete and Zabinsky (2010) use stochastic programming and mixed integer programming to investigate the optimal warehouse location and inventory level of the medical supply in pre-disaster stage, through solving the subproblem of minimizing the expected transportation cost after disaster. Miller-Hooks, Zhang, and Faturechi (2012) set up a two-stage stochastic model to maximize the resilience of a transportation network, which is defined as the expected fraction of demand that can be satisfied for all network arcs after the disaster. In the case study, they compare the expected total post-disaster flow of shipments under the binary combinational scenarios of implementing preparedness, and/or relief. Peeta, Salman, Gunnec, and Viswanath (2010) build and solve a two-stage stochastic programming model to obtain the optimal pre-disaster investment for a highway network. Rose et al. (2007) shows that overall, the pre-disaster investment of one dollar has about four dollars benefit in post-disaster stage for earthquake, flood and wind hazards across US between 1993 and 2003. Table 1 summarizes the features of past research and presents a comparison to the research conducted in this paper. As we can see, past research mostly focuses only on either preparedness or relief. While this paper studies both preparedness and relief, and provides analytical solutions.The damage of disaster has been categorized as direct or indirect loss; tangible or intangible loss. Tangible losses, such as physical destruction of buildings and equipment, can be evaluated by monetary values . Intangible losses are those that cannot be expressed as universally accepted financial terms such as human, social, environmental and cultural losses. Several methods have been applied to estimate intangible losses such as hedonic pricing methods and travel cost methods (Department of Homeland Security, 2011; Markantonis, Meyer, & Schwarze, 2012). Weitzman (2011) uses multiplicative- and additive-form damage functions as a method to investigate the economic impacts from global warming. In this paper, we propose a damage function that takes into account effects of preparedness and relief besides the disaster magnitude.The probability distribution of disaster magnitude can be described by normal distribution, exponential distribution, and power-law distribution corresponding to the trend, the extreme, and the breakdown type of disasters, respectively (Pisarenko & Rodkin, 2010). The trend, extreme, and breakdown type of disasters are categorized by the ratio of disaster magnitude to the background level from low, medium to high, respectively. Due to the scarcity of large-scale natural disaster and terrorism, it is challenging to accurately estimate the likelihood of disaster occurrence. Some exploratory methods are used to obtain the probability or distribution of catastrophes, such as Bayesian methods, catastrophe theory, entropy maximization, extreme value theory, modeling, and decomposition (Bier, Haimes, Lambert, Matalas, & Zimmerman, 1999). Based on the research conducted by Starr, Rudman, and Whipple (1976), Clauset, Shalizi, and Newman (2009) and Pisarenko and Rodkin (2010), river floods, hurricane energy, droughts and moderate-term sea level variations are usually described using exponential distribution. Heights of sea waves, drought occurrence, tsunamis, tornadoes’ damage swath, flood damage magnitude, and earthquake magnitude and frequency are described using lognormal distribution. The frequency of tornadoes is described using negative binomial distribution. Wind speed and wave heights are described using Rayleigh and Weibull distribution. Meteorite strikes can be described using Poisson distribution. Researchers use normal distribution to describe climate change and long-term sea level variations; and power law distribution for earthquake energy, eruption of volcanoes and terrorists attacks (Clauset et al., 2009; Pisarenko & Rodkin, 2010). Without loss of generality, we will use normal and exponential distributions to model disaster magnitude.In this paper we propose a two-stage model to study the trade-off between pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster relief to minimize the total expected damage and the costs of preparedness and relief. We model the disaster magnitude as a random parameter following either a discrete or continuous probability distribution, while the damage is a function of pre-disaster preparedness, disaster magnitude, and post-disaster relief. We formulate the model in Section 2. We provide an analytical solution framework in Section 3, and analytical solutions and numerical illustrations given exponential-form damage functions in Sections 4. We conclude in Section 5. Appendix A provides the proofs for propositions.The decision-making framework of preparedness and relief is shown in Fig. 1. We consider two decision variables: the pre-disaster preparedness c; and the post-disaster relief r(c, m) as a function of c and m, where m ≥ 0 is the disaster magnitude, which follows a discrete or continuous probability distribution FM(m). We consider three function forms for the disaster magnitude: (a) binary (discrete) distribution in Section 4.3; (b) normal (continuous) distribution in Section 4.4; and (c) exponential (continuous) distribution in Section 4.5. In the pre-disaster stage, the decision maker is uncertain about the disaster magnitude m, and decides the preparedness investment effort c based on the knowledge of the probability distribution of disaster magnitude FM(m). In the post-disaster stage, the disaster magnitude m is observed and the relief decision r will be made based on c and m. Table 2shows all the notation used in this paper.In the pre-disaster stage, the decision maker determines preparedness c with the objective of minimizing the loss LPr, which equals to the sum of preparedness investment, αc (where α is the unit cost of preparedness), and the expected post-disaster loss from the disaster, LPo(c, r, m), as shown in Eq. (1).(1)Pre-disasterstage:minc≥0LPr=αc︸pre-disasterpreparednessinvestment+∫mLPo(c,r,m)dFM(m)︸expectedpost-disasterlossfromdisasterFor the post-disaster stage, the decision maker observes disaster magnitude m, then decides the relief effort r to minimize the loss LPothat includes relief investment, βr (where β is the unit cost of relief), and damage, V(c, r, m), as shown in Eq. (2).(2)Post-disasterstage:minr≥0LPo(c,r,m)=βr︸post-disasterreliefinvestment+V(c,r,m)︸damagefromdisasterDamage functions V(c, r, m) evaluate the economic damage from disaster as a function of disaster magnitude, preparedness and relief efforts. The damage of disaster V(c, r, m) is assumed to be continuously differentiable, decreasing in both c and r, and increasing in m, with decreasing marginal effects in c and r. That is:(3)∂V∂m≥0,∂V∂r≤0,∂V∂c≤0,∂2V∂c2≥0,and∂2V∂r2≥0We use backward induction to solve this two-stage dynamic model. In particular, Proposition 1 provides the solution of best-response relief to the post-disaster problem (Eq. (2)). Using the results in Proposition 1, Proposition 2 provides the solution to the pre-disaster problem (Eq. (1)).Proposition 1The optimal reliefr^of optimization problem(Eq. (2)), given the preparedness c and the disaster magnitude m, is as follows:(4)r^(c,m)={{r>0:∂∂rV(c,r,m)+β=0}if−∂∂rV(c,r,m)|r=0>β0otherwiseFurthermore, we have:∂r^∂c≥0if and only if∂2V∂c∂r≤0;∂r^∂m≥0if and only if∂2V∂m∂r≤0.Proposition 1 shows that the best-response relief could be positive if the marginal reduction of damage when relief is zero∂∂rV(c,r,m)|r=0,is greater than the unit cost of relief β; and zero otherwise. In addition, the best-response reliefr^increases in the preparedness∂r^∂c≥0,if and only if the larger marginal effect of preparedness leads to a lower level of relief (∂2V∂c∂r≤0). In other words, preparedness and relief are substitute to each other.The optimal preparedness c*of optimization problem(Eq. (1)), given the optimal reliefr^(c,m),is as follows:(5)c*={{c>0:∂∂c∫m(βr^(c,m)+V(c,r^(c,m),m))dFM(m)+α=0}if−∂∂c{∫m(βr^(c,m)+V(c,r^(c,m),m))dFM(m)}|c=0>α0otherwiseProposition 2 shows that the preparedness could be positive if the marginal reduction of the sum of relief cost and disaster damage when preparedness is zero, is less than the unit cost of preparedness; or zero otherwise. In Section 4, we explicitly derive the optimal preparedness and relief given an exponential-form damage function.In this section, we first formulate the exponential-form damage function in Section 4.1, then derive the best-response relief based on the damage function form in Section 4.2, and analyze the optimal preparedness in Sections 4.3 when disaster magnitude follows binary, normal, and exponential distributions.We assume the damage function is as follows:(6)V(c,r,m)=Vd︸valuationofpotentialloss(1−e−λm)︸proportionofdamagedtargetse−ξ1c−ξ2r−ξ3cr︸discountpercentageofdamageduetopreparednessandreliefThe valuation of potential loss Vdindicates both tangible and intangible loss from disaster, such as from social displacement, psychological distress, and environmental impact (Department of Homeland Security, 2011). The damage is evaluated as the valuation of potential loss Vdreduced by the damage proportion1−e−λm,and the discount percentage of damage due to preparedness and relief efforte−ξ1c−ξ2r−ξ3cr. The proportion of damage is positively correlated to disaster magnitude m, and disaster severity parameter λ. A larger λ leads to a higher damage V(c, r, m) generated from m. The effectiveness of preparedness and relief are counted in three aspects: preparedness only ξ1, relief only ξ2, and jointly ξ3. A larger ξ1, ξ2, or ξ3 leads to a smaller V. We show that all the assumptions about the damage function presented in Eq. (3) are satisfied.Fig. 2 shows the contour of the damage V, with respect to the preparedness c, and relief effort r. The damage increases in the disaster magnitude m; and decreases in c, and r. Comparing the contours on Fig. 2(a) and (b) shows that the damage is about ten times larger when disaster magnitude is one hundred times larger.Using backward induction, we first solve for the best-response relief by inserting Eq. (6) into Eq. (4). We useh1,…,h4to denote disaster magnitude related thresholds; and uses1,…,s3to denote preparedness related thresholds.Proposition 3The best-response reliefr^,given the damage functionV(c,r,m)=Vd(1−e−λm)e−ξ1c−ξ2r−ξ3cr,is as follows:(7)r^(c,m)={1ξ3c+ξ2(lnVd(1−e−λm)(ξ3c+ξ2)β−ξ1c)ifs1<c<s2,orequivalentlym>h10otherwisewhere the thresholds,s1≡−1ξ1W0(ξ1βe−ξ1ξ2ξ3Vdξ3(e−λm−1))−ξ2ξ3,s2≡−1ξ1W−1(ξ1βe−ξ1ξ2ξ3Vdξ3(e−λm−1))−ξ2ξ3>0,h1≡−1λln(1−βeξ1cVd(ξ3c+ξ2)),and W0 andW−1are the two real-value branches of LambertW function (Corless, Gonnet, Hare, Jeffrey, & Knuth, 1996).Proposition 3 shows that the optimal relief is positive if the preparedness satisfies s1 < c < s2 (see Appendix A.3 for details). Note that the best-response relief will be zero when both the preparedness (c < s1) and the disaster magnitude are small, or the preparedness is too large (c > s2). This means that the relief is not implemented when the disaster is less likely to happen and a certain level of preparedness is sufficient to counter disasters, or when the cost versus benefit of relief is too high and it is not worthy to invest on relief. Note also that the condition s1 < c < s2 in Eq. (7) could be equivalently written as: m > h1. In other words, the relief is needed if and only if the disaster magnitude is sufficiently large.The optimal relief could increase in preparedness if the preparedness and disaster magnitude are relatively small.(8)∂r^∂c{>0ifandonlyifc≤s30otherwisewhere the thresholds3≡βe1−ξ1ξ2ξ3Vdξ3(1−e−λm)−ξ2ξ3. When 0 < s3 < s1, the reliefr^,decreases in preparednessc(∂r^∂c<0); otherwise if s3 > s1 > 0,r^first increases inc(∂r^∂c>0)when s1 < c < s3then decreases inc(∂r^∂c<0)when s3 < c < s2.The optimal relief increases in disaster magnitude, i.e.,(9)∂r^∂m≥0.Furthermore, we have(10)∂s3∂ξ3{≥0ifandonlyifξ1ξ2≥ξ3<0otherwise;∂s3∂m≤0;∂s3∂λ≤0;∂s3∂ξ1≤0;and∂s3∂ξ2≤0Proposition 4 implies that the relief increases in preparedness if both the disaster magnitude m and the preparedness c are relatively small. However, if the preparedness is large (c > s3) the relief decreases in preparedness. Furthermore, based on Eq. (8), with a larger disaster magnitude m, or a lower threshold s3 ≥ 0, it is more likely that post-disaster relief decreases in preparedness. With a greater effect of preparedness effectiveness, or relief effectiveness, a lower threshold s3 > 0, it is more likely that post-disaster relief decreases in preparedness.Fig. 3 shows various types of best responsesr^with respect to c whenβ=0.5,α=Vd=λ=ξ1=ξ2=1,andξ3=5. In particular, Fig. 3(a) shows that the best-response relief,r^,is always zero for all values of preparedness, c, when the disaster magnitude is small (m=0.5<h1=0.9) and there is no need to invest in relief. Fig. 3(b) shows thatr^is initially zero whenc<s1=1.6,then increases monotonically betweens1<c<s3=4.8and reaches the maximum valuer^=0.82whenc=s3. After that,r^decreases monotonically to zero betweens3<c<s2=24.5and stays at zero when c > s2. Fig. 3(c) shows thatr^starts as a positive value whenc=0,then monotonically increases untilc=s3=1.99. Afterwardsr^starts to decrease in c and remains zero whenc>s2=40. Fig. 3(d) shows thatr^always decreases in c and reaches zero whenc>s2=60.Fig. 4shows that the best-response relief increases with respect to disaster magnitude. Particularly, Fig. 4(a) shows thatr^is zero at first, which means the preparedness is sufficient to counter the disaster. Reliefr^then increases to positive values whenm>h1=0.66based on Eq. (7), and keeps increasing in m. Fig. 4(b) shows that positiver^is always needed once the disaster happens and preparedness level is intermediate. Fig. 4(c) shows that no relief is needed to counter disaster when the preparedness is large enough.Fig. 5shows the optimal relief contours as a function of the preparedness and disaster magnitude. The optimal reliefr^first increases, then decreases in c when m is small; decreases in c when m is large; and increases in disaster magnitude m.In order to explicitly solve the pre-disaster model, we need to specify the distribution of the random variable m. In the following sections, we show preparedness and relief when disaster magnitude follows binary, normal and exponential distributions.In this section, we study the simple case when magnitude m follows a binary distribution.(11)Pr(m=m0)=1−Pr(m=0)=PInsert Eqs. (7) and (11) into Eq. 5, we have the optimal preparedness c* is as follows:(12)c*={βeλmVdξ3(eλm−1)eh2−ξ2ξ3ifm>h30otherwisewhereh2≡ξ3LambertW(−2βαe2(λmξ3−ξ1ξ2)ξ3PVd2(eλm−1)2ξ3)+2ξ1ξ22ξ3,h3≡−1λξ3(ξ1ξ2−ln(ξ2Vdeξ1ξ2+h4ξ3ξ3+βeλξ2Vd)ξ3+h4ξ3),and h4 is the root of equationPVd2ξ3β(eλ)2h4+αξ22Vd2+2αβξ2Vde−−λξ3+ξ1ξ2+h4ξ3ξ3+αβ2e−2(−λξ3+ξ1ξ2+h4ξ3)ξ3=0. We notice that with the higher unit cost of relief, or the higher probability of disaster occurrence, the more likely preparedness is positive. The condition of positive preparedness shows that the preparedness is exerted when the unit cost ratio of preparedness versus relief is below a threshold, which is determined by the probability of disaster, the effectiveness of post-disaster relief, and joint effectiveness of preparedness and relief. A lower preparedness unit cost, a higher relief cost, a higher likelihood of disaster, a higher joint effectiveness, and lower relief effectiveness lead to a higher preparedness effort.We define four cases regarding the range of preparedness and relief as the followings:•#1:(c*=0,r*=0),#2:(c*=0,r*>0),#3:(c*>0,r*=0),#4: (c* > 0, r* > 0)Fig. 6shows the sensitivity of optimal solutionsc*,r*,andLPr*when the baseline values of the parameters areVd=1,ξ1=1,ξ2=4,ξ3=5,α=0.005,β=0.5,P=0.02,λ=1,andm0=1.Fig. 6(a) shows thatc*,r*,andLPr*all increase in m0. Relief will first increase due to the relative low disaster magnitude (0 < m0 < 5.5), then the preparedness will also increase when the disaster magnitude is large (m0 > 5.5). Fig. 6(b) shows thatc*,andLPr*increase in P, and r* decreases in P.Fig. 6 (c) shows that as α increases, c* decreases, andr*andLPr*first increase then remain at constant levels. After the preparedness decreases to zero, the relief and loss keep constant values because the unit cost of preparedness will not affect the preparedness and relief. Fig. 6(d) shows that r* decreases in β. The preparedness is always zero, which means that the relief alone is efficient enough to reduce the disaster loss. The expected pre-disaster lossLPr*first increases, then keeps at a constant level after r* goes to zero. Fig. 6(e) shows thatc*andLPr*increase in the valuation of potential loss, Vd. Relief r* could first increase then decrease in Vd, because the relief is needed when the preparedness is relatively small and is less needed when the preparedness keeps increasing. Fig. 6(f) shows that r* andLPr*decrease in ξ1, and c* first increases then decreases in ξ1, which makes the equilibrium shift from case 4 (c* > 0, r* > 0) to case 3 (c*>0,r*=0). The reason is that the preparedness has little effectiveness when the preparedness effectiveness coefficient ξ1 is small, so the optimal solution starts with a high level of relief. When ξ1 increases the preparedness has a larger effect of loss reduction, so less relief effort is needed. As c* and ξ1 increase, relief r* becomes unnecessary. When ξ1 increases further, preparedness begins to decrease since less preparedness can effectively reduce the loss. Fig. 6(g) shows that r* first increases then decreases in ξ2, preparedness c* is always zero, andLPr*decreases in ξ2. Fig. 6(h) shows that c* increases in ξ3, while r* andLPr*decrease in ξ3. Due to the increasing effect of preparedness, the decision maker would invest more on preparedness to minimize the total loss and reduce the relief. Fig. 6(i) shows that preparedness, relief and expected loss increase in the disaster severity parameter λ.When disaster magnitude m follows normal distribution with mean of μmand variance ofσm2,we have the probability density function of left-truncated Normal distribution with non-negative values as follows:fM(m)=2πσme−(m−μm)22σm2,∀m>0Fig. 7shows the sensitivity of pre-disaster preparedness and the total loss for all parameters when the benefit-cost ratio between pre- and post-disaster investment ξ1: ξ2 is 4:1. We only consider the left-truncated normal distribution with non-negative values. Fig. 7(a) shows that c* andLPr*increase in μm.Fig. 7 (b) shows that c* andLPr*first decrease then increase in σm. Specifically, when the ratio of variance versus mean of disaster magnitude is relatively small, which is less than 0.162/1 ≈ 0.026 in this case, the optimal preparedness and the expected loss decrease in the variance. But when the ratio exceeds the threshold, 0.026, the preparedness and the expected loss increase in variance. The reason is that the probability of disaster magnitude of μ decreases when the variance starts to increase, then the preparedness decreases since the preparedness always decreases in disaster magnitude. When the variance increases to a certain high value the probability of high disaster magnitude events increases resulting in an increase in preparedness. Intuitively, the decision maker would invest solely on preparedness if there is no uncertainty of disaster magnitude. When there is a small uncertainty of disaster magnitude when variance goes to a positive value, the decision maker would allocate less investment on preparedness and some investments for relief. When the variance increases, the decision maker would invest more on preparedness to minimize the highly uncertain disaster losses that might occur. Fig. 7(c) shows that c* decreases in α, andLPr*increases in α. Fig. 7(d) shows that both c* andLPr*increase in β. This is due to the high cost of relief restraining relief investments, so more preparedness is sought. Fig. 7(e) shows that both c* andLPr*increase in Vd. Fig. 7(f) shows that c* first increases then decreases in ξ3; andLPr*decreases in ξ3. The reason is that less preparedness is needed when the joint preparedness and relief is more effective. Fig. 7(g) shows that c* first increases then decreases in ξ3. The reason is that less preparedness is needed if preparedness is more effective. The lossLPr*decreases in ξ3. Fig. 7(h) shows that c* andLPr*decrease in ξ2. As expected the greater effectiveness of relief, the less preparedness is needed.Based on the fact that the probability of disaster occurrence exponentially decreases with the increase of disaster magnitude (Bier, Haphuriwat, Menoyo, Zimmerman, & Culpen, 2008; Starr et al., 1976), we assume that the probability density of disaster magnitude has the following form(13)fM(m)=ae−am,∀m≥0where a > 0. Notice that a is the probability density of disaster magnitude when the magnitude equals to zero. We find similar effects as shown in Sections 4.3 and 4.4. Specifically, preparedness decreases and expected loss increases in unit cost of preparedness; preparedness increases in unit cost of relief; preparedness and expected loss increase in target valuation; preparedness and expected loss decrease in preparedness effectiveness; and preparedness increases in disaster severity. Fig. 8(a) shows that when FM(m) follows the exponential distribution (Eq. (13)), preparedness first increases then decreases in the coefficient a, which negatively relates to the likelihood of disaster occurrence. The expected loss also decreases.In order to balance pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster relief, we develop a two-stage dynamic model to minimize the total loss in both pre- and post-disaster stages. We use backward induction to obtain optimal preparedness and relief both analytically and numerically. Our model reveals insights for seeking the optimal policy on balancing pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster relief for local, state, federal government or business units that are facing potential disasters. Our results show that relief can increase in preparedness (especially when disaster magnitude and preparedness are small), and eventually decrease in preparedness. The relief always increases in disaster magnitude. The preparedness decreases in the unit cost of preparedness but increases in the unit cost of relief. The preparedness and total loss first decrease then increase in the variance of the disaster magnitude.In the future, the effects of other important factors during disaster management can be analyzed such as budget constraint, interdependence between multiple affected locations, all-hazard including adaptive disasters such as terrorism, and multiple-period decision-making of mitigation and relief. We are also interested in utilizing data analytics on real disaster investment and historical damage data (e.g., Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, 2015) to validate model solutions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
