@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mass-casualty triage: Distribution of victims to multiple hospitals using the SAVE model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate mass casualty victim evacuation to multiple area hospitals.SAVE outperforms currently used heuristics in simulation experiments.These experiments were motivated by collaborative work with an airport.Possible implementation strategies for using the SAVE model are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in service industries,Risk management,Disaster management,Health care,Victim distribution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
During a mass casualty incident (MCI), to which one of several area hospitals should each victim be sent? These decisions depend on resource availability (both transport and care) and the survival probabilities of patients. This paper focuses on the critical time period immediately following the onset of an MCI and is concerned with how to effectively evacuate victims to the different area hospitals in order to provide the greatest good to the greatest number of patients while not overwhelming any single hospital. This resource-constrained triage problem is formulated as a mixed-integer program, which we call the Severity-Adjusted Victim Evacuation (SAVE) model. It is compared with a model in the extant literature and also against several current policies commonly used by the so-called incident commander. The experiments indicate that the SAVE model provides a marked improvement over the commonly used ad-hoc policies and an existing model. Two possible implementation strategies are discussed along with managerial conclusions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Effective disaster management has gained the attention of the public due to numerous recent natural catastrophes. However, in order to succeed at achieving effective disaster management, the definition of the term “disaster” must first be agreed upon. Surprisingly, experts in the disaster management field disagree on an exact definition of the term. However, several common elements appear in most definitions. This paper utilizes the definition of a mass casualty incident (MCI) as defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the terms disaster and MCI are used interchangeably throughout. The WHO defines a mass casualty incident (MCI) as “an incident which generates more patients at one time than locally available resources can manage using routine procedures” (WHO, 2007). Examples of MCI include disasters due to natural hazards (e.g., floods, earthquakes, etc.) or manmade disasters such as a bioterrorism attack.Effective response to a disaster, whether man-made or natural, follows a cyclical, four-step process. These steps include:1.Preparedness.Response.Recovery.Mitigation.Preparedness refers to the actions taken before the disaster to allow effective response. Response refers to the emergency actions taken just before, during, and just after the onset of a disaster to reduce casualties, damage, and disruption. The actions taken after a disaster to repair, rebuild, and restore community life to normalcy is the recovery stage. Mitigation refers to the actions taken both after one disaster and before another to reduce the physical impacts of hazards on a community.The focus here is on the critical time period immediately following the onset of an MCI. After victims have been rescued from immediate danger, they must be triaged and evacuated to a definitive care facility, such as a hospital. The focus of care must be on the population as a whole rather than the individual, providing the greatest good for the greatest number of people (Frykberg, 2005). Triage plays a vital role during this process. It is the process of assigning treatment and evacuation priorities to victims of an MCI and is used to guide the allocation of the limited health care resources. In effect, it helps determine who will be transported to which hospital. (For more details on the principles and practice of triage see Frykberg (2005).)Once the casualties have been triaged, the orderly distribution of victims among different hospitals must take place. However, managing the patient load during a disaster presents a major challenge to hospitals and disaster response managers. Patient allocation decisions are typically made by the so-called “Incident Command” based on resource availability, situation details (mechanism of injury, etc.), and triage data. In urban areas, the possibility of sending victims to one of several hospitals adds an additional layer of complexity to the decision process. Initially the goal is to move all victims out of the immediate vicinity of the disaster scene to a casualty collection area. The location of the casualty collection area should be situated away from the disaster scene due to the dangers it can pose to both health care providers and the survivors (Frykberg, 2002). Patients sent to the casualty collection area are triaged, treated for immediately life threatening injuries, and transported to area hospitals.In practice, managing patient allocation across a group of hospitals is challenging. Often the nearest hospitals are quickly overloaded. There are at least two reasons why the nearest hospitals become overwhelmed. First, critically injured patients require medical intervention as soon as possible. In many cases this necessitates that these patients go to the nearest hospital. Second, decisions regarding the allocation of patients are complex and response managers do not have the ability to dedicate large amounts of resources to that task. An easy allocation scheme for the incident commander is to continue to send victims to the nearest hospital until that hospital says it can no longer accommodate new patients.In order to avoid this geographic effect, a systematic method of distribution of casualties from the casualty collection area among available hospitals should occur in a manner that avoids overloading any single facility. One suggested approach within the urban setting is “leap-frogging” of hospitals by sequential loads of transported casualties (Jacobs, Goody, & Sinclair, 1983). For example, send every third victim to a specific more remote hospital. The problem with this type of allocation scheme is that it is often implemented in a static fashion as given in the example. However, all disasters are dynamic in nature. As new information concerning the disaster and the supporting hospitals becomes available, the allocation mechanism should adjust to this new information.No matter the mechanism, allocation of victims to several facilities will depend on the overall objective. The overriding theme within both the disaster management literature and the disaster management community is to “do the most good for the most number of people”. This objective is not precise. The two prevailing methods that attempt to operationalize this vague objective are START (simple triage and rapid treatment) and SALT (sort, assess, life-saving interventions, treatment and/or transport). Both START and SALT label victims into four broad categories which are intended to be indicative of the how quickly a victim should receive care. Green/Minor victims are considered ambulatory and care can be delayed for hours. Yellow/Delayed victims generally cannot self-evacuate and the goal is for care to begin within an hour. Red/Immediate victims have life-threatening injuries and require care immediately. Black/Deceased victims are mortally wounded and no care is required. One major drawback to both of these triage methodologies is that the prioritization and resource allocation within the Immediate and Delayed categories are often subjective. Researchers have looked at the effectiveness of START (Kahn, Schultz, Miller, & Anderson, 2009) and compared the two methodologies (Cone et al., 2009; Lerner et al., 2008). Both triage methods are deficient in terms of not precisely defining what is meant by “the most good for the most people”. The limitations of the current triage methods motivated the development of the Sacco Triage Method (STM) (Sacco et al., 2005). The STM work does provide a precise definition for the objective and operationalizes it as the expected number of survivors. The work presented here builds upon and enhances the STM model.The proposed model, which we call the SAVE (Severity-Adjusted Victim Evacuation) model, provides several major contributions. First, SAVE explicitly considers multiple hospitals while recommending evacuation decisions. Second, it handles the deteriorating condition of victims and hence the increased care time for them as the disaster unfolds. SAVE also takes into account the treatment capacities at the hospitals. When these limited resources are free to accommodate new victims is based on both the timing and the severity of the victim sent. The explicit consideration of ambulance availability based on when and where the transport was sent is also a contribution of the SAVE model. As is shown in the experimental section of the paper, all of these contributions lead to a better outcome when using SAVE to help manage the disaster. That is, the expected number of survivors from an MCI increases with the use of SAVE.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A literature review, highlighting papers relevant to decision making during the response stage of disaster management is provided in the next section. Section 3 describes the resource constrained triage problem, highlights the STM model, and describes the SAVE model as a way to solve the problem. Section 4 provides the explicit formulation of the SAVE model. The SAVE model is compared to several heuristics currently used in the field in Section 5. Potential implementation strategies are discussed in Section 6. The final section concludes with a discussion of the managerial and policy implications of using the SAVE model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
