@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal crude oil procurement under fluctuating price in an oil refinery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider a practical decision problem faced by many Chinese oil refineries—the optimal procurement of crude oil.This problem is extremely hard for three reasons—highly volatile crude oil prices, high dimensions and a multiperiod time horizon.We introduce an approximate stochastic dynamic programming method.Numerical results reveal that this complex oil procurement problem can be approximately solved with little loss of optimality.The approximate solution significantly outperforms a set of myopic policies that are currently used.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Uncertainty modelling,Risk management,Refinery operation,Procurement,Fluctuating price,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we study the optimal procurement and operation of an oil refinery. The crude oil prices follow geometric Brownian motion processes with correlation. We build a multiperiod inventory problem where each period involves an operation problem such as separation or blending. The decisions are the amount of crude oils to purchase and the amount of oil products to produce. We employ approximate dynamic programming methods to solve this multiperiod multiproduct optimization problem. Numerical results reveal that this complex problem can be approximately solved with little loss of optimality. Further, we find that the approximate solution significantly outperforms a set of myopic policies that are currently used.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The economics of a refinery mainly depends on the interaction between two key elements: the crude oil operations management and procurement management. Traditionally, the focus of the refineries literature is on the operations management, such as crude oil scheduling and blending, refinery design/configuration, product blending control, etc. Studies on the procurement management with uncertain prices were scarce as crude oil prices were relatively stable. Since the new millennium, however, crude oil prices have become extremely volatile. As the crude oil procurement cost is about 90 percent of the total operation cost, ignoring uncertainties in the crude oil prices may result in significant losses.Typical refinery operations involve a wide spectrum of activities, which are extremely complex and heavily linked. In this paper, we investigate optimal crude-oil procurement problem with consideration of the interaction between the price dynamics and the refinery operational decisions. This problem is extremely complex for three reasons.First, crude oil prices are highly volatile. Fig. 1 plots two oils’ weekly average spot prices from January 2004 to November 2013. We observe that the prices fluctuate significantly in short periods. It is interesting to see that the path of a crude oil price resembles the path of a stock value. This similarity is not surprising as many financial institutes and funds play in the oil’s future market. According to Brennan and Schwartz (1985), Paddock, Siegel, and Smith (1988), and Mostafaei, Sani, and Askari (2013), oil prices approximately follow geometric Brownian motion (GBM) processes. The analysis on high-dimensional GBM can be very complex, and optimal solutions may be extremely hard to obtain.Second, the procurement of crude oil is a multiperiod decision. For a Chinese state-owned oil refinery, purchase decisions are made every month or every two months. Managers frequently need to decide whether to purchase now or to wait. The purchase quantity of crude oil is also very hard to decide. No managers would like to purchase a lot of crude oil at very high prices. This multiperiod decision is very challenging and important. A bad decision hurts a manager’s reputation and performance.Third, oil refineries produce or consume multiple products at the same time. For instance, operations such as separation or blending involve multiple products at a given mix. As a result, different crude oils’ purchases are correlated. This correlation turns the problem into a high-dimensional optimization problem. In our project with a regional Chinese state-owned oil refinery, the dimension goes up to 26. This curse of dimensionality prohibits the search of optimal solutions.The contribution of the paper is threefold. First, we approximate the dynamic programming problem using orthogonal array (OA) sampling method and multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) algorithm. Numerical results reveal that the optimal solution of the approximate problem is a near-optimal solution of the original problem. Second, we find that this optimal solution significantly outperforms a set of myopic policies, which first set a minimum inventory requirement at the end of each period and then solve each period independently. Third, numerical results suggest that the superiority is robust to the estimation of oil price drift rate, but not very robust to the volatility of oil price.The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the related literature. Sections 3 and 4 describe the single-period and multiperiod setup, respectively. Section 5 presents an approximate solution approach. We test this approximate solution approach in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 offers some concluding remarks. We conclude this introduction with some notational conventions. Vectors will be in boldface. All vectors are column vectors by default, and primes denote transposes. A bar (for example,V¯) placed above a variable represents the average value of observations on this variable. A hat (for example,V^) placed above a function represents an approximation of that function.Edenotes the expectation. Indicator function 1{x} equals 1 if event x is true and 0 otherwise. Throughout this paper, “increasing” and “decreasing” mean “nondecreasing” and “nonincreasing,” respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
