@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Don't ask, don't tell: Sharing revenues with a dishonest retailer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider a single manufacturer single retailer supply chain that operates under a revenue sharing contract.The retailer can exert effort to increase demand.The retailer's effort and sales are unobservable to the manufacturer, so the retailer can underreport revenues.The retailer's opportunistic behavior can benefit the manufacturer and the supply chain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Information sharing,Asymmetric information,Dishonesty,Revenue-sharing contracts,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When different supply chain parties have private information, some form of information sharing is required to improve supply chain performance. However, it might be difficult to ensure truthful information transfer when firms can benefit from distorting their private information. To investigate the impact of dishonest information transfer, we consider a single-supplier single-retailer supply chain that operates under a contract with a revenue sharing clause, providing the retailer incentive to underreport sales revenues. In practice, suppliers utilize audits based on statistical tools that, for example, compare the retailers’ sales reports and order quantities to limit, but not necessarily eliminate, cheating. We investigate the impact of such limited cheating on the different supply chain constituents. We show that when the retailer can exert sales effort, a supplier might benefit from the retailer's dishonesty. Our findings also suggest that if the retailer's negotiation power is high or if retailer effort is effective, the supplier should reduce the retailer's revenue share and absorb some of the demand risk to increase retailer participation. When facing a less powerful or less capable retailer, the supplier might be better off extracting profitability upfront through a higher wholesale price.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supply chains where firms have private information are exposed to inefficiencies due to double marginalization and information asymmetry. The concept of double marginalization is often associated with the problems that arise as individual parties in a supply chain make their decisions following their own individual incentives, which are usually not aligned with the incentives of the overall supply chain. Over the last years, there has been extensive research on supply chain coordination, and different contract formats have been suggested to align the individual incentives in a supply chain. Sharing sales revenues between a seller and a supplier is one possible way to eliminate or at least mitigate the inefficiencies resulting from double marginalization. In a supply chain where a supplier sells a single good to a single (or multiple noncompeting) retailer(s), Cachon and Lariviere (2005) show contracts based on revenue sharing can coordinate the supply chain and induce an arbitrary profit allocation between the firms.11In the context of VHS rentals, Gerchak, Cho, and Ray (2006) show that the coordinating revenue-sharing contract does not achieve an arbitrary allocation of profits when the retailer's tape switching and holding costs are considered.Sharing of revenues is also a feature of franchise contracts, where revenue sharing is implemented through royalty fees.Inefficiencies due to information asymmetry arise since not all parties in the supply have access to all relevant information. While there has been research on how to elicit this private knowledge or to induce explicit information sharing, complications arise if firms have the ability and incentives to strategically distort the transferred information. We study a supply chain where incentives for such information distortion exist. We consider a supply chain where revenue is shared between the supplier and the retailer, such that the retailer, who actually collects the revenues, has incentive to underreport them. We focus on the informational dynamics that arise when the retailer's demand and sales effort are private information.Under contracts with revenue sharing, the supplier, who cannot observe the revenues being generated, must install the means to monitor revenues to guard himself against dishonest reporting (Varian, 2001). However, continuous and perfect monitoring is rarely possible or feasible. Instead, suppliers may conduct random audits of retailers to deter or minimize dishonest reporting. There are a number of companies (e.g., Audigence, KPMG, etc.), who offer contract compliance services to suppliers to uncover underreporting and noncompliance to contracts. While prohibitive costs and implementation issues are often cited as reasons why audits cannot completely eliminate cheating in practice, Heese and Kemahlioglu Ziya (2014) show that completely eliminating cheating is not in the best interest of the supplier even if auditing is free. In this paper, we analyze a related but different scenario. We focus on a situation where the supplier has formed an expectation regarding how an honest retailer would behave. Any sales reports that do not conform to these expectations result in such dire consequences for the retailer that he always chooses to appear honest and never triggers an audit. In addition, different from Heese and Kemahlioglu Ziya, we assume that the retailer can exert unobservable effort to increase demand.We consider a stylized supply chain with a single retailer and a single supplier, operating under a contract that stipulates sharing of revenues between them. In each period, the market size of the retailer is either low (with probability p) or high (with probability 1 − p), and the probability of low demand can be reduced through retailer effort. While the retailer knows the true value of p, the supplier does not. Note that our model of demand information asymmetry is different from and more complex than the one most often used in the literature, where the retailer privately knows whether she will face high or low demand (denoted as the retailer's type) before she places an order with the supplier. In our model, the retailer only knows the probability with which she will face high or low demand, so infinitely many retailer types are possible. Since the supplier neither knows p nor observes sales, he relies on the retailer's sales reports to estimate demand. We assume that the supplier is following an auditing strategy that tracks for obvious inconsistencies between the retailer's purchasing and sales reporting behavior and will audit her if there are notable inconsistencies (we define the exact mechanism in the following sections).Our first goal is to analyze how dishonesty (i.e., underreporting of sales) affects the retailer's decisions and impacts supplier and supply chain profits. To benchmark the results, we first analyze the behavior of an honest retailer, that is, one who reports sales truthfully, and we address the following questions: How does a dishonest retailer's order quantity and sales effort differ from that of an honest retailer? How does dishonesty affect the supplier and the supply chain? Not surprisingly, a dishonest retailer orders for the high-demand scenario for a wider range of parameter values than an honest one and is more likely to exert sales effort. Underreporting never causes a decrease in supply chain profits and sometimes results in an increase. We characterize the parameter regions where the latter happens.Our second goal is to gain insights on how a supplier should adjust his objectives in contract term negotiations when suspecting the retailer is dishonest. Our intent is not to design a mechanism that coordinates the channel, but rather to understand how a contract with a revenue sharing clause works in a channel, where the retailer can underreport revenues. Note that under our model of information asymmetry, it would be very difficult for a (Stackelberg) supplier to design a simple contract that coordinates the channel and extracts all profit. For example, two-part tariffs are used to coordinate the supply chain in many settings, as they allow the supplier to align the incentives through marginal cost pricing and then extract all surplus through a fixed fee (“selling the firm”). In our context however, the supplier does not know the retailer's demand distribution, so it would be impossible to determine the size of the fixed transfer payment. Designing a contract that elicits truthful demand information (i.e., the value of p) from a potentially dishonest retailer is not our objective either. It may be possible to elicit truthful information using a contract that is designed based on the principal-agent framework and mechanism design principles, but such contracts are usually complex to implement and require the supplier to make take-it-or-leave-it offers where, in practice, contract terms are usually determined through negotiations. Our goal is to provide insights regarding favorable contract terms for a supplier, who faces a potentially dishonest retailer. Therefore, given a distribution of bargaining power between the supplier and the retailer (defined as the ratio of retailer margin to supply-chain margin), we derive insights as to what the supplier should aim for in contract negotiations when the retailer is prone to underreporting sales.Intuition suggests that when the supplier cannot verify sales and the retailer underreports revenues, the supplier might favor a wholesale price-only contract over a revenue-sharing contract to reduce his exposure to cheating. Comparing the supplier's profits under a wholesale price-only contract that eliminates cheating with those under a revenue-sharing contract, we derive insights on when a supplier might prefer to absorb more or less risk. Surprisingly, our results suggest that the supplier will often prefer a revenue-sharing contract, even when facing a dishonest retailer.Our results have several practical implications. The need to monitor revenues accurately has long been cited as a barrier against the implementation of revenue-sharing contracts. Our results show that this is not necessarily a concern and, as long as blatant cheating can be prevented, leaving some room for underreporting may improve supplier and supply chain profits by aligning the retailer's decisions with those of the supply chain. We also provide insights for suppliers regarding contract choice when faced with a dishonest retailer. We find that suppliers may be better off using revenue-sharing contracts when the retailer's bargaining power is high and a wholesale price-only contract if the retailer's negotiation power is low. We show that there exists an all units quantity discount contract that coordinates the supply chain and which, by design, is not subject to underreporting risk. Intuition might suggest that the supplier would always be better off using that contract over revenue sharing when faced with a dishonest retailer. However, from our numerical study, we observe that the supplier is making at least as much money under a revenue-sharing contract (with limited underreporting) as under the best coordinating quantity discount contract. The managerial implication is that a revenue-sharing contract that leaves some room for underreporting might be an attractive contract choice for the supplier as long as he is able to prevent blatant cheating.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
