@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tactical berth allocation under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper investigates the tactical-level berth allocation problem.This paper proposes both a stochastic programming formulation and a robust formulation.The relationship between the two models is also investigated in an analytic way.Some solution methods are suggested for solving the models.Numerical experiments are performed to validate the effectiveness of the models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scheduling,Berth allocation,Container terminals,Uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The tactical berth allocation problem (BAP) concerns the allocation of favorite berthing positions to ships that periodically call at the terminals. This paper investigates the tactical-level berth allocation scheduling models. First a deterministic model for tactical BAP is formulated with considering the periodicity of schedule. However, in reality, the number of containers that need to be handled (discharging & loading) for each ship is uncertain in the ship's future periods. Thus for the tactical BAP, there is significant uncertainty with respect to the operation time (dwell time) of ships, which further complicates the traditional berth allocation decisions. From stochastic perspective, this paper proposes both a stochastic programming formulation that can cope with arbitrary probability distributions of ships’ operation time deviation, and a robust formulation that is applicable to situations in which limited information about probability distributions is available. The relationship between the two models is also investigated in an analytic way. Some meta-heuristic algorithms are suggested for solving the models. Numerical experiments are performed to validate the effectiveness of the proposed models and the efficiency of the proposed solution algorithms. The experiments also compare the above stochastic programming formulation and the robust formulation models, as well as evaluate their potential benefits in practice. This study finds that the robust method can derive a near optimal solution to the stochastic model in a fast way, and also has the benefit of limiting the worst-case outcome of the tactical BAP decisions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The berth allocation problem (BAP) is an important issue for the operations management in container terminals. It is mainly referred to the assignment of quay space and service time to ships that have to be discharged and loaded at a terminal. For a comprehensive overview on BAP, we refer to the review work given by Bierwirth and Meisel (2010). The extant literature deals largely with the operational-level BAP in deterministic environments with complete information. However, this paper investigates the tactical-level BAP, which is also known as home berth template planning (Moorthy & Teo, 2006). The tactical BAP arises in large container terminals and concerns the allocation of favorite berthing positions to ships which periodically call at the terminals (Giallombardo, Moccia, Salani, & Vacca, 2010). This paper studies how to obtain a robust berth allocation schedule under stochastic operation time (dwell time) of ships. Different from the deterministic operational-level BAP, the robust planning of tactical BAP supports the decisions made by port operators in the negotiation process with shipping liners. In this process, the port operators should try to satisfy the expected berthing time of ships, but also incorporate a degree of anticipation of uncertainty during the schedule's execution. From the stochastic perspective, this paper proposes both a stochastic programming formulation that can cope with arbitrary probability distributions of ships’ operation time deviations, and a robust formulation that is applicable to situations in which limited information about probability distributions is available. We compare the above two models and evaluate the potential benefits in practice. On the basis of numerical experiments, we find that the robust method can derive a near optimal solution to the stochastic model in a fast way, and also has the benefit of limiting the worst-case outcome of the tactical BAP decisions.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related works. In Section 3, we provide the background of the tactical BAP, and propose a deterministic model with considering the periodicity of schedule. Section 4 presents a stochastic programming model that takes account of random extra operation time of ships. In Section 5, some meta-heuristic algorithms are suggested for solving the model. Section 6 addresses a robust formulation model, and also discusses the potential relationship between the robust model and the stochastic programming model. Section 7 reports the numerical results and management implications based on the experiments using some sets of real world like instances. Some possible extensions of this study are also discussed in Section 8. Closing remark and summary are then outlined in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper studies the tactical-level berth allocation problem under uncertain ships’ operation time (dwell time) in the port. From stochastic perspective, this paper proposes two types of the stochastic models for handling the uncertainty. The relationship between the two models is also investigated in an analytic way. Some meta-heuristic algorithms are suggested for solving the models. Numerical experiments are performed to validate the effectiveness of the proposed models and the efficiency of the proposed solution algorithms. By comparing with other scholars’ work on the related areas, the contribution mainly includes four aspects:(1)Most of studies on berth allocation problems are operational-level decisions, and do not consider the periodicity of ships’ arrivals. The models proposed in this study take account of this feature. Besides the application in berth allocation problems, the proposed methodology can also apply in some other problems on job (or service) scheduling, in which the jobs (or services) will periodically call at a work station (service center) and the service time is random.For handling the random operation time (dwell time) of ships, this paper proposes both a stochastic programming formulation model and a robust formulation model. The former one can cope with arbitrary probability distributions of ships’ operation time deviation, while the latter one is applicable to situations in which limited information about probability distributions is available.The robust formulation model not only has the benefit of limiting the worst-case outcome of the tactical berth allocation decisions, but also can be solved faster and needs fewer inputs than the stochastic programming formulation model. So this study investigates the relationship between the two models, and proposes a heuristic for controlling a parameter in the robust formulation model so as to derive a near-optimal solution to the stochastic programming formulation model in a more efficient way.The proposed models are intractable by CPLEX and some exact solution methods when the numbers of ships and berths are large. This paper develops a scalable meta-heuristic algorithm that can well solve the proposed models in large-scale realistic environments. Numerical experiments are conducted to prove the necessity of the proposed model and also validate the efficiency of the proposed meta-heuristic algorithm. For a set of real world like instances, the algorithm can obtain good berth allocation plans within a reasonable time.However, there are limitations for the current study. First, the randomness of the ships’ arrival time is not considered explicitly in the models. This issue can bring more challenges to the model formulation because the earliness and the tardiness of ships’ arrival may change the precedence of ships in each berth. If the deviation of ships’ arrival time is not very large, we can combine it with the deviation of ships’ operation time and consider the uncertain issues together through random parameter δi. Then all the proposed methodology in this paper can also apply in this case. In addition, the considerations on quay cranes assignment, multiple periods, continuous berth allocation, and increasing cost rates, are not taken into account in the this study. However, all of these possible extensions are discussed in this paper. All of the above issues will be improved in future studies. Last but not least, this study is mainly based on mathematical programming methodologies. To give a more convincing validation for these proposed models, some specialized and detailed simulation models need to be developed in the future studies.