@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Product inspection policy for an imperfect production system with inspection errors and warranty cost

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Product inspection policy is considered.Two types of inspection errors namely Type I error and Type II error are introduced.Warranty cost is assumed for non-inspected items.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Production,Manufacturing system,Product inspection policy,Inspection errors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
During manufacturing of products, all produced items are considered as perfect in general. This viewpoint of taking all finished products are perfect is not correct always. Defective items may occur during the production process for several reasons. This paper describes a deteriorating production process which randomly shifts to out-of-control state from in-control state. In case of full inspection policy, expected total cost together with inspection cost results higher inventory cost. Therefore, product inspection policy is better to use for reducing inspection costs. During product inspection process, inspectors may choose falsely a defective item as non-defective and vice-versa. Type I and Type II errors are incorporated in this model to make more realistic rather than existing models. This model includes a warranty policy for some fixed time periods. Some numerical examples, sensitivity analysis, and graphical representations are given to illustrate this model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For any manufacturing industry, the minimization of cost is a major consideration with product’s quality. High quality products always lead to a higher cost and in-turn low quality products result to a lower cost. It is quite natural that manufactures decide the product’s quality by product inspection policy. During the process inspection policy, inspection cost needs much attention which indicates the increasing value of labor cost. To reduce inspection cost, instead of full inspection policy, only product inspection policy is utilized. For this inspection policy, defective products are detected easily with lower inspection cost. The aim of this inspection policy is to determine any quality defects that would prevent shipment of poor products. By utilizing this product inspection policy, shipments cost can be minimized by avoiding the dispatch of any imperfect quality products. Chryssolouris and Patel (1987) discussed the production process where imperfect items are detected through product inspection policy. Kim and Hong (1999) considered an economic manufacturing quantity (EMQ) model in an imperfect process which describes a random deterioration from an in-control state to an out-of-control state with an arbitrary distribution and some defective items. Wang and Sheu (2001) described the relationship between production, inventory, and inspection in a deteriorating production system. Chryssolouris (2006) developed several quality related issues for the process control. Previous research work with offline inspection policy of products was extended by Wang and Meng (2009). Bendavid and Herer (2009) introduced an optimal policy that obtains the number of units to inspect and the number of disposal units to minimize the expected cost. Hassan and Diab (2010) incorporated a visual inspection approach that can be used on line to test simultaneously multiple qualities characteristics. Based on tolerance bands of each characteristic, an index is experimentally developed to reflect the deviation of a quality characteristic dimension from its nominal value. Sarkar, Sana, and Chaudhuri (2010) formulated an optimal production lot size, safety stock, and reliability parameter where the production facility is subject to random breakdown of machinery system. They generalized the model with preventive and corrective maintenance, safety stock for repair items, and shortages. Laofor and Peansupap (2012) surveyed an innovative system for defective detection and quantification that able to augment for visual quality inspections. Chen (2013) formulated the integrated problem of production, preventive maintenance (PM), and inspection in an imperfect production process where rework and PM errors exist. Baudet, Maire, and Pillet (2013) described how a sensory analysis test can be applied for the visual inspection of product surface.The basic economic production quantity (EPQ) model assumes that all produced items are perfect. But it is almost impossible for any production system because of long-run production process. Imperfect quality or poor items may be produced during long-run production system. During production, the system may transfer to out-of-control state from in-control state at any random time. Thus, producing items are not always perfect. Generally it depends on the condition of production process. Usually, when the production process starts, the machine is in-control state and items produced are near about 100 percent perfect quality. After sometimes, it transfers to out-of-control state and produces defective products. In this direction, (Porteus, 1986) discussed about process quality by reducing the probability of the process moved to out-of-control state. Rosenblatt and Lee (1986) modeled the variable proportion of defective items for linear, exponential, and multi-state deteriorating processes. Tseng, Yeh, and Ho (1998) examined several maintenance policies for deteriorating production systems. Ben-Daya (2002) derived an integrated model for joint determination of economic production quantity and preventive maintenance (PM) level in an imperfect process with increasing hazard rate. Chung and Hou (2003) developed a production model to obtain an optimal run time for a deteriorating production system with allowable shortages. Lee (2005) investigated an imperfect production system with imperfect product quality and supplied quantity. Lin, Chiu, and Ting (2008) discussed an algebraic approach to replace the use of calculus on the cost function as well as long-run average production-inventory costs in an imperfect EMQ model. Liao, Chen, and Sheu (2009) extended previous works by assuming a deteriorating production system with increasing hazard rate: imperfect repair and rework upon failure (out-of-control state). Ouyang and Chang (2013) discussed effects of reworking for imperfect quality items, trade-credit policy, and complete backlogging in an economic production quantity model. Tai (2013) developed two economic production quantity (EPQ) models for deteriorating/imperfect items with rework process. Sarkar and Moon (2014) established the relationship between quality improvement, reorder point, lead time, and backorder rate in an imperfect production process. Sarkar, Chaudhuri, and Moon (2014) surveyed an inventory model with improved quality and backorder price discount under controllable lead time.Quality of any product can be obtained through product inspection policy by assuming 100 percent perfect inspection process. But in general, inspection process is not error free in reality as all machines are not allow 100 percent perfect inspections and human factors are involved. There may be a possibility of Type I error (falsely rejecting non-defective items) or Type II error (falsely accepting defective items) in any industry. Type I error generates when a perfect item is rejected and it implies manufacturer’s risk. On the other hand, Type II error generates when the acceptance of an imperfect lot is considered and it implies customer’s risk. It is also considered that cost of falsely accepted defective items is much greater than cost of falsely rejected non-defective items. Because, falsely accepted defective items in system may result system failure which causes loss of human lives. Raz and Bricker (1993) considered inspection errors during screening in an production process. Rentoul, Mullineux, and Medland (1994) studied several ways of inspection errors in manufacturing system which are made by comparing inspection points with a solid model of the desired component. Wang and Sheu (2003) determined an optimal production, inspection, and maintenance policy under the effect of process inspection errors. An inspection policy with two types of inspection errors to accept the economic production quantity for real world applications was considered by Wang (2007). An inventory model in an imperfect production process with the preventive maintenance and inspection errors was considered by Darwish and Ben-Daya (2007). Wang, Dohi, and Tsai (2010) considered a partial inspection approach over commonly used policies for both full and no inspection. Lin, Chen, and Chen (2011) investigated an imperfect production system for production lot size, maintenance, and quality with increasing hazard rates. Yoo, Kim, and Park (2012) obtained an optimal lot size in an imperfect production with inspection, customer return, and defective disposal. Hsu and Hsu (2013) developed an economic order quantity (EOQ) model with imperfect quality items, inspection errors, shortages, and sales returns. Cárdenas-Barrón, Sarkar, and Treviño Garza (2013) deduced an economic manufacturing quantity (EMQ) model for rework and multiple shipments. Sarkar, Gupta, Chaudhuri, and Goyal (2014) formulated an inventory model with inspection policy and variable lead time. Sarkar, Chaudhuri, and Moon (2014) discussed quality improvement of products and setup cost reduction for a continuous-review inventory model with a service level constraint. Sarkar, Cárdenas-Barrón, Sarkar, and Singgih (2014) obtained an inventory model by assuming random defective rates which follow three different distribution functions such as uniform, triangular, and beta.Warranty period is the time period in which a sale out product provides satisfactory performance to the customer offered by the retailer. If any purchased product/sale out item failed to work within its warranty period, then the retailer replace it with a new item or repair one part or some parts of that product. Warranty cost or post sale cost includes repair cost, parts replacement cost, and labor cost. Chun and Tang (1995) developed an inventory model with the free-replacement and fixed-period warranty policy within a given warranty period. Monga and Zuo (1998) derived a problem on reliability based design of a series-parallel system by considering burn-in, warranty, and maintenance. Wang (2004) deduced an economic production quantity problem in an imperfect production process with a free-repair warranty policy. Wang (2005) described product-inspection policy for a deteriorating production system. Chen and Lo (2006) developed an imperfect production system with allowable shortages for products with free minimal repair warranty. Giri and Dohi (2007) described an inventory model under two different inspection policies: (i) no action is taken during a production-run unless the system is discovered in an out-of-control state by inspection and (ii) preventive repair action is undertaken once the in-control state of the process is detected by inspection. Darghouth, Chelbi, and Ait-kadi (2012) presented an analytical model taking into account the commitments of manufacturer and customer. The model gives some instants where the inspections are performed by considering the warranty period. See Table 1for contribution of different authors.This paper describes a production process in which the machinery system shifts from in-control state to out-of-control state at any random time. It is considered that once the system transfers to out-of-control state, it remains there until the production-run. The out-of-control state of the imperfect process follows a probabilistic distribution until the production stops. Defective items are detected through product inspection and are reworked at some fixed cost. On the other hand, non-inspected defective items are transported to the market for sale with warranty/post sale cost. This paper is formulated to minimize the expected total cost per item by the product inspection policy and production-run length. The orientation of the paper is as follows: In Section 2, notation and assumptions are discussed. The mathematical model is given in Section 3. In Section 4, some numerical examples and sensitivity analysis are presented to illustrate the model. Finally, conclusions and future extensions of this model are given in Section 5.The following notation are used to develop this modelDecision variablest production-run length (unit time)u non-inspected fraction in a batch (0 ≤ u ≤ 1) (units)Parametersd annual demand per unit time (units/unit time)p production rate per unit time (units/unit time)k setup cost for each production-run per setup (dollar/setup)h unit inventory holding cost of a product per unit time (dollar/unit/unit time)Cmlabor cost to construct a single item (dollar/unit)θ1 percentage of defective items produced in in-control stateθ2 percentage of defective items developed in out-of-control state, θ2 > θ1X random variable during the elapsed time of system in in-control stateF(x) distribution function of XF¯(x)survival function of X i.e.,F¯(x)=1−F(x)f(x) probability density function of XE(X) mean lifetime of Xη fixed cost to check production process for determining the state of system (dollar)r restoration cost to transfer the process to in-control state if the system is in out-of-control state (dollar)C1 unit inspection cost (dollar/unit)Cssalvaged cost per defective lot after inspection (dollar/defective lot)Cwpost sale (warranty) cost for non-inspected defective lots (dollar/non-inspected defective lot)Cacost of falsely accepting defective lot (dollar/defective lot)Crcost of falsely rejecting non-defective lot (dollar/non-defective lot)m1 random variable representing Type I errorm2 random variable representing Type II errorCddefective cost includes the costs of defective lot (dollar/defective lot)C(t, u) expected total cost per item (dollar/unit)The following assumptions are considered to formulate this model1.Initially, production starts from in-control state for a single type of product. After some time, the production system shifts to out-of-controlstate until the end of the production-run.As p > d, there is no shortage in this model.This model assumes θ1 < θ2 i.e., the probability of number of defective items in in-control state is less than the probability of number of defective items in out-of-control state.The product inspection policy is performed to detect the defective items. These items are salvaged with some cost Cs.Two types of errors i.e., Type I and Type II errors are introduced during product inspection policy.This model considers a manufacturing system for single type of products such as glass, food products, and electronic gadgets. Initially the production system starts from in-control state and shifts to out-of-control state at any random time and it stays in out-of-control state until the end of the production-run. The probability (θ1) of the number of defective items in in-control state is less than the probability (θ2) of the number of defective items in out-of-control state. Once the production system stops, the product inspection policy is carried out to detect defective items. This model considers negligible product inspection time. The product inspection policy starts from the (ptu)th item till the end of the production system. It indicates thatu=0andu=1are full inspection as well as no inspection, respectively. It is assumed that while screening products, the inspectors make errors as Type I error and Type II error. They separate some non-defective products as defective, i.e.,(1−θ1)m1in in-control state and(1−θ2)m1in out-of-control state. On the other hand, they classify some defective items as non-defective, i.e., θ1m2 in in-control state and θ2m2 in out-of-control state. After product inspection with inspection cost, defective items are salvaged at some fixed cost Csbefore being shipped. In addition, non-inspected defective items are taken as salvable products and those items are sent to the market with post sale (warranty) cost Cw. Generally, it is assumed thatC1+Cs<Cw.Now the expected total cost per item C(t, u) is derived as follows:(i)Labor cost to make a single product is Cm.From Fig. 1in ΔOAF, the inventory level starts withp−drate and in ΔFAB, the inventory level depletes with a rate−d. Hence, the average inventory is(p−d)2d. Therefore, holding cost for carrying a single product during the time interval t ish(p−d)t2d.Setup cost for each production-run is k. During the production-run length t with the production rate p, the total produced items are pt. Therefore, setup cost per item iskpt.Fixed cost to check production process for obtaining the state of system is η. Thus the process inspection cost per item isηpt,where pt is total produced items.While the process shifts to out-of-control state, the process is transferred back to in-control state with some restoration cost r. Hence, the restoration cost per unit item isrF(t)pt,where pt is total produced items.Non-inspected fraction in every batch is assumed as u. Thus, the inspected fraction is(1−u). Therefore, product inspection cost per item isC1(1−u).To determine defective cost before and after sale, there are three cases which are as follows:Case 1 X ≥ t,Case 2 ut < X < t, andCase 3 0 ≤ X ≤ ut.Case 1 X ≥ tIn this case, the whole production process is in in-control state [See Fig. 1]. Product inspection starts from (ptu)th item until the end of finished products. The production time interval [0, t] can be divided into two sub-intervals i.e., [0, ut] and [ut, t], where u is the non-inspected fraction in every batch. During the time interval [0, ut], non-inspected defective items i.e., θ1put are shipped to market with some warranty cost Cw. On the other hand, inspected defective items i.e,θ1p(t−ut)are salvaged at some fixed cost Csin [ut, t].Therefore, the cost of defective items isCd=Cwθ1put+Csθ1p(t−ut).Case 2 ut < X < tDuring the time interval [0, X], the production process is in in-control state and in [X, t] the process is in out-of-control state. From Fig. 2, it is cleared that the production cycle time interval [0, t] can be divided into three sub-intervals i.e., [0, ut], [ut, X], and [X, t]. Throughout the time interval [0, ut], non-inspected defective items i.e., θ1put are shipped to market with some warranty cost Cw. Inspected defective items i.e,θ1p(X−ut)in [ut, X] andθ2p(t−X)in [X, t] are salvaged at some fixed cost Cs.Therefore, the cost of defective items isCd=Cwθ1put+Csθ1p(X−ut)+Csθ2p(t−X).Case 3 0 ≤ X ≤ utFrom Fig. 3, it can be seen that the production cycle time interval [0, t] can be divided into three sub-intervals i.e., [0, X], [X, ut], and [ut, t]. Non-inspected defective items i.e., θ1pX in [0, X] andθ2p(ut−X)in [X, ut] are transferred to market with some warranty cost Cw. On the other hand, inspected defective items i.e,θ2p(t−ut)are salvaged at some fixed cost Csthroughout the time interval [ut, t].Therefore, the cost of defective items isCd=Cwθ1pX+Cwθ2p(ut−X)+Csθ2p(t−ut).Hence, the defective cost Cdincluding the cost of defective items before and after sale isCd={Cwθ1put+Csθ1p(t−ut);ifX≥tCwθ1put+Csθ1p(X−ut)+Csθ2p(t−X);ifut<X<tCwθ1pX+Cwθ2p(ut−X)+Csθ2p(t−ut);if0≤X≤ut}This model considers inspection errors (Type I error and Type II error) during product inspection policy.Case 1 X ≥ tDuring product inspection in the time interval [ut, t], inspectors acceptsθ1p(t−ut)defective items in which falsely accept defective itemsθ1p(t−ut)m2with some fixed cost Caper unit and falsely reject non-defective items(1−θ1)p(t−ut)with some fixed cost Crper unit.Therefore, the defective cost isCrp(t−ut)(1−θ1)m1+Caθ1p(t−ut)(1−m2).Case 2 ut < X < tDuring the time interval [ut, X], inspectors acceptsθ1p(X−ut)defective items in which falsely accept defective itemsθ1p(X−ut)m2with some fixed cost Caper unit and falsely reject non-defective items(1−θ1)p(X−ut)with some fixed cost Crper unit. Also, throughout the time interval [X, t], inspectors acceptsθ2p(t−X)defective items in which falsely accept defective itemsθ2p(t−X)m2with some fixed cost Caper unit and falsely reject non-defective items(1−θ2)p(t−X)with some fixed cost Crper unit.Therefore, the defective cost for misclassification of produced items isp(X−ut)[Caθ1(1−m2)+Cr(1−θ1)m1]+p(t−X)[Caθ2(1−m2)+Cr(1−θ2)m1].Case 3 0 ≤ X ≤ utIn the time interval [ut, t], inspectors acceptsθ2p(t−ut)defective items in which falsely accept defective itemsθ2p(t−ut)m2with some fixed cost Caper unit and falsely reject non-defective items(1−θ2)p(t−ut)with some fixed cost Crper unit.Therefore, the defective cost for misclassification of produced items isp(t−ut)[Caθ2(1−m2)+Cr(1−θ2)m1].After adding Type I error and Type II error, the defective cost CdbecomesCd={P+Crp(t−ut)(1−θ1)m1+Caθ1p(t−ut)(1−m2);ifX≥tQ+p(X−ut)[Caθ1(1−m2)+Cr(1−θ1)m1]+p(t−X)[Caθ2(1−m2)+Cr(1−θ2)m1];ifut<X<tR+p(t−ut)[Caθ2(1−m2)+Cr(1−θ2)m1];if0≤X≤ut}whereP=Cwθ1put+Csθ1p(t−ut),Q=Cwθ1put+Csθ1p(X−ut)+Csθ2p(t−X),andR=Cwθ1pX+Cwθ2p(ut−X)+Csθ2p(t−ut).The expected total cost of per defective item isE[Cd]=[(1−u)Csθ2+Ca(1−E[m2])θ2+CrE[m1](1−θ2)+Cwuθ2]+[(θ1−θ2)Cs+Ca(1−E[m2])−CrE[m1]∫uttF¯(x)dx]t+[Cw(θ1−θ2)∫0utF¯(x)dx]tNow, the expected total cost per item i.e., C(t, u) is given byC(t, u)=labor cost+holding cost+setup cost+process inspection cost+restoration cost+product inspection cost+defective cost and warranty cost=Cm+h(p−d)t2d+kpt+ηpt+rF(t)pt+C1(1−u)+[(1−u)(Csθ2+Ca(1−E[m2])θ2+CrE[m1](1−θ2))+Cwuθ2]+[Cw(θ1−θ2)∫0utF¯(x)dx]t+[(θ1−θ2)(Cs+Ca(1−E[m2])−CrE[m1])∫uttF¯(x)dx]tAs C(t, u) is non-linear function of t and u. Thus, it is very much difficult to obtain some closed form solutions for this model. Hence, we use numerical method to obtain the solution.Using the numerical data from (Wang, 2005), the expected total cost per item C(t, u), production-run length t, and non-inspected fraction in a batch u are determined. Mathematica 9 as a tool is used to obtain expected total cost per item C(t, u). Assuming that, the fraction of defective and the percentage of inspection errors (Type I and Type II) follow a Weibull distribution, where the probability density function of Weibull distribution isf(x;α,β)={αβ(αx)β−1e(−αx)βifX≥00ifX<0}where α > 0 and β > 0.Example 1LetK=k+η=dollar50/setup,p=40units/hour,d=30units/hour,Cs=dollar1/defective lot,θ1=0,θ2=0.05,h=dollar0.08/unit/hour,Cm=0,Cw=dollar25/non-inspected defective lot,r=dollar100,C1=dollar0.1/unit,E[m1]=0.01,E[m2]=0.04,Ca=dollar0.023/defective lot,Cr=dollar0.01/non-defective lot,α=0.1,andβ=1,then the expected total cost per itemC(t,u)=dollar0.598and the expected total cost is dollar 400.85, production-run lengtht=16.758hours, and non-inspected fraction in a batchu=0.0005units.The optimum total cost C(t, u) versus non-inspected fraction in a batch u and production run length t are given by Fig. 4.In Wang (2005), labor cost to construct a single item Cmis zero. But in reality, the value of Cmmust be non-zero. We assume the labor cost Cmas dollar 0.02/unit and all values are same as Example 1.Then the expected total cost per itemC(t,u)=dollar0.618and the expected total cost is dollar 414.26, production-run lengtht=16.76hours, and non-inspected fraction in a batchu=0.0005units.The optimum total cost C(t, u) versus non-inspected fraction in a batch u and production-run length t are given by Fig. 5.In Wang (2005), percentage of defective items produced in in-control state i.e., θ1 is zero. But, in reality during in-control state of production process, any machine may produce defective items. Therefore, the value of θ1 must be non-zero. We assume defective items produced in in-control state i.e., θ1 as 0.002 and the labor cost Cmas dollar 0.02/unit and all values are same as Example 1.Then the expected total cost per itemC(t,u)=dollar0.618and the expected total cost is dollar 414.28, production-run lengtht=16.8hours, and non-inspected fraction in a batchu=0.000277units.The optimum total cost C(t, u) versus production-run length t and non-inspected fraction in a batch u are given by Fig. 6.Sensitivity analysisThe sensitivity analysis of the key parameters of the model are given based on Example 1 in Table 2.In this section, sensitivity analysis are given to obtain the effect of several parameters such as h, Cw, r, and C1, respectively on the expected total cost per item C(t, u).•If unit inventory holding cost of a product per unit time h increases then expected total cost per item C(t, u) increases. This model is more sensitive with the percentage change in h. As produced products are sent for inspection procedure one by one, therefore holding cost for produced items incurs less amount. The negative percentage change is greater than the positive percentage change in h.The expected total cost per item C(t, u) increases if post sale (warranty) cost for non-inspected defective lots Cwincreases. The parameter Cwis less sensitive as non-inspected fraction in every batch i.e., u is very small. Therefore non-inspected defective items are very few. These items are sale out with some warranty cost Cw.The expected total cost per item C(t, u) also increases while restoration cost to transfer the process to in-controlstate if the system is in out-of-control state r increases. This model is more sensitive in negative than positive percentage change for r.The expected total cost per item C(t, u) increases if the parameter C1 increases. The unit inspection cost C1 is almost similar for both positive and negative percentage changes.The sensitivity analysis of the key parameters of the model are given based on Example 2 in Table 3.Sensitivity analysis are considered to determine the effect of several parameters such as h, Cm, Cw, r, and C1, respectively on the expected total cost per item C(t, u).•The expected total cost per item C(t, u) increases if unit inventory holding cost of a product per unit time h increases. This model is more sensitive with the percentage change in h. As produced products are sent for inspection procedure one by one, therefore holding cost for produced items incurs less amount.It is found that the percentage change in labor cost to construct a single item Cmis equal for both positive and negative changes. The expected total cost per item C(t, u) increases if the parameter Cmincreases.The parameter Cwis less sensitive as non-inspected fraction in every batch i.e., u is very small. Therefore non-inspected defective items are very few. These items are sale out with some warranty cost Cw. An increasing value in post sale (warranty) cost for non-inspected defective lots Cwincreases the expected total cost per item C(t, u).While restoration cost to transfer the process for in-controlstate if the system is in out-of-control state r increases, the expected total cost per item C(t, u) also increases. This values for r are more sensitive in negative than positive percentage change.As the parameter C1 increases then the expected total cost per item C(t, u) also increases. The values of unit inspection cost C1 are almost equal for both positive and negative percentage changes.The sensitivity analysis of the key parameters of the model are given based on Example 3 in Table 4.The effect of various parameters as h, Cm, Cw, r, and C1, respectively on the expected total cost per item C(t, u) are discussed in this section.•From the above table, it can be found that this model is more sensitive with the percentage change in h. As produced products are sent for inspection procedure one by one, therefore holding cost for produced items incurs less amount. The expected total cost per item C(t, u) increases if unit inventory holding cost of a product per unit time h increases.The expected total cost per item C(t, u) increases if the parameter Cmincreases. The percentage change in labor cost to construct a single item Cmis same for both positive and negative percentage changes.While post sale (warranty) cost for non-inspected defective lots Cwincreases, the expected total cost per item C(t, u) also increases. The parameter Cwis less sensitive as non-inspected fraction in every batch i.e., u is very small. Hence non-inspected defective items are very few which are sale out with some warranty cost Cw.This model is more sensitive in negative than positive percentage change for r. While restoration cost to transfer the process to in-control state if the system is in out-of-control state r increases, the expected total cost per item C(t, u) also increases.It is observed that percentage change in the unit inspection cost C1 is almost similar for both positive and negative percentage changes. The expected total cost per item C(t, u) increases if the parameter C1 increases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper derived an economic production quantity (EPQ) model where the process deteriorated based on production of defective products. To avoid the higher cost of inspection, product inspection policy was performed instead of full inspection policy where the product inspection policy was not error free. Two types of errors namely Type I error and Type II error were introduced in this study. After the product inspection, inspected defective items are salvaged at some fixed cost and warranty cost were included for non-inspected defective items. The expected total cost per item was minimized by obtaining the production-run length and non-inspected fraction of batch. Some numerical examples are given to prove more saving from the existing literature. Thus, by using this policy (product inspection policy), this model saved more than the existing model belongs to this field. Therefore, industry sector will be more benefited if they use product inspection policy instead of process inspection. They should consider inspection errors as the inspectors are human and human can make mistakes. In future, this model can be extended by applying the following feature as machine breakdown. It will be a nice contribution if this model will assume some finite inspection time in production-run.