@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Joint employee weekly timetabling and daily rostering: A decision-support tool for a logistics platform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Timetabling and daily rostering application with the special constraints of logistics environment.Optimization methods with three sequential mixed and integer linear programs.Tool tested with industrial data and completely implemented at a logistics company.Assessment of the robustness of the daily rostering when the input data changes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Manpower planning,Logistics,Mixed integer linear programming,Sequential solving,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To deal with their highly variable workload, logistics companies make their task force flexible using multi-skilled employees, flexible working hours or short-term contracts. Together with the legal constraints and the handling equipments’ capacities, these possibilities make personnel scheduling a complex task. This paper describes a model to support their chain of decisions from the weekly timetabling to the daily rostering (detailed task allocation).We divide the problem into three sub-problems depending on the type of decision to be made: (1) workforce dimensioning, (2) task allocation for a week, and (3) detailed rostering for a day. The three decisions are made sequentially, the output of a step being the input of the next one. Each step is modeled as a mixed integer linear program which is described and commented.The proposed models are tested with industrial data as well as generated instances. From the observations made in an industrial context, we show that our model is an actual management tool supporting the managers in their operational decisions. This tool is currently used by the company which provided us with the industrial data. Based on the results with the generated instances, we present the conditions under which the models can be solved within a reasonable amount of time, and we assess the robustness of the daily rostering when the input data changes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Warehouses operate in a very competitive market, where purchasers keep pushing to knock the prices down (Klaus, 2011; Rebitzer, 2007). The logistics providers therefore have to show a high flexibility to be able to attract customers. Even if some operations can be automated, buying machines and adapting them to the customer’s need is barely cost-effective (Naish & Baker, 2004). Therefore, most of the operations taking place in logistics platforms are done by human beings, which makes manpower the first cost center. It is thus crucial to stick to the activity volume when dimensioning the task force.A difficulty is that the workload is variable: the number of arriving trucks and the number of orders to be prepared change every day. To be able to react accordingly, the workforce needs to be flexible: the number of working hours for a given employee may differ from one week to another. Short-term contracts can also be used to ensure more flexibility. All these parameters, together with other constraints such as the employees’ qualifications, vacations, and the handling equipment availability, make weekly timetabling and daily rostering a complex process.Wren (1996) defines rostering as “the placing, subject to constraints, of resources into slots in a pattern. One may seek to minimize some objective, or simply to obtain a feasible allocation. Often the resources will rotate through a roster”. Following Ernst, Jiang, Krishnamoorthy, and Sier (2004), we use the words personnel scheduling to describe the whole process of constructing work timetables for an organization’s staff, in order to satisfy the demand for its goods or services. As mentioned by Musliu, Gärtner, and Slany (2002), personnel scheduling algorithms consist of different stages related to each other, that can be solved simultaneously or in sequence, depending on the context. In this paper, we call weekly timetabling the part of the process which consists of determining the number of employees needed and allocating these employees to shifts (sets of consecutive time periods within a day) to meet the demand. The expression daily rostering refers to the assignment of tasks to employees on a daily level.The problem presented in this article falls in the category of “multi-day personnel scheduling problems” defined by Brucker, Qu, and Burke (2011) in their general model for personnel scheduling. The authors underline that the “multi-day personnel scheduling problems” can be decomposed into two levels: in the first stage, the working days are assigned to the employees (i.e. weekly timetabling), whereas the second stage assigns a shift for each employee working on a given day, and a task for which the employee is qualified on each working period (i.e. daily rostering). Although weekly timetabling and daily rostering are intertwined, they are often treated separately in the literature; in this paper, we propose to deal with the two of them together through sequential solving. We also notice from the literature that the logistics field is not a common application area for personnel scheduling problems, and the few existing papers use heuristic methods to solve the problem. The model proposed in this paper meets the specific requirements of a logistics platform to support the personnel scheduling process for warehousing operations, and its solution is based on optimal methods (mixed integer linear programming).Our purpose is to determine the working hours of all employees for one week, as well as their exact task allocation every day. All legal and job-related constraints must be included. We divide the problem into three steps, each representing a decision to be made. Each step is modeled by a mixed integer linear program.The model has been tested in a logistics company, whose name is not cited for confidentiality reasons. A decision-support tool, based on the models described in the present article, is now used on a weekly/daily basis to support the managers’ decisions.The rest of the article is organized as follows. After a literature review (Section 2), we give in Section 3 an overview of the problem, the decision-making process, and the general notations. Section 4 details the first part of the model, namely the weekly timetabling (steps 1 and 2). Section 5 deals with the detailed daily rostering (step 3). Section 6 presents the numerical results, and concluding remarks are given in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
