@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Time-dependent MEXCLP with start-up and relocation cost

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a new time-dependent probabilistic location model for Emergency Medical Service (EMS) vehicles.We test the model on both random and real data.We compare time-independent and time-dependent input.We perform a sensitivity analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Integer optimization models,Ambulance base locations,Case study,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we introduce a time-dependent probabilistic location model for Emergency Medical Service (EMS) vehicles. The goal is to maximize the expected coverage throughout the day and at the same time minimize the number of opened facilities and the number of relocations. We apply our model to both a randomly generated test instance and to data from the city of Amsterdam, the Netherlands. We see that time-dependent models can result in better solutions than time-independent models. Furthermore, we see that the current set of base locations in Amsterdam is not optimal. We can obtain higher coverage with even less base locations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) are concerned with providing adequate care to emergency patients. When a call arrives at the dispatch center, an ambulance is assigned to the call. The probability of survival of a patient that is involved in an accident is highly dependent on the time it takes before an ambulance arrives at the scene (Larsen et al., 1993). Consequently, it is of great importance that EMS vehicles respond as quickly as possible to the calls. In most countries, there is a certain target response time in which a minimum fraction of the calls must be reached. In the Netherlands, for example, 95 percent of all high priority calls must be reached within 15 minutes response time. In order to meet this requirement, it is important to determine good locations for the ambulances. The objective of this research is to maximize the expected number of calls that is reached within the target response time. To do so, it is important to take the availability of ambulances into account. If an ambulance is dispatched to a call, it is not available for other calls. This can result in lower coverage, in particular in the region that was covered by the dispatched ambulance. One way of taking this into account is by requiring back-up coverage. Another way is to use the expected coverage, which is calculated using the average fraction of time an ambulance is available. In this paper we will maximize the expected coverage. When we study the datacollected from the EMS system in the Netherlands we see that the characteristics of the system vary significantly over the day. Travel speeds, available ambulances, service times, and demand vary over the day. By ignoring these variations we miss certain aspects of reality, which can result in sub-optimal solutions. Therefore, we consider a time-dependent location model in this paper.One of the first ambulance location models in the literature is the Location Set Covering Problem introduced by Toregas et al. (1971). This model minimizes the required number of ambulances to cover all demand with at least one ambulance. A demand point is said to be covered by an ambulance, if the ambulance can reach that demand point within the target response time. Another early model, introduced by Church and ReVelle (1974), is the Maximum Coverage Location Model. This model maximizes the covered demand given a limited number of ambulances. Both early models ignore the fact that ambulances are not available when they are dispatched to a call. One model that does take this unavailability into account is the Double Standard Model introduced by Gendreau et al. (1997). This model maximizes the demand that is covered by at least two ambulances. Although this model recognizes the unavailability of ambulances, there is no guarantee that an ambulance is available when a call arrives. To overcome this problem probabilistic models are required. Daskin (1983) introduced the Maximum Expected Coverage Location Model (MEXCLP). This model assumes that an ambulance is unavailable a fraction q of the time, q is called the busy fraction. The expected coverage of a demand point that is covered by k ambulances is then, Ek= 1 − qk, which is the probability of at least one success in k independent Bernoulli experiments. The marginal coverage of the kth ambulance isEk−Ek−1=(1−qk)−(1−qk−1)=(qk−1−qk)=(1−q)qk−1.The model can be written as follows:(1)max∑i∈V∑k=1pdi(1−q)qk−1yik(2)∑j∈Wixj≥∑k=1pyiki∈V(3)∑j∈Wxj≤p(4)xj∈NThe decision variables in this model are xjand yik, where xjis the number of ambulances located at location j and yikis 1 if and only if demand point i is covered by at least k ambulances. The sets V and W are the sets of demand points and potential base locations, respectively. Wi⊆W is the set of locations that can cover demand point i ∈ V within a certain coverage standard r. The maximal number of ambulances that can be used is denoted by p.The objective is to maximize the total expected coverage over all demand points. Therefore, the marginal coverage of the kth ambulance multiplied by the demand of demand point i, di, is added to the objective if demand point i is covered by at least k ambulances. Constraints (2) make sure that a demand point is covered by at least k ambulances if at least k ambulances can reach this demand point within the coverage standard. Constraint (3) ensures that no more than p ambulances are used.Most work in the literature assumes that the travel-times and the demand are stable during the day. In general this is not the case. Therefore, we consider a time-dependent location model in this paper. Two papers are of particular interest for our work.Repede and Bernardo (1994) introduce the Time-dependent Maximum Expected Coverage Location Problem (TIMEXCLP), which is an extension of MEXCLP. They introduce multiple time periods and maximize the expected coverage over the day. Because there is no relation between the different time periods, the problem can be solved independently for each time period. As a result, there can be huge difference in the location of the ambulances between the different time periods, which can result in high costs for the EMS provider.Another time-dependent model is introduced by Schmid and Doerner (2010). This model is an extension of the Double Standard Model and assumes time-dependent travel times. To overcome the above-mentioned problem they add a penalty for the number of relocations between time periods. A relocation means that an ambulance is located at different base locations in consecutive time periods. As a result, the ambulance must be relocated between the two time periods. In this paper we will allow relocations with a penalty cost.We consider a time-dependent version of MEXCLP in which we define a setT={1,2,…,T}of T time periods. Compared to Schmid and Doerner we do not only assume time-dependent travel times, but also time-dependent demand and ambulance availability. As a consequence, we no longer have one demand difor each demand point i, but we have ditwhich is the demand generated from demand point i during time period t. The available number of ambulances during time period t is denoted by pt. We also have to adjust the decision variables x and y. Variable xjtwill now denote the number of ambulances located at base location j during time period t, while yiktwill indicate whether demand point i is covered by at least k ambulances during time period t. As a result of the time-dependent demand, service time, and ambulance availability, we also have a time-dependent busy fraction, qt. The set of base locations that can cover demand point i in time period t is denoted byWit. In the model, we take the relation between the different time periods into account by adding a penalty for the number of relocations between the time periods. Therefore, we introduce the binary variable rijtwhich indicates whether an ambulance is relocated from location i to location j between time period t and t + 1. The penalty for a relocation is γ. In practice there are costs involved with making use of a base location. These costs occur when a base location is used during at least one time period. We add a penalty, β, for each location that is used. In practice these cost can vary per base location. For example, it might be cheaper to make use of an existing base location than to build a new one. This can be modeled by a location-dependent βj. To keep track of the opened base locations we introduce the binary variable zjindicating whether base location j is used during at least one time period. To ensure a correct value for these variables, we need so-called big-M constraints. These constraints make use of a constant M, which value is large.The model can be formulated as follows:(5)max∑t∈T∑i∈V∑k=1ptdit(1−qt)qtk−1yikt−β∑j∈Wzj−γ∑i∈W∑j∈W∑t∈Trijt(6)∑j∈Witxjt≥∑k=1ptyikti∈V,t∈T(7)∑j∈Wxjt≤ptt∈T(8)∑t∈Txjt≤Mzjj∈W(9)xjt+∑i∈Wrijt−∑i∈Wrjit=xj(t+1)t∈T∖T,j∈W(10)xjT+∑i∈WrijT−∑i∈WrjiT=xj1(11)xjt,rijt∈N(12)yikt,zj∈{0,1}The objective function of this model consists of three terms. The first term calculates the expected coverage over all demand points and all time periods. The second term penalizes the number of opened locations. Finally, the third term subtracts a penalty for the number of relocations between time periods. Constraints (6) and (7) correspond to constraints (2) and (3) from MEXCLP. Constraints (8) state that the number of ambulances at a location can only be positive if the location is opened, i.e. zj= 1. For these constraints to be valid, M should have at least the value of the left hand side. However, a too high value for M will result in a weak LP relaxation and an increase in computation time. In Section 4 we address how to determine appropriate values for M. Constraints (9) and (10) ensure that the rijt’s have the correct value. In case the number of ambulances is not constant over the day, we need a dummy base location to which off-duty ambulances can be assigned.To test our model, we apply it to two different test instances. First, we will analyze the results for a randomly generated test instance with 500 demand points and 50 possible base locations. Afterward, we will apply the model to a real-life instance for the region of Amsterdam, the Netherlands. This instance consists of 161 demand points.For this test instance we generate 500 demand points within a unit square. Both the x and the y coordinates are randomly generated between 0 and 1. One might argue that this is not realistic as everything is uniform. We partly solve this by generating different call rates for each demand point. For more realistic test instances we refer to the case study in Section 3.2. The first 50 demand points are considered available as a potential base location. We divide the day in 6 time periods of 4 hours. The characteristics of the different time periods are shown in Table 1.The call intensity of a time period is the deviation from the average demand during that time period. So, during period 1 the average number of calls per hour is only 60 percent of the average over the entire day. These fluctuations in the call rates correspond roughly with the fluctuations we see in the Netherlands. The travel times shown in column 3 show the deviation from the average travel time during a time period. In period 1 it takes on average 20 percent less time to travel from A to B. Schmid and Doerner (2010) state that the travel speed can vary up to 25 percent from the daily average. The daily average is determined by the Euclidean distance multiplied by a constant, which in this case is 35. The busy fractions are calculated using the demand, the number of ambulances, and the call duration. The call duration is the average time an ambulance is unavailable after being dispatched to a call. This time does not include the time to return to the base, since ambulances are available for dispatching during that time. In these instance, the call duration is considered to be constant at 50 minutes. This is close to the average call duration in the Netherlands. In the case study, we incorporate call durations that are time-dependent. Furthermore, for each demand point we generated the demand for the different time periods. Each demand point has a specific call rate which is the average number of calls per hour. The mean of the demand during a time period is equal to this call rate multiplied by the call intensity of the time period. Because the time-dependency is not necessarily the same for each demand point we generate the demand uniformly between 85 percent and 115 percent of the mean.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
