@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation modelling for contracting hospital emergency services at the regional level

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model Polish regional hospital emergency system.We simulate the number and costs of acute services to be contracted by Health Fund.DES model predicts effects of the demand changes on the emergency unit workloads.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Simulation,Hospitals,Emergency services,Contracting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hospital emergency services are closely connected to demographic issues and population changes. The methodology presented here helps to assess the effects of the forecasted demand changes on the next-year emergency unit workloads. The objective of the study is to estimate the expected volume of emergency hospital services, as measured by the number and costs of medical procedures provided to patients, to be contracted by the Polish National Health Fund (NFZ) branch at the regional level to cover the forecasted demand. A discrete-event simulation model was developed to elaborate the credible forecasts of the function components, the fundamental elements of the contract values granted by the NFZ for emergency departments for the following year. Emergency department-level data were drawn from the NFZ regional branch registry to perform a statistical analysis of emergency services provided to patients in 17 admission units and emergency wards in 2010. The model results indicate that the predicted increase in two age groups, i.e., the youngest children and the older population, will have different effects on the number and value of hospital emergency services to be considered in the contracting policy. There is potential for a discrete-event simulation to support strategic health policy decision making at the regional level. The value of this approach lies in providing estimates for the what-if scenarios related to the prognosis of changing acute demand.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper describes the part of the project that aims to study the demand for emergency hospital care within the context of services provided by admission units (AUs) and emergency wards (EWs) located in the Lower Silesia region in Poland. The main objective is to assess the volume of services, which is measured by the number and costs of medical procedures, to be contracted by the National Health Fund (NFZ) in hospital AUs and EWs to satisfy the next-year demand for emergency medical treatment at the regional level.The demand for service reflects the relationship between the price and the quantity demanded. Typically, if the price decreases, the demanded quantity increases. In Poland, as in other European countries, most healthcare is contracted by the NFZ, which is financed by obligatory health insurance contributions from every working citizen. This legal system excludes the possibility of the regulatory role of a price mechanism because healthcare is provided to patients free of charge at the point of delivery. In the case of elective hospital care, the supply and demand relationship is rationed by waiting lists and the distinctly defined measures are available. For example, Martin, Rice, Jacobs, and Smith (2007) use outpatient referrals and decisions to admit to measure the demand side, and outpatients seen and inpatients admissions to measure the supply side, respectively. The emergency medical services (EMS) are provided without limits for every patient who requires medical assistance and there is no possibility to separately estimate demand and supply sides. The numerous literature on predicting acute demand assumes that the emergency needs of the population are correctly modelled by the exogenous random arrival process. This process describes also the supply side, because the emergency demand is recognised only if it is registered in the system. The challenge is to forecast how this process changes over time and to measure the influence of the spatial and the demographic factors on the volume of emergency patients.There are many obstacles that significantly hinder the process of acute healthcare demand–supply analysis. When studying emergency demand, information regarding the acute events arising process is unavailable because it is only possible to study events that are reported to the healthcare system. In fact, between the emergence of a need for service and notification of such an event to the public healthcare system, some information is dispersed. On the one hand, there are patients who decide to seek help in private health system or completely resign from applying for benefits. On the other hand, some patients consider hospital AUs as alternatives to general practitioners, which increases the number of non-emergency cases treated by the emergency system.The demand for acute hospital services is more variable than is demand for other categories of health services and the precise mix of treatments to be delivered under an acute contract is difficult to predict. Variability is displayed in the seasonal variations of arrival rates, in the treatment requirements of individual patients and in the variety of treatment options for the same diagnosis. The observed variability occurs for many reasons, such as seasonal illness, summer/winter outdoor incidents, fluctuations depending on time of day, day of the week and season-specific periods. The patient’s free choice of a healthcare provider makes forecasting even more difficult. In the case of acute events, patients usually select the closest available emergency department (ED) that offers the required service; however, sometimes the patients’ preferences cause them to travel to a facility located in a neighbouring area. Additionally, EDs serve students, temporary workers, tourists, and visitors who live outside the region and who are not included in demographic statistics. Furthermore, demand for emergency services is strongly driven by a broad range of random factors. Uncertainty relates to the unpredictable nature of acute events, particularly in terms of time, place and type of emergency care needed.The NFZ, when contracting ex ante AU/EW health services, specifies a lump sum payment based on the number of patients treated and the services provided in the previous settlement period. It means that the NFZ, the purchaser, has to assess in advance the expected volume of health services to be contracted with the service provider for the next year. This mechanism resembles the so-called naïve forecast, which assumes that recent periods are the best predictors of the future. The problem with this approach is that random fluctuations are tracked as faithfully as are other fundamental changes, seasonal trends are ignored and it is not possible to consider more complex relationships between demographic trends and the demand for emergency care.There is a large number of approaches available that attempt to forecast EMS demand and estimate the volume of services needed to cover the population needs, namely, regression modelling, time-series analysis, queuing theory-based models and simulation modelling. From among these methods, simulation seems to be well suited to tackle the problems of emergency hospital care, which is a highly complex system and a valid analytical model would in itself be very complex. Brailsford (2007) suggests that there are three main reasons for the popularity of simulations among healthcare researchers: the uncertainty and variability of healthcare systems forces the use of stochastic approaches; it is difficult or even impossible to model the complexity of healthcare organisations with analytical methods; and the key role of human factors can easily be implemented using a simulation methodology. The advantage of simulation approach stems from its flexibility as well as its ability to handle the variability, uncertainty and complexity of dynamic systems. Simulation is particularly useful when problem exhibits significant uncertainties, which give rise to stochastic analysis. It is also an ideal tool for performing “what-if” analysis, e.g. what effect would forecasted demographic changes have on the expected volume of emergency health services?The overall aim of the project is to use a simulation approach to assess the impact of the forecasted demographic changes on the expected volume and costs of treated emergency patients, to be subsequently considered by the NFZ when entering into the next year’s contract. The study includes an assessment of monthly dependent patterns of demand for emergency services. The general idea of the study was described by Mielczarek and Uziałko-Mydlikowska (2012b). The purpose of this paper is to present the first stage of the research. The challenge was to develop a simulation model that could be used to estimate the expected volume of emergency health services, as measured by the quantity of medical procedures and the overall costs of servicing the treated patients, to be contracted by the NFZ at the regional level, given the assumptions on forecasted demand. The next phase of the project will examine demographic trends across the population in the region and, using a Monte Carlo simulation and a regression model, explore the relationship between the changes in the population of the region and the number of acute services provided by the AUs and EWs. The valid forecasts might enable the Health Fund decision makers to accurately plan future supply and to improve the equity of access to emergency health services across the whole region.There are many taxonomies of healthcare simulation models in the literature. Brailsford (2007) divides the models into human body, operational models of healthcare units and strategic, system-level models. Jun, Jacobson, and Swisher (1999) address the problems encountered by healthcare clinics and systems of clinics and survey the application of discrete-event simulation (DES) modelling in two areas: patient flow and allocation of resources. Some reviews classify models into epidemiology, health and care systems operation, health and care systems design, medical decision making (Lagergren, 1998) and extreme events planning groups (Mielczarek & Uziałko-Mydlikowska, 2012a). In this paper, healthcare simulation models are classified into three groups depending on the purpose for which the process of analysing and estimating the demand is to be carried out.The first models, called Group 1 (improvements), are focused on the current work of service providers. These models are used for resource allocation, staff scheduling, admission planning, and managing patient flows in healthcare units. They are concerned with identifying bottlenecks and suggesting system improvements. They also help to formulate an overall diagnosis of system performance. To achieve these tactical and operational goals, it is necessary to obtain knowledge about the level, variability and uncertainty of demand. Arrival schedules are usually defined based on historical data or on-site empirical observations. The classical problem formulation is usually as follows: how to change the operation of the system to satisfy the output measures given certain levels and characteristics of the demand. The models concentrate on the units providing the healthcare services and try to identify improvements to the internal organisation of the unit assuming a certain level and structure of the demand. The layout of the conceptual model is consistent with the diagram presented in Fig. 1.Performance measures depend on the system under study. Emergency system models usually calculate response-time intervals or response-time threshold, although McLay and Mayorga (2010) proposed measures related to patient survival rates. Models of clinical settings usually concentrate on patient waiting time, cancellations and the utilisation of resources (i.e., time of utilisation of operating theatres, bed occupancy, exam room usage). Models from Group 1 may concern (a) different clinical settings, such as operating theatres, outpatient clinics, ambulatory care units or diagnostic departments, (b) complex centres such as multi-unit hospitals or multi-facility outpatient centres, or (c) treatment processes such as radiation therapies. Group 1 is extensively covered in the academic literature, and some illustrative examples are given below.The simulation approach has been used to improve the efficiency of orthopaedic trauma theatres (Bowers & Mould, 2004) and operating rooms (Persson & Persson, 2009; Steins, Persson, & Holmer, 2010) given the stochastic patient arrival and surgical procedure times. There are also many examples that illustrate the application of simulation approaches to studying emergency departments (Duguay & Chetouane, 2007; Su & Shih, 2002) and outpatient clinics (Chand, Moskowitz, Norris, Shade, & Willis, 2009; Rohleder, Lewkonia, Bischak, Duffy, & Hendijani, 2011) to reduce patient waiting times, increase throughput, and improve internal operations. Multi-facility models are underrepresented in the literature, possibly because of the time and effort required to collect and examine the data. Cochran and Bharti (2006) used a simulation to balance the bed unit utilisation across a multi-unit obstetrics hospital given the level of time-dependent patterns of demand. Ashton, Hague, Brandreth, Worthington, and Cropper (2005) planned the operation of a NHS walk-in, multi-service centre after its relocation to new premises. Matta and Patterson (2007) analysed the patient flow through a multi-facility oncology centre. Simulation is an appropriate tool for analysing complex treatment processes. Models have helped to identify potential improvements in waiting times for radiation therapy treatments (Werker, Saure, French, & Shechter, 2009), evaluate the needs and prioritisation of waiting lists for cataract surgeries (Comas et al., 2008), and assess different service modifications in stroke care delivery for a local community (Bayer, Petsoulas, Cox, Honeyman, & Barlow, 2010).Models from Group 2 (disease models) are built to study the cost-effectiveness or clinical effectiveness (in terms of mortality or morbidity changes) of medical procedures, medical treatments associated with clinical pathways, and prevention strategies or contemporary health trends. The simulation is run within a subgroup of the whole population, predefined according to the goals of the study. This subgroup could, for example, be the female population when studying the progression of breast cancer (Brailsford, Harper, & Sykes, 2012), the population between ages 35 and 84 with coronary heart disease when assessing the cost-effectiveness of secondary prevention drug prescriptions (Cooper, Davies, Raftery, & Roderick, 2008), or the male and female populations when calculating the profitability of thrombolysis in the treatment of stroke (Mar, Arrospide, & Comas, 2010). Demand is usually defined as the flow of patients classified by age, gender and medical history who are included in the simulation when they acquire the disease. First, the model has to be populated with the data of patients who already have the disease, which could be performed either by linking the model with an external database or by randomly sampling from the distributions estimated based on historical data. The new patients enter the model at a rate determined by the incidence rate of disease. The layout of the conceptual model is consistent with the diagram in Fig. 2.Several authors (Caro et al., 2006) proved the high usability of simulation models in representing the epidemiology of stroke at a population level. Policy-oriented simulation models to examine the effects of tobacco control policies were developed by many researchers (Ahmad, 2005; Levy, Hyland, Higbee, Remer, & Compton, 2007; Neovius, Rasmussen, Sundstrom, & Neovius, 2010). These models attempted to predict the changes in smoking prevalence explained by different policies, including price increases, clean air laws, mass media campaigns, and youth access laws.Finally, Group 3 (strategic) models concentrate on population needs and help decision makers to carry out capacity planning at the regional or national level. Gupta et al. (2007) suggest that the capacity management process starts with estimates of target utilisation rates to cover the population needs. Then, the funding levels are determined and, next, decisions are made on the unit levels that affect the realised capacity. Models from this group are also used to study the influence of the changes in demand (expected or theoretically feasible) on the healthcare units’ standards of service. In these ‘what-if’ type models, the ‘if’ refers to the fluctuations in demand intensity and patterns and their impact on the system’s operation. The layout of the conceptual model is consistent with the diagram in Fig. 3.Models from Group 3 are not very common among simulation healthcare models, which may be because the problem complexity does not lend itself to straightforward solutions. Gupta et al. (2007) studied the capacity planning process for cardiac catheterisation in a regional cardiac centre. The authors identified the capacity needed to achieve waiting time targets by testing different what-if scenarios. A simulation model to determine the primary care needs in the state of Oklahoma, developed by Pulat, Kasap, and Splinter (2001), generated the best-case scenario by defining the minimum but sufficient number of primary care service areas and estimating the number of needed beds. Desai, Penn, Brailsford, and Chipulu (2008) used simulation to forecast the demand for older people’s services and explored the impact this forecast would have on service provision. Two scenarios for reducing the numbers of patients receiving care were tested, and the possible effects of these hypothetical scenarios were explored. Vissers, Adan, and Dellaert (2007) developed a strategic-level model to examine and evaluate different admission planning concepts to help policy makers identify the right balance between the level of services offered to patients and the use of hospital resources. Yi, George, Paul, and Lin (2010) applied a simulation methodology to project hospital capacity in a disaster situation. All available hospitals in a given area were modelled, and various patient arrival rates were used based on the rates of two recent documented earthquakes. A simulation-based approach model by Harper, Shahani, Gallagher, and Bowie (2005) helped to plan the provision of health services considering the geographical locations of services and patients.The model presented in this paper belongs to Group 3. The aim was to investigate the relationship between the changes in demand and the volume of acute services contracted by the NFZ at the regional level. There are many factors that influence the demand for health services, such as the economic situation of the population, the free demographic movement between EU countries, easy and unlimited access to medical knowledge, demography trends and many others. According to the literature and a number of empirical studies, hospital emergency services are closely connected to demographic issues and population changes. The model introduced in this paper can be used at the regional policy level to investigate ‘cause and effect’ relationships, such as the effects of demographic changes on the number and type of services provided in AUs and EWs in one region.Hospital services in Poland are offered to elective and emergency patients. Before being admitted to a hospital, patients have to be served in an AU or an EW, where the patient is qualified for hospital care and, if necessary, receives some medical treatment. AUs and EWs are obliged to serve every patient who expresses a need for service (Fig. 4). The incoming patients are categorised into three groups: emergency patients without referral, emergency patients with referral and elective patients. The EW performs an initial diagnosis and offers the medical treatment necessary to stabilise vital functions. The AU provides consultation and basic medical intervention. Both the AU and the EW qualify the need for further hospital care and may, after a consultation, refer the patient to the hospital ward.The process of purchasing health services is based on contracts between the payer (NFZ) and healthcare providers. The NFZ contracts broad categories of service: primary and ambulatory care, specialised ambulatory care and inpatient care, emergency care, rehabilitation and intermediate care, long-term care, hospice and palliative care, mental healthcare and others. The regional branches of the NFZ grant the contract volume of emergency services in AUs and EWs for the following year based, partially, on the prior-year demand volume. The daily lump sum (R) intended to finance the services provided by particular AUs or EWs considers two components: the structure component (RS) defined by the NFZ regional authority and the function component (Rf) calculated based on the number of patient visits registered during the previously reported period: R=RS+Rf. The RSis determined based on the degree at which the standard levels of technical, organisational and personnel requirements are satisfied. The Rfvalue is a product of the average daily number of patients treated and the cost (measured in point weights) of the activities performed for the patient’s benefit. Point weights that describe AU and EW activities are published by the NFZ in special attachments (Table 1). For example, a medical examination equals 1 point, whereas an image diagnosis with CT/NMR equals 5 points. The higher the number of points assigned, the more costly is the service. The total cost of all services delivered to the patient determines the patient’s category. NFZ defines 5 categories (Table 2) according to the cost (measured in point weights) of the performed services. The Rfis calculated based on the number of patients qualified to each of the 5 categories, and it is calculated according to the following formula:Rf=ald*∑i=15Pi*Wiwhere a is the point rate; currently 1 point=30zł (≈7€), ldthe number of days in the calculation period, Pithe number of patients qualified for one of the 5 categories listed in Table 2, Withe weight of the category from Table 2, and i is the category’s number (i=1…5).According to Chalkley and McVicar (2008), this payment mechanism is a variation of a sophisticated block contract because all patients are treated and the monitored cost influences the value of next year’s contract. The credible assessment of future demand in terms of not only the number of treated patients but also the number and type of activities performed estimates the overall costs of acute services. Therefore, it may help the NFZ branch authority decision makers to divide the next-year budget between various types of services at the regional level.Lower Silesia is the southernmost region in Poland. It is the 7th largest region in terms of size and the 5th largest in terms of population density. It is divided into 5 subregions, 29 districts, and 169 communes. The capital of the region is Wrocław. In 2010, there were 91 hospitals of different types in the area with 39 admission units and 13 hospital emergency wards. Inhabitants are free to choose the hospital, but they usually select the unit in their neighbourhoods.In this study, the volume of services offered in 2010 by AUs and EWs located in 2 (of a total of 5) subregions of Lower Silesia is explored. These 2 subregions are treated in this paper as one area called the Wrocław Region (WR). The remaining 3 subregions are located around three other large Lower Silesian cities and are excluded from this phase of the project. The WR encompasses 9 districts: the capital of Lower Silesia and 8 other districts that are close to the capital. In 2010, there were 12 admission units (AU) and 5 emergency hospital wards (EW) operating in the WR. All AUs and EWs located in the WR serve the inhabitants of the region as well as patients from the 3 other Lower Silesia subregions and citizens from other Polish provinces. At the same time, people living in the WR receive medical treatments from both the AUs and the EWs situated in the WR and the AUs and EWs located in other Polish subregions (Fig. 5). Because the patient can freely select the hospital, indicators describing access to hospital services for emergency patients calculated based only on geographical location are misleading.Table 3presents the data, expressed in absolute numbers and percentages, showing the changes in the number of people inhabiting the WR, the number of acute services delivered to WR residents in Lower Silesia units, and the number of emergency patients registered in WR units. The WR population increases annually, but the forecasts formulated by the Central Statistical Office (CSO) predict this growth to be less intense in the coming years. The number of children and the older population exhibit a continuous and stable increase. This growth rate will, however, weaken in the coming years, particularly within the youngest group. The number of WR residents who receive emergency care increases annually, but the partial data provided by the NFZ for 6months of 2012 show a substantial decrease in patients serviced (−3.7%). The population of the WR makes up approximately 40% of the Lower Silesian population.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
