@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Solving the Aircraft Landing Problem with time discretization approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new approach based on time discretization and various approximations of the separation time matrix.The modelization provides very good LP relaxation especially for rank 2 separation time matrix.Lower bounding approximation is used in a dynamic constraint generation algorithm that can solve medium size instances.Best approximation leads to a heuristic method based on constraint generation.This heuristic can be applied to large instances and has improved previous results of the literature.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aircraft Landing Problem,Time discretization,Mixed Integer Programming,Dynamic constraint generation algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies the multiple runway Aircraft Landing Problem. The aim is to schedule arriving aircraft to available runways at the airport. Landing times lie within predefined time windows and safety separation constraints between two successive landings must be satisfied. We propose a new approach for solving the problem. The method is based on an approximation of the separation time matrix and on time discretization. The separation matrix is approximated by a rank two matrix. This provides lower bounds or upper bounds depending on the choice of the approximating matrix. These bounds are used in a constraint generation algorithm to, exactly or heuristically, solve the problem. Computational tests, performed on publicly available problems involving up to 500 aircraft, show the efficiency of the approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper addresses the problem of scheduling aircraft landings at an airport. Given a set of planes, the problem is one of assigning a runway and a landing time for each plane. Each plane has to land within its predefined time window and safety separation distances have to be maintained between any pair of planes. This problem, referenced in the literature as the Aircraft Landing Problem (ALP), has been extensively studied. Beasley et al. (2000) present a mixed integer zero-one formulation of the problem. Each plane has a target landing time within its time window. A cost is accounted when a plane lands after or before its target time. The objective is to minimize the total cost of deviation from the target times. The problem is solved optimally with a linear programming based tree search algorithm. A heuristic method is also proposed. Using a similar model, Ernst et al. (1999) propose a different heuristic approach. When the binary variables are fixed the remaining continuous linear problem is solved by a specialized simplex method which evaluates the landing times very quickly. The method is used in a space search heuristic as well as a branch and bound algorithm. Fahle et al. (2003) present a comparison of several models and heuristics. They study a MIP (mixed integer program) and an integer linear program using time discretization introduced in Beasley et al. (2000). They also compare two heuristic algorithms, Hill Climbing and Simulated Annealing methods. A SAT (Satisfiability Problem) formulation is proposed to decide if there exists a valid solution for the problem. In Hansen’s (2004) paper, four genetic algorithms are tested for the problem. The author introduces runway dependent time windows. Computational results are given for small instances. Beasley et al. (2001) use a population heuristic to solve a problem instance based on observations during a busy period at London Heathrow airport. Diallo et al. (2012) solve the problem for the single runway case. Experiments based on real datasets of Léopold Sédar Senghor Airport of Dakar are presented. Pinol and Beasley (2006) consider extensions of the previous model given in Beasley et al. (2000). Time windows and separation distance between two successive aircraft are assumed to be runway dependent. These new criteria involve respectively linear and quadratic constraints. Next, two population heuristics are applied to the problem. In order to consider airline preferences for individual flights, a new objective function is introduced by Soomer and Franx (2008). Equity considerations lead to a convex piecewise linear function which has to be minimized. The problem is solved by a local search heuristic. Artiouchine et al. (2008) consider the case where more than one time window is assigned to each plane. These time windows modelize the mechanisms as vector spaces and holding patterns, used by air controllers to delay planes. The separation criteria are not a constraint but the objective is to maximize the minimum elapsed time between any two consecutive landings. The authors study the complexity of the problem and identify polynomially solvable cases. For solving general problems, a branch and cut framework is used. Bianco et al. (2006) propose a job-shop scheduling model with sequence dependent processing times. Jobs modelize planes. The paths of the planes in the terminal area are decomposed into machines like runways. The processing times take into account the separation distances between planes. The model is quite general and is suitable for arrivals and departures. Several objectives are considered as average delay minimization, minimization of maximum delay and throughput (capacity) maximization. The problem is solved by a heuristic method based on a fast local search. Bencheikh et al. (2009) modelize the landing problem as a job-shop scheduling problem. The problem is solved by a hybrid method combining genetic algorithms with an ant colony optimization algorithm. D’Ariano et al. (2012) consider take-off and landing operations at a busy terminal area. Aircraft timing and routing issue is modelized as a job-shop scheduling problem and is solved by a truncated branch and bound algorithm for fixed routes. Aircraft rerouting is performed by a tabu search in order to improve the solution. The overall algorithm is tested on practical instances from Rome Fiumicino airport. Diaz and Mena (2005) and van Leeuwen et al. (2002) have used constraint programming. These methods are well suited for small instances. However, the quality of the provided solutions is not as good as for larger instances. The dynamic case of ALP is considered by Beasley et al. (2004). Decisions must be taken in a dynamic fashion as time passes. Each new decision must take into account the previous decision which was made. The problem is solved using two types of heuristics.In this paper, we propose a new approach for solving the Aircraft Landing Problem. The method is based on an approximation of the separation time matrix and on time discretization. The separation time matrix is approximated by a rank two matrix.In the ideal case, the separation time matrix is a rank two matrix. In this case, the problem is stated as a 0-1 linear program. The LP relaxation of this model is very tight. Discretization time induces an important number of variables but this drawback is counterbalanced by very good LP relaxation. The discretization methods proposed in Beasley et al. (2000) and Fahle et al. (2003) do not have this property.When the separation time matrix is not a rank 2 matrix, an approximation is done. This provides lower bounds or upper bounds depending on the choice of the approximating matrix. These bounds are used in a constraint generation algorithm to, optimally or heuristically, solve the problem.In Section 2, we recall the classical formulation of the problem. In Section 3, we show that the problem can be discretized. Next, in Section 4, we give the model based on time discretization and on a rank two separation time matrix. In Section 5, we present the approximation method of the separation time matrix, the exact algorithm and the heuristic method based on constraint generation. Computation results are reported in Section 6 and concluding remarks follow in Section 7.Each aircraft entering within the radar range at its destination airport, receives instructions from air traffic control. A landing time and a runway on which to land are assigned to the plane. The landing time must be between an earliest landing time and a latest landing time. The earliest landing time corresponds to the time at which the aircraft can land if it flies at its fastest speed. To delay the landing time, the speed of the aircraft can be decreased or the flight plan can be lengthened by circling. The latest time corresponds to the maximum landing time achievable by these delaying mechanisms. Within this time window, there is a target time which corresponds to the time at which aircraft can land if it flies at its cruise speed. The target time is the preferred landing time. Safety distances between pair of successive planes must be respected. Separation distances are converted into separation times using a fixed landing speed depending on the aircraft type. Then, there must be a minimal lapse of time between the landing of a plane and the landing of any successive plane. Separation time holds between a pair of planes landing on the same runway or on different runways.We give a modelization of the Aircraft Landing Problem which is based on the one presented in Beasley et al. (2000) and Pinol and Beasley (2006).The data are the following:•P set of planes, R set of runways available for landingEithe earliest landing time for plane i, ∀i ∈ PTithe target (preferred) landing time for plane i, ∀i ∈ PLithe latest landing time for plane i, ∀i ∈ PSij≥ 0 the minimum separation time between planes i and j where i lands before j on the same runwaysij≥ 0 the minimum separation time between planes i and j where i lands before j on a different runwaySijis called the longitudinal separation time between leading aircraft i and trailing aircraft j. sijis the diagonal separation time (cf. Bianco et al., 2006). We assume Sij> sij.The decision variables are the following:•δij1∀i, j ∈ P (i ≠ j) binary variable such thatδij1=1if and only if aircraft i lands before aircraft j and on the same runway.δij2∀i, j ∈ P (i ≠ j) binary variable such thatδij2=1if and only if aircraft i lands before aircraft j and on a different runway.zij∀i, j ∈ P (i < j) binary variable such that zij= 1 if and only if aircraft i and j land on the same runway.yir∀i ∈ P, r ∈ R binary variable such that yir= 1 if and only if aircraft i lands on runway r.xi≥ 0 the scheduled landing time for plane i, ∀i ∈ P.The constraints are the following:(1)(PB){xj≥xi+Sij+(1−δij1)(−Sij−Li+Ej),∀i≠j∈P(1)xj≥xi+sij+(1−δij2)(−sij−Li+Ej),∀i≠j∈P(2)δij1+δji1=zij,∀i<j∈P(3)δij2+δji2=1−zij,∀i<j∈P(4)zij≥yir+yjr−1,∀i<j∈P∀r∈R(5)∑r∈Ryir=1,∀i∈P(6)Ei≤xi≤Li,∀i∈P(7)δij1,δij2∈{0,1},∀i≠j∈Pzij∈{0,1},∀i<j∈P,yir∈{0,1},∀i∈P∀r∈RWe give a slightly different formulation of the one given in Beasley et al. (2000) and Pinol and Beasley (2006). Constraints (1) are related to planes landing on the same runway, while constraints (2) are related to planes landing on different runways. They ensure minimum separation time in each case ifδij1=1orδij2=1. Ifδij1=0then (1) becomes xj≥ xi− Li+ Ejwhich is true by (7). The same holds for (2). Hence forδij1=0andδij2=0,these constraints are inactive. In Beasley et al. (2000) and Pinol and Beasley (2006), conditions (1), (2) are aggregated in a single set of constraints.If planes i and j (i < j) land on the same runway, i.e. zij= 1, constraint (3) becomesδij1+δji1=1meaning that either aircraft i or j must land first. If planes i and j land on different runways, i.e. zij= 0, thenδij1+δji1=0and constraint (1) is inactive.Constraints (4) and (2), relative to planes landing on different runways, are linked in the same manner.If yir= yjr= 1, i.e. planes i and j land on the same runway r, then constraint (5) ensures that zij= 1. Otherwise zijwill be either equal to 0 or 1. The value zij= 0 will activate constraint (2) which is less constraining than (1) since Sij> sij, and zero value will be preferred in an optimization problem.Constraint (6) ensures that each plane lands on exactly one runway.Constraint (7) ensures that each plane lands within its time window.The remaining constraints are integrality conditions.Various objective functions can be defined for the problem. We consider two functions based on the deviations of the target times. Let us denote a+ = max (0, a).First, we consider the linear deviation cost function used in Beasley et al. (2000). Let gi(resp. hi) be the penalty cost per unit of time for landing before (resp. after) the target time Tifor plane i. The cost for plane i is:(8)ci(xi)=gi(Ti−xi)++hi(xi−Ti)+The objective is to land planes as close to their preferred landing time as possible. Hence, the problem is to minimize the overall cost.Next, we consider the non-linear deviation profit function used in Pinol and Beasley (2006). The contribution of plane i is:(9)qi(xi)=((Ti−xi)+)2−((xi−Ti)+)2A plane landing after its target time is penalized. On the contrary, a plane landing before its target time is preferred. The objective is to land planes as earlier as possible. Hence, the issue is to maximize the overall plane profit.Finally, depending on the chosen objective, ALP can be stated as:min∑i∈Pci(xi)ormax∑i∈Pqi(xi)s.t.x,δ1,δ2,z,ysatisfytheconstraintsof(PB)We show, in this section, that if the data S, s, E, L, T are integer then the landing times of an optimal solution are also integer.Proposition 1Suppose S, s are integer matrices, and E, L, T are integer vectors. Let δ1, δ2, z, y be fixed binary solutions satisfying (3), (4), (5), (6), then the optimal landing times relative to the linear cost (8) and to the non-linear profit (9) are integer.In any optimal solution, there are planes that land before their preferred landing time, i.e. P1 = {i ∈ P: xi≤ Ti}, and planes that land after their preferred landing time, i.e. P2 = {i ∈ P: xi≥ Ti}. Note that for i ∈ P1∩P2 we have xi= Ti.Then, constraints (1), (2), (7) are equivalent to the following constraints:(10){xj≥xi+Sij∀i≠j∈Ps.t.δij1=1(10)xj≥xi+sij∀i≠j∈Ps.t.δij2=1(11)Ei≤xi≤Ti∀i∈P1(12)Ti≤xi≤Li∀i∈P2(13)Now, for the linear cost (8), the problem can be written as the following linear problem with variables x:min∑i∈P1gi(Ti−xi)+∑i∈P2hi(xi−Ti)s.t.(10),(11),(12),(13)As the objective is linear, the optimum is achieved on an extreme point of the polyhedron defined by (10), (11), (12), (13).For the non-linear profit (9), the problem can be written as the following non-linear problem with variables x:max∑i∈P1(Ti−xi)2−∑i∈P2(xi−Ti)2s.t.(10),(11),(12),(13)An optimal solution of this problem is such that for any i ∈ P, xiis as low as possible:∀i∈P1∖P2,xi=max{Ei,maxj:δji1=1(xj+Sji),maxj:δji2=1(xj+sji)}∀i∈P2∖P1,xi=max{maxj:δji1=1(xj+Sji),maxj:δji2=1(xj+sji)}∀i∈P1∩P2,xi=TiHence, for each i ∈ P, an inequality in (10), (11), (12), (13) is saturated by xi, i.e. satisfied with equality. All the saturated inequalities are distinct and x is the unique solution of this set of equalities. Hence x is an extreme point of the polyhedron defined by (10), (11), (12), (13).The constraint matrix defined by (10), (11), (12), (13) is totally unimodular. As the data S, s, and E, L, T are integer, the extreme points are integer. Hence, there is an integer optimal solution for the linear and non-linear objectives.□The previous proposition allows us to discretize time. Models based on time discretization have been proposed in Beasley et al. (2000) and Fahle et al. (2003). Time is discretized in slots and for each plane a landing time slot is chosen. Exclusion constraints between each pair of planes and for each time slot ensure the separation requirements.Here, we propose a different discretization approach that is presented in the following section. In the rest of the paper, the data S, s, E, L, T are supposed to be integer.The modelization is based on the decomposition of the separation time matrix S, as well as s, into a rank two matrix, and on time discretization. First, we assume that the separation matrix is a rank 2 matrix and describe the modelization in this ideal case. In the next section, we will consider the general case.Separation time between planes landing on the same runway must be respected. These constraints are called longitudinal separation time constraints. The entries of the separation matrix S give the minimal required times between any pair of planes landing on the same runway. Sijis the required separation time between leading aircraft i and trailing aircraft j.Assume that S can be decomposed into the sum of a matrix with identical column-vectors a (with positive entries) and a matrix with identical row-vectors b (with non-negative entries),Sij=ai+bjwithai≥1,bj≥0andinteger.In the multiple runway case, separation time between planes landing on different runways must be respected. These constraints are called diagonal separation time constraints. sijis the required separation time between leading plane i and trailing plane j when these planes land on different runways. As for matrix S, rank two decomposition of matrix s is assumed,sij=αi+βjwithαi≥1,βj≥0andinteger.In fact, planes are partitioned into classes (for example, heavy, medium, light) and separation times are given between pair of classes (see for instance Bianco et al., 2006). For the sake of clarity, we assume that the entries of S and s are indexed by planes.The planning horizon is discretized into integer time slots. From Proposition 1, it can be assumed that no event occurs between two consecutive time slots.With this discretization process, we can modelize the problem via a finite number of scenarios. A scenario for a plane corresponds to a landing time in its time window and a runway assignment. The number of scenarios for a plane i is equal to the number of time slots in its time window multiplied by the number of runways. The set of scenarios of plane i is denoted by Scen(i).Scenarios are described in a multidimensional table slot with 0-1 entries.•Let us define slotikrℓ = 1 if and only if ℓ ∈ [tik− bi, tik+ ai[ where tikis the landing time and r the runway of plane i in scenario k ∈ Scen(i). slotikrℓ = 1 means that plane i in scenario k occupies the runway r at time ℓ. Note that a plane occupies the runway before and after its landing time.A fictive runway f is added to take into account the diagonal separation time constraints.•Let us define slotikfℓ = 1 if and only if ℓ ∈ [tik− βi, tik+ αi[ where tikis the landing time of plane i in scenario k ∈ Scen(i). slotikfℓ = 1 means that plane i in scenario k occupies the fictive runway f at time ℓ. Note that a plane occupies the fictive runway before and after its landing time.We denote by H the set of time slots of the planning horizon, i.e. H is the set of integer points of the interval [mini ∈ P(Ei− max {βi, bi}), maxi ∈ P(Li+ max {αi, ai})[.Time discretization and scenario formulation allow modelization of quite general objective functions. Let us define cikas the cost of the kth scenario of plane i and let tikbe the landing time of plane i in scenario k. Consider the linear deviation cost function (8) used in Beasley et al. (2000). Then the cost of scenario k is:(14)cik=gi(Ti−tik)++hi(tik−Ti)+Consider the non-linear deviation profit function (9) used in Pinol and Beasley (2006). Then the cost of scenario k is:(15)cik=((Ti−tik)+)2−((tik−Ti)+)2Finally, with the rank two assumption of separation time matrices S and s, the Aircraft Landing Problem can be stated as the following 0-1 linear problem:(16)(Psc(S,s))|min/maxλ∑i∈P∑k∈Scen(i)cikλiks.t.{∑k∈Scen(i)λik=1,∀i∈P(16)∑i∈P∑k∈Scen(i)slotikrℓλik≤1,∀r∈R∪{f},∀ℓ∈H(17)λik∈{0,1}∀i∈P,∀k∈Scen(i)The objective function depends on the chosen costs: for costs defined by (14) we have a minimization problem, for costs defined by (15) we have a maximization problem. Constraints (16) ensure that one and only one scenario is chosen for each aircraft. Constraints (17) ensure that separation time constraints are satisfied. This is proved in the following proposition. For r ∈ R, these constraints modelize longitudinal separation time. For the fictive runway r = f, they modelize diagonal separation time requirements. The remaining constraints are integrality conditions of the decision variables λik.Proposition 2Let λ be a 0-1 solution satisfying (16). ∀i ∈ P let kibe the chosen scenario for i, i.e. kisuch thatλiki=1. Lettikibe the landing time and ribe the runway of i in scenario ki. Suppose (w.l.o.g.) that planes are indexed in non-decreasing order of their landing times, i.e.i<j⇒tiki≤tjkj.We have the following equivalent conditions:∀i<j∈P,tjkj≥tiki+sij⇔λsatisfies(17)forr=fLet r ∈ R:∀i<j∈Ps.t.r=ri=rj,tjkj≥tiki+Sij⇔λsatisfies(17)forrConsider two planes i < j. LetI=[tiki−βi,tiki+αi[andJ=[tjkj−βj,tjkj+αj[. By definition of the table slot,ℓ∈I⇔slotikiℓf=1andℓ∈J⇔slotjkjℓf=1. We havetjkj+αj>tiki−βisince αj> 0, βi≥ 0 andtjkj≥tiki. Then I∩J ≠ ∅ if and only iftjkj−βj<tiki+αi. For ℓ ∈ I∩J, we haveslotikiℓf+slotjkjℓf=2.Hence,tjkj−βj<tiki+αi⇔∃ℓ∈Hsuchthatslotikiℓf+slotjkjℓf=2.In the same way, if i and j land on the same runway r = ri= rj, thentjkj−bj<tiki+ai⇔∃ℓ∈Hsuchthatslotikiℓr+slotjkjℓr=2.Hence, the following conditions are equivalent:∀i<j∈Ptjkj≥tiki+αi+βj=tiki+sij⇔∀i<j∈P∀ℓ∈Hslotikiℓf+slotjkjℓf≤1⇔∀ℓ∈H∑i∈Pslotikiℓf≤1The last condition means that constraints (17) for r = f are satisfied by λ.In the same way, for r ∈ R, the following conditions are equivalent:∀i<j∈Ps.t.r=ri=rjtjkj≥tiki+ai+bj=tiki+Sij⇔∀i<j∈Ps.t.r=ri=rj∀ℓ∈Hslotikiℓr+slotjkjℓr≤1⇔∀ℓ∈H∑i∈Pslotikiℓr≤1The last condition means that constraints (17) for r ∈ R are satisfied by λ.□Constraints (17) for r = f add diagonal separation time constraints between leading plane i and trailing plane j when i and j land on the same runway. But Sij> sij, and these constraints are inactive.Let i ∈ P and k ∈ Scen(i). ∀r ∈ R, we have slotikrℓ = 0 ∀ℓ∉[Ei− bi, Li+ ai[, and slotikfℓ = 0 ∀ℓ∉[Ei− βi, Li+ αi[. Hence, in constraint (17) for slot ℓ ∈ H, the summation on i ∈ P can be limited to indices i such that ℓ ∈ [Ei− max {βi, bi}, Li+ max {αi, ai}[. So, for each plane i, we have to consider only slots ℓ in the previous interval instead of H. This allows us to reduce the size of the table slot.In the discretization approach, runway dependent data can be easily taken into account. In Pinol and Beasley (2006), runway dependent separation times are considered.Sijris the required separation time between i and j landing on runway r. Assuming rank two decomposition of matrices Sr, this situation can be easily modelized in the scenario approach. It should be mentioned that in the classical model, this case involves quadratic constraints (see Pinol and Beasley, 2006). Runway dependent cost function, runway dependent earliest, target, latest times and runway restrictions (see Hansen, 2004; Pinol and Beasley, 2006) can also be easily modelized.In Section 4, we assumed rank 2 decomposition of separation time matrices. We now consider the general case. We follow the previous scheme with approximated matrices. We approximate the longitudinal separation time matrix S and the diagonal separation time matrix s by rank 2 matrices. The way we approximate leads to exact or heuristic algorithms. Some separation times may be too short and we have to correct them with the exact durations. To achieve this, we use constraints of classical model (PB) presented in Section 2. This leads to a dynamic constraint generation algorithm. In the following sections, we will explore these schemes but first, we have to expose the way the separation time matrices are approximated.In this section, we explain how separation time matrices are approximated by a rank two matrix. We consider the longitudinal separation time matrix S. But the results extend to the diagonal separation matrix.The planes are partitioned into categories and the separation times are not given for each pair of planes but for each pair of plane categories (see Bianco et al., 2006). The matrix S is indexed by plane categories and Sijis the minimum separation time between a plane of category i and a plane of category j when the first one lands before the second one. For example, three categories, heavy, medium, light, lead to 3 × 3 entries matrix. Let C be the set of aircraft categories.We use the following linear problem to approximate the matrix S:(18)(P)mina,b,e+,e−∑i,j∈Ceij++eij−s.t.{ai+bj+eij+=Sij+eij−,∀i,j∈C(18)ai≥1,bi≥0,∀i∈C(19)eij+≥0,eij−≥0,∀i,j∈CSijis approximated by ai+ bjin constraint (18).(P)minimizes ∑i, j ∈ C|ai+ bj− Sij| since in any optimal solutioneij+>0⇒eij−=0and conversely. Hence, this linear program gives a rank 2 matrix that is as close as possible to S.Constraints (19) ensure the conditions required for aiand bi∀i ∈ C (see Section 4).For our time discretization process, we need to have aiand biinteger. The constraints matrix of problem(P)is totally unimodular and integrality conditions are not necessary. S is supposed to have integer entries.•(P)provides the best rank 2 approximation of matrix S that is denoted by Sbest. Let ai, bi∀i ∈ C be the solution of(P),then (Sbest)ij= ai+ bj∀i, j ∈ C.If we seteij+=0then (18) gives ai+ bj≥ Sij. In this case, each entry of the rank 2 matrix provided by(P),is greater than or equal to each entry of S. This matrix is denoted by SUB and (SUB)ij= ai+ bj∀i, j ∈ C.If we seteij−=0then (18) gives ai+ bj≤ Sij. In this case, each entry of the rank 2 matrix provided by(P),is less than or equal to each entry of S. This matrix is denoted by SLB and (SLB)ij= ai+ bj∀i, j ∈ C.Note that with the conditionseij−=0∀i, j ∈ C, (P) may be infeasible because of the inequalities ai≥ 1 ∀i ∈ C. In this case, SLB cannot be computed.At last, note that the set of feasible solutions of (P) does not cover the entire set of rank 2 matrices, even with ai≥ 1 relaxed to ai≥ 0 ∀i ∈ C and the set of rank 2 matrices restricted to rank 2 matrices with non-negative entries.In this section, we present our dynamic constraint generation algorithm to exactly solve the Aircraft Landing Problem. Rank 2 separation matrices SLB, sLB (see Section 5.1) provide relaxation of the separation time constraints, and then lower bound of the Aircraft Landing Problem in the minimization case (upper bound in the maximization case). First, we solve problem Psc(SLB, sLB) built with separation matrices SLB, sLB(Section 4). Next, we correct the separation between planes if necessary. To do this, we use separation time constraints (1), (2) of model (PB) and add them to Psc(SLB, sLB). We have to link the variables of model (PB) to the variables of problem Psc(SLB, sLB). We need the data defined below.•The landing times depend on scenarios. Let tikbe the landing time of plane i in scenario k.The runway where a plane is landing depends on scenarios. The runways used in the scenarios are memorized in the table runw with 0-1 entries. Let us define runwikr= 1 if plane i, in scenario k, lands on runway r, runwikr= 0 otherwise.Then, variables x and y are defined by:xi=∑k∈Scen(i)tikλik∀i∈Pyir=∑k∈Scen(i)runwikrλik∀i∈P,∀r∈RThe remaining variablesδij1,δij2,zijare linked to yirby constraints (3), (4), (5). Then, constraints (1) and (2) can be expressed with variables λik, andδij1,δij2,zijand constraints (3), (4), (5).We dynamically generate the constraints that are necessary for finding the optimal solution. The algorithm can be stated as follows:1.Let (PB) = Psc(SLB, sLB) be the initial problem built with matrices SLB, sLB.Solve (PB). Let λ be the solution.Compute xi= ∑k ∈ Scen(i)tikλik∀i ∈ PFind violated longitudinal separation time constraints (1), i.e. find pairs of planes i, j landing on the same runway with xi≤ xjand xi+ Sij> xj.Find violated diagonal separation time constraints (2), i.e. find pairs of planes i, j landing on different runways with xi≤ xjand xi+ sij> xj.If violated inequalities have been found, express these constraints in variables λik,δij1,δij2,zij, add them to (PB) and reiterate (go to 2); otherwise stop, the problem is solved.The algorithm terminates with a solution satisfying all separation time constraints. Hence, it is an optimal solution. If |P| denotes the number of planes, the number of iterations of the algorithm is at most 2|P|(|P| − 1) because at each iteration we correct the longitudinal and/or diagonal separations between planes i ≠ j. This number corresponds to the total number of constraints (1), (2) of (PB).In this section, we use Sbest and sbest, the best rank 2 approximation of matrices S and s (see Section 5.1), in order to obtain heuristic solutions.The heuristic procedure is divided into two phases. First, we solve problem Psc(Sbest, sbest) built with separation matrices Sbest, sbest(Section 4). We obtain a landing sequence, i.e. a sequence of planes (i1, i2, …, i|P|) such that iklands before ik + 1 (k = 1, …, |P| − 1), and a runway assignment in which each plane is assigned to a runway. Next, we compute the optimal landing times relative to the landing sequence and runway assignment previously found.In this scheme, the first phase can be improved by adding constraints (1), (2) of model (PB) as in the algorithm presented in Section 5.2. Here, we can limit the number of iterations since we are seeking a heuristic solution. Note that even without limiting iterations number, the algorithm provides a heuristic solution because matrices Sbest and sbest are not lower bounds of separation time matrices S and s. Some entries of the approximating matrices may be greater than the original ones. Sbest and sbest being as close to the original matrices as possible, this effect is limited. Each iteration provides a heuristic solution, i.e. a landing sequence and a runway assignment. The solutions are saved in a list. In the second phase, we compute the optimal landing times of the solutions contained in the list and we return the best solution. The algorithm can be stated as in Algorithm 1for the first phase and Algorithm 2for the second phase.In phase 2, landing times computation depends on the chosen objective.•For the linear objective function built with (8), it is possible to use (PB) (Section 2). For a given landing sequence and runway assignment, the binary variables δ1, δ2 and y, z are fixed, and (PB) contains only continuous landing time variables x. Then, computing the optimal landing times is a linear problem which can be solved very quickly, see Beasley et al. (2000) and Pinol and Beasley (2006).For the non-linear objective built with (9), with the close-up property, i.e. each plane is as close to its earliest time as can be achieved by separation constraints, it is possible to compute optimal landing times using a polynomially bounded algorithm, see Pinol and Beasley (2006).Time discretization of a large planning horizon may induce a huge number of time slots which can cause serious troubles in solving problem Psc(Sbest, sbest) in phase 1. One way to bypass this drawback is the following. We choose a parameter d > 1. Entries of vectors L, E, T are divided by d. Fractional values encountered in the division of L, E, T are converted into the first lower integer. Entries of separation time matrices S and s are divided by d. Fractional values encountered in the division of S and s are converted into the first upper integer. This amounts to contracting the planning horizon by a factor1d. Scand scdenote respectively the new matrices S and s obtained by this contraction process. Best rank 2 approximation of matrices Scand scare computed. Next, we call Algorithm 1 with matricesSbestcandsbestc. We obtain a list of landing sequences and runway assignments. Then, we go back to the original data L, E, T, S, s, and we call Algorithm 2 to compute the optimal landing times of the solutions (landing sequences and runway assignments) found in the first phase.Algorithms and mathematical models presented in Sections 4 and 5 were implemented using FICO-Xpress Mosel language and problems were solved with FICO-Xpress Optimizer (version 7.0) software, on a PC-Windows computer, dual-core processor Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-2520M (2.5 gigahertz) with 4 gigabytes of RAM.Computational tests have been performed on 12 instances publicly available from the OR-library (Beasley, 1996) involving from 10 to 500 aircraft. The instances are partitioned into two sets: small instances involving from 10 to 50 aircraft and large instances involving from 100 to 500 aircraft. There are no diagonal separation time constraints. The description of the instances is given in Table 1. |P| is the number of planes of the problem. For each instance, the length of the planning horizon is given in hours, minutes, and seconds. The number of planes per hour, and the number of aircraft categories are also given.In the following tests, we consider the linear objective built with (8) and the non-linear objective built with (9), described in Section 2.First, we study our method on problems built with rank 2 separation time matrices. In this case, we do not need to use the dynamic constraint generation method (Section 5.2) but we just have to solve problem (Psc) (Section 4). We build two rank 2 matrices from the original matrix S given in Beasley (1996): Sbest and SUB (see Section 5.1).The separation times in Sbest are smaller than in SUB. So, problems built with Sbest are less constrained than those built with SUB. The tests are performed on the small instances with the linear objective function.For comparison, we have reported the results of the classical discretization methods proposed by Beasley et al. (2000) and Fahle et al. (2003). Fahle et al.’s method is an improvement of Beasley et al.’s method in which the number of constraints is reduced. We implemented the models in AMPL language and solved them using the CPLEX software package (CPLEX 12.6), on a quad-core processor Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-3470 CPU (3.2 gigahertz) with 4 gigabytes of RAM.Table 2reports the results. The table is divided into two parts: above, short separation times, corresponds to problems built with the separation matrices Sbest and below, long separation times, corresponds to problems built with the separation matrice SUB. The columns of Table 2 are described below.•Instance The description of the instances is reported with Pb = name of the problem, |P| = number of planes, |R| = number of runways, and optimal value of each instance.Our discretization method The CPU time column gives time in seconds for computing the exact solution. The LP value column reports the value of the LP relaxation. The gap column indicates if there is an integrality gap or not.Beasley et al.’s discretization The results obtained by Beasley et al.’s discretization method (Beasley et al., 2000) are reported: CPU time in seconds needed to solve the problem and LP value of the model.Fahle et al.’s discretization The results obtained by Fahle et al.’s discretization method (Fahle et al., 2003) are reported: CPU time in seconds needed to solve the problem and LP value of the model.The LP relaxation of our method is very tight. The LP relaxation is equal to the exact value very often. This is why the time needed to compute the exact solution is short in comparison to CPU time of the classical discretization methods, especially for the instances with long separation times. Our discretization method is less sensitive to the separation time matrix than the other methods. For the two types of separation matrices, the computation times are similar. This is not the case for the classical discretization methods. The tightness of the LP bound in our discretization method can be explained by the fact that exclusions between planes landing at the same time slot are taken into account for all planes together. In the classical discretization methods, the exclusions are modelized for each pair of planes. At last, we point out that the most important part of CPU time of our method is spent in loading the problem. Loading the problem takes up to 10 times the duration of resolution. Time for loading the problem increases with the number of runways. But, only a few seconds are needed to solve the problem.Now, we study the problem with the original separation time matrices given in Beasley (1996). We consider the small instances. We solve the problems exactly with the dynamic constraint generation algorithm described in Section 5.2. We need to compute SLB. The required CPU time is negligible. For S8, problem (P) (Section 5.1) has no feasible solution and the instance cannot be treated.First, we consider the linear objective. For comparison, the results given in Beasley et al. (2000) are reported. Beasley et al. (2000), use a MIP formulation similar to the one given in Section 2. At the beginning of the tree search, this MIP is tightened each time an improved feasible solution is found. The feasible solution is used to tighten the time windows constraints (7).The results for the linear objective are given in Table 3. Table 3 is divided into three parts described below.•Instance The description of the instances is reported with Pb = name of the problem, |P| = number of planes, |R| = number of runways, and optimal value of each instance. The values can be found in Beasley et al. (2000).Our exact method This part gives the number of iterations (iter), CPU time in seconds required by our dynamic constraint generation algorithm, and the LP value, i.e. the value of the continuous relaxation of the initial problem.Beasley et al.’s MIP Final LP value is the final (hence the best) LP value found by the improved MIP formulation of Beasley et al., CPU time is the total amount of time in seconds to solve the problem. Beasley et al. use a heuristic algorithm and when this algorithm gives a zero value, the optimal solution is found (all planes land on target). In this case, results concerning MIP are not reported. This is indicated by *.We observe that the LP value of our method is greater than the Beasley et al.’s improved LP value, except for problem S7 with one runway. The quality of the lower bound depends on the quality of the approximation of the separation time matrix S. The approximation is good for instances S1–S5. For S6, S7 the approximation is not as good and the lower bound is not always very tight. Nevertheless, it is sufficient for solving the problem within a short CPU time. When the lower bound is too weak as for S7 with one runway, the problem cannot be solved: the resolution is stopped after 1 hour of computation.Now, we consider the non-linear objective. We have a maximization problem in this case. For comparison, the results given in Pinol and Beasley (2006) are reported. Pinol and Beasley solve the problem using two population heuristics.The results for the non-linear objective are given in Table 4described below.•Instance Pb = name of the problem, |P| = number of planes, |R| = number of runways. We have reported the optimal value of each instance computed by our algorithm except for S7, one runway. For this instance, the value is a heuristic value that can be found in Pinol and Beasley (2006).Our exact method Identical as above.Pinol and Beasley’s best heuristic We have reported the best result of the two heuristic methods of Pinol and Beasley, with respect to the quality of the solution. The Gap column gives the best gap (in percent) against the optimal value, that isGap=optimalvalue−heuristicvalueoptimalvalue×100. CPU time is given in seconds.As above, the quality of the LP bound depends on the quality of the approximation of the separation time matrix S. We observe that the LP value of our method is a good upper bound (recall it is a maximization problem), except for problems S6 and S7 with one runway. For S7, the gap between LP and optimal value is huge and the problem cannot be solved after 1 hour of computation. For S6, the gap is quickly closed and the problem is solved with a small number of iterations. The problems are solved in a reasonable CPU time. These times may be greater than those of Pinol and Beasley’s algorithm but one must keep in mind that our algorithm is an exact method.Now, we are going to consider the large instances. We use our heuristic algorithm described in Section 5.3. The value of parameter d (see Section 5.3.1) varies in the interval [4, 10] and depends on the size of the planning horizon. For comparison, the best results of the two population heuristics used by Pinol and Beasley (2006) are reported.The results for the linear objective are given in Table 5. Table 5 is divided into three parts described below.•Instance Pb = name of the problem, |P| = number of planes, |R| = number of runways. For each instance, the best known value given in Pinol and Beasley (2006) is reported.Our heuristic method This part gives the value found by our heuristic method and the required CPU time in seconds. The gap (in percent) is calculated with reference to the best known value asheuristicvalue−bestknownvaluebestknownvalue×100. When our heuristic method improves the best known solution, the corresponding gap is negative. The maximum number of iterations is set to 4. The first iteration result and the best result among the four iterations are reported. The corresponding number of iteration is given in the iter column. The Improve column denotes the improvements: x indicates that we have improved the solution given by the heuristic method of Pinol and Beasley, and a further x indicates an improvement of the best known solution. An improvement, if there is one, is indicated only once, on the best iteration.Pinol and Beasley’s best heuristic The best results, with respect to the solution quality, given in Pinol and Beasley (2006) are reported. The Gap column gives the best gap (in percent) of the heuristic method of Pinol and Beasley, against the best known solution value (see the previous formula). The corresponding CPU time is given in seconds.The initial solution (first iteration) of our method is generally good. The quality of the solution is improved with a small number of additional iterations. Our heuristic method gives better solutions than Pinol and Beasley’s heuristics on 14 instances among 24. Moreover, it ameliorates the best known solution of nine instances. The average of our best gaps (best gap of each instance) is equal to 10.41 percent.Note that in this average, we have excluded L3 with five runways instance whose gap is undefined. Indeed, the value returned by our heuristic method is 1.73 and the best known value is equal to zero. For comparison, the best average of Pinol and Beasley’s heuristics is equal to 22 percent. Our method requires a reasonable amount of time for these sizes of problems.Now, let us consider the non-linear objective. We must keep in mind that the problem is a maximization problem in this case.The results for large instances with non-linear objective are given in Table 6. The content of this table is the same as previously in Table 5. The gap is computed bybestknownvalue−heuristicvaluebestknownvalue×100since we have a maximization problem.The results are similar to the linear case. The initial solution (first iteration) of our method is very good except for L5 with one runway. A few iterations provide substantial benefit. Our heuristic method gives better solutions than Pinol and Beasley’s heuristics on 12 instances among 23. Moreover, it ameliorates the best known solution of six instances. The average of our best gaps (best gap of each instance) is equal to 0.92 percent. In comparison, the best average of Pinol and Beasley’s heuristics is equal to 2.9 percent. Once again, the amount of time required for solving these large instances is not excessive.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
