@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integer programming techniques for solving non-linear workforce planning models with learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We address a class of production problems that model human learning with non-linear curves.We reformulate the non-linear program to an equivalent mixed integer program (MIP).We present a specialized algorithm for solving the MIP.We show that the MIP is much easier to solve than the non-linear program.We show that the specialized algorithm is superior to a state-of-the-art solver.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Production planning and scheduling,Human learning,Nonlinear programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In humans, the relationship between experience and productivity, also known as learning (possibly also including forgetting), is non-linear. As a result, prescriptive planning models that seek to manage workforce development through task assignment are difficult to solve. To overcome this challenge we adapt a reformulation technique from non-convex optimization to model non-linear functions with a discrete domain with sets of binary and continuous variables and linear constraints. Further, whereas the original applications of this technique yielded approximations, we show that in our context the resulting mixed integer program is equivalent to the original non-linear problem. As a second contribution, we introduce a capacity scaling algorithm that exploits the structure of the reformulation model and reduces computation time. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the techniques on task assignment models wherein employee learning is a function of task repetition.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Peter Senge famously wrote that the learning organization is “continually expanding its capacity to create its future” (Senge, 2006). Citing employee learning as an effective way to create capacity from existing resources, Levinthal and March (1993) argue that effective management of employee learning can lead to a sustainable competitive advantage. Some go further and claim that, in the modern business environment, the only sustainable competitive advantage will come from a company’s ability to learn more effectively than its competitors (Kapp, 1999). Even if it is not the only source of competitive advantage, Moustaghfir (2009) identifies learning as a core component of organizational capabilities that are “immune to competitive duplication.” In this paper, we address the issue of learning at the operational level by developing solution techniques for workforce planning models that incorporate individual on-the-job learning.In particular, this paper focuses on a class of multi-period workforce planning models that recognize human learning and forgetting over a fixed planning horizon in environments that can be characterized as task assignment. We consider a workforce that produces a product, the production of which requires the completion of a sequence of tasks. Inventory is allowed to accumulate in between each task in the sequence. We assume that the workforce’s current skill levels and thus their productivity are heterogeneous. As workers perform a particular task, they gain experience that correspondingly leads to a productivity improvement as they learn on the job. In addition, when workers are not doing a particular task, they forget some of what they have learned and their productivity on that particular task erodes. We assume that each worker has his or her own rate of learning and forgetting for each task. The objective is to maximize production over a fixed time horizon.In humans, the relationship between experience and productivity, also known as learning (possibly also including forgetting), is non-linear. Thus, prescriptive models incorporating learning are difficult to solve. This paper helps overcome this challenge in two ways.First, it adapts a reformulation technique for non-convex optimization problems that enables linearization of the learning curves. For general non-convex optimization, the reformulation yields an approximation of the original non-linear program (NLP). However, in our application, the non-linear functions have a specific structure that has not previously been explored. Specifically, they are functions of the number of times an individual has performed a task over a fixed number of periods, and thus have discrete and finite domains. In this case, solutions to the mixed integer program (MIP) resulting from the reformulation are optimal for the original non-linear program. As a result, we can solve MIPs instead of NLPs, and with the superior capabilities of MIP solvers to those of NLP solvers, we are able to solve problems that are significantly larger than what has been previously possible.The reformulation technique associates a binary variable with each element of the domain of the non-linear function we wish to linearize. In our application this translates to representing each potential skill level for each worker in each period of the planning horizon with a binary variable. As a result, as instance sizes grow, the resulting MIPs become large, increasing solve times. Thus, as a second contribution, we derive structural properties of the feasible region of the MIP that in turn motivate a capacity scaling algorithm wherein these variables are generated dynamically. With an extensive computational study, we see that this algorithm reduces solution time. The capacity scaling algorithm can be applied to any MIP resulting from the reformulation technique.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the relevant literature. Section 3 presents our reformulation technique, and Section 4 introduces the capacity scaling heuristic that exploits the structure of the reformulation. Section 5 presents the non-linear and reformulated math programs for the workforce planning model on which we perform computational tests. The section also demonstrates how to implement the capacity scaling algorithm with the reformulated workforce planning model. Using instances of different sizes and characteristics, Section 6 studies the computational times associated with the reformulated math program and the scaling algorithm. Section 7 offers conclusions and opportunities for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we adapt a technique for modeling a (non-linear) function with binary variables and linear constraints to a case where the function has a finite and discrete domain. We show that, in this case, solving the resulting mixed integer program yields an optimal solution to the original non-linear program (unlike the case for general, non-convex optimization problems wherein the resulting MIP is an approximation). With this technique, workforce planning models that contain non-linear models of human learning can be reformulated as mixed integer programs. Our computational study indicates that the resulting instances are much easier to solve and thus much larger instances can be solved than when the original non-linear program is solved with commercial software. We also use the resulting mixed integer program to develop an integer programming-based exact algorithm that can quickly produce a high quality solution.While this reformulation technique does reduce solve times and enable larger instances to be solved, there is room for improvement. Our results indicate that strengthening the formulation with valid inequalities may greatly reduce solution times for instances that are tightly capacitated. Further, this paper is intended to demonstrate the general value of the reformulation technique. We have not addressed any particular workforce planning problem, and future studies demonstrating the impact of the reformulation on solving such practical problems would be valuable. Also, we are developing models that are similar to the AwRL, but that recognize there may be uncertainty with respect to a worker’s learning parameters.