@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring supplier performance risk and the buyer's role using chance-constrained data envelopment analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We evaluate supplier efficiency with data envelopment analysis and under delivery disruptions.We examine supplier risk by considering buyer's information sharing performance factors.Supplier classification is sensitive to the severity of on-time delivery disruption.Buyer's ability to share timely/accurate information impacts supplier performance.Managers can identify suppliers capable of absorbing information uncertainty and disruptions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supplier performance risk,Information sharing,Supplier classification,Data envelopment analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Current sourcing paradigms are described by greater complexity in managing suppliers' performance in purchasing cycle execution, product quality and logistics competence. When we combine the stages of the order fulfillment cycle with the buyer's information sharing factors, a more complete view of the buyer-supplier exchange becomes useful for performance evaluation of both the suppliers and the buyers. Using operational data obtained from a large telecommunications firm, which placed strategic importance on measuring the performance in the purchase order fulfillment cycle stages, this study offers a new context for supplier evaluation. This context also conceptualizes several on-time delivery disruption scenarios as supplier delivery performance risk, and investigates the sensitivity of both the buyer's information sharing and the suppliers’ performance capabilities to on-time delivery disruptions. We evaluate supplier performance and segment suppliers through recourse to chance-constrained data envelopment analysis at high and low discriminatory power levels. Our results show that there are statistically significant relationships between the dimensions of information sharing by the buying firm and the classification of supplier firms at varying levels of on-time delivery performance risk. We also identify robust suppliers demonstrating the capability to remain efficient across disruption levels despite poor buyer performance on information sharing factors, and provide managerial insights on buyer-supplier exchange.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traditional sourcing paradigms were developed to manage conditions described by stable demand, reasonable certainty in demand forecasts, high levels of stock, reliable transportation, and high volume production, all supported by fiscal solvency. However, newer sourcing paradigms of multi-sourcing, outsourcing and off-shoring, among others, have increased total non-conformance costs, and further complicated the management of suppliers’ quality and delivery performance. In both sourcing paradigms, understanding a (domestic or foreign) supplier's performance capability is vital to the allocation of purchase decisions. Moreover, the current business climate of increased fiscal insolvency, poor quality in the form of scrap or rework, poor synchronization between the buyer-supplier exchange, and unreliable delivery performance all lead to more pronounced non-conforming performance in the buyer-seller exchange (Hoetker, 2005).With rare exception (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000), studies evoking or testing the resource-based view (RBV) typically assume resource or capability uniqueness resides with the organization as a whole, implying homogeneity in terms of the applicability and diffusion of unique resources and capabilities to the suppliers comprising the supply base (Miller, Ross, & Carpenter, 2010; Adner & Helfat, 2003). If the firm's resources and capabilities are indeed internally homogeneous, and evenly distributed throughout the firm, then it is a relatively easy task for top managers to specify and codify best practices, or identify appropriate internal role models that each unit can adopt to improve its performance. However, we contend that this assumption may be invalid, and that resources and capabilities are heterogeneously distributed throughout the firms comprising the buyer's supply base. The extreme case of such resource heterogeneity would be that advantages accruing from unique resources and capabilities in one supplier firm do not, or may not even be able to, pass along the same advantages to other suppliers. Such is the case when considering suppliers’ performance risk and the buyer's information sharing role during the order fulfillment cycle.Much importance is accorded to the information flows between the buyer and the supplier exchange to enhance synchronization during the order fulfillment cycle/process (Rezaei & Ortt, 2013; Joshi, 2009; Prahinski & Benton, 2004). For example, sourcing alternatives are vital when suppliers fall short in compliance to order acknowledgement, quality, cost, on-time delivery, or on-time shipment. Conversely, the same is often true when the buying firm falls short in sharing revised forecasts, or subjects its suppliers to capacity shirking by changing purchase order requirements (Oehmen, Ziegenbein, Alard, & Schonsleben, 2009). In such case, the buying firm should factor its own performance into the evaluation process. Therefore, newer sourcing paradigms imply that buyer/supplier performance risk is an area in need of investigation in the literature.Information flows are embedded in the dynamic planning process where the standard procedure for firms to react on updated forecasts is by periodically revising the actual production schedule while rolling forward the planning horizon (de Kok & Inderfurth, 1997). Vollmann, Berry, and Whybark (1988) state that operations with revised plans are connected with discontinuities in maintaining former ordering decisions, which is stated as nervousness syndrome. Nervousness, also known as lack of planning stability, results in considerable adjustment efforts as well as possible loss of confidence in planning (de Kok & Inderfurth, 1997). Changes in demand quantities can lead to schedule nervousness and be an obstacle to effective planning (Kadipasaoglu & Sridharan, 1995). If the buyer's information on the required quantities of supplies and the dates the shipments must be at the buyer location is of poor quality, suppliers will face severe disruptions in their own production schedules, which in turn will affect their own suppliers’ schedules. Krajewski, Wei, and Tang (2005) identify two reaction strategies, reduce uncertainty (for infrequent revisions) and cope with uncertainty (for relatively frequent revisions), suppliers use to respond to schedule changes occurring within a supplier's manufacturing and delivery lead time. Sahin and Robinson (2005) show that information sharing not only reduces costs, but also provides more economic benefits from coordinated decision-making. Liker and Wu (2000) show that significantly fewer short-term changes in schedules contribute to better operational performance of the suppliers.While the generic term ‘supplier risk’ is very broad and replete with many definitions (Khan & Zsidisin, 2012; Tang, 2006; Wu, Zhang, Wu, & Olson, 2010), we adopt the view in this study that supplier risk refers to the adverse effects of deviations in measured supplier performance factors such as on-time delivery and others. Therefore, we use the term supplier performance risk referring to the effects of deviations in the measured performance factors. We characterize it as either the sudden process-level failures of manufacturing, logistics, or supply management during the buyer-supplier exchange, or, a distortion in planning information that is shared between buyers and their suppliers. There is a continuing need to understand supplier performance risk (Craighead, Blackhurst, Rungtusanatham, & Handfield, 2007; Wagner, Bode, & Koziol, 2009; Lee & Johnson, 2010). Its practical importance (L'Oreal, 2010; Kearney, 2011; Bunkley, 2011) evolved from the heavy reliance upon traditional competitive sourcing practices that drove key suppliers to financial ruin (Martha & Subbakrishna, 2002).This study extends the only other known study of supplier performance risk in a chance constrained data envelopment analysis context (Talluri, Narasimhan, & Nair, 2006). Our work goes further in several important ways. First, until now, a more robust evaluation of supplier performance risk has been constrained by the absence of a more diverse industrial case application context and the oversight in consideration of the buyer's role in supplier performance risk. Therefore, we attempt to fill this gap in the literature using operational data obtained from a large telecommunications firm that placed strategic importance on its supplier performance management system. Second, the supplier factors considered in this study represent stages of the order fulfillment process or cycle. When we combine the stages of the order fulfillment cycle with the buyer's information sharing factors, a more complete view of the buyer-supplier exchange becomes useful for performance evaluation of both the suppliers and the buyer. Finally, in this view, we investigate the relative performance differences and the sensitivity of buyer's information sharing and supplier's performance capabilities, affected by disruptions in on-time delivery, for efficient and inefficient supplier groups. Taken together, we offer a new perspective for evaluating the supplier performance risk by considering each of these prior limitations under nine levels (scenarios) of on-time delivery disruption.The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. Section 2 melds together the relevant supplier performance risk and performance evaluation literature. Section 3 presents the data used and the research methodology. A discussion of alternative risk and disruption scenarios is presented along with results in Section 4. Finally, the concluding section offers several interpretations and research implications.This section reviews the relevant literature on supplier performance risk and methods of supplier performance evaluation. Several issues require further investigation in the supplier performance literature. These include extending the dimensions beyond simple aggregations of quality, cost and delivery performance to include dimensions reflecting information sharing between the buyer and supplier (Prahinski & Benton, 2004; Tuncel & Alpan, 2010), the issues of performance segmentation (Rezaei & Ortt, 2013), and shirking by the buyer or supplier (Swink & Zsidisin, 2006). These all have interpretations for shielding organizations against supplier performance risk (Neiger, Rotaru, & Churilov, 2009). From the RBV perspective, resource and capability heterogeneity are central to explaining performance differences among firms (Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997). If we apply the principle underlying the Austrian School (Jacobson, 1992) to the supply base of a buying organization, then it is conceivable that heterogeneity is likely to exist across the supply base, as suppliers often differ in their ability to innovate and to gather and exploit information regarding the resources and capabilities relevant to performance-based future opportunities with their buyers. However, little is understood regarding supplier performance risk in the context of information sharing. The following sections offer several premises based upon our interpretation of this relevant literature.The first premise is that current supplier performance evaluation practices and risk management programs increasingly focus on mitigating the fiscal and the operational impact of supplier performance risk. Academic research in this area still draws considerable attention (Ojala & Hallikas, 2006; Tang, 2006; Wu et al., 2010; Khan & Zsidisin, 2012). The supplier performance risk literature is fairly new as a research domain. In a broad sense, it includes any uncertainty across the supply chain network that leads to failures in normal business operations for the supplier and/or the buyer, and the deployment of their resources/capabilities (Tomlin, 2006; Rao & Goldsby, 2009).The second premise is that the impact of the supplier performance risk, as one category of supply chain disruption, is an increasingly important topic in the literature, and information sharing (order stability and nervousness for example) in the buyer-supplier exchange may moderate the severity of risk impact. Kleindorfer and Saad (2005) point to the risks arising from not synchronizing activities and the absence of information sharing between buyers and suppliers. The authors provide empirical evidence of the positive impact of risk management and conclude that strategic and tactical actions should be taken to minimize disruption impacts. Tachizawa and Thomsen (2007) classify supply chain risks according to their source (within the company, downstream, and upstream), and point out that improved supplier resiliency and flexible sourcing are two main strategies to mitigate supply risk. Craighead et al. (2007) outline supply chain factors that are positively related to the severity of a supply chain disruption. While literature on this subject is vast, these particular studies are representative as they highlight the ubiquity of risk in the supply chain and the need for additional study from the supplier performance risk modeling perspective (Ritchie & Brindley, 2007; Wu et al., 2010). As such, a new step that is needed in this literature is the explication of the relationship between supplier and buyer factors under alternative supplier performance disruption scenarios. Next section details efficiency-based evaluation methods since it is the approach adopted in this examination.Useful existing approaches for supplier performance evaluation include weighted linear models (Timmerman, 1987), Analytical Hierarchy Process (Barbarosoglu & Yazgac, 1997), discrete choice analysis (Verma & Pullman, 1998), total cost of ownership (Ellram, 1995), efficiency (Weber, Current, & Desai, 1998), multi-objective programming (Wu et al., 2010) and others. Each has its own unique strengths and limitations. However, efficiency-based approaches consider multiple measures simultaneously, are widely accepted (Wu & Blackhurst, 2009; Wu et al., 2010), and allow for the examination of supplier performance risk conceptualized in this study.The efficiency-based evaluation method of data envelopment analysis (DEA) is accorded to Charnes and Cooper (1959), and continues to be widely accepted for supplier evaluation due to its multi-attribute nature (Wu, 2009). It is a non-parametric approach to measure the relative efficiency of organizational units in the presence of multifarious inputs and outputs. Refinements reported in Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978a, 1978b) developed this mathematical programming model further and are regarded as the “CCR” approach to evaluate efficiency of organizational units (i.e., public schools, manufacturing plants, supplier firms to a buying organization) under constant returns to scale assumptions. DEA computes an efficiency score for each evaluated unit, called Decision Making Unit (DMU), and relates the performance of evaluated units to a piecewise-linear production frontier. It empirically estimates the production function for each evaluated unit based on the ratio of output factors and input factors of the most efficient units. Those units with production function values on the production frontier are assigned a value equal to 1, and those under the frontier receive values between zero and one. DEA accommodates differences in firm size, management objectives or other characteristics. Finally, DEA requires no statistical assumptions about the underlying data. Many modeling variants for a variety of problem contexts have appeared over the last four decades (Liu, Ding, & Lall, 2000; Chen & Yan, 2011).There has been renewed attention to understanding the impact of risk on supplier performance evaluations (Araz & Ozkarahan, 2007; Wu et al., 2010; Lockamy & McCormack, 2010; Jung, Lim, & Oh, 2011). The evaluation of supplier performance risk using DEA was not possible until the work by Land, Lovell, and Thore (1993). They extended the seminal study by Charnes and Cooper (1959) who introduced chance-constrained programming to DEA (now called CCDEA). In CCDEA, input factors or output factors are regarded as stochastic rather than deterministic metrics as in the traditional CCR model (Land et al., 1993); therefore, the CCDEA approach to performance evaluation takes the uncertainty or risk in DMUs’ inputs or outputs into account. The evaluation results can then be used to uncover the overall performance outcomes of the DMUs (e.g. suppliers). Talluri et al. (2006) and Wu et al. (2010) both point out the continued importance accorded to evaluating and selecting supply chain partners and propose two diverse approaches, namely efficiency analysis and multi-objective programming techniques while addressing supplier risk.The third premise is that simple segmentation of efficient and inefficient suppliers by utilizing DEA models is not sufficient so we also (i) analyze the behavior of efficient/inefficient suppliers and buyers under different levels of on-time delivery disruption levels, and (ii) identify the patterns leading to efficiency and inefficiency of suppliers. Furthermore, we provide the framework for associating the levels of disruption (risk) in the supplier performance to the CCDEA model parameters and offer a new analysis approach. Our study addresses some research gaps using perspectives of efficiency as discussed in Section 3.The fourth premise of this study is that understanding performance variability among suppliers and buyers offers important insights for sourcing decisions and the development needs of these firms (Chang, Ouyang, Wu, & Ho, 2006; Wu & Blackhurst, 2009; Jung et al., 2011). A sudden amplification of operational uncertainty caused by a disruption in operations or information sharing often leads to a deviation in expected performance. Similarly, distortions in information (e.g. poor forecast accuracy) or supplier shirking (frequent purchase order changes) in the supply chain will impact the ability to meet expected scorecard targets and thus reduce performance along the supply chain (Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997; Burt, Petcavage, & Pinkerton, 2010). This section begins by describing the dataset that consists only of quantitative data due to our focus on uncertainty in supplier performance. Following the dataset description, the methodology discussion covers the traditional CCDEA models and our incorporation of varying levels of supplier performance risk into the CCDEA models of efficiency evaluation.Table 1below lists the specific supplier-side (referred to as output performance factors) and buyer-side (referred to as input performance factors) performance factors used in this manuscript and their unit of measure. On the supplier-side, operational synchronization, delivery reliability and responsiveness between the supplier and the buyer are generally influenced by the order-to-delivery performance capabilities in firm. As observed in several leading purchasing organizations, the general purchase transaction cycle process can be divided into stages determined most relevant to the firm. Each stage is then assigned a relevant metric to be monitored during the course of transacting with suppliers.Such was the case in the testbed electronics firm in which the stages included the following specific scorecard metrics: (1) the timely acknowledgement of purchase orders (PORAC), (2) sending shipment notices in advance (PSNOT), (3) releasing shipments on the original promised ship dates (PSHIP), (4) releasing shipments to carriers on the committed date (OTS), and (5) adhering to on-time delivery (OTD) expectations (Liu et al., 2000). These metrics reflect many, if not all, of the major stages of the supplier's replenishment and delivery performance during a typical exchange with buyers. PORAC, PSNOT and PSHIP reflect the competence of the suppliers in purchasing processes, whereas OTS and OTD reflect the competence of the suppliers in logistics processes. Quality acceptance rate, ACCEPT, is also included on the supplier scorecard of the buyers (Wu, Zsidisin, & Ross, 2007; Forker, Ruch, & Hershauer, 1999) and reflects the competence of suppliers’ product quality. In the RBV lens, we conclude that under some contexts, disruptions lead to inefficient use of resources or operational congestion leading to incomplete or damaged orders both of which lead to rejected shipments. A sample of the full data set used for this study appears in Appendix A.The work in supplier evaluation has used many different classes of data. We reviewed the long history of literature and found that many authors have used two or more variables in the form of proportional data in their evaluation studies. For example, Chen and Chen (2006) actually used six such variables, Reiner and Hofmann (2006) used three, and Sevkli, Lenny-Koh, Zaim, Demirbag, and Tatoglu (2007) used several as well. There are also several studies/surveys investigating the kinds of variables that are used to evaluate suppliers in practice (Liu et al., 2000; Jung et al., 2011). The variables we used are very similar to the ones reported in these studies. Given that our data is actual data currently in use by a Fortune 500 Corporation as key metrics of its supplier performance management program, there is practical relevance for its use in this study of supplier risk evaluation with performance disruptions.On the buyer-side of performance evaluation, the volatile nature of customers’ preferences and the dynamics of their respective markets are recognized as critical concerns (Sodhi & Lee, 2007). That is, the focal buyer firm uses a scorecard system that incorporates factors reflecting purchase order stability (BSTAB), forecasting accuracy (FA) and comprehensiveness of forecasts (COF). These are buyer factors that represent the competence of buyers in information sharing and planning processes, and often affect the supplier's ability to meet performance expectations (Kahn, 2002; Saloner & Spence, 2002). Purchase order stability (BSTAB) measures the percentage of the orders the buyer made no changes to during the performance review period. Buyer's Forecast Accuracy (FA) represents the ratio of the actual number of units the buyer purchases to the forecasted number of units to purchase during the performance review period. Although the ratio can theoretically exceed 1.0, the company did not observe such a case in actual practice as the managers frequently revised both the planned purchases and/or the actual purchase quantities as part of the regular planning and review meetings. Buyer's Comprehensiveness of Forecast (COF) calculates the ratio of the number of product lines the buyer actually purchases to the number of product lines the buyer forecasts to purchase. There is no penalty for ordering from product lines that were not initially forecasted as potential lines to purchase.Providing accurate forecasts, minimizing changes to released purchase orders, and committing to planned purchase schedules can impact supplier performance (Chopra & Sodhi, 2004; Hendricks & Singhal, 2009; González-Benito, 2007). Suppliers generally benefit from accurate buyer information on demand schedules, stable orders and sufficient volume commitments to cover their production cost structure.This section introduces the CCDEA model with deterministic input and stochastic output factors to evaluate the performance of DMUs (suppliers) under varying levels of supplier performance risk. CCDEA is a popular technique for supplier evaluation and ranking has been used by Land et al. (1993), Sengupta (1990), and Cooper, Deng, Haung, and Li (2002). Land et al. (1993) provides the first established CCDEA model with the following standard notation and formulation:Notation used:i, j = 1, … , Isupplier sample index (the set of decision-making units),input factors,output factors,sample input matrix, with dimension M * I,sample output matrix, with dimension N * I,row vector of X,row vector of Y,one output factor of the supplier under evaluation,one input factor of the supplier under evaluation,column vector of inputs of the particular DMU investigated,column vector of outputs of the particular DMU investigated,(radial input) contraction factor, DMU's efficiency score,weights vector, for all DMUs (column vector of DMU loadings, determining the “best practice” for the DMU being evaluated).Model 0(1)minθsubjecttoProb(Ynλ≤yn0)≤p,n=1,…,N(2)θxm0≥Xmλ,m=1,…,Mθunrestricted,λ≥0This model assumes that the sample input matrix X (for the input factors) is predetermined and the sample output matrix Y (for the output factors) is random. Specifically, the outputs yni(n=1,…,N) are assumed to be jointly normal conditional on the inputs xmi(m=1,…,M). The optimal (radial) contraction factor θ represents the DMU efficiency scores, whereas the p-level represents the probability that the observed outputs exceed best-practice outputs. The “best practice” for the observed DMU is a weighted arithmetic mean of all the observations, and the individual components of the λ-vector form the weights for the DMUs. In other words, λ is the vector of loadings that determine the best practice for the evaluated DMU.Model 0 minimizes θ considering two sets of constraints. In the first equation set (1), the model limits the percentage of cases where the observed outputs exceed best practice outputs with a known probability denoted as “p-level”. We refer to this as the discriminatory power level or power level. In the second equation set (2), we ensure that the best practice suppliers do not use more inputs than θX0. It can be shown that Model 0 is easily converted to certainty equivalents depicted in Model 1 below (Charnes & Cooper, 1959, 1962).Model 1(3)minθsubjecttoE(Ynλ−yn0)−F−1(1−p)σ≥0,n=1,…,N(4)θxm0−Xmλ≥0,m=1,…,Mθunrestricted,λ≥0where σ is the standard deviation of (Ynλ - yno) given by Eq. (5) below, F is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution and E is the expectation operator.(5)σ=(∑i=1I∑j=1IμiμjCov(yni,ynj))where Cov is the covariance operator, andμi={λi,∀i:i≠0,(λ0−1),i=0.As outlined in Land et al. (1993), it is required thatσ≥0,n=1,…,N.This condition imposes restrictions on the values of μi, i.e.μi≥0,i=1,…,I,i≠0andμ0≥−1.Model 1 is solved once for each DMU to obtain the DMU-specific contraction factor θ*. The value of the contraction factor θ* cannot exceed unity. Depending on the value of θ*, we provide three possible interpretations for the performance of the evaluated DMU:(1)θ* < 1: DMU is CCDEA-inefficient.θ*=1but some constraints contain slack at the optimum: DMU is Type-F inefficient (or sub-efficient). Type-F inefficient suppliers face two possibilities: a) They require more input than the best-practice DMUs do to generate the best level of outputs, or b) they generate less outputs than the best-practice DMUs’ do with the current level of inputs. In either case, Type-F inefficient DMUs’ performance can be further improved since they are characterized by an excess of inputs or insufficient level of outputs.θ*=1and all the constraints are binding at the optimum: DMU is CCDEA-efficient and categorized as Type-E.Model 1 is usually adjusted to Model 2 (below) in implementation to avoid possible difficulties that might arise if one or more of the Lagrange multipliers become zero.Model 2(6)minz=θ−ɛ(e·s++e·s−)subjecttoE(Ynλ−yn0)−F−1(1−p)σn−sn+=0,n=1,…,N(7)θxm0−Xmλ−sm−=0,m=1,…,Mθunrestricted,λ,sn+,sm−≥0n=1,…,N,m=1,…,MIn Model 2,s+=[sn+]ands−=[sm−]are the column vectors of the output and input slack variables,eis the row vector of suitable dimension with unity in all positions, and ɛ > 0 is a non-Archimedean infinitesimal. Again, a DMU is CCDEA-efficient if and only ifθ*=1ands+*=s−*=0. We implement Model 2 as our solution methodology.In this study, the deterministic and the chance-constrained (Model 2) DEA models are deployed to evaluate, segment and rank 170 suppliers in a novel dataset. In the CCDEA case, a series of computations are presented based upon some guiding assumptions on the individual and the joint probability distributions of the output and input factors. First, the output factors for each supplier are regarded as random variables following a normal distribution. Supplier factors (PORAC, PSNOT, PSHIP, OTS, OTD and ACCEPT) described in Section 3.1 are collectively considered as CCDEA output factors given that higher values correspond to better supplier performance. Therefore, we assume the variables across all the suppliers, used as output factors, follow a normal distribution. Second, the within supplier variability of each output factor is assumed to be identical across the suppliers for all outputs. To achieve this, we compute the standard deviation of each output variable across the panel data and use it as the corresponding input parameter for the variable's normal distribution. As such, the standard deviations for the six output performance factors (σPORAC, σPSNOT, σPSHIP, σOTS, σOTD, σACCEPT) used in the CCDEA evaluations are 1.6341, 1.6106, 1.7772, 1.8583, 0.2621, and 0.4348, respectively. These values replace σs in Eq. (6) of Model 2. For implementation purposes in this study, the σ values represent the supplier performance risk, and are augmented at several levels to investigate the impact of performance uncertainty on supplier evaluation and rankings.The two probability distribution assumptions outlined above can be relaxed when longitudinal supplier data are available over several time epochs, making it possible to estimate the individual and the joint probability distributions more accurately. Although the resulting evaluation process then becomes more complex, it would remain structurally identical for all instances of Model 2 analyzed in this paper.Resilient suppliers tend to have the capability to adjust and adapt to fluctuations in the buyer's information that is shared. Therefore, in this manuscript, the buyer-related factors (BSTAB, FA and COF) are regarded as inputs whose values fluctuate and the buying firm often views favorably those suppliers capable of sustaining performance despite the fluctuations. Given the perspective summarized above, performance evaluation using deterministic DEA models reflects only a snapshot of supplier performance. This static view may mislead the supply manager if she considers the results as an overall performance measure. In addition, the impact of varying levels of risk on supplier evaluation and rankings cannot be ignored. This study implements the chance-constrained DEA approach to supplier performance evaluation under risk and compares the results under varying levels of risk with the deterministic DEA results in accordance with the third premise in Section 2.2. The CCDEA efficiency-based approach and the new data available permit the consideration of input factors and output factors originally reported by Ross, Buffa, Droge, and Carrington (2009) who examined the linkage between the actions of the buyer and the suppliers using only deterministic models of efficiency evaluation.Implementing Model 2, we evaluate the performance of, segment and rank the suppliers using three p-levels (0.1, 0.05 and 0.01). Among the supplier (output) factors, we focus solely on investigating the impact of varying levels of risk in the on-time delivery (OTD) variable by setting the delivery performance risk at nine levels. Modifying the magnitude of σOTD from its baseline value reflects varying intensities of a transportation disruption and is represented by using eight additional values of σOTD set at 0.5σOTD, 1.25σOTD, 1.5σOTD, 1.75σOTD, 2σOTD, 3σOTD, 4σOTD, and 5σOTD. With these settings, the analysis of results is presented next.The model results are evaluated in two phases. First, we briefly compare efficiency scores for the deterministic and the three chance-constrained DEA contexts (obtained by altering the p-levels) considering the buyer's planning information linked to the suppliers’ purchase order cycle performance capability. Second, we evaluate several supplier performance disruption scenarios using on-time delivery performance as the output factor of interest.Table 2 summarizes the supplier efficiency scores under the deterministic DEA and the CCDEA models. Note that, the OTD variable's risk is set at its original σ-level for Phase I analysis. In the CCDEA evaluation, the probability that the observed output values exceed best practice values is controlled at three discriminatory power levels or power levels (p-level): 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01. Ordinal rankings of supplier efficiency scores are reported for the deterministic DEA and the CCDEA scenarios with p-level 0.1 in Appendix B Panel A. The supplier rankings for p-level 0.01 and the full listing of Appendix B Panel A are available upon request.As reported in Table 2, CCDEA models at the three power levels do result in different portfolios of efficient/inefficient suppliers compared to those provided by the deterministic DEA model. While the deterministic DEA provides zero Type-F inefficient suppliers, several Type-F suppliers emerge for decreasing power levels in CCDEA. In other words, by decreasing the power level, the CCDEA model evaluates a larger numbers of suppliers as efficient and as Type-F inefficient. The interpretation here is that if the buying firm classifies efficient suppliers as top-performing and inefficient suppliers as low-performing, then traditional DEA models will misclassify efficient suppliers as inefficient.Appendix B Panel A provides further details on the potential for misclassification for power level 0.1 and 0.01. For example, supplier 17 (S17) is inefficient according to the deterministic DEA. However, for all the nine CCDEA scenarios, this supplier is (more accurately) classified as efficient. As a result, segmenting suppliers into subgroups based upon one instance of efficiency scores and then allocating financial incentives, preferred status, or additional business decisions to the wrong supplier may actually lead to worse outcomes. We observe a similar pattern of misclassification for suppliers S32, S37, and others highlighted in Appendix B Panel A. Dramatic differences in suppliers’ rankings are observed among the CCDEA models for each one of the power levels. For example, the three lowest-ranked suppliers in the deterministic DEA are suppliers S47, S10 and S54. However, under the CCDEA with power levels 0.1 and 0.01, the three worst-performers are actually suppliers S8, S10 and S54.Most firms use some kind of ranking process to segment (or classify) suppliers into subgroups, and then implement various governance models and relationship development strategies based upon sub-groups (Ogden & McCarter, 2004; Joshi, 2009). In this study, CCDEA results are used to segment suppliers and investigate relationships among the supplier and the buyer performance factors. Phase II of the analysis considers the performance differences between the efficient and inefficient suppliers using the nine levels of on-time delivery performance variability discussed in Section 3.2.We explored disruption in on-time delivery performance in the experimental runs by modifying the magnitude of standard deviation in suppliers’ OTD. Among the six output factors considered, only σOTD is varied from its baseline value reported earlier while the variance of all remaining output factors is held constant at their original values. The rationale is that an external or internal disruption event affects each supplier's delivery performance differently. Modifying the magnitude of σOTD from its baseline value yielded a total of nine settings for OTD disruption. The CCDEA efficiency scores for all 170 suppliers are computed for the nine CCDEA scenarios. In this phase, power level 0.05 is eliminated from the analysis without loss of generality, and we instead focus on the high (0.1) and low (0.01) tails of the discriminatory power levels. This 9 × 2 design results in 18 scenarios with the descriptive statistics summarized in Table 3.First of all, the number of efficient suppliers is smaller under the high discriminatory power (0.1) than it is under the low discriminatory power (0.01) at all levels of OTD disruption. Second, using independent samples T-tests, we confirmed that the group means of the supplier efficiency scores under the high and low discriminatory power levels are statistically different at p = 0.05 level. Finally, as Fig. 1displays, suppliers’ mean and median CCDEA scores are lower under the high discriminatory power. This indicates that the low discriminatory power misclassifies some suppliers as efficient and inflates the mean and median efficiency scores relative to the high power case. In both power levels, increases in OTD disruption levels lead to higher number of misclassified suppliers. We explore this relationship next by segmenting the efficient suppliers from the inefficient ones for all disruption levels. Our interest is to evaluate the differences between these segmented subgroups along the supplier and buyer factors, and to determine in what disruption contexts the performance factors influence the OTD performance.We varied the suppliers’ OTD performance at eight levels from the baseline (1σOTD) level as discussed earlier and indicated in the columns of Table 4 Panels Aand B. Table 4 Panel A reports the cross-cluster analysis of variance for the supplier-related performance factors for the efficient/inefficient suppliers at discriminatory power level 0.1. There are several differences between the efficient and inefficient suppliers in terms of the performance factors. First, in terms of OTD, the number of efficient suppliers detected increased along with the OTD performance risk level. For example, at 5σOTD, there were 44 efficient suppliers, an increase of 10 percent from the baseline level number of efficient suppliers, suggesting evidence of misclassification of suppliers’ resiliency. Second, at the baseline level (column three in Table 4A) in OTD performance, 40 efficient suppliers provided the required acknowledgement of purchase orders 91.5 percent of the time. The remaining 130 inefficient suppliers responded only 85.6 percent of the time.Several differences among the two supplier segments also exist for the remaining factors. First, the average values of the factors (Value rows) for efficient suppliers were higher than those for inefficient suppliers at each risk level. We found this difference to be statistically significant for PORAC (p<0.05) and ACCEPT (p<0.10). Second, we found statistically significant differences in purchase order acknowledgement responsiveness (PORAC) across all levels of OTD performance risk. For both groups, the mean values were clustered tightly between 91.1 and 91.9 percent, and 85.3 and 85.6 percent for efficient and inefficient suppliers, respectively. Also, for the three additional dimensions of supplier responsiveness (PSNOT, PSHIP and OTS), we found no statistically significant differences among efficient and inefficient suppliers, but the mean scores were higher for the efficient suppliers. For the supplier quality (ACCEPT) dimension, we observed that under extreme conditions (>3σOTD) there were no significant differences in quality performance (ACCEPT). However, the differences were significant for less extreme conditions (<= 3σOTD). We infer that efficient suppliers maintain higher resiliency in product acceptance rates despite the increasing uncertainty surrounding rush deliveries or expediting. In the seven remaining scenarios these differences were statistically significant (p < 0.10), and thus may contribute to the resulting higher performance scores.Table 4 Panel B below compares the efficient and inefficient supplier groups relative to the buyer-related information sharing inputs across nine levels of disruption. Several significant findings also materialized, which illustrate the contributing factor played by the buyer's role in sharing planning information with each supplier. First, in all instances, the group mean values for the efficient suppliers were not only less than the corresponding means for inefficient suppliers, but the differences in group means were statistically significant (p<0.01). Second, for the baseline OTD disruption level, the buyer's purchase orders remain unchanged only 86.2 percent of the time for efficient suppliers but 91.9 percent of the time for inefficient suppliers. This pattern was consistent in the results. Moreover, the mean values of the three buyer factors show that efficient suppliers tend to have greater capacity to absorb information uncertainties than the inefficient suppliers do.The cross-cluster analysis of variance in the supplier-related performance factors for the efficient/inefficient suppliers at power level 0.01 is reported in Table 5 Panel A. There was no dominant pattern in the number of efficient suppliers for increasing OTD risk levels. However, efficient suppliers performed better on PORAC than inefficient suppliers did at risk levels (0.5σOTD, σOTD, 2σOTD). There was no significant finding for differences in PSNOT and PSHIP. We did find significant between-group differences in OTS at the tail ends of the risk level. The OTS performance at the 1.5σOTD through 4σOTD disruption levels was not significantly different. Differences in supplier quality (ACCEPT) were marginally significant at only some of the higher disruption levels. In the RBV sense, we conclude that under extreme conditions, disruptions lead to inefficient use of resources or resource input congestion. The result of this may lead to operational pressures and actions that negatively affect supplier quality performance. As in the high discriminatory power case, we also compared between-group differences for the buyer-related inputs and found statistically significant differences between the supplier groups for all buyer-related performance factors (Table 5 Panel B). The mean values for the buyer-related factors are also lower for the efficient suppliers, an indication that efficient suppliers still have a greater capacity to absorb the buyer information inaccuracies than the inefficient suppliers do.We proposed the idea that current sourcing paradigms heighten the need to better understand supplier performance risk and disruptions because operations synchronization between the buyer and its suppliers is becoming the norm rather than the exception. Being faster, better and cheaper with exceptional quality requires even greater information sharing with a capable supply base and monitoring the appropriate set of performance factors. External expenditure savings alone will not be sufficient. Rather, greater process synchronization and performance monitoring/evaluation of buyer and supplier performance are necessary. The results discussed above provide several interpretations that are now folded back into some key premises stated earlier in the paper. Related to our first premise, the work shows that operational performance differences in on-time delivery are, in part, influenced by tasks such as purchase order receipt acknowledgement which signals suppliers’ initial resource commitment toward the planning, scheduling and execution costs of completing the buyer's order.For the second premise about supplier performance risk and the buying firm's information sharing with its suppliers, we show the need for continuous information communication and performance monitoring during the exchange. The results identify several best practice templates in this regard. Consider the baseline (1σ) disruption level under high discriminatory levels (Appendix B Panel A) where suppliers S32, S50, S94, S127 and S169 were also classified as efficient across all other levels. We found that the buyer's average performance on BSTAB (0.844), FA (0.526), and COF (0.794) for these particular suppliers was worse than for other efficient and several inefficient suppliers in the dataset (Panel B). Also, the buyer's behavior in terms of sharing reliable information on its forecast accuracy, forecast comprehensiveness and stability of purchase orders also corresponded to statistically significant performance differences between efficient and inefficient suppliers. We report the mean, minimum and maximum values across all factors for these robust suppliers in Panel B to provide tolerance ranges for the factors. Disruptions in on-time delivery performance risk can indeed be mitigated by the information sharing capabilities of the buyer.For the third premise, we identify various patterns in the data. For example, in Table 4 Panel A the baseline OTD disruption level shows that efficient suppliers outperform inefficient suppliers on OTS and PORAC. But in Table 4 Panel B, all of the buyer's behaviors are central to efficient performance of suppliers. These factors can be considered most significant to improving performance of the inefficient suppliers yet different constellations of significant performance factors resulted across the nine levels of OTD disruption. A similar pattern was detected for Table 5 Panel A and B. But we suggest that further consideration of alternative discriminatory power levels may be of assistance. We also caution that identifying the ideal power level will likely depend on decision-maker's preferences and the type of data used.Our fourth premise suggests the combined insights from premises one, two and three can provide a better understanding of the performance drivers for each supplier under consideration. Identifying the weakness areas can provide decision makers better clarity on precisely the location (the buyer or supplier) and type of investment activities (information sharing capabilities or logistics capabilities, procurement capabilities, and product quality capabilities) needed to improve buyer and/or supplier performance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
