@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cone contraction and reference point methods for multi-criteria mixed integer optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An interactive approach for a mixed integer multi-criteria optimization is introduced.The DM makes pairwise comparisons of identified Pareto optimal points and gives reference points.Assuming a quasi-concave value function pairwise comparisons are used to contract the cone of admissible objective vectors.Numerical simulation tests indicate reasonably fast convergence.Convergence is guaranteed for the pure integer case.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-criteria decision making,Multi-criteria optimization,Cone contraction,Reference point method,Integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Interactive approaches employing cone contraction for multi-criteria mixed integer optimization are introduced. In each iteration, the decision maker (DM) is asked to give a reference point (new aspiration levels). The subsequent Pareto optimal point is the reference point projected on the set of admissible objective vectors using a suitable scalarizing function. Thereby, the procedures solve a sequence of optimization problems with integer variables. In such a process, the DM provides additional preference information via pair-wise comparisons of Pareto optimal points identified. Using such preference information and assuming a quasiconcave and non-decreasing value function of the DM we restrict the set of admissible objective vectors by excluding subsets, which cannot improve over the solutions already found. The procedures terminate if all Pareto optimal solutions have been either generated or excluded. In this case, the best Pareto point found is an optimal solution. Such convergence is expected in the special case of pure integer optimization; indeed, numerical simulation tests with multi-criteria facility location models and knapsack problems indicate reasonably fast convergence, in particular, under a linear value function. We also propose a procedure to test whether or not a solution is a supported Pareto point (optimal under some linear value function).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-criteria optimization with integer variables has received relatively little attention in comparison with continuous problems during the past decades. Yet, studies on integer valued interactive approaches have advanced remarkably as indicated by reviews of Ehrgott and Gandibleux (2000), Ehrgott (2005), Köksalan (2009) and Alves and Clímaco (2007) – moreover, the last reference reviews also the developments in multi-criteria mixed integer problems as well as provides references for earlier reviews. Recently much progress has been made also in the area of multi-objective metaheuristics and evolutionary algorithms with integer variables. For reviews see Ehrgott and Gandibleux (2004) and Gandibleux and Ehrgott (2005).Integer variables represent increased difficulty in the multi-criteria problems in the same way as in single objective problems. Thus numerous heuristic approaches have been put forward, often applicable only for a special type of problems, e.g. spanning tree, assignment or shortest path problems. Approaches have been suggested that work only in a subset of problems with integer variables – they deal with bi-criteria problems, with linear objective functions or with problems having a special structure. Some suggested approaches assume an implicit value function with some properties like quasiconcavity – as we do – and thus may guarantee that the best solution is found. The alternative is that the process is not aiming at converging to the best solution but, instead, represents a learning process, where the decision maker acquires insight into the set of non-dominated solutions.Quite a significant number of papers present methods that aim at generating all Pareto optimal solutions first and choosing the most preferred solution thereafter. However, a large share of the Pareto optimal solutions may be uninteresting, while second best solutions may be dominated. Hence, it often does not pay off to generate the set of all Pareto optimal solutions. A favorable approach is to use an interactive procedure which is characterized by the alternating phases of the decision maker’s (DM) preference information elicitation and computation of candidate solutions. Thereby, only a small fraction of the Pareto optimal solutions needs usually be generated.Korhonen et al. (1984) consider an interactive method for the multi-criteria problem of choosing from an explicit list of alternatives. Assuming an underlying quasiconcave and non-decreasing value function and using pair-wise comparison results they develop convex polyhedral cones whose points cannot be better than the vertex of the cone. In each iteration, such non-admissible cones are used to rule out alternatives in the list and a Pareto optimal choice is made from the remaining admissible set. Along the iterations, for any single alternative in the admissible set, Korhonen et al. (1984) solve a linear programming problem to test if the alternative can be ruled out. Iterations stop, if all alternatives are either identified or ruled out. At this point the best alternative identified is optimal.Based on the result of Korhonen et al. (1984) and Lokman et al. (2011) introduced an interactive method applicable for general multi-criteria integer programs. As both our methods and the approach of Lokman et al. (2011) rule out solutions employing convex cones, we discuss the advantages of our methods against their approach in the electronic appendix. Both Korhonen et al. (1984) and Lokman et al. (2011) as well our approaches employ cone contraction to exclude solutions; for a review of cone contraction, see Kadzinski and Slowinski (2012).The reference point method has been extensively used after its introduction by Wierzbicki (1980). In this article, we propose a reference point approach for a multi-criteria mixed integer or pure integer problem with an underlying quasiconcave value and non-decreasing function. In a special case, a linear value function is assumed.Our approach is interactive incorporating the DM’s preference information in the search. Two kinds of preference information are employed: reference points (aspiration levels of objectives) and pair-wise comparisons which rank already identified Pareto points. Transitivity is assumed and employed to reduce the number of pair-wise comparisons. Preference information is utilized in two ways: First, it is used to rule out feasible solutions that cannot bring improvement over the solutions already found. Second, if a linear value function can be assumed, then preference information is also used to rule out solutions using the result of Kallio et al. (1980). We propose a simple and operational test employing binary variables to check if a candidate point is not ruled out. In each iteration, a new reference point is defined and an admissible Pareto optimal solution is found. Iterations continue until all solutions are ruled out or – as usual in the reference point approaches – until a satisficing solution is found. In the former case, an optimal solution is found for a multi-criteria problem with the underlying value function. Such convergence is achieved for pure integer problems with a finite Pareto set. For other problems, however, converge to an optimum may not be guaranteed and termination of iterations may occur when a satisficing Pareto point is found.In case the underlying value function is linear, the optimal solution is a supported Pareto point; i.e. optimal under some linear value function. However, all Pareto points generated by our methods during the iterations need not be supported even if a linear value function is assumed. For this reason, we also propose a novel test to diagnose if a Pareto optimal solution is supported.In computational simulation experiments we employ underlying true linear value functions which are used in the pair-wise comparisons and thereby in determining the ranking of solutions over the iterations. Tests with multi-criteria facility location models and knapsack problems show that the interactive iterations converge reasonably fast, in particular, when a linear value function is assumed.The rest of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2 we define the multi-criteria mixed integer programming problem. Section 3 provides an outline of our reference point methods. Section 4 specifies the algorithmic steps in detail under a quasiconcave value function. In Section 5, we consider the case of a linear value function. A procedure is proposed in Appendix A as well to test if a Pareto point is supported. Section 6 presents numerical illustrations and Section 7 concludes.Consider a multi-criteria optimization problem with k objectives to be maximized. Let g∈Rkdenote the column vector of objectives. The underlying value function which the DM aims to maximize is u(g). At the outset the value function is not known, but we assume that u is quasiconcave and non-decreasing. As a special case we assume u=wg is a linear value function with a positive row vector w>0 of weights.Given a set F of feasible objective vectors g, the multi-criteria problem is(1)maxg∈Fu(g).We consider the feasible set(2)F={g|g⩽f(x),h(x)⩾0,xjintegerforj∈J}where x∈Rnis a vector of decision variables, function h∈Rmis concave, f∈Rkis concave in the domain {x∣h(x)⩾0}, and J is a subset of {1,…,n} with J={1,…,n} for pure integer problems. For a Pareto point g∈F, g=f(x).1For subsequent application of branch-and-bound methods for mixed integer programming problems, we require g⩽f(x) in (2), so that set F becomes convex if the integer requirements are relaxed. However, we are only interested in Pareto points g of F and for such points g=f(x).1The multi-criteria mixed integer linear programming problem is a special case of (1), (2).We assume that set F is closed and bounded above, and an optimal solutiongˆfor (1), (2) exists. Ifgˆis not Pareto optimal, then an optimal solution g′ for the problemmaxg{∑kgk|g⩾gˆ,g∈F}is Pareto optimal and g′ is optimal for (1), (2) as well; i.e., under our assumptions, the Pareto set contains an optimal solution for (1), (2).The following example shows that if F is closed but not bounded above, then it may happen that an optimal solution for (1), (2) exists but not one which is Pareto optimal. In this two-critaria example, u(g)=max{g1, g2} and F={g∣ g1⩽0, g2⩽x, x∈R}. All points g with g1=0 and g2⩾0 are optimal but none of them is Pareto optimal.Another example shows that if F is not closed, then it may happen that the Pareto set is non-empty but an optimal solution for (1), (2) does not exist. In a two-critaria example with u(g)=2g1+g2, x∈R2, F={g∣g1⩽x1, g2⩽−x1, x1⩽−1/x2, x1∈R, x2⩾1 and integer}. All points g with g2=−g1 and g1<0 are Pareto optimal but none of them solves (1) and (2).The final example shows that an optimal solution may not exist even if F is closed and bounded above. In this example u(g)=g2 and F={g∣g1⩽x, g2⩽1/x, x⩽0}. All points g with g1<0 and g2=1/g1 are Pareto optimal but none is optimal.In each iteration τ, τ=1, 2, 3, …, of the iterative procedure, a reference pointg¯τin the objective space is employed to compute a Pareto pointgˆτ. The reference pointg¯τis provided by the DM and it reflects the DM’s aspiration level of objective values given the Pareto pointsgˆν, for ν<τ, found so far. The reference pointg¯τguides the computation of the subsequent Pareto pointgˆτ. Furthermore, in the course of the interactive iterations we employ pair-wise comparisons of the identified Pareto points. The computation of Pareto pointgˆτis also guided by preference information which accumulates via pair-wise comparisons. Thereby any objective vector g is ruled out whenever the preference information obtained from pair-wise comparisons indicates that g cannot provide improvement over the set of Pareto points which already have been found. Also Pareto points, which already have been generated, are prevented from re-generation. Following Korhonen et al. (1984), such non-admissible points are defined by convex non-admissible cones constructed during the iterations. In each iteration, pair-wise comparisons of the Pareto points at hand are carried out to disclose full ranking. In an iteration, the ranking in the preceding iteration is adopted and transitivity is used to reduce the comparison effort.As usual in a reference point method, we scale the criteria so that the ranges of their values are of the same order of magnitude, for instance. For notational convenience, scaling is suppressed however.Formally, the steps of our three reference point methods (named QC, LIN and SLIN) are stated next. Details of these steps are presented in Sections 4 and 5 in case the underlying value function is assumed quasiconcave and linear, respectively.Step 0: Initialization. Start iteration τ=1 without ruling out any feasible point g∈F.Step 1: Reference point. Pick a reference pointg¯τfor iteration τ.Step 2: Pareto point. Solve an optimization problem to generate a new Pareto pointgˆτ. Under a quasiconcave value function, the problem employs an augmented Chebychev achievement scalarizing function, which is further modified if a linear value function is assumed. The original constraints in (2) are appended by further requirements ruling out non-admissible cones (if any) whose points cannot bring improvement over the Pareto points generated in iterations ν<τ. If all points g∈F are ruled out, then stop; the best Pareto point found is optimal. The decision maker may also decide to quit iterations in case a satisficing Pareto pointgˆν, for some ν⩽τ, has been found. The initial non-admissible cone atgˆτconsist ofgˆτand all points dominated bygˆτ.Step 3: Pair-wise comparisons. The new Pareto pointgˆτis compared with the earlier solutions to achieve full ranking of Pareto pointsgˆν, for all ν⩽τ. The number of comparisons is reduced employing the existing old full ranking and transitivity.Step 4: Non-admissible points. Based on the pair-wise comparisons, update the set of non-admissible cones which will be ruled out in subsequent iterations. Increment the iterations count τ by one and return to Step 1.In this section we specify the reference point method outlined in Section 3 in case a quasiconcave value function is assumed. We refer to this method by QC. In the procedure each iteration starts by the computation of a new Pareto point using the problem (5)–(7) in Section 4.3 below and the current set of admissible points defined by (3) and (4) in Section 4.2. The new Pareto point is compared pair-wise with the previously generated points and a full ranking of them is created as discussed in Section 4.1. The specification of set of admissible directions is updated using a procedure described in Section 4.4.The current iteration is denoted by τ, whereas ν refers to the history of iterations. At the beginning of iteration τ, pointsgˆν, for ν<τ, are the Pareto points generated so far.At the beginning of iteration τ, the full ranking of Pareto pointsgˆν, for ν<τ, is available from the preceding iteration. To update the ranking in iteration τ, we carry out pair-wise comparisons of the new Pareto pointgˆτandgˆνfor all ν<τ for which the preference relation is not implied by transitivity. Thereby a ranking of all Pareto pointsgˆν, for ν⩽τ, results in Step 3.Consider two distinct points p and q among the generated Pareto points. If the pair-wise comparisons imply that p is preferred to q, we interpret this as u(p)>u(q) and vector d=p−q is a preferred direction at q.2In case of indifference among p and q no preferred direction is detected.2Because the value function is quasiconcave, u(q+θd)⩾u(q) for 0⩽θ⩽1.Taking into account all pair-wise preference relations we obtain a set of preferred directions atgˆν, for all ν⩽τ. For the most preferred Pareto point found so far, this set is empty for the method QC, there are no preferred directions identified at the most preferred point.Again, consider two distinct Pareto points p and q such that p is preferred to q, and d=p−q is a preferred direction at q. By quasiconcavity, u(q−μd)⩽u(q)<u(p), for all μ⩾0. Hence, if g⩽q−μd, then u(g)⩽u(q−μd), by monotonicity, and u(g)⩽u(q). Therefore we declare point g non-admissible at q as it cannot improve over the generated point q (Korhonen et al., 1984).Non-admissibility can be extended as follows. Consider a Pareto pointgˆνof iteration ν<τ. At the beginning of iteration τ, let {dj} be the set of preferred directions atgˆν. This set depends on τ because preference information accumulates along the iterations. For a pointg≠gˆν, supposeg⩽gˆν-∑jμjdj, for some weights μj⩾0. Theng⩽gˆν-μd, whereμ=∑jμj>0and d is a convex combination of the vectors in {dj}. Quasiconcavity of u implies that d is a preferred direction atgˆν, and by the argument above, g is non-admissible atgˆν.Define the non-preferred coneΛ-νatgˆνsuch that-Λ-νis the cone spanned by the preferred directions in {dj} atgˆνand all unit vectors. Then, the set of non-admissible points atgˆνis the non-admissible cone{g|g⩽gˆν-∑jμjdj,μj⩾0}=gˆν+Λ-ν. Given that the preferred directions in QC identified atgˆνrelate to pointgˆνonly, the non-admissible cone is locally defined, it is coneΛ-νwith vertexgˆν.Next, we operationalize the use of non-admissible cones for the reference point optimization of Step 2. Let Λνbe the dual cone of-Λ-ν. Then for allg∈gˆν+Λ-νand for allλ∈Λν,λ(g-gˆν)⩽0. Hence, a feasible point g∈F is non-admissible in iteration τ, if for someν<τ,g∈gˆν+Λ-ν; i.e., ifλ(g-gˆν)⩽0for all λ∈Λν. Otherwise a feasible g∈F is admissible in iteration τ so that for allν<τ,λ(g-gˆν)>0for some λ∈Λν. Letλiν,i=1,…,nν, denote the extreme rays of Λν, for all ν<τ. For all ν and i, the extreme rays are scaled so thatλiνe=1, where e is a sum vector. Then g∈F is admissible in iteration τ if and only if for some small ∊o>0 and for all ν<τ,λiν(g-gˆν)⩾∊o, for some extreme rayλiνof Λν. Using binary variablesziνand a ‘big-M’, g∈F is admissible in iteration τ if and only if(3)Mziν⩾∊o-λiνg-gˆνfori=1,…,nνandforallν<τ,and(4)∑iziν⩽nν-1forallν<τ.In (3), for all i such thatλiν(g-gˆν)<∊o,ziνis forced to level 1.3In such a case, M should be big enough so that (3) is feasible for all points g of interest. For example, in practice one may pick a lower boundgˇsuch that only points g withg⩾gˇare of interest. An interpretation of this can be that the value function approaches minus infinity as any of the objective vector components approaches its lower bound. Alternatively,gˇmay be the nadir point, in which caseg≱gˇimplies that g is dominated. Ifg⩾gˇand g∗ is the ideal point then in (3),λiν(g-gˆν)⩾λiν(gˇ-g∗)⩾-ρ, whereρ=maxl(g∗-gˇ)l>0. Hence, for all g withg⩾gˇ, (3) is feasible if M⩾∊o+ρ.3Condition (4) guarantees thatλiν(g-gˆν)⩾∊o>0, for some i, so that g is not in the non-admissible conegˆν+Λ-ν, for all ν<τ.At the beginning of iteration τ, let Gτ⊂F denote the set of admissible points g satisfying (3) and (4).For illustration, see Fig. 1, whereg=gˆνis the Pareto point of iterationν,Λ-=Λ-νis the non-preferred cone at g, g+Λ− is the non-admissible cone at g, and λ1 and λ2 are the extreme rays of the dual cone Λ=Λνat g. For p∈Λ−, g+p is non-admissible at g and λp⩽0 for all λ∈Λ. For q∉Λ−, g+q is admissible at g and λiq>0 for some extreme ray λiof Λ. In Fig. 1 we have λ1q>0.In Step 2 of QC, given the set Gτof admissible points, the computation of a Pareto point employs an augmented Chebyshev function. We also provide an interpretation using the level sets of the Chebyshev function; a similar interpretation based on a different scalarizing function is then given in Section 5 in the case of a linear value function.For QC, let Dτ=I be an identity matrix of unit vectors in the objective space. We use this notation, because in the case of a linear value function, matrix Dτis defined by iteration and generally it is not an identity matrix. To compute a Pareto point in iteration τ, given a reference pointg¯τand a small positive constant4In Section 6 we test the impact of the choice of ∊ as well as ∊oin (3).4∊, we solve in Step 2 the problem of finding a scalar θ, a vector μ, an admissible point g∈Gτand binary variablesziνfor i=1, …, nν, ν<τ to(5)minθ-∊∑jμj,(6)s.t.(3)–(4),g∈F,(7)g=g¯τ-θe+Dτμ,μ⩾0.Recall that for an admissible point g∈Gτ, we have stated two requirements in (6): first, g has to be in the feasibility set F defined by (2), and second, g cannot be in any of the non-admissible conesgˆν+Λ-ν, for ν<τ. Hence g is admissible if there is a feasible vector x in (2) such that g⩽f(x), and if there are binary variablesziνsatisfying (3) and (4).To interpret this optimization problem for QC, let Λ+ denote the non-negative orthant in the objective space. Then Λ+ is a preferred cone such that for any point g, if g′∈g+Λ+ and g′≠g, then g′ dominates g. The objective in the problem (5)–(7) is to find an admissible point g∈Gτsuch that there are no admissible and dominating points g′; i.e., g′∈Gτ, g′≠g and g′∈g+Λ+. To see this, suppose g∗, θ∗ and μ∗ are optimal for problem (5)–(7). If there is a dominating point g′∈Gτsuch that g′=g∗+δ with δ⩾0 and δ≠0, then g′, θ∗ and μ=μ∗+δ satisfy (7) andθ∗-∊∑jμj∗>θ∗-∊∑jμj∗+δj. This is a contradiction, wherefore such point g′ does not exist andgˆν=g∗is a Pareto point.If problem (5)–(7) is infeasible, then there is no admissible point g; i.e., for each g∈F, g is in at least one of the non-admissible conesgˆν+Λ-ν, for some ν<τ. In such a case, we stop and the most preferred point in set{gˆν}ν<τis an optimal solution of problem (1) and (2). Otherwise, a new Pareto pointgˆτis found.Initially, when Pareto pointgˆνof iteration ν has been generated in Step 2, the unit vectors form the set of extreme rays of the dual cone Λν. In our procedure, preference information accumulates from iteration to iteration and thereby we need to update the dual cones in Step 4. When a new preferred direction atgˆνis found the procedure described in this section can be used to update the set of extreme rays of the dual cone Λν.Consider iteration τ and a Pareto pointgˆνwith ν⩽τ. At the end of Step 2 of iteration τ, given current set {λi} of extreme rays of the dual cone Λνatgˆν, let Lνbe the matrix with rows λi. In Step 3 of iteration τ, suppose a pair-wise comparison yields an additional preferred direction d atgˆνso that the matrix Lνmay need to be updated.If λid⩾0, for all i, then the dual cone Λνand the matrix Lνremain unchanged. Otherwise, the entering new extreme rays λ are convex combinations of the current extreme rays λisuch that λd=0.An example is shown in Fig. 2depicting the intersection of the dual cone Λνand hyperplane λe=1 in case of three objectives. At the outset, the dual cone is spanned by unit vectors only and the extreme rays are the extreme points λ0λ1 and λ2 of the simplex. At the beginning of current iteration τ, the dual cone has already been updated once and the current extreme rays are λ1, λ2, λ3 and λ4. Candidates for entering new extreme rays are the points a, b, c and h of the simplex on the intersection of the dual cone and the hyperplane λd=0. These points are convex combinations of pairs of extreme rays, which are separated by the hyperplane λd=0. From this set, a and h are the new extreme rays of the dual cone. Current extreme rays λ1 and λ2, for which λ1d<0 and λ2d<0, are omitted. Hence, the updated collection of extreme rays consist of a, h, λ3 and λ4.The general procedure is as follows. With a row vector β of weights, one component for each λi, we first identify all extreme point solutions βefor the system5If no feasible solution β exists, then there are no non-zero vectors in the updated dual cone. In this case, λid<0 for all current extreme rays λiimplying that the accumulated preference information is inconsistent. In the course of iterations, such situation may occur due to changing preferences or due to pair-wise comparison errors. As a cure, we suggest omitting oldest preferred directions until feasibility is achieved.5βLνd=0,βe=1,β⩾0.Because this system has two equations only, extreme point generation is simple. Each entering new extreme ray of the dual cone belongs to the set {λe} of vectors λe=βeLνwith extreme point solutions βe. In the case of Fig. 2 we find points a, b, c and h. Vector λeis an extreme ray of the updated dual cone Λνif and only if there is a hyperplane which strictly separates λefrom the other (distinct) vectors in {λe}. Hence, λeis an extreme ray and this row vector is appended to the matrix Lν, if the optimal value of the following linear programming problem is infinite6Alternatively, the dual problem of (8) and (9) implies that λeis an extreme ray if it is not a convex combination of other vectorsλe′≠λe.6(8)maxθ,μθ,(9)s.t.(λe-λe′)μ⩾θforallλe′≠λe.Finally, all row vectors λiwith λid<0 are deleted from matrix Lν. Thereby, matrix Lνand the set of extreme rays of the dual cone Λνare updated.In each iteration τ, at most one new preferred direction atgˆν, for all ν<τ, is found by pair-wise comparisons and the tests (8) and (9) for all candidates found can be arranged by solving only a single (separable) linear programming problem (with positive upper bounds on parameters θ) in iteration τ.In the reference point methods LIN and its simplification SLIN the value function u(g)=w g is assumed linear with some weight vector w>0. In this case, the optimal solution is a supported Pareto point. However, all Pareto points generated by LIN and SLIN need not be supported. Therefore, in case a test is desired, we provide a procedure in Appendix A to diagnose if a Pareto optimal solution is supported.For LIN and SLIN, in each iteration τ pair-wise comparisons in Step 3 are carried out as in QC to establish a full ranking of the identified Pareto points. If d is a preferred direction at a Pareto point q, then q+d is preferred to q and consequently, wq<w(q+d). Hence, wd>0, and for all g, wg<w(g+d). Therefore, d is a preferred direction at g, for all g. Thus, unlike in QC, in LIN and SLIN we obtain a set of preferred directions at the most preferred Pareto point as well. Furthermore, the non-preferred coneΛ-ν=Λ-atgˆνis the same for all ν. For LIN and SLIN, the cone Λ+=−Λ− is the preferred cone such that, for any point g, if g′∈g+Λ+ and g′≠g, then g′ is preferred to g or g′ dominates g.In Step 4 of iteration τ, given two Pareto pointsgˆνandgˆν′with ν⩽τ and ν′⩽τ, supposegˆνis the most preferred point found so far. Forgˆνbeing preferred togˆν′,gˆν′∈gˆν+Λ-, the non-admissible cone atgˆν. Then the non-admissible conegˆν′+Λ-is a subset ofgˆν+Λ-, wherefore it can be ignored. Consequently, we only employ the non-admissible cone at the most preferred Pareto pointgˆν. This observation allows major savings for LIN in the number of additional binary variables needed in (3) and (4) to define the admissible set; for numerical evidence, see Table 3 of Section 6.In Step 2 under a linear value function, we employ the method of Kallio et al. (1980). In iteration τ, suppose a set {dj} of preferred directions has been detected. Let Dτin (7) be the matrix formed by column vectors djand all unit vectors; i.e., columns of Dτspan the preferred cone Λ+. To compute a Pareto point in iteration τ, we solve problem (5)–(7) with definitions of Dτand Gτspecific to LIN. Hence, we account for the requirements (3) and (4) only at the most preferred Pareto point found.The interpretation for LIN is similar to QC. The objective in the problem (5)–(7) is to find an admissible point g∈Gτsuch that there are no admissible points g′≠g in g+Λ+, preferred cone with vertex g. The argument is as in QC, but matrix Dτin general is not an identity matrix. Again, let g∗, θ∗ and μ∗ be optimal for (5)–(7). If there is g′∈Gτsuch that g′=g∗+Dτδ with δ⩾0 and δ≠0, then g′, θ∗ and μ=μ∗+δ satisfies (7) andθ∗-∊∑jμj∗>θ∗-∊∑j(μj∗+δj); a contradiction, wherefore such point g′ does not exist andgˆν=g∗is a Pareto point. For illustration, see Fig. 3, where two cases are illustrated: (i) with no preferred directions known, and (ii) with two known preferred directions spanning the preferred cone Λ+In addition to ruling out non-admissible points, our procedure in LIN excludes further points from consideration. As in QC, an admissible point, which is dominated by another admissible point is ruled out; in Fig. 3 (i), point A is ruled out. However, also an admissible Pareto point g in iteration τ is ruled out if there is another admissible point g′ such that g′∈g+Λ+; in Fig. 3 (ii), Pareto point B is ruled out.The method SLIN is a simplified version of LIN. Step 2 and Step 3 are as in LIN. However, in Step 4 the non-admissible cones with vertices at Pareto pointsgˆνare defined using unit vectors only; i.e., the non-admissible cone atgˆνconsists ofgˆνand of all points dominated bygˆν. Thereby we essentially prevent re-generating Pareto points already found. The motivation for SLIN is that the implementation simplifies significantly in comparison with LIN, because extreme rays of the dual cones in each iteration are unit vectors and they need no updating. Besides, computational examples in Section 6 indicate that an optimal solution is found equally fast by SLIN and LIN. The drawback of SLIN compared with LIN is that it takes much longer until optimality is confirmed. Additionally, the number of binary variables needed in (3) and (4) in iteration τ is k(τ−1), where k is the number of criteria; see Table 3 in Section 6. Nevertheless, for the sake of simplicity, it may be worthwhile to start with SLIN and implement LIN thereafter.Figures illustrate the differences of the three versions of a reference point method. Fig. 4i shows the situation after three iterations. Three Pareto points A, B and C have been generated so far and pair-wise comparisons revealed that B is preferred to A and C is preferred to B. The third relation, C being preferred to A, is implied by transitivity. There are three preferred directions d1=B−A, d2=C−B and d3=C−A. There are three additional feasible points D, E and F, which may or may not be admissible depending on the three version of the reference point method. The reference point for iteration τ=4 is denoted byg¯.Fig. 4ii refers to the QC method. Because the preferred directions are locally defined, d1 and d3 apply at A, d2 applies at B, while at C there are no preferred directions. Hence, we obtain the region of non-admissible points below the solid line in Fig. 4ii. All points D, E and F are admissible in this case. For the scalarizing function, the broken line indicates the level set of the Chebyshev function and the chosen pointgˆτ=D.Fig. 4iv illustrates the LIN method, where the non-preferred cone Λ− spanned by d1 and d2 apply everywhere. The non-admissible cones at A and B are subsets of the non-admissible cone at the most preferred point C. Hence, the non-admissible cones at A and B are ignored while considering admissible points. We now obtain an expanded region of non-admissible points. It is the non-admissible cone C+Λ− bounded above by the solid line. Only point F remains admissible. The broken line indicates the level set of the scalarizing function at the optimum and it includes the only admissible pointgˆτ=F.The SLIN method is shown in Fig. 4iii, where the non-admissible cones at A, B and C are determined by the unit vectors only. The stair-case region of non-admissible points is bounded above by a solid line, so that all points D, E and F are admissible as in the QC method. The preferred cone Λ+ is spanned by d1 and d2. Note that the preferred direction d3 implied by transitivity is in Λ+. The broken line shows the level set of the scalarizing function at the optimum and it includes the pointgˆτ=Eto be chosen.Our procedure is implemented using AMPL/MOSEK (Fourer et al., 2003). Numerical tests were carried out with pure integer problems. For numerical illustration, we use simulation tests on three versions of a facility location model (Alves and Clímaco, 1999) and on three versions of a multi-criteria knapsack problem (Lokman et al. (2011).The facility location model concerns selection of the sites among n regions, for waste processing facilities. All the n regions are potential sites to locate a facility. If a facility is located in region i, it can serve other regions j situated within a suitable distance. Three objectives are defined; while the first concerns the cost – to minimized the total cost of building the facilities – the two other concern the risk – to minimize the total population directly affected by the facilities and to minimize the total number of regions within distance d from each facility. The problem is stated as follows. Let cibe the cost of construction and aithe population directly affected, given a facility is located in region i. For a square matrix (tij), let tij=1 if facility location in region i can serve region j, and tij=0 otherwise. In this case, due to the objectives to be minimized in the problem (1) and (2), the gradient of the value function u(g) is non-positive for all g. The set of feasible points g∈F is determined by endogenous vectors x and g satisfying the following:(10)g1=∑icixi,(11)g2=∑iaixi,(12)g3=∑i∑jtijxi,(13)∑itijxi⩾forj=1,…,n,(14)xi=0or1,fori=1,…,n,In (14), xi=1 indicates the choice to construct a facility in region i, (13) states that each region has to be served by at least one facility, and (10)–(12) define the criteria.Instead on using the data of Alves et al. (1999) with 40 regions, we generate somewhat larger problems with n=50, n=100 and n=200 regions. The parameters ciand aiare randomly drawn from log-normal distributions. For the matrix (tij), the diagonal elements are set to value 1 and other elements are randomly generated with values 0 or 1.For the knapsack problem with n items and three criteria to be maximized, the feasible points g are determined by endogenous vectors g and x satisfying the following:(15)gj=∑ivijxiforj=1,2,3,(16)∑irixi⩽R,(17)xi=0or1fori=1,…,n,In (17), xi=1 indicates the choice of item i; the coefficient vijin (15) is the contribution of item i in the objective j, the coefficient riin (16) is the space taken by item i and R is the total space available. We generate problems with n=50, n=100 and n=200. We choose R=n and draw the parameters rirandomly from log-normal distributions with a normal distribution N(1,2). Also the parameters vijare randomly generated from log-normal distributions.To test the methods, we first determine the ideal point for each problem. Thereafter, each objective is first scaled by its value at the ideal point and then multiplied by 100. Hence, the ideal points in the scaled space have all components equal to 100, and these are chosen as initial reference points.Consider the facility location model with scaled objectives. For the objective vector g, we employ a true value function u=wg to be maximized with w=(−10,−1,−1)/100. Similarly, for the knapsack problems we employ a true value function u=wg with w=(1,2,3)/100. While applying LIN or SLIN, we assume that the value function is linear, but for the weight vector we only assume that w<0 for the facility location models, and w>0 for the knapsack problems. For QC, we assume that the value function is quasiconcave and monotone in each objective.For pair-wise comparisons, the true value function is used. Given thatgˆis the most preferred Pareto point found, the next reference point in our tests isg¯=gˆ+ψw, where w is the gradient of the value function and ψ is a step size parameter chosen such that the norm of the step ψw is 5% of the norm ofgˆ.Table 1of shows the results of QC, LIN and SLIN for the facility location model with 50 regions for which the true optimal value (weighted cost) −wg is 13.179. For each iteration (iter), Table 1 shows the reference point, the Pareto point, the number of additional binary variables (bin) employed, the number of pair-wise comparisons (p-w), and the weighted cost (value). For LIN and SLIN, supported Pareto point are indicated by ∗. The optimum (with values in boldface) is found in iterations 4, 3 and 3, for QC, LIN and SLIN, respectively. Optimality is confirmed by termination after iterations 8 and 5 for QC and LIN. For SLIN, iterations are terminated before the optimum is confirmed; however, along the iterations the Pareto points get increasingly worse, wherefore one may be convinced that the optimum has already been found.For QC, up to 29 additional binary variables are employed to deal with the non-admissible cones. Because only a single non-admissible cone is used for LIN, very few additional binary variables are employed. In SLIN, a non-admissible cone is used at all Pareto points identified, and in each case the dual cone has three extreme rays. Therefore, the number of additional binary variables needed by SLIN increases by three in each iteration and soon exceeds that of the QC method.To show how the counts for pair-wise comparisons evolve, we discuss the iterations for LIN in case n=50: in iteration 1, there is nothing to compare; in iteration 2, Pareto pointqˆ2is compared withqˆ1; in iteration 3,qˆ3is compared withqˆ2while transitivity is used to avoid comparison withqˆ1; in iteration 4,qˆ4needs to be compared withqˆ3andqˆ2, transitivity is used to avoid comparison withqˆ1; in iteration 5,qˆ5is compared with all preceding Pareto points. (See Table 1 for the values of function wg.)Table 2of shows the results of the three methods for the knapsack problem with 50 items. In this case the true optimal value of wg is 5.897. Similarly as for the facility location model, optimal solutions are found in a few iterations and optimality is confirmed in five iterations by QC and LIN. Again, for SLIN iterations are terminated before the optimum is confirmed.We also checked the sensitivity of the results with respect to the two small positive parameters ∊oin (3) and ∊ in (5). In the runs reported above, the values were ∊o=10−3 and ∊=10−6. We rerun the cases of Tables 1 and 2 using QC and LIN and letting both parameters vary in a wide range from 10−2 to 10−10. Both methods found the same optimal solutions irrespective of the choices of values for ∊oand ∊. Furthermore, in all these experiments the number of iterations until the optimum was confirmed was small: three to nine iterations for the knapsack problem and five to nine iterations for the facility location problem.Table 3summarizes the results of QC, LIN and SLIN both for the facility location models (with 50, 100 and 200 regions) and for knapsack problems (with 50, 100 and 200 items). The table shows the number of iterations to find the optimum (opt), iterations to confirm the optimum (conf), the maximum number of additional binary variables (max) per iteration and the average number of pair-wise comparisons (p-w) per iteration. For SLIN, iterations are terminated before the optimum is confirmed. In these six test problems, due to efficient use on pair-wise comparison information, the performance of the LIN method is superior to the QC method, as expected. In terms of iterations, convergence is faster for LIN than for QC. Because only a single non-admissible cone is used by LIN, the number of additional binary variables needed is small. Instead, in QC the number of such cones increases with iterations and thereby the number of binary variables increases rapidly. The number of pair-wise comparisons is favorable for LIN as well. Note that in all six cases, the number of iterations needed to find the optimum by SLIN is equal or close to that of LIN. Such observation may be explained by the procedure of computing Pareto points.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article, three versions of a reference point method employing cone contraction were proposed for multi-criteria optimization with mixed integer variables. For the version QC, we assume that the underlying value function of the decision maker (DM) is quasiconcave and non-decreasing. As a special case, a linear value function is assumed for the versions LIN and its simplification SLIN.In each interactive iteration, the DM provides a reference point (new aspiration levels), and a Pareto point is found from a set of admissible objective vectors using, for QC an augmented Chebyshev scalarizing function or, for LIN and SLIN the method suggested by Kallio et al. (1980). In each case an optimization problem with mixed integer variables needs to be solved.In the interactive process the DM provides preference information via pair-wise comparisons of Pareto points. Similarly as in Korhonen et al. (1984), we use such preference information to restrict the set of admissible objective vectors by ruling out convex cones. Points of these non-admissible cones cannot improve over the solutions already found. Unlike the linear programming test used by Korhonen et al. (1984) to check if a solution is not ruled out, we develop simple constraints employing additional binary variables. The iterations terminate if all feasible solutions are ruled out or a satisficing Pareto point has been identified. In the former case, the best Pareto point found is an optimal solution.The Pareto points generated by our methods need not be supported (optimal under some linear value function) even if a linear value function is assumed. Therefore, we also proposed a test to check if a Pareto point is supported.In the course of interactive iterations, due to learning, evolving preferences or pair-wise comparison errors, oldest preference information (preferred directions) may be omitted. As suggested in Kadzinski and Slowinski (2012), it is also possible to backtrack to one of the previous iterations and restart.Our optimization procedure is implemented using AMPL with the solver option MOSEK. Numerical simulation tests with multi-criteria pure integer facility location models and knapsack problems indicate reasonably fast convergence, in particular, under a linear value function. In the electronic appendix, using a set of knapsack problems with underlying linear value functions, we also compared QC, LIN and the method suggested by Lokman et al. (2011). For the latter method, the average number of iterations until an optimum is confirmed was three- (six-) fold compared with QC (LIN), the number of additional binary variables per iteration was more than three- (ten-) fold compared with QC (LIN), and the number of pair-wise comparisons per iteration was about 1/3 (2/3) of the comparisons with QC (LIN).For LIN and SLIN, after generating the Pareto pointgˆτin iteration τ, we may want to test whether or notgˆτis a supported Pareto point; in other words, we may test whether or notgˆτis an optimal solution for some linear value function. Our test proceeds iteratively by solving a sequence of reference point optimization problems (5)–(7) restated below with appropriate notation.The procedure employsgˆτas the reference point in each iteration. Pointgˆτplays the role of the most preferred point as well and thus we account for the non-admissible cone atgˆτonly. In the course of iterations, we seek for a dual cone Λ such thatgˆτis optimal for all value function weight vectors λ∈Λ. In an iteration, (i) ifgˆτis optimal for all λ∈Λ, thengˆτis supported, (ii) if a Pareto pointgˆis found that is superior togˆτfor all λ∈Λ, thengˆτis unsupported, and (iii) otherwise we narrow Λ.At the beginning of each iteration, a preferred cone Λ+ is spanned by the columns of matrix D and thus Λ={λ∣λD⩾0} is the dual cone of Λ+. The non-preferred cone is Λ−=−Λ+ and the non-admissible cone atgˆτisgˆτ+Λ-. Vectors λi⩾0, for i=1, 2, …, n are the extreme rays of the dual cone Λ such that the component sum λie=1, for all i. Each column djof D is defined such thatgˆτ-djis not preferred togˆτ; how these are found, is explained later. Initially D is an identity matrix, Λ={λ∣λ⩾0}, the extreme rays λiare the unit vectors and n=k. At the end of each iteration, unless the test terminates, matrix D, extreme rays λiand n are updated.In an iteration of the test, the problem is to find θ, μ, g, and binary variables zi, for i=1, 2, …, n, to(18)minθ-∊∑jμj,(19)s.t.g∈F,(20)g=gˆτ-θe+Dμ,μ⩾0,(21)Mzi⩾∊o-λi(g-gˆτ)foralli=1,…,n,(22)∑izi⩽n-1.Note that this is a special case of problem (5)–(7) with constraints (21) and (22) specified for the non-admissible cone atgˆτonly.Three cases can happen in each iteration; see Fig. 5i–iii:(i)All feasible points g∈F are in the non-admissible conegˆτ+Λ-. In this case the problem is infeasible, andλig<λigˆτ+∊o, for all g∈F and i=1, …, n. Thusgˆτis optimal within tolerance ∊o>0, for all value function weights λ∈Λ such that λe=1. Hence,gˆτis a supported Pareto point (within tolerance ∊o) and the test ends.An optimal solution is found with Pareto pointg=gˆsuch thatλi(gˆ-gˆτ)>0for all i=1, …, n. Then for all λ∈Λ with λe=1, it holds thatλgˆ>λgˆτ. Thusgˆτis an unsupported Pareto point and the test ends.An optimal Pareto pointg=gˆis found such thatλi(gˆ-gˆτ)⩽0for some i. In this case, forgˆτto be optimal for a linear value function λg, we must have λd⩾0, ford=gˆτ-gˆ. We append d into matrix D whose columns then span the updated preferred cone Λ+. The set of extreme rays of the dual cone Λ is updated using the new requirement λd⩾0 (see Section 4.4).7Because λid⩾0, the updated dual cone includes non-zero vectors. Becausegˆis admissible, λjd<0 for some extreme ray λjwhich is excluded from the updated dual cone.7Thereafter, we proceed to the next iteration.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.03.006.