@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A noisy principal component analysis for forward rate curves

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PCA analysis is not suitable for estimating forward rate factors due to noisy data.Robust Principal Component Analysis estimation of term structure models.Consistent estimation of number of factors in forward curves.Implications for pricing interest rate derivatives are also discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finance,Pricing,Principal component analysis,Term-structure of interest rates,HJM models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is the most common nonparametric method for estimating the volatility structure of Gaussian interest rate models. One major difficulty in the estimation of these models is the fact that forward rate curves are not directly observable from the market so that non-trivial observational errors arise in any statistical analysis. In this work, we point out that the classical PCA analysis is not suitable for estimating factors of forward rate curves due to the presence of measurement errors induced by market microstructure effects and numerical interpolation. Our analysis indicates that the PCA based on the long-run covariance matrix is capable to extract the true covariance structure of the forward rate curves in the presence of observational errors. Moreover, it provides a significant reduction in the pricing errors due to noisy data typically found in forward rate curves.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The term-structure of interest rates is a high-dimensional object which has been the subject of much research in the finance literature. It is the natural starting point for pricing fixed-income securities and other financial assets. In particular, the identification of factors capable to explain its movements plays a crucial role in modeling complex interest rate derivative products. Since the seminal works of Steeley (1990), Stambaugh (1988) and Litterman and Scheinkman (1991), it is well-known that most of the covariance yield curve structure can be summarized by just a few unobservable factors. This stylized fact is fundamentally based on the Principal Component Analysis (henceforth abbreviated by PCA) based on sample covariance matrices. In this case, a small number of eigenvectors summarize the whole second moment structure of the yield curves.The interest rate markets can be summarized by two fundamental high dimensional objects: the yield x ↦ yt(x) and forward rate curves x ↦ rt(x); t ≥ 0 which are connected by the following linear relation:(1.1)yt(x)=1x∫0xrt(z)dz;0≤t<∞,x≥0.See e.g. Filipovic (2009) for more details. In particular, the underlying covariance structure of yield and forward rate curves play a major role in the statistical analysis of the term-structure of interest rates. See e.g Rebonato (2002), Schmidt (2011) and other references therein. For instance, forward rate curves play a central role in pricing and hedging interest rate derivatives by means of the classical methodology proposed by Heath, Jarrow, and Morton (1992). Their contribution can be summarized by the representation of the forward rate curve dynamics in terms of a stochastic partial differential equation(1.2)drt(x)=(∂rt(x)∂x+αHJM(t,rt(x)))dt+∑j=1dσj(t,rt(x))dBtj;0≤t<∞,x≥0,where r0(x) = ξ(x); x ≥ 0 is a given initial forward rate curve, αHJMis the so-called (HJM) drift condition which is fully determined by the volatility structure σ = (σ1,…, σd) and (B1,…, Bd) is a d-dimensional Brownian motion. Indeed, the initial forward rate curve ξ and the volatility structure σ fully determine the no-arbitrage dynamics of the model (1.2). In the remainder of this paper, the family of models of the form (1.2) parameterized by volatilities σ will be called HJM models. See e.g Filipovic (2009) for further details.For a given initial forward rate curve, the fundamental object which encodes the whole dynamics of (1.2) is volatility. In particular, due to closed form expressions for derivative prices and hedging, it is common (see e.g. (Falini, 2010; Jarrow, 2002; Rutkowski, 1996)) to assume that the volatility structure is deterministic. In this case, the stochastic dynamics of forward rates is given by a Gaussian HJM model:(1.3)drt(x)=(∂rt(x)∂x+αHJM(x))dt+∑j=1dσj(x)dBtj;0≤t<∞,x≥0.The most common alternative to estimate the underlying volatility structure is to use PCA methodology (see e.g. Filipovic, 2009; Jarrow, 2002; Schmidt, 2011 and other references therein) based on the static covariance matrix of a given sample (rt(x1),…, rt(xM)). The PCA methodology provides the following estimator for the volatility structure:(1.4)σ^i=φ^iλ^i;i=1,…,m^,wherem^is the estimated number of principal components of the forward rate curves and the estimated eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the associated static covariance matrix are given byλ^iandφ^i, respectively. See also Bermin (2014) for a recent theoretical link between PCA based on conditional covariance matrices and the Brownian dimension d which drives forward rates curve processes (1.2).There are many drawbacks when estimating parameters and structures related to forward rate curves: (a) The intrinsic infinite-dimensionality of forward rate markets (see e.g Carmona and Tehranchi, 2006), (b) daily calibration may lead to inconsistent conclusions due to a possible non-existence of finite-dimensional realizations produced by (1.2) (see e.g Filipovic, 2001), and (c) the absence of fully observed forward rate curves in interest rate markets (see e.g. McCullogh, 1971). In this article, we discuss three fundamental issues related to (c) and the common use of PCA methodology in forward rate markets: Evidence of observational errors in forward rate markets; the sensitiveness of the PCA methodology facing noisy forward rate curves and their implications to pricing interest rate derivatives.The next section continues with a brief literature review about the use of PCA methodology in interest rate data. In Section 3, we precisely state the main questions we want to tackle in this article. In Section 4, we report an elementary result about the equivalence of ranks between the covariance operators of the forward rate and yield curves. In Section 5, we describe some alternatives of estimating covariance structures in the presence of observational errors, the so-called LRCM estimators. Section 6 presents a detailed simulation analysis reporting the performance of the PCA based on LRCM estimators. Moreover, we discuss the role played by measurement errors in the PCA methodology applied to the term-structure of interest rate. In order to compare the simulation results reported in Section 6 with a real data set, Section 7 provides an empirical analysis on the number of principal components for US and UK term-structure of interest-rates. In Section 8, we analyze the impact of neglecting observational errors in pricing interest rate derivatives in light of the PCA methodology. Section 9 presents the final remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
