@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sufficient conditions under which SSD- and MR-efficient sets are identical

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We show that SSD- and MR-efficient sets are identical under three conditions.First: the risk measure satisfies two mild axiomatic requirements.Second: the choice set includes the riskless asset.Third: the choice set satisfies a generalized location and scale property.These conditions provide a decision-theoretic foundation for many mean-risk models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Efficient sets,Utility theory,Generalized location and scale property,Mean-risk models,Second-degree stochastic dominance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Three approaches are commonly used for analyzing decisions under uncertainty: expected utility (EU), second-degree stochastic dominance (SSD), and mean-risk (MR) models, with the mean–standard deviation (MS) being the best-known MR model. Because MR models generally lead to different efficient sets and thus are a continuing source of controversy, the specific concern of this article is not to suggest another MR model. Instead, we show that the SSD- and MR-efficient sets are identical, as long as (a) the risk measure satisfies both positive homogeneity and consistency with respect to the Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970) definition(s) of increasing risk and (b) the choice set includes the riskless asset and satisfies a generalized location and scale property, which can be interpreted as a market model. Under these conditions, there is no controversy among MR models and they all have a decision-theoretic foundation. They also offer a convenient way to compare the estimation error related to the empirical implementation of different MR models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Modern decision theory under uncertainty plays a fundamental role in finance and in fields such as economics, psychology, operational research, and management science. A leading example, perhaps because enormous amounts of money are invested in financial markets, is the problem of choosing between investment alternatives or portfolios with uncertain returns (Bawa, 1975). Three approaches are commonly used to make such decisions: expected utility (EU), stochastic dominance (SD) and mean-risk (MR) analysis. Expected utility theory is a pillar of modern decision theory (Krokhmal, Zabarankin, & Uryasev, 2011). The closely related concept of SD belongs to the most widely accepted decision-making models (Aumann & Serrano, 2008). No widely accepted MR model, however, has been found to date (Farinelli & Tibiletti, 2008).The best-known MR model dating back to the pioneering work of Markowitz (1952) is the mean–standard deviation (MS) approach, which is often criticized because it is, in general, not consistent with SD rules (Ogryczak & Ruszczyński, 1999). Since a MR model is easily obtained from the MS model by replacing the standard deviation with an alternative risk measure, the literature on MR models is potentially as diverse as the literature on risk measures.1Krokhmal et al. (2011), Ortobelli, Rachev, Stoyanov, Fabozzi, and Biglova (2005), Szegö (2005), and Pedersen and Satchell (1998) provide overviews of risk measures.1Important MR models have been suggested and analyzed by Roy (1952), Porter (1974), Bawa (1975, 1978), Fishburn (1977), Yitzhaki (1982), Konno and Yamazaki (1991), Ogryczak and Ruszczyński (1999), Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000), Krokhmal, Palmquist, and Uryasev (2002), Gaivoronski and Pflug (2005), Homm and Pigorsch (2012). From an academic point of view, this diversity of MR models offers a continuing source of controversy and ongoing research. From the practitioner’s point of view, however, diversity is a drawback, because different MR models, in general, lead to different efficient sets (i.e. the set of random alternatives such that no other random alternative dominates them by the specific rule).This article does not suggest another MR model but rather analyzes a class of models that offers a modest degree of reconciliation among the different models involved in this controversy. Its main contribution is to suggest sufficient conditions under which the second-order stochastic dominance (SSD)-efficient set and all MR-efficient sets are identical. The implications are clear. If all MR-efficient sets are identical there is no controversy among MR models. Furthermore, if these efficient sets are identical to the SSD-efficient set, all MR models have a decision-theoretic foundation.We show that the SSD- and MR-efficient sets are identical, if (a) the risk measure satisfies both positive homogeneity and consistency with respect to the Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970) definition(s) of increasing risk and (b) the choice set includes the riskless asset and satisfies a generalized location and scale (LS) property. Thus, if an investor uses different performance measures such as Omega, Sortino or Kappa (as defined in Eling & Schuhmacher, 2007), he always obtains the same efficient set if these investment alternatives satisfy the generalized LS property. This is because these performance measures are based on lower partial moment risk metrics that, in general, fulfill both positive homogeneity and consistency with respect to Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970).In addition to supplying a decision-theoretic foundation for certain MR models, our theoretical conditions provide a convenient setup for comparing estimation errors of performance measures related to different MR models. Suppose we want to rank N investment funds according to different performance measures. Our main result implies that if all performance measures are estimated without any estimation error, then all performance measures rank the N investments funds identically. This means that the rank correlations between two arbitrary performance measures are equal to 1. Our main result also implies that if the performance measures are estimated with estimation error, other performance measures might rank the N investment funds in a different way, and the more different the rankings are (i.e. the rank correlation coefficients), the higher the estimation errors of the performance measures are. Using this idea in a small simulation study, we find that partial moment-based performance measures show lower estimation error than measures based on the Value-at-Risk (VaR) or the conditional VaR (CVaR). We also find that the simple and elegant performance measure recently proposed by Homm and Pigorsch (2012) is characterized by low estimation error comparable to the results for the partial moment-based metrics.To demonstrate our contribution to the literature, our article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review that highlights previous theoretical results with special relevance for our results and proofs. Section 3 suggests sufficient conditions under which the SSD- and MR-efficient sets are identical. Section 3.1 describes the setup, especially the choice set and the generalized LS condition. Section 3.2 discusses the empirical relevance of the generalized LS property. Because the MS is the best-known MR model, Section 3.3 shows that the MS- and SSD-efficient sets are identical under the generalized LS condition. Section 3.4 then shows that MR- and MS-efficient sets are identical, as long as the risk measure satisfies both positive homogeneity and consistency with respect to Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970). Section 4 provides a small simulation study analyzing the estimation error of selected MR models. Section 5 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
