@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A case study of an integrated fuzzy methodology for green product development

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The method adopts the concept of LCA and integrates Fuzzy Extent Analysis and Fuzzy TOPSIS.It exhibits superiority of hierarchical structure and easiness of TOPSIS implementation.It captures the uncertainty and provides flexibility to incorporate experts’ judgement.It is applied to a case for evaluating and identifying design improvement options.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi criteria decision analysis,Green product development,Life cycle assessment,Fuzzy Extent Analysis,TOPSIS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Green product development has become a key strategic consideration for many companies due to regulatory requirements and the public awareness of environmental protection. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a popular tool to measure the environmental impact of new product development. Nevertheless, it is often difficult to conduct a traditional LCA at the design phase due to uncertain and/or unknown data. This research adopts the concept of LCA and introduces a comprehensive method that integrates Fuzzy Extent Analysis and Fuzzy TOPSIS for the assessment of environmental performance with respect to different product designs. Methodologically, it exhibits the superiority of the hierarchical structure and the easiness of TOPSIS implementation whilst capturing the vagueness of uncertainty. A case study concerning a consumer electronic product was presented, and data collected through a questionnaire survey were used for the design evaluation. The approach presented in this research is expected to help companies decrease development lead time by screening out poor design options.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to increasing awareness of environmental issues, green product design (e.g., carbon reduction) has been a challenging new area of inquiry. There are many tools for green product design, some as simple as a checklist or the Materials, Energy, and Toxicity (MET) matrix. Among them, Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA) has gained noteworthy attention. LCA is a scientific model used to analyse the environmental impacts of a product by taking its whole product life cycle, including material selection and production, manufacturing, usage, delivery, end-of-life treatment, and so on, into consideration (Hawkins, Hendrickson, Higgins, Matthews, & Suh, 2007; Yung et al., 2012). Conducting an LCA can help designers understand the environmental impacts of a design by quantifying the secondary (i.e., undesired) outputs of the whole life cycle and then converting them into measureable impact items for analysis (Cerdan, Gazulla, Raugei, Martinez, & Fullana-i-Palmer, 2009). LCA has been employed in various applications such as the electricity market (Stoppato, 2008), packaging materials (González-García et al., 2011), building projects (Tsai, Yang, Chang, & Lee, 2014), and so on.Despite the popularity of LCA, a recent survey indicated that it is ranked as only the ninth most popular tool for eco-design (Knight & Jenkins, 2009). In contrast, some qualitative tools, such as the aforementioned checklist, guidelines, and simple analytical tools, such as MET, are voted as more popular than LCA. This may be partly attributed to the shortcomings of LCA. A survey indicated that 68% and 63% of respondents considered LCA time-consuming and costly, respectively (Cooper & Fava, 2008). In addition, accuracy of the data collection is also a barrier to successful LCA, and thus some studies are conducted taking this into account (e.g., Chan, Wang, White, & Yip, 2013). Handling data uncertainty and inaccuracy are important in the design stage because the final options are often not well-defined at that point. Furthermore, modelling or coding of the LCA required sophisticated, and usually proprietary, software (Favi, Germani, Marconi, & Mengoni, 2012; Vallet et al., 2013). In summary, conducting an LCA is not an easy task.Therefore, there is a need to develop innovative approaches for, or to supplement, LCA. In this paper, a screening approach that can alleviate the shortcomings of LCA is proposed. To be precise, a hierarchical structure is employed to represent the life cycle of a product design in order to break down the complex problem into such a hierarchy. Then, fuzzy logic is used to take uncertainty into consideration as a screening tool. A hybrid, two-step approach is adopted (details to be discussed in Section 3). The proposed approach can be used as a screening tool to reduce the number of eco-design options and to identify key improvement areas. It is particularly useful in the early stages of design when different options can be evaluated and screened out. The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the two methods employed in this study, followed by the descriptions of the model in Section 3. Then, Section 4 presents how the method can be applied in a real-life case study in selecting eco-design options. Numerical examples are provided in this section. The findings are then discussed in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
