@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integration of electromagnetism with multi-objective evolutionary algorithms for RCPSP

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Electromagnetism (EM) is integrated with multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs).Performance of EM integration to NSGA-II, SPEA2 and MOEA/D for RCPSP is compared.Employment of EM to NSGA-II is the most effective.EM does not improve the performance of MOEA/D on RCPSP.Explanation of why EM heuristics plays different roles in the studied algorithms is given.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple objective programming,Heuristics,Resource-constrained project scheduling,Electromagnetism,Evolutionary algorithms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As one of the most challenging combinatorial optimization problems in scheduling, the resource-constrained project scheduling problem (RCPSP) has attracted numerous scholars’ interest resulting in considerable research in the past few decades. However, most of these papers focused on the single objective RCPSP; only a few papers concentrated on the multi-objective resource-constrained project scheduling problems (MORCPSP). Inspired by a procedure called electromagnetism (EM), which can help a generic population-based evolutionary search algorithm to obtain good results for single objective RCPSP, in this paper we attempt to extend EM and integrate it into three reputable state-of-the-art multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) i.e. non-dominated sorting based multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (NSGA-II), strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm (SPEA2) and multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition (MOEA/D), for MORCPSP. We aim to optimize makespan and total tardiness. Empirical analysis based on standard benchmark datasets are conducted by comparing the versions of integrating EM to NSGA-II, SPEA2 and MOEA/D with the original algorithms without EM. The results demonstrate that EM can improve the performance of NSGA-II and SPEA2, especially for NSGA-II.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The research on the classical resource-constrained project scheduling problem (RCPSP) has been widely expanded over the past several decades. According to the reviews provided by Herroelen, Demeulemeester, and Reyck (1999, chap. 1), Brucker, Drexl, Möhring, Neumann, and Pesch (1999), Icmeli, Erenguc, and Zappe (1993), Kolisch and Padman (2001) and ÖZdamar and Ulusoy (1995), the RCPSP can be stated as follows. A set of activities N numbered from 0 to n is to be scheduled without preemption. Activity i has a duration diand needs some resources which are limited during every moment to be completed. We assume that the renewable resource set is R and the availability of each resource type k, k ∈ R, which is a constant akthroughout the project horizon. Each activity i needs rikunits of resource k during each period of its duration, i ∈ N, k ∈ R. The dummy start and end activities 0 and n have zero duration and do not require any resource. The precedence relation among the activities is that one activity cannot be started until all its predecessors have been finished. A solution for RCPSP is feasible if and only if the precedence and resource constraints are satisfied. In general, a solution of RCPSP is represented as a schedule or a list of start timess=(s0,…,sn)that implies a corresponding finishing timesf=(f0,…,fn). Obviously, as every manager usually wants to finish projects as quickly as possible with minimum cost and high quality, RCPSP is a multi-objective optimization problem. Słowiński (1981) is the first to describe the multi-objective resource-constrained project scheduling problem (MORCPSP) framework and list all kinds of objectives. After the further research on MORCPSP, the primary objectives include makespan, activity tardiness, net present value (NPV), resource investment (RI), and robustness. MORCPSP is strongly NP-hard.As one kind of the most effective algorithms used for solving NP-hard problems, metaheuristic algorithms have been developed and proved to be successful in practice. Certainly many multi-objective metaheuristic approaches named MOEAs (multi-objective evolutionary algorithms) have been developed rapidly and applied for multi-objective optimization problems widely. Fonseca et al. (1993) proposed multi-objective genetic algorithm (MOGA); Srinivas and Deb (1994) proposed non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA) and Horn, Nafpliotis, and Goldberg (1994) proposed niched Pareto genetic algorithm (NPGA). These algorithms were generally classified as the first generation of MOEAs in which selecting individuals based on Pareto ranks and maintaining population diversity by fitness sharing were the common features. The second generation of MOEAs based on elitism strategy has been proposed successively since 1999. Zitzler and Thiele (1999) presented Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm (SPEA) and the improved version SPEA2 was described in Zitzler, Laumanns, and Thiele (2001). Pareto Archived Evolution Strategy (PAES) was proposed by Knowles and Corne (2000). Pareto Envelope-Based Selection Algorithm (PESA) and its improved version of PESA-II were introduced in Corne, Knowles, and Oates (2000) and Corne, Jerram, Knowles, and Oates (2001) respectively. Erickson, Mayer, and Horn (2001, chap. 48) advanced NPGA2, and the famous NSGA-II was proposed by Deb, Pratap, Agarwal, and Meyarivan (2002). On the other hand, Zhou, Zhang, Jin, Sendhoff, and Tsang (2007) presented Regularity Model Based Multi-objective Estimation of Distribution Algorithm (RM-MEDA), and Zhang and Li (2007) introduced Multi-objective Evolutionary Algorithm Based on Decomposition (MOEA/D) by combining traditional mathematical programming with evolutionary algorithms.Even though the MOEAs of the second generation have been proved to be successful in handling multi-objective optimization problems with high performance, only a few MOEAs such as NSGA-II have been used for dealing with MORCPSP. Meanwhile, many excellent hybrid algorithms have been presented and applied for classical single objective RCPSP successfully. As the electromagnetism (EM) heuristics has been applied for many unconstrained global optimization problem, Debels, De Reyck, Leus, and Vanhoucke (2006) extended the electromagnetism heuristics and integrated it into a scatter search (SS) frame for single objective RCPSP. By utilizing the principle that the EM force generated by two solutions would guide the search direction, scatter search integrated with EM outperformed other state-of-the-art heuristics for single objective RCPSP in this literature. However, to the best of our knowledge, no paper was found in literature integrating EM heuristics into MOEAs to solve MORCPSP. Inspired by the method presented by Debels, we modify the EM heuristics to make it suitable for MORCPSP and combine it with several state-of-the-art MOEAs i.e. NSGA-II, SPEA2 and MOEA/D in this paper.The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, a literature review is presented. In Section 3, some basic concepts concerning MORCPSP are introduced. Then the representation and evaluation measurements for MORCPSP are defined in Section 4. In Section 5, we show how the EM methodology can be modified to be used for MORCPSP. Brief introductions of NSGA-II, SPEA2, MOEA/D and the method of integrating EM heuristics into the three algorithms are given in Section 6. Section 7 shows experimental results and comparison analysis. Finally, some concluding remarks are given in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have studied if the electromagnetism (EM) heuristic procedure could be integrated into multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) for the multi-objective resource-constrained project scheduling problem (MORCPSP), one of the most challenging combinatorial optimization problems in scheduling. Not only the approach of extending EM heuristics to multi-objective optimization but also how to combine it with MOEAs framework for MORCPSP have been introduced. We have conducted experiments on integrating EM heuristics with three state-of-the-art MOEAs including NSGA-II, SPEA2 and MOEA/D, and compared with their corresponding original versions for 160 standard test instances. The computational results show that integrating EM heuristics with NSGA-II and SPEA2, especially for NSGA-II, could improve various aspects of performance, and it may not suitable to combine EM with MOEA/D. We also give a brief explanation that why EM plays different roles in these three algorithms. Finally , we can get a conclusion that NSGA-II integrated with EM heuristics may be the most effective algorithm for MORCPSP among the algorithms we studied. The further research will consist of doing research on the other objectives mentioned in this paper and developing exact algorithms capable of calculating the real Pareto front for MORCPSP.