@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Local matching of flexible load in smart grids

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a model of flexible loads and renewable supply in the smart grid.Supply and demand are matched locally via an incentive compatible online mechanism.Demand flexibility reduces payments and increases allocation probability.Increasing demand flexibility will increase suppliers profits.The cost of establishing incentive compatibility is decreasing in flexibility.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in energy,Smart grid,Load flexibility,Online mechanism design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Today’s power systems are experiencing a transition from primarily fossil fuel based generation toward greater shares of renewable energy sources. It becomes increasingly costly to manage the resulting uncertainty and variability in power system operations solely through flexible generation assets. Incorporating demand side flexibility through appropriately designed incentive structures can add an additional lever to balance demand and supply. Based on a supply model using empirical wind generation data and a discrete model of flexible demand with temporal constraints, we design and evaluate a local online market mechanism for matching flexible load and uncertain supply. Under this mechanism, truthful reporting of flexibility is a dominant strategy for consumers reducing payments and increasing the likelihood of allocation. Suppliers, during periods of scarce supply, benefit from elevated critical-value payments as a result of flexibility-induced competition on the demand side. We find that, for a wide range of the key parameters (supply capacity, flexibility level), the cost of ensuring incentive compatibility in a smart grid market, relative to the welfare-optimal matching, is relatively small. This suggests that local matching of demand and supply can be organized in a decentral manner in the presence of a sufficiently flexible demand side. Extending the stylized demand model to include complementary demand structures, we demonstrate that decentral matching induces only minor efficiency losses if demand is sufficiently flexible. Furthermore, by accounting for physical grid limitations we show that flexibility and grid capacity exhibit complementary characteristics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today’s energy system is experiencing a transition from mainly fossil-fueled power generation toward greater shares of renewable energy sources (RES). While these new energy sources are clean and have quasi-zero marginal cost, they are highly fluctuating and feature a lower energy density than fossil fuels. This challenges conventional wisdom in power system planning: the future system topology will be much more decentralized with significant generation capacities being located on the distribution grid level. Furthermore, system operators need to be able to cope with much higher variability levels on the supply side. Recent experiences in power systems around the world suggest that traditional procedures will have to be adapted in light of these new challenges. For example, Subramanian, Garcia, Callaway, Poolla, and Varaiya (2013) note, that “the current operating paradigm […] works at modest penetration levels, but fails when 30 percent or more of total energy generation comes from renewables.” This observation is shared by the IEA (2014) who posit to reach renewable generation shares beyond 30 percent will “require a transformation of the system.” Similar observations were made in Germany where the share of power generation from renewables increased between 2009 and 2013 from 15.9 percent to 23.4 percent. However, over the same period the number of days with exceptional RES shedding events in Germany’s northeastern transmission grid increased from 4 to 142—what used to be a rare event has become the norm.11Sources: www.50hertz.com/en/file/50Hertz-Almanac-2012-EN.pdf, www.bdew.de.Acknowledging the central role of the underlying stochastic dynamics of RES generation, Varaiya, Wu, and Bialek (2011) claim that power grid operations will need to fundamentally change in a similar manner as the manufacturing industry did when it adopted IT-based just-in-time supply chain management. IEA (2014) underline the superior cost benefit performance of demand side integration compared to other flexibility options. The research on demand side management (DSM) so far is generally based on variable, yet pre-announced, electricity prices. This resonates well with traditional forward power markets for conventional generators, but seems ill-suited to describe a RES-dominated power system which is characterized by quasi-zero marginal cost supply and limited reliability. A possible remedy is the introduction of quality differentiation with respect to reliability and adopt value-based pricing. Then, payments and realization of energy delivery are not specified a priori, instead arising endogenously from heterogeneous customer valuations and flexibility endowments. From a market design perspective, establishing such a quality-differentiated market requires the explicit consideration of incentive-compatibility with respect to load flexibility.We consider a smart microgrid with distributed generation (Chen, Duan, Cai, Liu, & Hu, 2011). However, instead of optimally determining a central dispatch plan for flexible loads, we seek to establish a dynamic, decentral economic coordination approach. To this end, we consider a local market for direct and instant matching of flexible loads with volatile generation. We envision this market platform as a parallel, secondary marketplace for excess RES generation which can no longer be integrated into the primary wholesale market at reasonable costs. Consequently, demand side applications can choose which market to engage in, and highly flexible, non-mission-critical demand may be attracted by lower costs on the microgrid’s flexibility market. Alternatively, this may be interpreted as an additional quality-differentiated tariff offer by existing suppliers.Similar to Bitar and Low (2012), we apply a generic model to explore the general implications of such a secondary marketplace with differentiated service quality. Unlike most prior research, we do not make a distinction between shiftable and sheddable loads but consider demand flexibility on a job level. This means that individual jobs have freedom with respect to their execution time (shifting characteristic) and furthermore may not be executed at all (shedding characteristic). We complement this micro-founded demand model by an online mechanism which yields truthful revelation of jobs’ preferences with respect to both value and temporal flexibility. Furthermore, the proposed mechanism is weakly budget-balanced under the mild assumption of homogeneous reservation prices on the supply side. Our analysis provides a quantitative assessment of the potentials to match renewable generation to a flexible demand side in a decentral smart grid.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
