@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The strength of coalition in a dispersed decision support system with negotiations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Dispersed decision support system with dynamically generated coalitions is used.In the process of coalition creating, a negotiation stage was applied.Four new methods for determining the coalition strength are proposed.General guidelines for the application of methods in practice are given.Numerical examples that justify the proposed methods are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knowledge-based systems,Group decisions and negotiations,Decision support systems,Dispersed knowledge,Strength of coalition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Issues related to decision making based on dispersed knowledge are discussed in the paper. A system using a process of combining classifiers into coalitions is used. In this article clusters that are generated using an approach with a negotiation stage are used. Such clusters are more complex and are better able to reconstruct the views of the agents on the classifications. However, a significant improvement is not obtained when we use these clusters without an additional enhancement to the method of conflict analysis. In order to take full advantage of the clustering method, the size and structure of the clusters should be taken into account. Therefore, the main aim of this paper is to examine the impact of the method of conflict analysis and the methods that are used to determine the individual weights of the clusters on the effectiveness of the inference in a system that has a negotiation stage. Four new methods for determining the strength of a coalition are proposed and compared. The tests, which were performed on data from the University of California, Irvine Repository, are presented. The results that were obtained are much better than in the case in which the strength of the clusters was not calculated. The approach that consists in the computation of the individual weights from the judgments of each cluster allowed the size and structure of the clusters to be taken into account. This in turn allowed us to take full advantage of a clustering method with a negotiation stage.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The effectiveness of decision making based on dispersed knowledge is an increasingly vital issue. When important economic, medical, enterprise management, business and risk assessment or political issues are to be resolved, groups rather than individuals are employed to make high-quality decisions. In addition, very often many different centers accumulate knowledge on the same subject, but it is stored in separate sets in various forms. Thus, we have access to a dispersed knowledge, which can be processed separately. Compared to individual decision makers, groups have access to more and a broader range of information, which is distributed among group members. So making decisions based on distributed knowledge is more difficult, demanding and requires new methods of inference.In the paper, issues that are related to decision making that is based on dispersed knowledge are considered. We use the knowledge that is stored in many different knowledge bases, which is a difficult and challenging issue. An example of a real application of this approach can be found, for example, in the medical field. Consider four different medical centers that have different apparatuses and diagnostic methods to detect heart problems. Each medical center has different patients, but some patients may be treated at several of the medical centers. Suppose that one of the medical centers in the database stores information about echocardiograms, cholesterol levels and electrocardiograms (EKGs). Another medical center only examines the level of cholesterol and performs Doppler tests. Another medical center investigates cholesterol and performs computerized tomography (CT) Heart Scans. Another medical center performs echocardiograms, myocardial biopsies and stress tests. Thus, we have the knowledge about the same topic stored in four different databases. There are different objects in these databases, which can sometimes be shared and there are different attributes that also can be shared. Certainly, a decision attribute is a common element that is present in all of these databases, i.e. the information about the heart problem that was diagnosed. The approach that was investigated involves the use of the knowledge that is accumulated in all of the available databases via the process of inference. The situation in the medical field that is described above is also very common in many of the other areas that are mentioned above.The main concept that we deal with in this paper is dispersed knowledge. We understand knowledge that is stored in several independently gathered knowledge bases to be dispersed knowledge. The issues that are being considered can be assigned to areas of study such as group decision support systems, the multiple model approach and group decision making. In this paper, concepts were taken from the Pawlaks papers (Pawlak, 1984; 1998; 2006)—papers in which a conflict situation that is resolved in a peaceful way is considered. Therefore, like Pawlak, entities that are involved in a conflict that are able to make their own decisions are called agents. In the case that is considered, simple classifiers that are built based on local bases are called agents. In the proposed system, agents are joined into groups, which we call clusters or coalitions. The aim of a group of agents is to take a common decision. The method for the formation groups that is used in the paper is associated with the theory of negotiations and the formation of coalitions and is an extension of Pawlaks work. However, the formation of groups of agents has nothing to do with cluster analysis. Another important concept that is addressed in the paper is conflict analysis. In the paper, it is proposed that different clusters weights and a method that uses a clustering algorithm are used in order to resolve conflicts.Issues concerning the use of dispersed knowledge were discussed by the authors in earlier papers (Przybyła-Kasperek & Wakulicz-Deja, 2013, 2014a, 2014b; Wakulicz-Deja & Przybyła-Kasperek, 2010, 2011). Part of the methodology that is used in this article is taken from the paper Przybyła-Kasperek and Wakulicz-Deja (2014a), in which a system with a negotiation stage was proposed. The main idea of the process of creating a system structure and formulating coalitions of individual classifiers, which was proposed in the paper (Przybyła-Kasperek & Wakulicz-Deja, 2014a), is as follows. Three types of relations—friendship, conflict and neutrality—are defined between local classifiers. Then a two-stage process of connecting the local classifiers in coalitions, which are groups of classifiers that agree on the classification of the test object, is implemented. In the first step of this process, the local classifiers that remain in a friendship relation are combined into groups. The second step consists of re-examining the relations between the initial coalitions that were created. A negotiation process is implemented, in which in addition to the initial coalitions, the local classifiers that remain in a neutrality relation are included. After this step we get the final form of clusters.An extension of that system is discussed in this article. The need to extend the system has already been noted in the article (Przybyła-Kasperek & Wakulicz-Deja, 2014a), in which two approaches were compared—an approach with a negotiation stage and an approach without negotiations. The form and structure of the clusters was investigated. The main conclusions that were drawn are as follows. The application of the system that has a negotiation stage allows fewer, but more complex and more numerous clusters, to be generated. Moreover, it was observed that the agents more often belong to more than one cluster in the approach with negotiation. This property is a consequence of the use of a negotiation stage in which neutral agents are connected to each initial cluster with whom their relations are good enough. In general, in the approach with negotiation, the clusters are more complex and therefore better reconstruct and illustrate the views of the agents on the classification. But when the effectiveness of the system’s inference was compared, it was found that a better method for generating clusters is not reflected in the final result. The reason for that was the method of conflict analysis that was used, which did not take into account the size and structure of the clusters, which means that both small and large clusters had the same impact on decision-making. In addition, agents that simultaneously belonged to several clusters in the same way had an influence on the decision in all of the clusters. To overcome these drawbacks, this paper proposes a modification of the method of conflict analysis, which consists in the calculation of the agents’ weights that takes into account the size and structure of the clusters as well as some properties that occur in the decisions that are taken by the agents. Because the structure of clusters is quite complex and provides a multitude of aspects that have to be taken into account when determining the weights, four different methods are proposed and compared. In the paper, we present numerous experiments that were performed on dispersed data that had different degrees of complexity. The results that were obtained indicate that the use of the proposed modifications provides much better results and also allows a system with a negotiation stage to be used to the fullest advantage.In this paper, an extension of the system that was proposed in the article (Przybyła-Kasperek & Wakulicz-Deja, 2014a) is discussed. The two approaches have different methods of conflict analysis. The new proposed approach is compared with the approach that was described in the article (Przybyła-Kasperek & Wakulicz-Deja, 2014a). In Section 6, it is shown experimentally that the results that are generated using these two approaches are completely different. The main contributions of this paper are listed below:•modification of a method of conflict analysis, which consists in the calculation of the agents’ weightsthe membership of each agent in the clusters is calculateddifferent methods of calculating the strength of a cluster is proposed:–with respect to the number of component agentswith respect to the decisiveness of agentswith respect to the number of component agents and the decisiveness of agentswith respect to the decisiveness-based cluster strengthall of the proposed methods are comparedthe results that were obtained were compared with the results that were obtained in the paper Przybyła-Kasperek and Wakulicz-Deja (2014a)the role of the parameters in a dispersed system is discussed.The article is organized as follows. In the second section of this paper an overview of papers that are related to the subjects being discussed in this article is included. In the third section an approach to the creation of the system structure that was proposed in the paper Przybyła-Kasperek and Wakulicz-Deja (2014a) is described. In this section, we define the relations (friendship, conflict and neutrality) and present a two-step process for creating a coalition of local knowledge bases. In the fourth section, a method for the elimination of inconsistencies in the knowledge and a method of conflict analysis are described. This section introduces the new proposed methods of determining the strength of a coalition. The fifth section describes example that show the proposed approach being used. The sixth section contains a description and the results of the experiments that were carried out using some data sets from the University of California, Irvine (UCI) repository. The article concludes with a short summary in the seventh section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
