@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stochastic models for strategic resource allocation in nonprofit foreclosed housing acquisitions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We build stochastic models for budget allocation in foreclosed housing acquisition.We use real data to derive computational and policy related results for nonprofits.The efficient heuristic simplifications proposed produce near optimal solutions.Results imply no significant conflict between financial and nonfinancial objectives.A trade-off of around 20% exists between equity and social utility for given data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in societal problem analysis,OR in strategic planning,Foreclosures,Stochastic programming,Resource allocation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Increased rates of mortgage foreclosures in the U.S. have had devastating social and economic impacts during and after the 2008 financial crisis. As part of the response to this problem, nonprofit organizations such as community development corporations (CDCs) have been trying to mitigate the negative impacts of mortgage foreclosures by acquiring and redeveloping foreclosed properties. We consider the strategic resource allocation decisions for these organizations which involve budget allocations to different neighborhoods under cost and return uncertainty. Based on interactions with a CDC, we develop stochastic integer programming based frameworks for this decision problem, and assess the practical value of the models by using real-world data. Both policy-related and computational analyses are performed, and several insights such as the trade-offs between different objectives, and the efficiency of different solution approaches are presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A dramatic increase in mortgage foreclosures has had adverse effects in all sectors of the economy but especially in the housing sector in the United States. Home foreclosures have resulted in massive losses of consumer wealth. U.S. households lost around $1.1 trillion per year on average in home value between 2007 and 2011 (Daily Finance, 2011; Zillow, 2010), and the fraction of mortgages that are more than 90days delinquent has been over 8% (Norman, 2010). The foreclosure crisis in Europe has not had as severe of an impact, but the European mortgage market also saw a 1.2% decline in 2008 due to the same economic crisis (European Mortgage Federation, 2010), while rates of severe mortgage delinquency are generally about a third of U.S. rates (European Commission, 2011).Several efforts by governments, companies and social organizations have been in place to reduce the losses realized due to the foreclosure problem. In the United States, such social organizations involve non-governmental/nonprofit entities referred to as community development corporations (CDCs). Among other community development projects, these organizations try to mitigate the socio-economic impacts of foreclosures by purchasing, redeveloping and selling foreclosed properties. While CDCs are more common in the United States than elsewhere in the developed world (Anheier, 2005), our research is applicable to non-US government actors at the local and regional levels as well.While actions of CDCs help maintain social and economic stability in neighborhoods, the resources typically available to these entities are limited, and thus efficient resource allocation strategies are needed to maximize the effectiveness of their investments. Considering these resource limitations and the uncertain nature of the social returns to be realized from property acquisitions, CDCs face several complex decision problems, which can be categorized as being strategic or tactical.The strategic decision problems for CDCs involve setting priorities for residential real estate investments and developing specific resource allocation plans for different geographical regions that comprise a given service area. These decisions typically consider a timeline of 1–3years into the future. The tactical decision problems, on the other hand, are short-term and are primarily related to the selection of particular foreclosed units for acquisition and redevelopment.In this paper, we focus on the strategic resource allocation problem faced by CDCs, which, however, cannot be addressed independently from tactical decision problems. Strategic resource allocations need to consider potential availability and acquisitions of individual foreclosed units in the future, as well as the social impacts associated with these acquisitions which are all redeveloped and placed on market for sale. Given that all acquired properties are redeveloped, by acquisition we imply both the acquisition and redevelopment activities on a property unless noted otherwise in the paper. Another key issue is that all these decisions are made under uncertainty, as several relevant inputs for the decision making process are determined by the state of the local and national economy, which is inherently uncertain. For example, the number of foreclosures to occur in a given region over the planning horizon, the purchase price of a foreclosed property, as well as the value generated by an acquired property are directly related to the economic conditions, and thus are not known in advance. Our decision framework is intended to capture these complexities in determining optimal resource allocations to different geographical regions by considering the specific acquisition decisions to be made in response to different realizations of future uncertainty. To address these issues, we develop strategic resource allocation models under uncertainty, apply these multi-period stochastic models to a case study of a community-based organization, and discuss the solutions with respect to their policy implications and effectiveness.Contributions of this research involve multiple dimensions. First, we note that we address an important decision problem that directly deals with effective management of public resources to improve social welfare, a central concern of public-sector operations research (Gass, 1994). Moreover, this policy-relevant application of decision modeling contributes to the scholarly body of work in community-focused operations research for housing and community development (Johnson, 2011). Second, the stochastic foreclosed housing acquisition models we develop are novel variants of stochastic resource allocation problems. These stochastic decision models are, to the best of our knowledge, the first in the area of private- or public-sector housing investment, for which we demonstrate that certain rule-based heuristics can perform quite well. As a third dimension, we note that we use data derived from CDC practice to rigorously apply and assess realistic problem instances. We demonstrate that our models, and the results derived from them, are generalizable to similar investment or resource allocation problems where the objectives may involve only financial returns.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we study stochastic dynamic models for resource allocation and foreclosed property acquisition to provide some general evidence-based guidance to a specific CDC, with potentially broader implications. To this end we first develop a two-stage stochastic programming formulation, and then expand this model through a multi-stage structure involving gradual uncertainty resolution. We also study two variations in these models in order to capture some additional complexities. Finally, an empirical analysis is performed based on real-world data for practical and computational evaluations.While our conclusions are based on the specific numerical data used, we demonstrate through our analyses that CDCs can benefit from the utilization of the proposed models either through direct implementation for specific strategic guidance, or through the indirect use of several policy results obtained. We further show that two simplistic heuristic improvements result in increased efficiency without a significant optimality gap, indicating the potential practical value of these approaches.A specific characteristic of our analysis is that we build our models through interactions with a CDC, and use real-world data to test them. As a first stochastic model of its type in this application area, our study is aimed to provide strategic resource allocation guidelines for practitioners through explicit consideration of uncertainty. On the other hand, as in any model, accurate quantification of relevant measures is crucial for the validity of implementations involving the presented approach. Hence, in addition to the consideration of the variances of objectives and priorities between different CDCs, future work may involve assessments of the accuracy of expert opinions used in quantitative measurements with respect to their impacts on the optimization models.