@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
It’s not now or never: Implications of investment timing and risk aversion on climate adaptation to extreme events

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new modeling framework for evaluating climate change adaptation investments.We analyze investment timing for risk reduction projects, accounting for market risk preferences.Optimal timing has important impacts on the NPV of projects, especially when investment cost is high.Assuming risk neutrality when the market is risk averse results in unnecessary investment delay.More serious climate change, results in higher investment values and earlier investment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Climate change adaptation,Investment timing,Catastrophic risk,Risk aversion,Real option,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Public investment into risk reduction infrastructure plays an important role in facilitating adaptation to climate impacted hazards and natural disasters. In this paper, we provide an economic framework to incorporate investment timing and insurance market risk preferences when evaluating projects related to reducing climate impacted risks. The model is applied to a case study of bushfire risk management. We find that optimal timing of the investment may increase the net present value (NPV) of an adaptation project for various levels of risk aversion. Assuming risk neutrality, while the market is risk averse, is found to result in an unnecessary delay of the investment into risk reduction projects. The optimal waiting time is shorter when the insurance market is more risk averse or when a more serious scenario for climatic change is assumed. A higher investment cost or a higher discount rate will increase the optimal waiting time. We also find that a stochastic discount rate results in higher NPVs of the project than a discount rate that is assumed fixed at the long run average level.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A major concern with global warming is that the climate system may become more energetic and the frequency and severity of catastrophic events will increase in the years to come. The rising number of natural disasters during the last two decades has put governments under increasing pressure to implement policies and investment projects to facilitate climate change mitigation and adaptation (Hochrainer-Stigler, Mechler, Pflug, & Williges, 2014; Van Aalst, 2006). Mitigation requires time to yield impacts, since greenhouse gases have a long life and the global climate system takes time to cool down once being heated. Therefore, it is generally assumed that the global temperature is going to increase before stabilizing, even if emissions are substantially reduced (Solomon, 2007). Therefore, the risks related to catastrophic events are expected to increase regardless of existing and potential additional mitigation efforts, making climate adaptation an essential task.Australia is well-known for bushfire, storm surge and flood disasters. Several studies suggested that these events would become more frequent in many regions of Australia and more attention should be paid to adaptation measures (Antón, Cattaneo, Kimura, & Lankoski, 2013; Garnaut, 2011; Murphy & Timbal, 2008). Climate adaptation requires input from all levels of government and could be one of the most challenging tasks in environmental management. While it has often been argued that action is most effective at the local level, local government is confronted with the complex and difficult task of planning and implementing mitigation and adaptation actions within existing budget constraints. This requires an economic framework to evaluate potential climate adaptation options to facilitate decision making.Although climate adaptation is required for many sectors and in many cases involves expensive investments, see e.g., Felgenhauer and Webster (2013), there are a few empirical studies conducting cost benefit analysis for catastrophic risk reduction projects. In Appendix A we provide an overview over recent studies that evaluate catastrophic risk reduction projects. These include the work of Kirshen, Knee, and Ruth (2008); Michael (2007); Tsvetanov and Shah (2013), and West, Small, and Dowlatabadi (2001) who examine storm surge risk in coastal areas as well as studies by Bouwer, Bubeck, and Aerts (2010); Brouwer and van Ek (2004); Mathew, Trück, and Henderson-Sellers (2012), and Zhu, Lund, Jenkins, Marques, and Ritzema (2007) who examine flood risk in riverine regions. In these studies, except for West et al. (2001) and Michael (2007), it is assumed that the benefits of a risk reduction project are equal to the expected avoided losses. This assumption holds when the potential losses are insured and the insurance premium is actuarially fair. However, in practice, it is often found that insurance premiums in laissez-faire markets may not be actuarially fair, especially for extreme events. Insurers may charge higher premiums when the risk cannot be accurately estimated, for example due to the uncertain impacts of climate change, to reduce their insolvency risk, or when risks are highly correlated (Ermoliev, Ermolieva, MacDonald, Norkin, & Amendola, 2000). Correlated risks require additional capital for insurers to protect themselves against large losses. Further, when spatially correlated losses occur, they may drain the capital of the insurance industry and put insurance firms under financial distress. Insurers may therefore require an additional premium to bear the risk of financial distress (Cummins & Trainar, 2009; Froot, 2007). Furthermore, assuming risk neutrality when evaluating adaptation projects is likely to result in an underestimation of the project benefits and a low level of public investment in risk reduction infrastructure. We also find in this study that assuming risk neutrality may lead to unnecessary investment delay for risk reduction projects.West et al. (2001) provide one of the first studies to estimate the cost of increased storm surge damage under climate change based on insurance premiums. In their model, the distance of a property from the shoreline determines the expected damage to a property and the insurance premium. Under climate change, sea level rise reduces the distance to the shoreline of all properties in a coastal region and increases the insurance premiums accordingly. The cost of increased damage is found by aggregating additional discounted premiums required in future years. Michael (2007) follows a similar approach, but uses the elevation of a house instead of its distance to the shoreline to determine the insurance premium. In both of these studies, insurance premiums are determined based on the assumption that the frequency and intensity of storms do not change in future years. This is a strong and possibly unrealistic assumption since it is often argued that a warmer climate in future periods will result in more frequent and more severe catastrophes (Parry, Canziani, Palutikof, Van der Linden, & Hanson, 2007). The method proposed in this paper does not require such an assumption.In addition to the risk neutrality assumption, most studies – with the exception of West et al. (2001); Zhu et al. (2007) and Tsvetanov and Shah (2013) – use the NPV rule to determine the investment decision, i.e., a project is invested if its NPV is positive. However, investing immediately based on a positive NPV may not be optimal if investing at a future time provides an even higher NPV. This occurs when the NPV of the project is increasing in investment time, see, e.g., Firoozi and Merrifield (2003) and Hagspiel, Huisman, and Nunes (2015), what may often be the case for projects that deal with risk reduction of climate impacted hazards. Annual benefits of such a project typically increase over time due to increasing catastrophic risk or growing potential losses, while annual costs such as interest expenses on the investment cost or project maintenance costs remain rather constant. Therefore, deferring instantaneous investment to a future period may help to avoid the initial years’ negative impact on the NPV, when annual benefits of the project are lower than the occurred costs. Overall, in such a situation, a deferral of the investment would be expected to increase the NPV of the project. Therefore, in order to obtain the optimal investment decision, one also needs to determine the investment time that yields the highest NPV for a project.West et al. (2001), Zhu et al. (2007) and Tsvetanov and Shah (2013) departed from the NPV rule to examine the optimal time to invest. In Zhu et al. (2007), water inflows are simulated from historical data or climate models and used in a hydraulic model to generate losses. In contrast, West et al. (2001) derive the expected avoided losses using a statistic model called the Loss Distribution Approach (LDA).11The Loss Distribution Approach is a term commonly used in insurance analysis, see e.g. Klugman, Panjer, and Willmot (2008) and Shevchenko and Wüthrich (2006). In this paper, it is used to refer to catastrophic risk modeling.The simulation approach used in Zhu et al. (2007) is computationally intensive, in particular due to the time required to run complex climate models. The LDA, on the other hand, is tractable and can give rise to an analytical solution to the investment problem. In practice, the two approaches can be combined, with simulation results being used to estimate the parameters of the LDA, as suggested in our approach. Tsvetanov and Shah (2013) use the damage curve approach that relates the total loss in each period with the corresponding return period.22The return period indicates how frequent an event is. As such, a return period indicates the probability that the event occurs.The damage curve is then used to estimate the expected loss and an optimal adaptation time is selected to maximize the net present value of a project.In this paper, we propose a general economic framework to determine optimal adaptation decisions at the local level. Different from previous studies, we evaluate the investment benefits based on optimal timing of the investment as well as the risk preference of the representative agent in the insurance market. In our model, risk preference is represented by a parameter that is separated from the loss distributions. As such, the framework allows loss frequency and severity distributions to adjust as the climate changes. A future climate that entails more frequent catastrophes or more heavy tailed severity distributions will result in a larger insurance premium in our model. In contrast, the framework in West et al. (2001) and Michael (2007) utilizes insurance premiums specified for different elevations under current climate conditions only. As a consequence, the impact of changes in the loss frequency and severity distribution on insurance premiums cannot be determined and incorporated (unless risk neutrality is assumed). Another advantage of our model is that different heavy tailed distributions can be used to model loss severity, which allows to incorporate the impact of not only the mean but also the tail characteristics of extreme losses on insurance premiums and investment project values.Our model is developed in a semi-continuous time framework and provides a simple formula to determine the optimal time for adaptation investment. Using a case study of bushfire risk management, we illustrate that investing at the optimal time has the potential to significantly increase the net present value (NPV) of a project, even though the project provides a positive NPV if invested immediately. Risk preference also has an important impact on the NPV of the project, but tends to be less important in comparison to the impact of investment timing. Factors that significantly influence investment decisions and outcomes include climatic change scenarios, risk preferences, investment costs and the applied discount rate. We find that a more serious scenario of climate change and higher risk aversion increase the NPV of a project for any investment time and will reduce the optimal waiting time. This is consistent with the precautionary principle, which encourages early action to protect the environment when there is potential for serious or irreversible damage (UNEP, 1992). A precautionary decision maker will most likely base her decision on an extreme, serious climate change scenario and invest in the project early. The value added by the investment model compared to a simple NPV rule, i.e. invest immediately if the project provides a positive NPV, is found to be lowered in these cases. In contrast, higher investment costs and higher discount rates increase the optimal waiting time and raise the value added by the investment model. We also illustrate that allowing the discount rate to vary stochastically, instead of assuming a constant discount rate, leads to a lower certainty equivalent discount rate and higher NPVs of the project.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines and analyzes the developed modeling framework. Section 3 provides an application of the framework in a case study, using catastrophic risks from bushfires as an empirical example. The section also examines the impacts of optimal investment timing, risk preferences, investment costs and the applied discount rate on the results. Section 4 concludes and gives suggestions for future work.We adapt the standard LDA to quantify potential losses from extreme events and apply the Bühlmann (1980) framework to convert a loss distribution into insurance premiums. Then, a dynamic investment model is constructed to determine the optimal investment time.The LDA is commonly used to model catastrophic losses in the insurance and banking sector as well as losses arising from operational risks, see e.g. Klugman et al. (2008) and Shevchenko and Wüthrich (2006). There are also a few applications of the framework to modeling losses related to natural or climate impacted hazards such as, e.g. storms, earthquakes and flooding (Härdle & Cabrera, 2010; Mathew et al., 2012; West et al., 2001). With this approach, the total loss over a period (0, t] is modeled as a compound Poisson process:(2.1)St=∑n=1N(t)Xn,where N(t) denotes the number of catastrophic events occurring from time 0 up to time t,Xnis the loss caused by the nth event. In this standard model, N(t) is assumed to follow a homogeneous Poisson process with intensity λ > 0,Xnis assumed to be independently and identically distributed according to a distribution H(X) and Xnis independent from N(t). A realization of two catastrophes with severitiesx1,x2over period (0, t] corresponds to{N(t)=2;X1=x1,X2=x2}.The standard model (2.1) can be extended to allow for growing loss severity and frequency. We allow the loss severity to grow over time by modeling the catastrophic loss Xnas a product of the catastrophic loss under zero growthX0and a growth component:(2.2)Xn=X0eγτn.In Eq. (2.2), γ is the growth rate of the risk prone asset values, andτnis the random time when the nth climate impacted event occurs, which is determined by the Poisson process. A growth in the value of risk prone assets may, for example, be due to increases in the number of properties in a region, investment in additional infrastructure, or due to improvements in properties’ or assets’ conditions as the economy grows.33The exponential growth of loss severity is consistent with the pattern of natural disaster losses observed in Australia, see, e.g., Crompton, McAneney, and Leigh (2006) and Crompton and McAneney (2008), and the pattern of flood losses in Netherlands, see, e.g., Brouwer and van Ek (2004).The random variableX0is the catastrophic loss when the values of the assets at risk do not grow over time, which can also be interpreted as a measure of the destruction force of the catastrophe. It is assumed thatX0is identically, independently distributed andX0is independent from N(t) and thereforeτn.Increasingly frequent catastrophes can be modeled by allowing N(t) to follow a non-homogeneous Poisson process with increasing intensity λ(t) over time. Following previous studies on climate change (Garnaut, Howes, Jotzo, & Sheehan, 2008; Quiggin, Adamson, Chambers, & Schrobback, 2010), we assume that the climate changes over time but due to mitigation efforts, it will stabilize eventually. We also assume that the frequency of catastrophes is increasing in global temperature. As a result of these assumptions, the probability of a catastrophe occurring during a small time interval grows over time, but converges to a limit as time becomes large:(2.3)λ(t)=λ(0)e−αt+λ¯(1−e−αt).In Eq. (2.3), t represents time that can take any value from 0 to infinity, λ(0) is the Poisson intensity at time 0,λ¯is the Poisson intensity when the climate system stabilizes and α is the rate at which the Poisson intensity λ(t) grows towards its limit (Fig. 1).44Note that since the functional form assumed in Eq. (2.3) mirrors the projected global temperature change, it is appropriate for catastrophes whose frequency is increasing in global temperature. These include, for example, floods, droughts, bushfires and storm surge, see e.g. Symes, Akbar, Gillen, and Smith (2009).A higher Poisson intensity λ(t) means a higher expected frequency of catastrophic events.The function λ(t) in Eq. (2.3) is concave and is consistent with the projected global temperature provided by Nordhaus (2007) and many of the IPCC emission scenarios, see, e.g., Meehl et al. (2007).55Note that one could further extend the suggested approach, by modeling the frequency of catastrophic events using a doubly stochastic Poisson process (also called Cox process), where the time-dependent intensity λ(t) is itself a stochastic process. See, e.g., Härdle and Cabrera (2010) for an application of doubly stochastic Poisson processes to modeling the frequency of earthquakes.In practice, estimates of the equilibrium level of global temperature and thereforeλ¯are quite uncertain and we follow the literature in using sensitivity analysis to examine the impact of different estimates (Bouwer et al., 2010; Brouwer & van Ek, 2004; Kirshen et al., 2008; Mathew et al., 2012; Michael, 2007; Tsvetanov & Shah, 2013; West et al., 2001; Zhu et al., 2007).To determine the value of the project, we need to determine the premium ptthat is paid at timet=0to insure a catastrophic lossLt=St+dt−Stthat occurs during a small time period(t,t+dt]. Insurance markets, however, do not exist for risk in the far future, and to overcome this incomplete market problem, we use the market equilibrium model proposed by Bühlmann (1980) to determine the risk premium. The Bühlmann model has been used widely to price insurance products (Aase, 1999; Christensen & Schmidli, 2000; Cox, Lin, & Pedersen, 2010; Dassios & Jang, 2003; Muermann, 2008; Samson & Thomas, 1985) as well as financial products (Embrechts, 2000; Gerber & Shiu, 2000).66An alternative method for pricing is to appeal to no arbitrage arguments, see e.g. Cabrera, Odening, and Ritter (2013). In the current model, the market is incomplete and there are many risk neutral equivalent martingale measures that ensure no arbitrage. Additional restrictions need to be imposed to obtain a unique equivalent martingale measure. When the minimum relative entropy or the minimum Kullback–Leibler index of information distance with respect to the original probability measure is used to select an equivalent martingale measure, the resulted measure is the same as the measure obtained by using Esscher transform or Bühlmann (1980)’s model, see, e.g., Chan (1999) for more details.According to this model, assuming that risk preferences of economic agents in the insurance market can be represented by exponential utilities, the premium ptpaid at timet=0to insure a loss Ltis given by:(2.4)pt=e−rtE{eθLtE[eθLt]Lt},where θ is an aggregate measure of the risk aversion of economic agents in the market77The aggregate risk aversion, θ, is related to the risk aversion θ1, ..., θnof individual agents 1, ..., n viaθ−1=∑i=1nθi−1. As such, adding more agents to the market will reduce the aggregate risk aversion and makes the market less risk averse.and r denotes the applied discount rate. Note that in the following, the discount rate is assumed constant at the long run average level to enable clear exposition of the pricing framework. However, in Section 3.6.1, we relax this assumption and extend the model to allow also for a stochastic discount rate.The premium given in (2.4) depends only on the probability distribution of the loss and the risk aversion parameter. When insurers are uncertain about the estimation of the loss distribution and charge an additional premium to cover the uncertainty, such prudent action is reflected by an increase in the risk aversion parameter. A high risk aversion parameter may also reflect high transaction costs in the market, or it may reflect the additional premium required to compensate for financial distress caused by catastrophic events. The risk aversion parameter θ can be calibrated using data on observed premiums in the market.Eq. (2.4) is also known as the Esscher transform pricing rule which states that the premium required to insure a loss Ltis the discounted expected value of Ltunder a transformed probability measure Pθ. In Eq. (2.4),eθLtE[eθLt]is the state price density used to transform the original (or physical) measure P into Pθ. Whenθ=0,i.e. the representative agent is risk neutral, the transformed measure Pθis the same as the physical measure P and the risk premium is equal to the discounted expected loss under P.The premium or the discounted expected value of Ltunder Pθis calculated using moment generating functions.88Alternatively, one can use Levy exponents, which is more general but also more complex than moment generating functions. For the connection between Esscher transform and Levy exponents, we refer to Hubalek and Sgarra (2006).As a result of (2.4), the moment generating function ML, θ(u) of the loss Ltunder the transformed measure Pθcan be expressed in terms of the moment generating function ML(u) of the loss Ltunder the physical measure P as99The moment generating function of a random variable Ltis defined asML(u)=E{euLt},where u is a real number. Under the transformed measure Pθ, the moment generating function of LtisML,θ(u)=E{eθLtE[eθLt]euLt}=ML(u+θ)ML(θ).(2.5)ML,θ(u)=ML(u+θ)ML(θ).If the project is not invested, the lossLt=St+dt−Stthat occurs during a small time period(t,t+dt]follows a compound Poisson process with intensity λ(t)dt and severity density ht. The moment generating function of Ltunder the measure Pθcan be written as1010Using the moment generating function of the compound Poisson variable Lt:ML(u)=exp{λ(t)dt[∫euxh(x)dx−1]},we can writeML(θ)=exp{λ(t)dt[∫eθxh(x)dx−1]}andML(u+θ)=exp{λ(t)dt[∫e(u+θ)xh(x)dx−1]}.DividingML(u+θ)by ML(θ) yields ML, θ(u).(2.6)ML,θ(u)=exp{λ(t)dt∫(eux−1)eθxht(x)dx},which shows that under the transformed measure, the density of the loss size is changed from ht(x) to eθxht(x). Since θ ≥ 0, a higher probability is assigned to a larger loss size under the transformed measure. The adjustment in the loss size distribution usually leads to an adjustment of the Poisson intensity as well. For example, if htfollows a normal distribution N(μ, σ), then under the transformed measure, it becomesN(μ+θσ2,σ)and the Poisson intensity becomesλtdteμθ+12θ2σ2.The effects of an Esscher transform for commonly used severity distributions are presented in Table 1. Note that other, more flexible, but also more complex distributions such as the Variance Gamma, Generalized Hyperbolic, Meixner, or Carr–Geman–Madan–Yor distribution can also be used to model loss severities using the Esscher transform method. For details on these distributions, see e.g. Cabrera et al. (2013) and Dingeç and Hörmann (2012).Given the lack of data on losses, in this paper, we will use a Gamma distribution to model the loss severity. When X0 follows a Gamma distribution with densityh0(x)=1Γ(a)saxa−1e−x/s,the insurance premium ptin (2.4) is given by (see Appendix B for a derivation of this relationship):(2.7)pt=e−rtλ(t)dtsaeγt(1−seγtθ)−a−1.In the next step, the costs and benefits of investments into climate change adaptation are determined. We consider an investment project with investment cost I and maintenance cost flow C. As in other real option studies (Baranzini, Chesney, & Morisset, 2003; Dixit & Pindyck, 1994; Fisher, 2000; Gollier & Treich, 2003; Pindyck, 2002), we assume that the project lasts infinitely and the investment cost is sunk once committed. In practice, an infinitely lasting project is constructed as a series of finite lifetime projects, where a new finite lifetime project is put in place whenever the previous project is fully depreciated.Investment projects may reduce losses by reducing the frequency or severity of losses. For bushfires, where fire is contained if it is discovered and suppressed in time, the main impact of investment projects such as construction of fire trails or fire stations is to reduce the frequency of house damaging events. In investigating bushfire risk management strategies, we use a non-decreasing, linear function of Poisson intensity λ(t) to model the risk reduction impact of the project. In the presence of the project, bushfire events occur with Poisson intensity kλ(t), where k ∈ (0, 1) is a constant, and severity X0eγt.The benefit of the investment project is the total discounted value of the reduction in the insurance premium due to the project. With the project in place, the Poisson intensity of the loss Lt(under measure P) is reduced to kλ(t)dt and the premium is reduced to kpt, where ptis given in (2.7). The premium reduction due to the project over period(t,t+dt]is therefore(1−k)pt. Integrating this premium reduction from time T, when the project is invested, to infinity gives the benefit B(T) of the project:(2.8)B(T)=∫T∞(1−k)e−rtλ(t)saeγt(1−sθeγt)−a−1dt.The NPV of the project invested at time T, V(T), is obtained by subtracting the present value of the project’s investment and maintenance costs from its benefits:(2.9)V(T)=∫T∞(1−k)e−rtλ(t)saeγt(1−sθeγt)−a−1dt−e−rT(I+C/r).Eq. (2.9) allows us to examine the optimal time for a considered investment into climate change adaptation. Clearly, the optimal time to invest is the time when V(T) is maximized. It can be shown that the maximal value of V(T) is obtained from the first order condition1111Note that the derivative of∫T∞f(x)dxwith respect to T is−f(T).:(2.10)(1−k)λ(T)saeγT(1−sθeγT)−a−1=rI+C.The left hand side of Eq. (2.10) is the marginal benefit of the project. It is the per period reduction in the insurance premium due to the project. The right hand side is the marginal cost of the project, which is composed of the interest expense on the investment cost and the maintenance cost of the project. As illustrated in Fig. 2, at the initial time, the marginal benefit is lower than the marginal cost and it is not optimal to invest in the project. As time goes by, the frequency of catastrophes increases, and the marginal benefit of the project increases. When the marginal benefit is equal to the marginal cost, it is optimal to invest in the project. The optimal investment time is therefore the time when the marginal benefit of the project is equal to the marginal cost, as required by Eq. (2.10).In the following, the proposed model is applied to a case study of bushfire management in a local area (Ku-ring-gai) of Southeast Australia. Climate change seems to already show its impact as an upward trend in historical records of the Forest Fire Danger Index (FFDI) Australia1212The FFDI is a an index created based on weather variables. It was proposed by an Australian CSIRO scientist A.G. McArthur in the 1960s. A higher index indicates a higher risk of bushfire.for various areas in Southeast Australia, as indicated by Fig. 3.Ku-ring-gai is an urban area with residential properties surrounded by three National Parks. It has 89 kilometers of urban and bushland interface and ranks third in bushfire vulnerability among the 61 local government areas in the Greater Sydney region (Chen, 2005).1313Bushfire vulnerability is defined as the number of addresses within 130 meters of bushland.The community in Ku-ring-gai recognizes bushfires as the most concerning risk under climate change, followed by storms, water supply security and heat stress mortality risk (Ku-ring-gai Council, 2010).Adaptation to the increased bushfire risk can be done at various levels. The Federal and State governments can revise building codes and adjust funding for investment projects to reduce bushfire risk. Local governments can propose and implement investment projects and provide education programs to reduce the risk. Households can purchase insurance and upgrade their home to increase their resilience. However, adaptation at the local government level seems to be most feasible and effective. At the household level, insurance takeup is already high and improvement in fire resistance is costly in many cases.1414In NSW, the building code did not reflect bushfire risk until 1997 and houses that were constructed before 1997 may not be as fire resistant as they should be.The adaptation benefits of revising building codes at the Federal and State government are also limited, since revised building codes apply only to new or reconstructed houses.A number of options have been identified by Ku-ring-gai Council to reduce the risks from bushfires. These include, among others, building new fire-trails, constructing new fire-stations and rezoning land, see (Ku-ring-gai Council, 2010). Fire trails allow for controlled hazard reduction burning, break wild fire transition and potentially allow more time for fire brigades to respond to bushfires. Constructing more fire stations reduces the response time and, thus, may also significantly reduce the risk of a fire to become more severe. In the following, we will focus on evaluating an adaptation project that involves the construction of additional fire trails to illustrate the proposed framework and provide economic insights on the optimal timing of the investment.Information on the estimated and assumed parameter values for the considered investment project is provided in Table 2. The appropriate process for the Poisson intensity of the occurrence of bushfires in the area is derived in the following way: the current frequency of bushfires over a one year time horizon, λ(0), is estimated from historical data, i.e. three bushfires with damage to houses over the last 100 years. To estimate the growth rate of the catastrophic intensity, we adopt the results of Hasson, Mills, Timbal, and Walsh (2009) who used 10 general circulation models together with a low (B1) and a high (A2) GHG emission scenario to study the changes in the frequency of extreme fire weather events in south-eastern Australia. The authors find that on average, the frequency of the extreme events increases from one event every two years during the 20th century to one event per year by the end of the 21st century, while results given by different models vary significantly. Assuming that the increase in the frequency of bushfires in the studied Ku-ring-gai area is proportional to the increase of extreme fire weather events proposed by Hasson et al. (2009), the frequency of bushfire is therefore predicted to double by the end of the 21stcentury. Eq. (2.3) then becomes:(3.1)λ(0)e−90α+λ¯(1−e−90α)=0.06Also, assume that the bushfire frequency in 2100 is close to the equilibrium frequency, i.e.0.06=0.95λ¯,such that we obtainλ¯=0.0632andα=0.026.For estimating the loss severity, we assume that houses are either completely destroyed by bushfires or will survive unscathed, based on the empirical observation by Crompton, McAneney, Chen, Pielke, and Haynes (2010). The loss severity is then a product of the number of damaged houses and the reconstruction cost per house. We estimate the reconstruction cost per house by subtracting the average land value estimated by the NSW Valuer General (DOL, Department of Land, 2009) from the average net-of-realtor-commission property sales price in the region provided by Hatzvi and Otto (2008).1515Note that we assume an additional 2.5 percent realtor commission for property sales.This results in an estimated reconstruction cost per house of 405,000 dollars.The number of damaged houses in a bushfire fire event is estimated using information provided by a local expert from the bushfire brigade. The expert suggests that for a severe bushfire, the average number of houses being damaged is 30 and the range for the average number of damaged houses is between 15 (the lower quartile) and 50 (the upper quartile) houses. These figures yield an expected loss of 12,150,003 dollars, while the 25th percentile for the severity of losses is 6,075,000 dollars and the 75th percentile is 20,250,000 dollars. The corresponding parameters of the gamma distribution matching these loss estimates area=8077.55ands=1504.17.The growth rate of loss severity (γ) is estimated based on disaster insurance claim data provided by the Insurance Council Australia (ICA) and yields a growth rate ofγ=0.01.Estimation of the risk aversion parameter θ requires information about the loss distribution and the corresponding insurance premium. Without access to insurance premium data for the study region, we follow (Farrow & Scott, 2013) to examine the impact of risk preference on the optimal investment decision for a range of possible risk aversion values,θ∈[2×10−9,10−8]. We use the mid-point of the range,θ=6×10−9,for the baseline case.Other parameters relating to the investment project, including investment cost, loss mitigation effectiveness and project life, are estimated using expert elicitation. Expert elicitation is an effective way to overcome data scarcity problems and has been used in many previous climate adaptation studies, see e.g. Baker and Solak (2011) and Mathew et al. (2012). The expert specifies that the conducted project is expected to reduce the frequency of house damaging bushfire events by 20 percent. The estimated costs for a finite lifetime project can be used to calculate the investment cost of an infinite lifetime project as follows. First, we convert the investment costIMof a project that lasts M years into an annuity flow, A:A=IM1−β1−βM+1,whereβ=1/(1+r). The annuity A is then used to calculate the investment cost of an infinite life project:(3.2)I=A(1+r)/r.We select a constant discount rate of 4.7 percent equal to the long term expected real interest rate that we derive from observations on risk free rates for Australia for the time period 1970–2010.1616See Section 3.6.1 for results on the impact of applying a stochastic discount rates instead of assuming a constant rate.At a 4.7 percent discount rate, the present value of building a bushfire trail every 50 years for 1.5 million dollars, is 1.66 million dollars.Fig. 4provides a plot for the NPV, denoted by V(T), of the considered project as a function of investment time T. Hereby, T ranges from immediate investment into the project (T=0) up to an initial investment into the project inT=100years. We find that immediate investment into the project provides a positive NPV of 471,304 dollars. However, deferring the investment to a later time can provide an even higher value for the conducted project. Based on our model, the optimal time to invest is in yearT=16and investing according to this optimal rule will provide a NPV of 784,118 dollars for the project, a difference of 312,814 dollars in comparison to the value of the project for investment atT=0. FromT=16onwards, postponing the investment to a later time will decrease the NPV of the project. Overall, applying the developed framework to the case study, we find that the optimal timing of the investment will have a significant1717Note that in the following, similar to Koopman, Lucas, and Schwaab (2012), we use the term ‘significant’ not in a statistical sense, but referring to ‘economic significance’ or significance with regards to the impact on the obtained results.impact on the NPV of the project. Clearly, if the project was invested atT=0based on a simple NPV0 > 0 rule, a lower NPV is attained.The impact of risk aversion on the results is examined by comparing the baseline case with the case of risk neutrality (θ=0), see Fig. 5. Fig. 5 also provides the plots for the case when risk aversion takes a higher value (θ=1×10−8) and the case when it takes a lower value (θ=2×10−9) than in the baseline case to examine the sensitivity of the results to changes in the risk aversion parameter.Recall that the coefficient of risk aversion for the baseline case was estimated asθ=6×10−9. We find that risk aversion significantly changes the NPV of the project. For example, under risk neutrality, the NPV of the project invested at timeT=0is below 200,000 dollars, while under risk aversion, the NPV of the project invested at the same time is more than twice as large. Consequently, assuming risk neutrality may severely underestimate the NPV of climate change adaptation projects and will possibly allocate more public funding towards non-climate related investments where risk neutrality holds such as, e.g., road infrastructure.A more risk averse preference, in fact, raises the NPV of the project in a way that causes the optimal investment to occur earlier. Assuming risk neutrality will lead to an optimal investment time in yearT=20,while assuming a higher degree of risk aversion in the market (θ=10−8) will lead to an earlier optimal investment time (T=14) than the baseline case (T=16).We find that immediate investment at timeT=0will always result in a significantly lower NPV than investing at the optimal time, regardless of the coefficient of risk aversion. The loss in investment value is highest in the case of risk neutrality (406,708 dollars or 73.47 percent of the investment value) and lowest in the case of high risk aversion (256,741 dollars or 26.46 percent of the investment value). This result is not surprising given that more risk averse preferences will lead to an earlier investment such that the difference between immediate and optimal timing of the investment are not as large as for the risk neutral case.The impact of climate change is examined by comparing the baseline scenario with the case where the frequency of bushfire triples (instead of doubling) by 2100, corresponding toλ¯=0.0947,andα=0.029,see Fig. 6. We find that the more serious climate change scenario results in significant increases for the NPV of the project. For example, in the baseline case, the NPV of the project invested at timeT=0is below 400,000 dollars, while under a more serious scenario for climatic change, the NPV of the project invested at the same time is about three times as large. In addition, the more serious climate change scenario also changes the relationship between timing of the investment and NPV of the project. Given a faster increase in the frequency of bushfires, we would expect an earlier optimal time to invest than under the baseline scenario. Indeed, we find that the optimal investment time is reduced fromT=16in the baseline case toT=9under the assumption of a more serious scenario for climatic change. Therefore, we also find that investment inT=0,based on a simple NPV rule, is much closer to the optimal timing of the investment under a more serious climate change scenario. The reduction in NPV due to an investment inT=0is smaller under the more serious scenario for climatic change (189,641 dollars compared to 312,814 dollars) than in the baseline case.The impact of investment cost on the results is examined by allowing investment costs to range between 1 million dollars and 2 million dollars. Fig. 7provides a plot that illustrates how investment costs will impact on the NPV of the project. Hereby, for the entire range of possible investment costs from 1 million dollars to 2 million dollars, we plot the maximal possible NPV that is obtained when the project is conducted (i) under optimal timing of the investment, and (ii) immediately with investment inT=0. As expected, investment cost has a huge impact on the NPV of the project. Interestingly, higher investment costs seem to decrease the NPV of the project under immediate investment inT=0even more than when the project is conducted under optimal timing. For example, an increase in investment cost by 10 percent (from 1.5 million dollars) reduces the NPV of the project under immediate investment by 35.24 percent, while it reduces the maximal NPV (under optimal timing) by only 9.47 percent. The figure also illustrates that the difference between the NPV of the project under optimal timing and the NPV for immediate investment inT=0becomes larger for increasing investment costs.Investment costs also have an impact on the optimal investment time. When the investment cost increases by 10 percent from 1.5 million dollars to 1.65 million dollars, the optimal time to invest increases by 15.46 percent fromT=16toT=18.4. On the other hand, for a lower investment cost of 1 million dollars, the waiting time for optimal investment is reduced to less than 10 years. The higher the investment cost, the more important becomes the optimal timing of the investment, since it is more valuable to avoid the interest expense on the investment costs in the initial years, when the benefits of the project are still low. Thus, when investment costs for the project increase, so does the waiting time for optimal investment.The impact of the applied discount rate on the results is examined by calculating the NPV under optimal timing of the investment and for immediate investment inT=0as well as the optimal investment time for different discount rates. Fig. 8provides the results for a range of discount rates between 3 percent and 10 percent.We find that the discount rate has a significant impact on the NPV of the project. Again, the impact on the NPV under immediate investment is more significant than when the project is conducted under optimal timing. For example, an increase in the discount rate by 10 percent from 4.7 percent to 5.17 percent reduces the NPV of immediate investment by 64.69 percent while it reduces the NPV under optimal timing of the investment by 31.16 percent only. Also, the difference in the NPV of the project under optimal timing and for immediate investment becomes more significant when the discount rate is higher.The discount rate also has an important impact on the optimal investment time. We find a positive linear relationship between the discount rate and the optimal time to invest. An increase in the discount rate by 10 percent results in an increase in the optimal investment time by 11.85 percent. This also illustrates that the optimal timing of the investment becomes more important for higher discount rates, since it is more valuable to avoid the interest expense in initial years when investment benefits are still low. With higher discount rates, the waiting time becomes longer and the difference between the NPV of the project for investment under optimal timing in comparison to investment atT=0becomes larger. We also find that for an assumed discount rate greater than 5.4 percent, immediate investment into the project will provide a negative NPV.So far in this paper, we have assumed a constant discount rate. This approach simplifies cost benefit analysis and has been taken in most previous studies (see Appendix A). In reality, prices of government bonds vary stochastically over time, and risk free interest rates are stochastic rather than constant. Newell and Pizer (2003) and Groom, Koundouri, Panopoulou, and Pantelidis (2007) show that when interest rates are stochastic and persistent, the certainty equivalent discount rate is decreasing over time. This is consistent with hyperbolic discounting behavior (Frederick, Loewenstein, & O’donoghue, 2002).1818Note that the discount rate can also be established using other approaches. For a summary of these approaches, we refer to Bottero, Ferretti, and Mondini (2013). We select the method of using a stochastic discount rate mainly for its objectivity.We examine the impact of stochastic discount rates by using the interest rate model proposed by Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985):(3.3)dr(t)=κ[r¯−r(t)]dt+σr(t)dW(t),where r(t) is the real risk free rate,r¯is the long run level to which r(t) reverts, and η is the rate of reversion of r(t). In this model, W(t) is a Wiener process andσr(t)is the local volatility. This model ensures that the discount rate r(t) is never negative. If r(t) is near zero, then the volatilityσr(t)is very small, and the drift will dominate the change in r(t), pushing it upwards towardsr¯.We estimate the model using maximum likelihood estimation. Data on the real risk free rate r(t) is obtained by subtracting the inflation rate from nominal yields of long term government bonds. Observations on risk free rates are available at quarterly frequency and cover the time period 1970–2010. The estimated parameters of model (3.3) are:η=0.47,r¯=0.047andσ=0.152.With the discount rate following model (3.3), the discount factor for discounting time t money values back to time 0 is given by:(3.4)P(t)=exp(−a(t)−b(t)r(0))wherea(t)=−2κr¯σ2[(κ+γ)τ2+ln2γc(t)]b(t)=2(exp(γt)−1)c(t);γ=κ2+2σ2c(t)=(κ+γ)(exp(γt)−1)+2γ.To examine the implication of the stochastic interest rate model for the certainty equivalent discount rate, we use Newell and Pizer (2003)’s definition of the certainty equivalent discount rate:(3.5)CE(t)=−dP(t)/dtP(t).The certainty equivalent discount rate CE(t) is the instantaneous deterministic discount rate that gives a discount factor equal to the expected discount factor under a stochastic discount rate at time t. As shown in Fig. 9, for the estimated process, and an initial interest rate of 4.7 percent, the certainty equivalent rate decreases over time towards 4.5 percent, a level that is lower than the long term expected interest rate (r¯=4.7percent). This difference between the certainty equivalent and the expected rates is due to Jensen’s inequality. Higher uncertainty in the interest rate results in a higher discount factor and a lower certainty equivalent rate. When interest rates are highly persistent, Newell and Pizer (2003) show that the certainty equivalent rate continues to decrease even in the far future. Newell and Pizer (2003) also consider the case where interest rates may follow a random walk rather than being mean reverting. However, given the low persistence parameter (0.47) in our Australian dataset, this case does not appear to be a likely scenario for our study.The discount factor P(t) in (3.4), which implies a decreasing discount rate, is then used in the investment model. With the application of a time varying discount rate, the NPV of the project and optimal investment time need to be computed numerically. We use a long time horizon of 400 years to ensure that the present values of cashflows from the project beyond the time horizon are close to zero and can be ignored.The impact of different discount rate models on the investment results is shown in Fig. 10. We provide the plots for the baseline case where the discount rate is assumed to be equal to 4.7 percent for all time periods and the case when the discount rate is allowed to vary stochastically, starting from an initial rate of 4.7 percent. We find that assumptions about the behavior of the discount rate have an important impact on the NPV of the project. For example, switching from a constant discount rate to a stochastic discount rate will increase the NPV of immediate investment by 31.19 percent, while it will increase the NPV of the project under optimal timing by 16.54 percent. In contrast, the waiting time is reduced slightly by 5.03 percent from 16 years (base case scenario with a constant discount rate) to 15 years in the case of a stochastic discount rate.The sensitivity of results on the NPV as well as for the optimal timing of the investment to a 10 percent increase in the value of considered key variables are summarized in Table 3. The results are relatively insensitive to changes in the risk aversion parameter, while they are quite sensitive to changes in scenario for climate change, investment costs and the discount rate. The loss due to ignoring the optimal timing of the investment is particularly sensitive to the cost of the investment, what implies that it is important to examine optimal investment timing when evaluating high cost projects. The optimal investment value (measured by NPV) is most sensitive to the discount rate, but also quite sensitive to the applied climate change scenario. A stochastic discount rate model that provides a more realistic description of the behavior of the discount rate may therefore be used to ensure that projects are optimally invested. The sensitivity of investment results to the applied climate change scenario also highlight the importance of scientific studies that help to reduce uncertainty about the impacts of climate change.Table 3 also highlights that risk aversion has an opposite impact compared to the discount rate. The more risk averse the representative agent, the earlier the project will be invested under optimal timing. The higher the discount rate, the later will be the optimal investment time. This is consistent with the results of another strand of literature that examines the relation between risk aversion and discount rates. For example, Cameron and Gerdes (2007) show that a more risk averse representative agent is associated with a lower social discount rate.1919We would like to thank one of the anonymous reviewers for pointing this out.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
