@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Eco-activities and operating performance in the computer and electronics industry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An innovative difference-in-differences research design is proposed.Eco-collaboration is likely expensive to establish.Eco-activities take time to yield benefits.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,OR in environment and climate change,Eco-activities,Operating performance,Analytics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite the complexity of implementing environmentally sustainable practices, an increasing number of firms have invested in eco-activities. This study investigates the association between eco-activities and operating performance over time. Moreover, this study explores the impact of eco-approaches (eco-collaboration and eco-certification) on operating performance. A difference-in-differences research design is established using operating performance data (COMPUSTAT) and eco-activity data (eco-announcements, eco-certification providers, and ASSET4). Empirical results reveal that eco-activities in the computer and electronics industry are associated with increased margin and revenue performance; however, the realization of benefits takes time (improvement typically occurs within three years of the corresponding eco-announcement). Furthermore, although eco-collaboration tends to be expensive to establish, operating performance is improved over the long term. This study also finds that eco-certification is associated with increased improvement in operating performance delivered by eco-activities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The beginning of the 21st century is marked by a significant amount of activity related to environmental sustainability (called eco-activity in this work) by both policy makers and firms. Actions related to eco-activities by policy makers have ranged from publication of assessment reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to passing the Restriction of the Use of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) directive by the European Union (EU) in 2003, which prohibits the use of certain materials in amounts beyond agreed-upon levels. Actions related to eco-activities by companies have ranged from Alcatel-Lucent's development of network processors that perform better and consume less power than earlier processors to the sourcing of products and services by MedAssets Inc. from suppliers that support green initiatives. Fig. 1displays the number of press releases related to eco-activities (i.e., eco-announcements) in the computer and electronics industry by year. Eco-activity in this industry has clearly increased. The Pearson value for correlations between year and number of eco-announcements is 0.755 (p-value < 0.01) over time. Similar increases in eco-activities have occurred in other industries.Given this increase in eco-activities, understanding how an investment in eco-activities affects firm performance is important. Most of the existing literature has taken a shareholder perspective and focused on the link between eco-activities and stock market performance of the firm. Our goal in this paper is to understand the link between eco-activities and operating performance of the firm. On the one hand, failure to choose the “right” activities or ineffective implementation may negatively impact operating performance. Even when a firm effectively implements an eco-activity, customers may not reward the firm for its effort. Negative links between certain types of eco-activities and stock market performance have been found in the literature. For example, Jacobs, Singhal, and Subramanian (2010) demonstrated that voluntary emission reductions generated a negative market response (stock price) as well as Kroes, Subramanian, and Subramanyam (2012) demonstrated that pollution prevention and pollution control reduced market performance (Tobin's q). Conversely, investment in eco-activities can positively affect firms when the activity is favorable to the firm and it is implemented effectively (customers reward firms for this effort). Corbett and Klassen (2006) noted that “environmental excellence is key to improving operations.” Evidence of a positive link between eco-activities and stock market performance has also been found in the literature. For example, Dowell, Hart, and Yeung (2000) found that adopting a single stringent global environmental standard increased market values (Tobin's q) and that the market's reaction to this environmental standard involved no time lag.Most of the research has found that shareholders react quickly to evidence of eco-activities by firms (whether positively or negatively). This leaves open the question whether shareholders are reacting to anticipated changes in future operating performance or other factors. However, few studies have explored the relationship between eco-activities and operating performance over time. Also, few studies have determined whether eco-approaches (eco-collaboration and eco-certification) are worthwhile for firms.This research seeks to elucidate the association between corporate efforts in environmental sustainability in the computer and electronics industry and operating performance. Specifically, the association between the eco-activities of firms and their operating performance over time is assessed via a difference-in-differences research design applied to a sample of eco-announcements from the computer and electronics industry. The primary challenge with this design is identifying treated firms (those engaged in eco-activities) and control firms (those not engaged in eco-activities) that are similar. Hence, this work exploits various data sources (eco-announcements, and the ASSET4, and COMPUSTAT databases) to identify the two groups of firms.Our empirical results reveal that implementing eco-activities is generally associated with positive profitability in the computer and electronics industry. Nevertheless, the realization of benefits takes time. Contrary to anecdotal reporting in the press discussing retailers like Walmart that have implemented sustainability efforts that lowered costs, we have not been able to find significant evidence of sustainability efforts lowering costs in the electronics industry. This may be because changes in the electronics industry have been driven by strengthening regulation, while changes by firms like Walmart were voluntary. As a result, Walmart is more likely to select eco-activities that produce immediate benefit (often in terms of reduced cost) while electronics firms may not always have that choice.Given the challenges and complexity of implementing eco-activities (Theissen & Spinler, 2014), this study also investigates the effects of eco-approaches on the success of implementations by firms. Eco-approaches in this investigation are eco-collaboration (collaborating with other firms in an eco-activity), and eco-certification (obtaining eco-certifications such as ISO 14000). The essential results of our empirical analysis imply that although eco-collaboration appears to be expensive to establish, operating performance is typically improved over time. Additionally, eco-certification generally increases the extent to which eco-activities improve operating performance.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formulates hypotheses. Section 3 describes the research design and data. Section 4 presents empirical results and corresponding discussions. Section 5 draws conclusions and managerial implications.A growing body of literature focuses on environmental issues such as closed-loop supply chains (Georgiadis & Vlachos, 2004; Govindan, Soleimani, & Kannan, 2015), global diffusion of ISO14000 certification (Albuquerque, Bronnenberg, & Corbett, 2007), e-waste and environmental regulations (Atasu & Van Wassenhove, 2012; Plambeck & Wang, 2009), environmental safety stock (Chen & Monahan, 2010), consumer environmental awareness (Liu, Anderson, & Cruz, 2012; Yenipazarli & Vakharia, 2015), industrial ecology (Agrawal, Ferguson, Toktay, & Thomas, 2012), product reuse (Galbreth, Boyaci, & Verter, 2013), carbon footprinting (Caro, Corbett, Tan, & Zuidwijk, 2013), a carbon tax (Plambeck & Taylor, 2013), reverse channel choice (Atasu, Toktay, & Van Wassenhove, 2013), energy efficiency (Muthulingam, Corbett, Benartzi, & Oppenheim, 2013), and a sustainable supply chain network (Cruz, 2008; Devika, Jafarian, & Nourbakhsh, 2014; Faccio, Persona, Sgarbossa, & Zanin, 2014). Furthermore, eco-activities by firms have been identified based on public announcements (Klassen & McLaughlin, 1996), surveys (Sharma & Vredenburg, 1998), eco-certifications (Melnyk, Sroufe, & Calantone, 2003) or databases (Sharfman & Fernando, 2008). Metrics of performance have included market value such as stock price (Klassen & McLaughlin, 1996) and operating metrics such as operating income (Hendricks & Singhal, 2005). This work identifies firms engaged in eco-activities via press releases (announcements) in the FACTIVA database, and then measures firm performance using operating metrics such as operating income and cost per dollar for sales.The natural-resource-based view (NRBV) theory (Hart, 1995) asserts that successful eco-activities provide firms with strategic capabilities that promote sustainable competitive advantage. Hart (1995), using the natural-resource-based view, argued that “firms that adopt sustainable-development strategies will evidence substantial development of new, low-impact technologies and competences.” The natural-resource-based view implies that engaging in eco-activities can enhance a firm's competitive advantage, eventually improving operating performance (Hart, 1995; Hart & Dowell, 2011). Several studies have identified a positive relationship between improved environmental performance and stock returns. Flammer (2013) observed that eco-friendly announcements triggered an increase in stock price. Kassinis and Soteriou (2003) applied structural equation modeling (SEM) to survey data from Europe's hospitality industry, concluding that positive environmental practices (such as energy-saving, recycling, and water-saving practices) positively impacted market performance (including growth in profits, revenues, and market share) by enhancing customer satisfaction and loyalty. Some studies have identified the positive impacts of eco-activities on operating performance. Russo and Fouts (1997) observed that good environmental performance (as indicated by environmental ratings from the Franklin Research and Development Corporation) were associated with increased return on assets (ROA) in 1991 and 1992. Sharfman and Fernando (2008), who utilized the U.S. EPA's TRI data along with environmental scores from the Kinder, Lydenberg, Domini & Co., Inc. (KLD) social performance dataset, found that improving environmental risk management reduced capital costs (data were for 267 U.S. firms listed in Standard and Poor's (S&P) 500 for 1999–2002. This leads to our first hypothesis.H1Implementing eco-activities in the computer and electronics industry is positively associated with operating performance over time.Eco-activities can broadly be viewed in two categories – those that can be done independently and those that require collaboration. Certain activities like switching to LED lighting in a facility can be performed independently. Other eco-activities, such as designing recyclable products, cannot be implemented effectively in isolation. Eccles, Perkins, and Serafeim (2012) asserted that “companies cannot achieve their sustainability objectives without widespread support and cooperation.”Transaction cost theory (TCT) asserts that exchange or interaction between parties, such as negotiating, monitoring, and enforcement, have associated costs (Klein, Crawford, & Alchian, 1978; Williamson, 1979). Given the complexity of interactions required between firms when collaborating on eco-activities, significant transaction costs are likely during the initial setup of collaboration. Thus, implementing eco-collaboration is likely to negatively impact operating performance initially compared to firms that engage in eco-activities not requiring collaboration. This leads to our second hypotheses.H2Firms that engage in eco-activities without collaboration are likely to do better than firms that engage in eco-activities with collaboration in the short term.Empirical studies have identified the importance of other complementary capabilities when engaging in eco-activities to improve firm performance. Christmann (2000), who surveyed 88 chemical companies, found that to get advantage from best practices in environmental management (involving, for example, pollution prevention technologies), firms needed complementary assets that support both process innovation and implementation. As the level of complementary assets increased, firm performance increased. Jira and Toffel (2013) found a relationship between an increase in information-sharing by suppliers as it relates to climate change and an improved profit margin from the Carbon Disclosure Project's Supply Chain surveys in 2009 and 2010. Collaboration can be viewed as a significant complementary capability. While it is initially expensive to set up, firms are likely to benefit once this complementary capability is in place. This leads to our third hypotheses.H3Implementing eco-collaboration positively impacts operating performance over time.Several researchers have identified the benefits of certification in various settings. Melnyk et al. (2003) demonstrated the importance of an environmental management system (EMS) and ISO 14001 certification. Analyses of data from a survey of 1,222 North American manufacturing firms showed that firms that have an EMS and ISO 14001 certification outperformed those that do not (Melnyk et al., 2003). Aguilar and Vlosky (2007), using data for U.S. residential consumers in 1995 and 2005, found that environmentally certified wood products can improve the willingness of consumers to pay price premiums. Based on the CoStar database for U.S. commercial real estate, Fuerst and McAllister (2011) observed that eco-certified buildings have rental and sale price premiums. Based on survey results for six countries, Bellesi, Lehrer, and Tal (2005) indicated that environmental certification can help firms achieve comparative advantage. Specifically, when selecting suppliers, environmental certification signifies good management and environmental responsibility (Bellesi et al., 2005). Jacobs et al. (2010) examined 780 eco-announcements and showed that the relationship between environmental performance and stock market price was insignificant. Nonetheless, Jacobs et al. (2010) determined that ISO 14001 certification positively impacted market value on Day -1 (one day before its announcement) to Day 0 (the day of announcement). This leads to our fourth hypothesis:H4Obtaining eco-certification is associated with positive operating performance over time.In summary, this work investigates the relationship between corporate eco-activities and operating performance over time in the computer and electronics industry. Specifically, the questions addressed can be briefly summarized as follows. Is engaging in eco-activities positively associated with operating performance in the computer and electronics industry? If so, how long do improvements to operating performance take? How do eco-approaches (eco-collaborations and eco-certifications) affect operating performance?Information for firms in the computer and electronics industry that engage in eco-activities was collected via a keyword search for press releases added to the FACTIVA database between 2000 and 2011. In this work, eco-announcements, eco-collaboration announcements, and eco-certification announcements are proxies for implementation of eco-activities by firms. Information for environmental performance was obtained from the Thomson Reuters ASSET4 database. The ASSET4 database is a compilation of publicly available information, including sustainability/CSR reports, firm websites, annual reports, proxy filings, non-governmental organizations, and news of all major providers (Reuters, 2011).Data for operating performance were obtained from the COMPUSTAT database of Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). The COMP.FUNDQ and COMP.G_FUNDQ datasets provide quarterly data for North American (U.S. and Canadian) and global firms, respectively. Table 1summarizes definitions and implications of measures.A difference-in-differences design can eliminate potential for biases, such as omitted variable biases, when inferring causal relationships (Imbens & Rubin, 2015; Imbens & Wooldridge, 2009; Katchova, 2010). Hence, this work utilizes the methodology of average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) to investigate the association between eco-activities and operating performance. Average treatment (eco-activities) effect on the treated is the difference between the actual outcomes (operating performance) of treated firms and the outcomes of the treated firms if they had not been treated in Eq. (1).(1)ATET≈E(Δ,S=1)≈E(yt,S=1)−E(yu,S=1),where ∆ denotes the difference in outcomes;S=1denotestreatedfirms;ytare the outcomes of the firms if they had been treated; yurepresents the outcomes of the firms if they had not been treated.Given that the performance of treated firms cannot be observed without the treatment, the second term (yu) in Eq. (1) is a counterfactual. Hence, the counterfactual part is tackled by identifying a control firm that is similar to its treated firm and using its performance instead. Accordingly, the counterfactual in (1) can be replaced with the outcome of the control firm as follows:(2)ATET≈E(Δ|m(f),S=1)≈E(yt|m(f),S=1)−E(yu|m(f),S=0)where m(f) signifies matching on the features of firms and S = 0 denotes control firms.Moreover, once time series data is available, the difference-in-differences model can be utilized to further eliminate the potential biases such as time trends. Let j be a period after eco-activities and i a period before eco-activities. The difference-in-differences average treatment effect on the treated is defined as the following equation:(3)ATET≈E(ytj−yti|m(f),S=1)−E(yuj−yui|m(f),S=0)where the first term (S = 1) represents the difference between the outcomes of period j (ytj) and period i (yti) for the treated firms, while the second term (S = 0) indicates the difference between the outcomes of period j (yuj) and period i (yui) for the control firms.The greatest challenge with a difference-in-differences design is identifying treated and control firms that have similar characteristics but differ in the treatment of interest. Hence, this work devises an innovative strategy for identifying treated and control firms (Sections 3.2.1. and 3.2.2.) that accounts for the timing of the treatment. Herein, treated firms invest in eco-activities while control firms do not. Different treated firms invest in eco-activities at different times. The goal is to identify a control firm that is similar to each treated firm in all regards other than the fact that it has not engaged in an eco-activity over the specified time horizon. After the treated and control firms are identified, covariate similarity is assessed by testing for differences between treated firms and control firms in means (T-statistic), medians (Wilcoxon signed-rank test S-statistic), and distributions (Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic) of variables of interest. Kernel density plots are used to visualize the differences between distributions of variables of interest for treated and control firms. Furthermore, treatment distinction is applied to determine whether control firms do in fact differ from treated firms in terms of the target treatment (change in eco-performance). Once the treatment difference and covariate similarity have been confirmed, the first difference in performance between two specified periods (e.g., from the quarter of the eco-announcement to the fourth quarter after the eco-announcement) is evaluated for both groups. Then, the second difference (difference-in-differences) is the difference between the difference in outcomes of the treated and that of the control firms.To identify firms that have engaged in an eco-activity, an event study is utilized (Hendricks & Singhal, 2005). Specifically, eco-announcements, eco-collaboration announcements, and eco-certification announcements, are surrogates of firms’ investments in eco-activities.Data were collected from the FACTIVA database (which covers nearly 200 countries) for 2000–2011 for companies in the computer and electronics industry. The primary sources providing data to the FACTIVA database are Business Wire, PR Newswire, the Wall Street Journal, and Dow Jones News Service. Searches with “environmental sustainability,” “eco-friendly,” “environmentally friendly,” “green energy,” “eco-products,” and “green supply chain,” yielded an initial set of 30,230 articles. An example eco-announcement is “Universal Display Corporation and Acuity Brands, Inc. announced today that the companies are working together under a dollar 2 million, U.S. Department of Energy SBIR Phase III Xlerator grant to develop an energy-efficient and color-tunable phosphorescent OLED lighting system” (Business Wire, November 2, 2010).A careful pruning of articles (elimination of unrelated and duplicate articles) resulted in an initial dataset with 2,258 treated firms. To investigate the impact of eco-activities on operating performance, the COMPUSTAT database was used to acquire the quarterly operating performance of treated firms. All treated firms for which COMPUSTAT data was unavailable were deleted. This left us with 454 firms that engaged in eco-activities and had financial data.The performance of each treated firm was compared with that of a suitable control firm over a matching time horizon in order to control for industry and/or economy-wide effects (Hendricks & Singhal, 2005). This work first checked that the control firms did not appear in eco-news stories during the study period. However, this alone was not sufficient to ensure that a firm did not engage in eco-activities. Correspondingly, as a surrogate for not having engaged in eco-activity, all control firms were required to exhibit low environmental performance and have no increase in their environmental performance in the ASSET4 database in the time period around the eco-announcement for the corresponding treated firm. Specifically, control firms were selected from the bottom 50 percent of firms based on environmental performance within a year, and they must have exhibited no improvement in environmental performance in the ASSET4 database, from four quarters before (-4Q) to four quarters after (+4Q) the corresponding treated firm's eco-announcement.To identifycontrol firms that are similar to treated firms, this work controlled for event dates and fiscal dates, firm industry (Campbell, 2007), its geographical location (Madsen, 2009), and its size (Sarkis & Cordeiro, 2001). First, compared firms should have the same event dates and fiscal dates because treated firms that made an eco-announcement in 2000 must be compared with control firms for the same period. Second, since firms in various industries are affected differently by industry-wide phenomena (Campbell, 2007), such as the RoHS regulation in the electronics industry, this work ensured that the control firms and treated firms had the same SIC code. Third, since firms in different countries are subject to different eco-regulations and eco-sensibilities (Madsen, 2009), control firms with the same ISO country code as the treated firms were chosen. Fourth, following two studies (Hendricks & Singhal, 2001b, 2005), this work selected control firms with sales and assets that were similar to those of treated firms within a factor of three. Via this approach, the control firm with the minimum total percentage error of sales and total assets was assigned to the corresponding treated firm. The treated and control firms were then compared to confirm that they had similar changes in operating performance from eight quarters prior to four quarters prior to the eco-announcement.Based on the above matching mechanism, a suitable control firm in the ASSET4 database was identified for each treated firm. All treated firms for which suitable controls could not be found were further eliminated. Starting with 454 treated firms we were left with 71 matched-pair firms. While this strict filtering does a good job of identifying suitable controls, it greatly shrinks the dataset making it harder to obtain significant results. Table 2 provides descriptive statistics of the final set of 71 treated firms for the four quarters before their eco-announcements. The mean (median) treated firm had revenues of dollar 305 million (dollar 209 million), and firm revenues varied widely (standard deviation = dollar 258 million; the coefficient of variation = 85).Table 3 compares means (T-statistic), median (Wilcoxon signed-rank test S-statistic), and distributions (Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic) for sales and assets between treated and control firms. These results confirm that treated and control firms do not differ significantly in terms of net sales and total assets four quarters before the eco-announcements were made. The Kernel density plots of net sales and total assets of treated and control firms closely resemble each other four quarters before the eco-announcements (Fig. 2). Additionally, each control firm has the same event date, fiscal reporting date, SIC code, and ISO country code as the corresponding treated firm. Hence, empirical results show that the treated and control firms exhibit covariate balance.To further ensure that treated and control firms were similar prior to the eco-announcement, the difference in the difference in their performance was compared between eight quarters before the eco-announcement (-8Q) to four quarters before the eco-announcement (-4Q) based on the similar concept of prior performance matching (Barber & Lyon, 1996). Specifically, this work compared the difference in difference {Treated(-4Q) – Treated(-8Q)} - {Control(-4Q) – Control(-8Q)} for each metric. The results in Table 4show that any changes in operating performance prior to the eco-announcement were similar between treated and control firms. These results provide strong evidence that treated and control firms did not differ significantly in performance during the year before the eco-announcement year.To confirm that treated and control firms differed in terms of the treatment (eco-activity), the difference in eco-performance (as per ASSET4) between the treated and control firms was assessed (Table 5). We observe a significant difference in environmental performance between treated and control firms from four quarters before an eco-announcement (-4Q) to four quarters after the eco-announcement (+4Q). This difference becomes even more significant eight quarters after the announcement (+8Q). The results in Table 5 show that treated firms improved their eco-performance significantly more than control firms in the period from before to after the eco-activity. Given these comparisons (Tables 3–5), our results support the claim that treated and control firms were similar prior to the eco-announcement and any future changes can be associated with the eco-announcement.Our empirical results show no significant relationship between eco-activities and operating performance from one year before to one year after an eco-announcement. However, eco-activities are associated with positive operating performance in the second year after an eco-announcement. While eco-activities improve performance, a lag of approximately two years was needed to realize improvements. Table 6shows analytical results for the entire sample over the period beginning four quarters before the eco-announcement (-4Q) and ending eight quarters after the eco-announcement (+8Q). We consider the results in terms of the mean, the median, and the percentage of difference-in-difference that are negative. A small percentage being negative implies that for most treated firms the change in operating metric is larger than for control firms. In Table 6, for example, in 28.3 percent of the instances the change in operating income for treated firms was smaller than the change for control firms. Equivalently, in 71.7 percent of the instances, the change in operating income for treated firms was greater than that for control firms. This observation is significant for p < 0.01 as shown in Table 6. In our results, the percentage negative (percent neg.) is an important metric to check the significance of our results. The results in Table 6 support H1 and show a positive association between eco-activities and operating performance. The results in Table 6 show that treated firms performed better than the control firms in terms of operating income, operating margin, gross profit, cost per dollar of sales, revenue, and PPET. Given that cost per dollar of sales is the ratio of cost and revenue, our results reveal that improved performance in terms of operating margin and cost per dollar of sales in the computer and electronics industry is likely driven more by revenue increases than cost decreases over the period under study.A comparison of results in Tables 4 and 6 shows that while the performance of control firms resembled that of treated firms in the year before the announcement (Table 4), treated firms outperformed control firms two years after the eco-announcement (Table 6). More details related to the results in Table 6 are given in electronic supplementary material that provides that before and after mean performance for each variable for both treated and control firms.To assess the robustness of findings, the parameters used to select control firms were varied as shown in Table 7. Specifically, this study compares the difference between treated-control firms’ performances in terms of control timing, eco-performance, and firm size. First, the timing for the selection of control firms was changed from four quarters before the announcement (original setting) to eight quarters before the announcement. Changing the control timing did not significantly change differences in operating performance (left-most column in Table 7). Second, control firms were selected from the bottom 20 percent in terms of environmental performance instead of the bottom 50 percent (original setting). Changing the level of environmental performance for control firms did not significantly change the differences in operating performance (middle column in Table 7). Third, the range of firm size was changed and control firms were selected to within a factor of two of firm size instead of within a factor of three (original setting). Changing firm size did not significantly alter differences in operating performance (right-most column in Table 7). Therefore, sensitivity analyses support the robustness of the analytical results.This section reports on the investigation of whether engaging in eco-collaboration and obtaining eco-certification are associated with improved operating performance for firms that engage in eco-activities (Hypotheses H2–H4).To identify treated firms that engaged in eco-collaboration, eco-announcements were re-read and checked for words or phrases indicating collaboration. An example announcement of eco-collaboration is “Say Goodnight to Wasted Power: Citrix Drives Energy Efficiency through the Datacenter with HP” (Business Wire, October 22, 2007). In most instances, the title alone was not sufficient to identify eco-collaboration — the entire article had to be read carefully.Our empirical results in Table 8 support Hypothesis 2. Firms that engaged in eco-activities without need for collaboration did much better than their control firms in the year leading up to the eco-announcement. These firms obtained the benefit of eco-activities immediately. In contrast, firms that engaged in eco-collaboration did worse than their controls during this period. In particular, whereas firms that engaged in eco-activities without need for collaboration saw an increase in operating income and operating margin over this period relative to their control firms, firms that engaged in eco-collaboration saw a decrease in operating margin over this period relative to their control firms. These results support the idea that firms engaging in eco-collaboration are incurring significant transaction costs during the initial setup phase of collaboration.The two years after the announcement, however, reveal a turnaround for firms engaging in eco-collaboration. Our results support Hypothesis H3 and demonstrate that operating performance of treated firms that engaged in eco-collaboration was significantly superior to that of their control firms in the two years from 0Q to +4Q (see Table 9) and +4Q to +8Q (see Table 10). Firms that engaged in eco-collaboration did better than their controls in terms of operating margin and cost per dollar of sales in the first year after an announcement (Table 9). This improvement continued into the second year after eco-announcements. The eco-collaborating firms also did better than their controls in terms of operating income, ROA, and ROS (Table 10). Over these two years, firms engaging in eco-collaboration significantly outperformed their controls in contrast to the firms that did not engage in eco-collaboration. These results support the resource based view of collaboration as a complementary capability, which once developed provides the firm with a competitive advantage.To characterize the association between eco-certification and operating performance, this work identified treated firms that have obtained such certification. This was done by first searching for eco-certification announcements in the FACTIVA database. We then searched firm websites for mention of eco-certification. We also checked the websites of eco-certifying agencies (e.g., International Organization for Standardization and the U.S. Green Building Council) and contacted these agencies for a list of certified firms. For instance, Akamai Technologies received the LEED Commercial Interiors 2.0 Gold certification from the U.S. Green Building Council in 2010. For this case, the U.S. Green Building Council website was checked to identify all certified firms. This information divided the group of firms which have eco-announcements into two groups — those with eco-certification and those without.Our results in Table 11support Hypothesis H4 and reveal that firms with eco-certification did significantly better than their controls compared to firms without eco-certification. As Table 11 shows, firms that engaged in eco-activities and obtained eco-certification achieved significantly better operating income, gross profit and revenue than their control firms. Even though certified firms had higher costs than their controls, the increase in revenue more than compensated resulting in higher profits. In contrast, even though firms that engaged in eco-activities without certification did better than their control firms, the difference was not as significant as for the firms with certification.Our results point to the value of eco-activities in terms of improved operating performance and also show how eco-collaboration and certification affect this improvement. First, eco-activities in the computer and electronics industry are generally associated with positive profitability by increasing operating income and operating margin. However, the benefits of eco-activities do not accrue until the second year after a firm's eco-announcement. This finding is critical. Since rewards are not gained in the short term, firms may abandon their investment in eco-activities if they are not aware of the time it requires for benefits to accrue. Rather, firms should have the foresight to support their eco-activities for the longer term. Our results seem to indicate that improved performance in the computer and electronics industry is more likely due to improved revenues, not lower costs. Second, this work contributes to the literature by empirically showing that eco-collaboration is initially expensive but bears fruit over time. Collaborating firms typically exhibit negative operating performance the year before their announcements (setup), which is consistent with transaction cost theory, but collaborating firms improve operating performance in each of the two years following the announcement, which is consistent with natural-resource-based view. Specifically, eco-collaboration is beneficial but clearly requires patience and significant initial effort. Finally, identifying the positive association between eco-certification and profitability is a contribution to the literature. Firms engaging in eco-activities generally benefit from certification, which is in line with natural-resource-based view theory.There are three primary managerial implications that arise from this work. First, managers that engage in eco-activities must be patient to gain the benefits from these activities. Second, engaging in eco-collaboration eventually pays off even though it is expensive to set up. Third, obtaining eco-certification enhances the benefits from engaging in eco-activities.A limitation of this work is the small sample sizes, which resulted from careful identification of suitable controls using the ASSET4 database. Also, findings may be limited to the computer and electronics industry and may not extend to other industries. Future research could help determine whether some forms of eco-collaboration (with suppliers/customers/organizations/government) or eco-certification (ISO 14000, ISO 50001, LEED, GBI, GRADE, EMAS) are more or less associated positively with operating performance. An opportunity also exists to categorize eco-activities (process-related/product-related) to further an understanding of how each impacts operating performance. Moreover, future research may investigate the association between eco-activities and operating performance across industries.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
