@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pricing in a supply chain for auction bidding under information asymmetry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine a supply chain where a manufacturer bids through a distributor in a procurement auction.Under information asymmetry, we find the equilibrium manufacturer mark-up and distributor bid.The manufacturer’s ex-ante expected mark-up and expected profit are derived.In unilateral communication, the informed agent enjoys a higher mark-up by concealing information.In information sharing, profit is equally divided among the two agents.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Auctions/bidding,Supply chain management,Equilibrium mark-up,Information asymmetry,Double marginalization,Information sharing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We examine a supply chain in which a manufacturer participates in a sealed-bid lowest price procurement auction through a distributor. This form of supply chain is common when a manufacturer is active in an overseas market without establishing a local subsidiary. To gain a strategic advantage in the division of profit, the manufacturer and distributor may intentionally conceal information about the underlying cost distribution of the competition. In this environment of information asymmetry, we determine the equilibrium mark-up, the ex-ante expected mark-up and expected profit of the manufacturer and the equilibrium bid of the distributor. In unilateral communication, we demonstrate the informed agent’s advantage resulting to higher mark-up. Under information sharing, we show that profit is equally shared among the supply chain partners and we explicitly derive the mark-up when the underlying cost distribution is uniform in [0,1]. The model and findings are illustrated by a numerical example.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supply chain competition is increasingly replacing the firm versus firm framework of market competition (Ha & Tong, 2008). Ideally, partners in a supply chain should cooperate and proceed together with coordinated decisions against competing supply chains (Gumus & Guneri, 2007). In a manufacturer–retailer scheme, the two agents will have to determine the inventory level, the order quantity, the transfer sales price and the market price, ensuring profit maximization (Hu, Beil, & Duenyas, 2013; Lovejoy, 2010). Typically, the market demand function involves uncertain parameters and the supply chain partners have asymmetric information about the possible states of the demand (Ha & Tong, 2008).We extend this framework examining the purchase of a product or service for which there is no active market and, therefore, the end-user initiates a procurement auction. When the quantity of a supply is large, even if the product is sold in the retail market on a retail, the procurer may run an auction mechanism to purchase the object at a bid price, which is lower than the retail price. Public tenders or bidding in a Request for Quotation are common examples of such auctions. We consider a procurement mechanism of a sealed-bid auction, where the awarding criterion is the lowest bid. This form of auction is commonly used in public procurement contracts both in the EU (European Parliament and Council Directive, 2004) and the U.S. (Federal Acquisition Regulation, 2005).In our setting, the upstream agent of the supply chain is a manufacturer, who collaborates with a downstream distributor. For example, the Austrian firm Rosenbauer International AG, a leading fire fighting vehicle and equipment manufacturer, has established a worldwide network of distributors and provides its customer support “via a global sales and services organization with the cooperation of selected partners” (Rosenbauer Group website). Clearly, the vast majority of state and municipal procurement for these products is through a tender process.We examine the environment in which the manufacturer is unwilling to participate directly to the procurement auction. Instead, the manufacturer prefers to supply the auctioned item to the distributor, who eventually bids in the auction. There are many reasons for which a manufacturer may decide to sell through a distributor. In many cases, the manufacturer is located overseas and he is unfamiliar with the local market, which may present various barriers for entry. The terms of the supply often require that the supplier should provide maintenance and repair service, which the manufacturer is unable to offer to the end user without the cooperation of a local firm. Moreover, the manufacturer may evaluate the establishment of a local subsidiary company as unprofitable, since the local customer pool is usually limited and the outcome of the particular procurement auction remains uncertain, whereas the investment and the corresponding fixed cost are in most cases considerably high. This supply chain framework is consistent with the estimate that 60% of US companies and 70% of European companies use foreign-based agents or distributors to export their products (Jobber, 2010). The appointment of local distributors, who will promote a product and penetrate the local market, appears to be preferable when the profit is expected to be low or the risk involved is high (Arnold, 2000). In general, manufacturers may decide to make their products available to end-users using distributor channels because of the expertise and capacity of the distributors in the promotion, sale and technical support of the corresponding products.In public procurement, only authorized distributors or manufacturers are usually allowed to participate in a supply or service auction. For example, the US government typically requires from distributors, who want to become suppliers to the General Services Administration (GSA), to provide a letter from the corresponding manufacturer which certifies their status as authorized distributors (Letter of Supply in US GSA website). Moreover, manufacturers have to provide confirmation that, if their authorized distributor is awarded the procurement contract, they will properly supply to the distributor the auctioned item. Authorized distributors are carefully selected on the basis of geographic location or with regard to product or market segmentation. In general, the partner manufacturer and the authorized distributor are bound by a formal contractual agreement, which extends beyond the scope of a particular auction project. Therefore, in a procurement auction, the agents of the supply chain have established a long lasting collaboration and, for this reason, the respective manufacturers will typically refrain from cooperating with other bidders.Moreover, participants in public procurement auctions are usually not allowed to propose variants to their tenders. For example, EU regulations specifically prohibit variant offers, when the criterion of awarding a supply or service contract is the lowest price (European Parliament and Council Directive, 2004; Guide to the Community Rules on Public Supply Contracts, Guide to the Community Rules on Public Service Contracts). Consequently, in public procurement, distributors are legally bound to present only one proposal coming from a single manufacturer. Further, most manufacturers expect from their foreign authorized distributors not to sell competing products (Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, Canada). Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that in the procurement auction environment that we examine, a distributor will choose to cooperate with a single upstream agent.We embed our supply chain model in a setting of information asymmetry. In a manufacturer–retailer supply chain with downstream market competition instead of an auction, the asymmetry of information is reflected in the representation of the market demand curve and the unit cost of the retailer. Typically, in the literature, the market demand function includes random parameters and, as a result, the supply chain partners have asymmetric information about the possible states of the demand. For example, Ha and Tong (2008) consider a manufacturer who does not observe the intercept of a linear demand curve, although this parameter is known to the retailer. Wang, Lau, and Ling (2008) considered a manufacturer–retailer supply chain, where the downstream agent sells in an active market, which is described by a linear demand curve, instead of participating in a downstream auction. The manufacturer has incomplete knowledge about the stochastic parameters of a linear demand function and the retailer’s cost, whereas the retailer is fully aware about the form of the demand curve. Wang et al. (2008) showed that in this setting it is preferable for the distributor to withhold or distort information and increase the manufacturer’s uncertainty about the parameters of the demand. We pose a similar question in the environment of a downstream procurement auction and we investigate how the two agents interact by exchanging information.We model supply chain information asymmetry in an innovative way through the underlying distribution of the cost of the competition. The probability distribution of cost plays a crucial role in the determination of the bid price and, consequently, the transfer price. The manufacturer, who is active in international markets, usually has a more comprehensive and global view of the competition. In contrast, the distributor possesses more accurate information about the local market competition. Therefore, each supply chain partner estimates differently the probability distribution of the cost of competing bidding supply chains.Collaborative partnership in the supply chain requires trust and commitment for long term cooperation (Kiefer & Carter, 2009). In general, however, within a manufacturer–distributor supply chain and under conditions of unequal power, the party which possesses the greater relative power tends to behave exploitatively towards the less powerful agent (Ghauri & Usunier, 2003). Our analysis contributes in the understanding of this behavior. In our setting, although both supply chain partners share the same goal, namely to win in the auction, there is an adversarial relationship on how the profit made will be divided among them. Consequently, the agents may decide to avoid an open and truthful exchange of information between them. Intuitively, the motive of each partner is to gain a strategic advantage, which will allow a higher mark-up for the particular agent while maintaining a competitive bid. The source of this conflict of interests may be traced to the dual role of the distributor, who simultaneously acts as a purchasing agent for the manufacturer and as a selling agent for the downstream customer (Jobber, 2010).In our framework of information asymmetry, we examine the role of communication in the determination of the mark-up of each agent and the division of the total potential profit. We explore the interaction among agents in an auction with intermediaries, with heterogeneous beliefs and limited communication across the supply chain. To the best of our knowledge, this supply chain structure has not been previously examined in the existing literature of auction theory. Initially, we consider the case of limited exchange of information within the two partners, who do not disclose their knowledge and beliefs about the competition. When the upstream agent believes that the competition is less intense compared to how the downstream player expects his opponents to behave, we establish analytically that the manufacturer is motivated to mislead the distributor about the level of competition, as described by the cost probability distribution. The distributor acts in a similar way, when the manufacturer engages in one-way upstream communication. Unilateral upstream or downstream exchange of information, where one agent reveals to the other one the underlying cost probability distribution, provides an information advantage to the informed party, which we formally derive and express in the form of a higher mark-up. In information sharing, which occurs under an open, complete and truthful upstream and downstream exchange of information, both partners share the same view on the underlying probability distribution of the cost of the competition and profit is equally divided.Our results are useful to supply chain management, explaining the fragility of partnership with respect to the division of profits, generated by information asymmetry in an auction setting. Our work raises the need to design contractual agreements within the supply chain, which induce truthful information sharing and equal allocation of profits.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A review of the existing literature is examined in Section ‘Literature review’. The model description is formally presented and the assumptions made are explicitly stated in Section ‘The model’. In Section ‘Equilibrium mark-up and bidding strategies’, under information asymmetry within the supply chain, we derive the equilibrium mark-up for the manufacturer and the equilibrium bid for the distributor, who participates in the downstream auction. Further, in Section ‘Upstream one-way communication in the supply chain’, we examine the supply chain with upstream communication and we analytically establish the manufacturer’s advantage over the distributor in the division of profits. In Section ‘Downstream one-way communication in the supply chain’, we look at the symmetric case of downstream one-way communication, and we find that the distributor enjoys an advantage in terms of the mark-up. In Section ‘Information sharing across the supply chain’, we show that, with information-sharing, the profit is equally shared among both supply chain partners. Moreover, when the underlying cost distribution is the uniform in [0,1] distribution, and there is information sharing, we derive explicitly the equilibrium mark-up and we investigate the effect of double marginalization on the bid price. In Section ‘Expected mark-up and profit of the manufacturer’, we present an expression of the expected ex ante mark-up and profit of the manufacturer, under the beliefs of the manufacturer. Section ‘Numerical illustration of the model’ illustrates the model and discusses the findings by a numerical example. A discussion with conclusions can be found in Section ‘Discussion – Conclusion’. All proofs are deferred to Appendix A.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
