@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling and solution of the joint quay crane and truck scheduling problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Both the unidirectional and bidirectional flow problems are researched in this paper.Several valid inequalities and a property of the optimal solutions of the problem are proposed.Two lower bounds are introduced.A new velocity updating strategy is incorporated into PSO algorithm to improve solution quality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Container terminal,Quay cranes,Internal trucks,Joint scheduling problem,Particle swarm optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the joint quay crane and truck scheduling problem at a container terminal, considering the coordination of the two types of equipment to reduce their idle time between performing two successive tasks. For the unidirectional flow problem with only inbound containers, in which trucks go back to quayside without carrying outbound containers, a mixed-integer linear programming model is formulated to minimize the makespan. Several valid inequalities and a property of the optimal solutions for the problem are derived, and two lower bounds are obtained. An improved Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm is then developed to solve this problem, in which a new velocity updating strategy is incorporated to improve the solution quality. For small sized problems, we have compared the solutions of the proposed PSO with the optimal solutions obtained by solving the model using the CPLEX software. The solutions of the proposed PSO for large sized problems are compared to the two lower bounds because CPLEX could not solve the problem optimally in reasonable time. For the more general situation considering both inbound and outbound containers, trucks may go back to quayside with outbound containers. The model is extended to handle this problem with bidirectional flow. Experiment shows that the improved PSO proposed in this paper is efficient to solve the joint quay crane and truck scheduling problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Container terminals are crucial interfaces between land and sea transportation modes. Container ships carry inbound containers to a terminal and carry outbound containers away. At container terminals, containers are transferred from one mode to another (Vis & De Koster, 2003). Inbound containers are unloaded from container ships by quay cranes and then transported by internal trucks to storage yard where they are stacked by yard cranes to their allocated positions waiting for the consignees to pick up. Outbound containers are handled in the opposite direction. Shippers send the containers into the terminal and yard cranes store them in their allocated positions. Later they are retrieved by yard cranes and transported by trucks to quayside where they are loaded onto ships by quay cranes. Fig. 1illustrates the handling processes for inbound and outbound containers.As described above, the whole terminal operation is very complex and involves different types of equipments. The operations of the equipments need to be planned appropriately in order to ensure an efficient operation, especially for busy terminals with increasing throughputs.Operations planning and scheduling at container terminals include berth allocation to incoming ships, quay crane scheduling, ground transport equipment scheduling, yard crane scheduling, storage space allocation, and so on. From the above brief description of terminal operations, we can see that quay cranes are the equipment directly unloading containers from and loading containers to ships. Trucks provide ground transportation of containers between the quay cranes and the storage yard. Effective quay crane scheduling and truck scheduling are both important in terminal management. The operations of quay cranes and trucks are closely linked and need good coordination to avoid efficiency loss due to waiting for each other. Therefore in this paper we study the problem of jointly scheduling quay cranes and trucks.The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we first briefly review related research in the existing literature. Then a detailed problem description is given in Section 3. A mixed-integer linear programming model is formulated in Section 4 for the problem with unidirectional flow. Section 5 provides one optimal property, four valid inequalities and two lower bounds for the unidirectional flow problem. A Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm is proposed in Section 6 to solve the unidirectional flow problem. Section 7 considers the more general situation with ships involving both unloading and loading of containers. The model and the PSO algorithm are extended to solve this general problem with bidirectional flow. The lower bounds are also modified to suit the general situation. Experiment results are reported in Section 8 showing that the proposed PSO algorithm is effective and efficient in solving the joint quay crane and truck scheduling problem with unidirectional or bidirectional flow. Section 9 provides conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a mixed integer programming model was first formulated for the joint quay crane and truck scheduling problem with only inbound containers. A PSO algorithm with a modified update strategy was proposed for this unidirectional flow problem. The results of the proposed PSO algorithm were compared with the optimal solutions and two lower bounds. The model was then extended to the general situation with both inbound and outbound containers. For this bidirectional flow problem, a new velocity strategy and a disturbance method were added into the PSO algorithm, and the solutions were compared with the optimal solutions and a lower bound through computational experiments. The results demonstrated that the proposed PSO algorithm was very effective and efficient for the joint quay crane and truck scheduling problem with unidirectional or bidirectional flow.