@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
“Do the electronic books reinforce the dynamics of book supply chain market?”–A theoretical analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To study a book supply chain through mathematical modeling.Different copyright and launch modes are considered.To investigate pricing and launch strategies of electronic and physical books.Two copyright models are considered when studying strategies.Sensitivity analysis is conducted to assess influence of publisher's choice.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Dual channel,Electronic book,Channel management,Pricing decision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we develop a set of mathematical models to examine and compare different pricing and launch strategies of electronic books (e-books) under two types of copyright arrangements, namely the royalty and buyout arrangements. We conduct a sensitivity analysis to assess how various market structure parameters influence the publisher's pricing options in different copyright, launch modes, and channels of distribution. Aimed at gaining managerial insights into the complex issues in pricing and launch strategies involving e-books, we recommend optimal launch strategies and pricing decisions for the e-book supply chain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
“The printed word is in the midst of a revolution. Digital books are gaining ground on their dog-eared, bookmarked counterparts and experts predict e-books could seriously challenge traditional tomes in just two years. By 2012, three in every 10 books could be delivered digitally, according to booksellers, and publishers are fuelling the transition by adding more back-catalogue books and story types to the mix. After a slow start, the e-book revolution is now well under way” (Herald Sun on 05 January 2011).11Refer to http://www.heraldsun.com.au/archives/old-news-pages/e-books-begin-a-new-chapter/story-fn5bodiu-1225982366532.The fast penetration of electronic commerce in the publication industry has profoundly transformed the structure of the book market, and stimulated a tremendous growth in the industry. While the printed book (p-book) sales have steadied or even plummeted, particularly in some countries, such as Japan and China (Economist, 2007; Du8.com, 2010), the electronic book (e-book) sales in recent years are soaring. As the International Digital Publishing Forum reported, e-book sales were up from US$6 million in 2002 to US$20 million in 2006 and reached a staggering US$31.7 million in 2007 registering a 23.6 percent growth over 2006 (Vasileiou, Hartley, & Rowley, 2009). The worldwide e-book sales grew more than two folds between February 2010 and February 2011 (Sporkin, 2011), and it is projected to account for about half of the total book sales by the year 2020 and around 90 percent of total book sales by the year 2030 (Ojala, 1998).The prosperous yet diversified book markets provide great business opportunities while also bring up challenges to the stakeholders involved in the book supply chain. The major issues for the book supply chain to resolve in recent years include: the format of the book, the selection of delivery channel, launch timing for different channels, the access platform, and the pricing policy. Among these, timing of launch and pricing of e-books are two most important challenges to the book marketers. As Ojala (1998) points out “The greatest enigma in the online world remains pricing and it's amazing that, after a quarter-century of information being sold online, no one has a definitive pricing model.” Many publishers are trying out different pricing strategies to stay alive in the market and to compensate for their falling hard cover and paperback printed book sales revenue (Ming, 2000). Take Amazon, the most popular book seller in the world, as an example. One case is on simultaneous launch mode that Amazon simultaneously sells the hardcover and kindle edition of “Finger Lickin’ Fifteen”, the kindle edition of the book costs $22.36 and is $6.99 more than that for the hardcover version.22http://www.amazon.com/Finger-Lickin-Fifteen-Stephanie-Novels-ebook/dp/B002FB68CG.However, on book “The King of Kahel” (by Tierno Monénemb), whose paperback and electronic edition released simultaneously, Amazon priced the paperback edition at $15.95, which is more than the e-book at $9.99.33http://caribbeanbookblog.wordpress.com/2010/05/27/amazon-and-barnes-noble-give-writers-more-publishing-options/http://info.printing.hc360.com/2010/10/111029268092.shtml.The other case is on lag launch mode, for example a thriller novel by Conrath in 2008, Amazon priced the paperback edition of the book at $14.9 while lag launched e-version of the book at $2.99.44http://jakonrath.blogspot.com/2011/12/guest-post-by-elle-lothlorien.html.Such a context raise a question being addressed in this research: how does the publisher optimize the timing of launch in terms of e-book and p-book, and in different launch modes, what is the pricing strategy the publisher should apply in this context?The electronic channel structure is undergoing a serious change as it attracts more and more retailers venturing into the electronic channel and adopting different sales and pricing models. Many factors, external and internal, such as markets, organizational structures, pricing and launch schedule, have significant impacts on the performance of the digital distribution of books. Often, these factors individually or in combination lead to conflicts of interests among the digital supply chain members. Therefore, it is critical to analyze how the retailers and publishers make the pricing and supply decisions in a dynamic e-book market. While the extant literature reports on analyses of pricing and distribution strategies of book distribution channels in isolation, to the best of our knowledge, no report is available that considers the pricing and launch strategies of different book distribution models in combination.This paper is intended to present the analyses of the pricing and launch strategies of e-books adopted by the major stakeholders in the book supply chain, by mathematical modeling. We formalize the model with three important dimensions: centralized versus decentralized decision making in pricing a book, simultaneous versus lag launch of e-book and p-book, and royalty versus buyout copyright model. The combinations of these three pairs of factors can result in eight book selling patterns with differentiated pricing strategies. These theoretical models help analyze publishers’ and retailers’ launch and pricing strategies, and assess the sensitivity how the market structure parameters influence the publishers’ choice in different copyright and launch modes. These studies are aimed at gaining managerial insights into the complex issues involving pricing and launch strategies.This is how rest of the paper is organized: in Section 2 we provide a brief background of existing book selling models with the relevant literature. The research problem is described in Section 3 followed by our theoretical models in Section 4. Our numerical study, and analyses of results are presented in Sections 5 and 6 respectively. We conclude with mention of few limitations and probable further extensions of this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we studied the launch strategy and the optimal pricing of the e-book in different copyright arrangements – the royalty, and the buyout models. In both the simultaneous and lag launch modes, we found that the wholesale price of the p-book in the royalty model is higher than that in the buyout model, and the launch price in the royalty model is higher than that in the buyout model. Furthermore, in the simultaneous launch mode, the launch price of the e-book is slightly less than the retail price of the p-book whereas it is substantially less in the lag launch mode. Based on the theoretical and numerical analyses, we recommend that the simultaneous launch mode is the optimal choice for the publisher in either of the copyright contexts.There are few limitations in this paper. We assumed the royalty and the buyout payments for the copyright to be exogenous. In reality, these expenses are decided by the negotiation between the publisher and the author. Further studies can be conducted to investigate how the negotiated payments affect the publisher's choice of launch and pricing strategies. Moreover, this paper only investigates the pricing decision of the e-book between the publisher and the seller, while the marketing of the e-book in the electronic channel is usually handled by the third-party in practice. In this case, the revenue or profit sharing agreement becomes different and analyzing the entire supply chain's profit may suggest some interesting strategies that the supply chain members may choose to adopt. This may be another interesting issue for further research in this direction. In addition, we only consider the wholesale model between the book publisher and seller, while the agency model is also popular in practice, which could present interesting opportunities for future research. Another perspective is that the publisher informs the readers about its e-book launching plan, in this case, how do strategic readers make their purchasing decisions, to buy p-book in advance or wait to buy e-book later? In general, we believe that strategic consumer behavior is a fruitful research topic.