@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Asymmetric flow networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A model of network formation bridging the gap between Bala and Goyal’s two-way and one-way flow models is introduced.Flow through a link is perfect towards a player supporting it, while there is some friction in the opposite direction.In this setting Bala and Goyal’s models and results appear as extreme particular cases.Nash and strict Nash stable networks for this new model are characterized.Convergence to a strict Nash network for a dynamic model is also proved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Networks,Non-cooperative network formation,Asymmetric flow,Stability,Dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper provides a new model of network formation that bridges the gap between the two benchmark game-theoretic models by Bala and Goyal (2000a) – the one-way flow model, and the two-way flow model – and includes both as limiting cases. As in both the said models, a link can be initiated unilaterally by any player with any other in what we call an “asymmetric flow” network, and the flow through a link towards the player who supports it is perfect. Unlike those models, there is friction or decay in the opposite direction. When this decay is complete there is no flow and this corresponds to the one-way flow model. The limit case when the decay in the opposite direction (and asymmetry) disappears corresponds to the two-way flow model. We characterize stable and strictly stable architectures for the whole range of parameters of this “intermediate” and more general model. A study of the efficiency of these architectures shows that in general stability and efficiency do not go together. We also prove the convergence of Bala and Goyal’s dynamic model in this context.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The “area statement” corresponding to “Games, Information, and Networks” in the prestigious journal Operations Research states the following: “A fundamental understanding of network behavior, including the nature of interconnections, issues of stability, and decision making place operations research methodology at the core of this emerging research program.” This work seeks to contribute to the theoretical foundations of this research program at a methodological level.2Increasing attention to networks in different contexts is perceptible in operational research literature. Usually, applied to different problems (e.g. flow optimization for evacuation planning (Lim, Zangeneh, Baharnemati, & Assavapokee, 2012), terrorism (Lindelauf, Hamers, & Husslage, 2013), network security (Skorin-Kapova, Furdeka, Aparicio Pardo, & Pavón Mariño, 2012)); but also addressing theoretical issues (e.g. models of opinion dynamics (Acemoğlu, Como, Fagnani, & Ozdaglar, 2013), network formation and stability (Dieker & Shin, 2013; Harmsen-van Hout, Herings, & Dellaert, 2013; Janssen & Monsuur, 2012; Monsuur, 2007).2More specifically, we address the issue of stability and dynamics in models of network formation. The possibility of generating complex structures from simple assumptions is interesting in various contexts.3A remarkable example is Conway’s Game of Life (Gardner, 1970).3In the context of networks, where complexity is often an unavoidable ingredient, it is also interesting to provide models that generate simple or relatively simple structures from simple assumptions. In this line of research, the seminal paper by Bala and Goyal (2000a) introduced two benchmark game-theoretic models of network formation: the “one-way flow” model, and the “two-way flow” model. In both models each player can unilaterally create (i.e. initiate and support) links at a given cost with any other player, and the objective is to receive the maximal flow at the minimum cost.4In Jackson and Wolinsky’s (1996) model the formation of a link between two players requires the agreement of both. See Hellmann and Staudigl (2014) for a review on social network formation which includes a brief discussion of these basic game-theoretic models.4These two models differ in the way that the information and other benefits flow through the resulting network. In the one-way flow model the flow through a link runs only towards the player that supports it, while in the two-way flow model the flow through a link runs in both directions irrespective of who supports it. It is not surprising that such different models yield very different conclusions. In the absence of friction or decay, stable (in the sense of Nash equilibrium) networks are merely those minimally connected in either model, which means completely different architectures in each case.5Connectedness in the one-way flow model requires the existence of an oriented path from any player to any other player, while in the two-way flow model it only requires the existence of a path, and the orientation of the links is indifferent. “Minimal” in both cases means that every link is necessary to keep the network connected. Thus, minimal connectedness yields different architectures in each model.5The situation is also completely different in regard to stability in the strict Nash sense (i.e. where any unilateral deviation of any player means a loss): in the one-way flow model the “wheel” is the only strictly stable architecture, while in the two-way flow model the only strictly stable architecture is the “center-sponsored star”. Despite the elegance of these results, the extreme simplicity of the emerging structures6In the presence of decay, things become much more complicated, but remain very different from one model to the other.6– stars and wheels – is somewhat disappointing. Richer structures might have been expected to emerge even from simple assumptions.Both models have been extended in several directions, but those extensions take one model or the other as their starting point and ignore the other.7The two-way flow model has received more attention, see e.g. Bala and Goyal (2000b), Goyal and Vega-Redondo (2005), Galeotti, Goyal, and Kamphorst (2006), McBride (2006), Feri (2007), Hojman and Szeidl (2008), and Bloch and Dutta (2009). For extensions of the one-way flow model see Galeotti (2006), Billand, Bravard, and Sarangi (2008), Derks, Kuipers, Tennekes, and Thuijsman (2009), and Derks and Tennekes (2009). We also address separately the extension of either model in the presence of constraints (Olaizola & Valenciano, 2013a, 2013b). Excellent books surveying this literature are Goyal (2007), Jackson (2008) and Vega-Redondo (2007). See also Jackson’s (2010) survey.7To the best of our knowledge, no joint generalization has been provided so far, that is, no model has been proposed that integrates both models as particular cases. Notwithstanding, these two models look like extreme cases in an unspecified sense of an unspecified model, so different that they are hard to compare given the lack of intermediate models. One may, for instance, wonder about how the “transition” from wheels to stars occurs, but no transition is possible without intermediate situations or models. This paper provides such an “intermediate” model: a model of network formation that in fact includes Bala and Goyal’s models as particular extreme cases.As in those two models, a link can be initiated unilaterally by any player with any other in what we call an “asymmetric flow” network. As in the one-way flow model (without decay), the flow towards the player who initiates a link is perfect, without friction or decay, but in the opposite direction it is not. More precisely, if player i supports a link with j but player j does not support a link with i, all the information at node j reaches i without friction through this link, but only a fractionαof the information at node i reaches j through this link. Note that whenα=0this is the one-way flow model, while whenα=1the asymmetry of flow disappears and this is the two-way flow model. A second parameter of the model is the cost c (which we assume to be homogeneous across players) of initiating a link. Thus, Bala and Goyal’s models are actually the limiting cases of this asymmetric flow model.This new model has inherent interest per se, apart from the nice fact of including both benchmark models as extreme cases. It is worth noting that asymmetry actually occurs in different contexts. In many situations the flow of information between two agents is not equally fluent in both directions. Also, information which is supposed to flow only unidirectionally may suffer some sort of leakage in the opposite direction. Asymmetry also appears in telecommunications, where within the bandwidth of a system data speed and quantity differs from one direction to the other direction. In all these cases there is two-way asymmetric flow (or “asymmetric flow” for short).Unilateral formation and asymmetric flow combine in some situations. For instance, the information flow within a network of informers, e.g., about catastrophes such as fires and earthquakes. In the academic world, quotations between authors and recommendations, where it is prestige that flows to some extent in both directions, are basically unilateral decisions with asymmetric consequences. Websites’ links to other websites provide another example. This model can also be seen as complementary to the two-way asymmetric model of public relationships by Grunig (2001), where the point is to emit information and feedback is allowed but secondary. Finally, abundant asymmetric relationships are also conspicuous in the animal kingdom. A good example is provided by symbiotic relationships between individuals of different species from which two individuals benefit and which are often initiated unilaterally.Thus, examples where asymmetry is present in bilateral relationships or transmissions and/or connections are created unilaterally abound. How each specific case should be treated is a different issue. In particular, the adequacy of a network formation model depends on the situation considered. In this respect, we have chosen basically the economically motivated model of network formation used by Bala and Goyal (2000a). On the plus side there is in the first place the simplicity of this decentralized formation model, which allows for a noncooperative game-theoretic analysis. This along with the asymmetric flow assumption provides a model which bridges the gap between Bala and Goyal’s models and raises questions about stable, strictly stable and efficient architectures, the answers to which go beyond the dichotomy of “wheels versus stars”. Here again wheels and center-sponsored stars are encountered (for certain configurations of values of the two parametersαand c), but so are new, richer structures such as root-oriented trees, with the oriented line as an extreme case among them, and other more complex architectures. We study the ranges for the parameters where such architectures are strictly stable, which of them overlap and where (in particular this may be the case for wheels and stars for certain ranges of these parameters). In fact all these structures, including the oriented wheel and the center-sponsored star, turn out to be particular cases of a general architecture precisely described and characterized as the only one for which strict stability may hold. A similar study about non-strict stability yields a characterization of the architecture of Nash networks. We also study the efficiency of these architectures. By contrast with Bala and Goyal’s models, where efficiency and stability do not conflict, in the asymmetric flow model Nash and strict Nash networks may not be efficient and efficient networks may not be stable.Finally, we address the extension of Bala and Goyal’s dynamic model and results. This extension is achieved at the cost of a lengthy algorithmic constructive proof of the existence of a sequence of best responses which yields a strict Nash network starting from an arbitrary network.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 an introductory example illustrates and anticipates in a simple context the general results presented later. Section 3 outlines the basic model and gives the necessary notation and terminology. Section 4 studies stability (Section 4.2) and strict stability (Section 4.1). Efficiency is briefly dealt with in Section 5. Section 6 applies Bala and Goyal’s dynamic model to this setting. Finally, Section 7 summarizes the main conclusions and lines of further research.A brief discussion of the conclusions of stability for the simplest case, a three-player society, provides an easy advance illustration of the general model and results presented and proved in subsequent sections. Consider a three-player society and assume that (i) each node has an information of value 1 for the other players; (ii) information flows through a link without loss in the direction of the player that supports it, but only a fractionα(0⩽α⩽1) flows in the opposite direction; and (iii) the cost of initiating a link is c (0<c<1). Given the small number of essentially different structures for a three-player network, it can easily be checked that the only architectures that can be strict Nash are the oriented wheel, the center-sponsored star and the oriented line (each of them for a certain range of the parametersαand c). These three structures are shown in Fig. 1along with the payoff of each player, the condition for strict stability of each structure and the aggregate payoff.8Nodes are represented by dots (without labels unless convenient), and links by arrows between them with the convention that the node at the tip of the arrow supports it.8In the case of the oriented wheel, there is an oriented path between any two nodes, therefore each node receives the information from the other two without loss, and pays a single link. Hence all nodes receive the same payoff2-c. Since each node receives the information from the other two without loss, adding a new link cannot be part of a best response, and then the only possible deviating best response of a player would consist of deleting her/his single link, which would mean a payoff ofα+α2. Therefore, the oriented wheel is strictly stable if and only if2-c>α+α2. In a center-sponsored star, the node at the center of the star supports links with the other two nodes, thus receiving the information from both of them without loss at the cost of two links, which means a payoff of2-2c. Each of the other players, the spokes of the star, pays no link while receiving the information from the node at the center at discountαand that from the other spoke also at discountαthrough the node at the center, thus receiving a payoff of2α. The center plays her/his only best response given thatc<1, and therefore deleting a link would mean a loss. Then, the only possible deviating best response of a player would consist of a spoke node adding the most rewarding link, that is, a link with the center, which would mean a payoff of2-c. Therefore, the center-sponsored star is strictly stable if and only if2α>2-c. Finally, in an oriented line, the player at the root receives the information from the other two without loss at the cost of a single link, meaning a payoff of2-c. The player at the end of the line pays no link and receives the information from the node at the middle of the line at discountαand that from the node at the root at discountα2, which means a payoff ofα+α2. The node at the middle pays a single link, thus receiving the information of one node without loss and that of the other node at discountα, meaning a payoff of1+α-c. Sincec<1, disconnecting the network cannot be part of a best response, therefore the only possible deviating best response of a player would consist of initiating new links. The most rewarding among such responses would be that of the player supporting no links initiating a new link with the player at the root of the line, which receives all the information without friction. This would mean a payoff of2-c. Therefore, the oriented line is strictly stable if and only ifα+α2>2-c. Note that this condition is the reverse of the condition of strict stability for the oriented wheel. It is easy to check that no other structure with three players can be strictly stable.Fig. 2shows the regions where each of these three architectures is a strict Nash network. Whenc<2-2αonly the wheel is strictly stable, but beyond this straight line, i.e. whenc>2-2α, the center-sponsored star is also strictly stable. This situation persists as long asc<2-α-α2, but whenc=2-α-α2a player in a wheel is indifferent between keeping or deleting her/his link, that is to say both the wheel and line structures are stable but not strictly stable. Beyond this point, whenc>2-α-α2the line is strict Nash but the wheel is not. In short, parabolac=2-α-α2divides the region of possible values of the parameters into two disjoint regions: below it the wheel is strict Nash but the line is not, and above it the line is strict Nash but the wheel is not. The third structure, the center-sponsored star, is strictly stable above the straight linec=2-2α, thus sharing strict stability first with the wheel and then with the line. Finally, as mentioned previously, it is easy to check that no other architecture is strict Nash for any value of the parameters. Note also that the points with the form(0,c)in the rectangle represented correspond to the one-way flow model, where the only strict Nash architecture is the wheel, and those with the form(1,c)correspond to the two-way flow model, where the only strict Nash architecture is the center-sponsored star.As for non-strict Nash stability, the only architecture apart from the three considered above that can be stable consists of four links, where one player links with the other two and s/he is linked by both. This structure is stable forc⩽1-α.Now consider efficiency in the sense of aggregate payoff. The following conclusions may be reached for the three possible architectures of a strict Nash network. The aggregate payoff of the wheel isW=6-3c, that of the center-sponsored star isS=2+4α-2c, and that of the line isL=3+2α+α2-2c. Which of these architectures is most efficient depends on the parameters. As represented in Fig. 3, the rectangle containing all possible pairs(α,c)is divided into three regions by the parabolac=3-2α-α2and the straight linec=4-4α:–below the parabola:W>L>S,between the parabola and the straight line:L>W>S,above the straight line, as long asα<1:L>S>W.Moreover, it can easily be checked that in the first region it is the wheel that is more efficient than any other network architecture, while in the other two regions it is the oriented line. But observe that in view of the analysis of strict stability, in the region between parabolasc=2-α-α2(upper dotted line in Fig. 3) andc=3-2α-α2, although the wheel is efficient it is not strictly stable. Note also that forα=1both the line and the star are efficient but only the latter is strictly stable.As the reader may guess, matters become more complex when the number of players increases. Nevertheless, we show that things remain tractable and results extend in a smooth and clear way. In particular, oriented wheels and root-oriented trees are stable for certain ranges of values of the parameters,9Observe that for the three-player case the center-sponsored star and the oriented line are the only root-oriented trees, while in general they are only the two extreme cases: the shortest and the longest oriented trees.9but other more complex structures appear as Nash and as strict Nash networks for certain values of the parameters, though they are all particular cases of a general pattern.LetN={1,2,…,n}denote the set of nodes or players. Each player may initiate and support links with other players. Letgij∈{0,1}denote the existence (gij=1) or not (gij=0) of a link connecting i and j initiated by i. When such a link exists it is referred to as “linkij←”.10Given the importance of the direction of a link in this work, we have preferred the notationij←over the simpler ij because of its mnemonic value.10It is assumed that a linkij←allows the transmission of information or other benefits without friction from j to i, but with decayα(0<α<1) from i to j. Vectorgi=(gij)j∈N⧹{i}∈{0,1}N⧹{i}specifies the links supported by i and is referred to as a strategy of player i.Gi≔{0,1}N⧹{i}denotes the set of i’s strategies andGN=G1×G2×⋯×Gnthe set of strategy profiles. A strategy profileg∈GNdetermines a directed N-network(N,Γg), whereΓg≔{(i,j)∈N×N:gij=1},which is identified as g and referred to as network g. IfM⊆Ntheng|Mdenotes the M-network(M,Γg|M)withΓg|M≔{(i,j)∈M×M:gij=1},which is referred to as the M-subnetwork of g. As N is usually clear from the context, we generally write just “network” instead of “N-network”.Given a networkg,g¯ij≔max{gij,gji}defines the non-directed networkg¯whose links represent the existence of flow, perfect or otherwise but direct, between nodes in g. A path of length k from j to i in g is a sequence ofk+1distinct playersj0,j1,…,jk, s.t.j=j0,i=jk, and for alll=1,…,k,g¯jl-1jl=1. A reversed link on such a path is a pairjl-1jlon the path s.t.gjljl-1=0. If the path does not contain any reversed links it is called i-oriented and written asi←gj, and we say then that i is a predecessor of j in g. The distance between two nodes is the length of the shortest path connecting them. The discounted length of a path from j to i in g is defined as the number of reversed links on the path.It is assumed that each node contains a particular type of information valuable to other players, and as a linkij←transmits information from j to i without friction but with decayαfrom i to j, the best communication channel from node j to i is not the shortest path but the path with the smallest discounted length. This motivates the following definition.Definition 1The “discounted distance” from node j to node i(i≠j)in a network g, denoted byδ(i,j;g), is the discounted length of the path from j to i for which the discounted length is minimal. If no path between i and j exists we writeδ(i,j;g)=∞, and we setδ(i,i;g)=0.Thus, if there is an i-oriented path from j to i thenδ(i,j;g)=0. Note that the discounted distance is not symmetric, i.e. it may well be the case thatδ(i,j;g)≠δ(j,i;g).11Note thatδ(·,·;g), though not a metric, satisfies the triangle inequality, i.e.δ(i,k;g)⩽δ(i,j;g)+δ(j,k;g).11In Fig. 4an example illustrates the notion of discounted distance.A weak (strong) component of a network g is a subnetworkg|C, whereC⊆N, such that for any two playersi,j∈C,δ(i,j;g)<∞(δ(i,j;g)=0), and no set strictly containing C meets this condition. We say that g is weakly (strongly) connected if g is the unique weak (strong) component of g. A weak (strong) component of a networkg|Cis minimal if for alli,j∈Cs.t.gij=1, the number of weak (strong) components of g is smaller than the number of weak (strong) components ofg-ij, whereg-ijis the network that results from replacinggij=1bygij=0in g. A network is minimally weakly (strongly) connected if it is weakly (strongly) connected and minimal. Note that weak (strong) connectedness means the existence of a path (oriented path) between any two players.The set of players with whom i supports a link is denoted byNd(i;g), and its cardinality is the indegree of i, denoted byμid(g), while i’s outdegree is the number of nodes which support a link with i. The set of players at a finite discounted distance from i is denoted byN(i;g)≔{j∈N:δ(i,j;g)<∞}.Thus each node i receives some information from all nodes at a finite discounted distance from it. Letvij>0be the payoff that player i derives from j whenδ(i,j;g)=0, andcij>0the cost for player i of initiating a link with j. Asviiandciiplay no role in the strategic analysis, it is assumed thatvii=cii=0. Thus, the payoff of player i in g isΠi(g)=∑j∈N(i;g)vijαδ(i,j;g)-∑j∈Nd(i;g)cij.In what follows costs and benefits are assumed to be homogeneous across players (i.e.vij=vandcij=c, for alli≠j). It is also assumed thatv>c, so that connecting with new nodes (i.e. those at discounted distance∞) is always profitable. Without loss of generality it is assumed thatv=1. In short, the following is assumed:(1)Πi(g)=∑j∈N(i;g)αδ(i,j;g)-cμid(g)(c<1).The first term on the right-hand side of (1) represents the information that reaches player i through network g and the second its cost. Denoting them byIi(g)≔∑j∈N(i;g)αδ(i,j;g),Ci(g)≔cμid(g),(1) can be rewritten asΠi(g)=Ii(g)-Ci(g)(c<1),that is:Payoff=Information-Cost.One network is said to be more efficient than another when the aggregate payoff is greater. A network is efficient if it maximizes the aggregate payoff.In this section, we study the stability in the network formation game specified in the preceding section. Following Bala and Goyal (2000a), we consider two notions of stability: in the sense of Nash equilibrium and in the stronger sense of strict Nash equilibrium. We address this issue in two separate subsections: we first focus our attention on strict Nash networks (Section 4.1), and only when this issue is solved do we address the question of non-strict stability (Section 4.2).Letg-idenote the network where all links supported by i in g are deleted, andg-i,gi′is the strategy profile and network that results from replacinggibygi′in g.Definition 2A Nash network is a network g that is stable in the following sense: for alli∈N:(2)Πi(g)⩾Πig-i,gi′forallgi′∈Gi.When (2) holds,giis said to be a best response of i tog-i. The stability notion can be refined in the strict sense:Definition 3A strict Nash network is a Nash network g that is stable in the following stronger sense: for alli∈N:(3)Πi(g)>Πig-i,gi′forallgi′∈Gigi′≠gi.Thus, in a strict Nash network a unilateral change of strategy means a loss for the player who deviates.As a term of reference we first establish the range of values for the parameters within which the oriented wheel, the center-sponsored star and the oriented line are strict Nash networks. Let g be an N-network andM⊆N. Nodes in M form an oriented wheel, a wheel for short,12In the literature the adjective “oriented” is often omitted, so an oriented wheel is usually called just a wheel. But given the importance of its oriented nature we choose to use the term at least in the statement of the results, omitting it sometimes in the text for the sake of brevity. The same applies for oriented lines and trees as defined below.12in g if for a certain permutation ofM,i1,i2,…,im, we havegikik+1=1(k=1,…,m-1), andgimi1=1, and no other links exist. Nodes in M form a center-sponsored star, a star for short, if a node in M (the center) supports a link with each of the others in M and no other links exist between them. Nodes in M form an oriented line, a line for short, if for a certain permutation ofM,i1,i2,…,im, we havegikik+1=1(k=1,…,m-1), and no other links exist. Unless otherwise specified, in what follows we assumeN=Mwhen we refer to these structures.Proposition 1In a society with n players where payoffs are given by(1):(i)An oriented wheel is strict Nash if and only ifc<n-1-α-α2-⋯-αn-1.A center-sponsored star is strict Nash if and only ifc>n-1-(n-1)α.An oriented line is strict Nash if and only ifc>n-1-α-α2-⋯-αn-1.(i)In an oriented wheel all players receive all the information in the network without friction by paying a single link each, i.e. a payoff ofn-1-c. Thus the only possible best response of a player is to delete her/his single link, which would mean a payoff ofα+α2+⋯+αn-1for the player doing so. Therefore, the oriented wheel is strictly stable ifn-1-c>α+α2+⋯+αn-1, which yields the necessary and sufficient condition.In a center-sponsored star the center plays its only best response given thatc<1and consequently deleting a link would mean a loss. The payoff of each spoke agent is(n-1)α, while initiating the most rewarding link, i.e. with the center, would meann-1-c. Thus, the center-sponsored star is a strict Nash network if(n-1)α>n-1-c, which yields the necessary and sufficient condition.In an oriented line, given thatc<1, deleting a link would mean a loss. The least demanding best response would be that of the player supporting no links and would consist of initiating a link with the player that receives all, i.e.n-1, without friction. The condition for this not to be a best response is the exact reverse of the one obtained for the oriented wheel. Observe that the oriented wheel and the oriented line only differ in one link.□Fig. 5shows the regions where each of these three architectures is strictly stable. The wheel is strict Nash below the polynomial functionc=n-1-α-α2-…-αn-1, i.e. in regions I and II. The center-sponsored star is strict Nash above the straight linec=(n-1)-(n-1)α, i.e. in regions II and III. Therefore both structures are strict Nash in region II. The line becomes strictly stable just where the wheel ceases to be so, i.e. in region III. As the number of players grows, the range of values of the parameters for which the wheel is strictly stable widens while those for the line and the star shrink.Note that Fig. 2 represents the particular case forn=3of Fig. 5. Forn=3there are no more strictly stable architectures, but this is not so forn>3. In particular, many more root-oriented trees other than the center-sponsored star and the oriented line appear, each of them strictly stable for a certain range of the parameters, as shown below. A root-oriented tree is a network where there is a single nodei0, called the root, such that for any other node j there is a unique path from j toi0, and that path isi0-oriented. Observe that in a root-oriented tree all the information in the tree reaches the root without friction (at the cost of as many links as the root supports), while all other nodes receive some of the information in the network with some loss. Note also that on going further down the tree away from the root by any path the amount of information that reaches a node diminishes. In particular, a terminal node pays no links but receives less information than its predecessors closer to the root. The following notation proves useful. Let g be ani0-oriented tree, i a node and assume that the length of the path connectingi0and i is r. Notice that then the maximal discounted distance from any node in the tree to i is r. Then there is a partition ofN⧹{i}into r disjoint setsNi0,Ni1,Ni2,…,Nir, whereNis≔{j∈N⧹{i}:δ(i,j;g)=s}.Thus, denoting the cardinality ofNisbynis, the payoff of a node i in a root-oriented tree is given by(4)Πi(g)=ni0+ni1α+ni2α2+⋯+nirαr-cμid(g).Note that for a terminal node in the tree, asni0=0andμid(g)=0, the following is obtained(5)Πi(g)=Ii(g)=ni1α+ni2α2+⋯+nirαr.Then the following result emerges concerning the stability of trees.Proposition 2A root-oriented tree g is a strict Nash network if and only ifIi(g)>n-1-cfor all terminal nodes.Let g be a root-oriented tree. Asc<1no deletion which disconnects the network can be part of a best response. Asα<1, the root is playing its only best response. A player other than the root is playing her/his only best response if her/his current payoff is greater than what s/he would receive by initiating a link with the root. That is, using (4), for all nodes other than the root inequalityni0+ni1α+ni2α2+⋯+nirαr-cμid(g)>n-1-c-cμid(g)must hold or, equivalently,ni0+ni1α+ni2α2+⋯+nirαr>n-1-c.That is,Ii(g)>n-1-c. This condition is necessary for all players other than the root, but the payoffs of the terminal players improve most if they initiate a link with the root (they receive less information than their predecessors). In other words it is for terminal players that this condition is most demanding. Thus, g is a strict Nash network if and only if the following condition holds for every terminal node i:(6)Ii(g)=ni1α+ni2α2+⋯+nirαr>n-1-c.□Observe that because the center-sponsored star and the oriented line are root-oriented trees parts (ii) and (iii) of Proposition 1 are now corollaries of Proposition 2. Nevertheless, the range of strict stability which has been established for each of the three architectures in Proposition 1 allows a clearer idea of the ranges of the new ones yet to be established. In particular, observe that the boundary above which condition (6) holds is within region II in Fig. 5. Indeed, the bound for the cost c in terms ofαfor any root-oriented tree is of the formc>n-1-(ni1α+ni2α2+⋯+nirαr),for a terminal node, but observe that whatever the root-oriented tree is, for allα(0<α<1):(7)α+α2+⋯+αn-1<ni1α+ni2α2+⋯+nirαr<(n-1)α.Accordingly, observe that the three terms that appear in (7) are polynomials whose coefficients are positive integers that add up ton-1.13The particular structure of such polynomials makes it easy to make comparisons within the interval0<α<1, whereα>α2>α3⋯. Note that given one such polynomial, any “transfer of weight” from a coefficient of, sayαk, to that of smaller powerαl(l<k) increases its value.13The left-hand side term is the information that the terminal node receives in an oriented line, while the right-hand side is the information received by a terminal node in a center-sponsored star. Therefore the concave curve,c=n-1-(ni1α+ni2α2+⋯+nirαr), above which a root-oriented tree is strictly stable is between the straight line corresponding to the center-sponsored star and the curve corresponding to the oriented line, i.e. it is within region II in Fig. 5.In summary, oriented wheels and root-oriented trees are strict Nash networks for certain ranges of values of the parameters. As we show below, there is a still more complex architecture that can be strictly stable, in fact an architecture that incorporates all the preceding ones as particular cases, which we call “wheel of trees”. A wheel of trees is a weakly connected network which consists of a set of nodesi1,i2,…,ik(k⩾1) arranged as an oriented wheel ifk>1(i.e.gilil-1=1forl=2,…,k,gi1ik=1and no more links between them exist), plus a “tributary”il-rooted root-oriented treetilfor some of them (see Fig. 6). That is, eachilbelonging to the central wheel can be the root of a root-oriented treetil. Letwildenote the “weight” (i.e. the number of nodes) of treetil, withwil=1if no tree hangs fromil. In a network with such an architecture all nodes in the central wheel, and they alone, receive all the information from all the nodes through the tributary trees without loss. Observe also that this structure includes the oriented wheel (when no tree hangs from any node in the central wheel or, equivalently, ifk=n), and the root-oriented tree (when the central wheel collapses into a single node or, equivalently, ifk=1). In terms of this notation and terminology we have the following result.Proposition 3A wheel of trees g consisting of a wheel with nodesi1,i2,…,ikand tributary treestil(l=1,2,…,k)is strict Nash if and only if(8)n-1-Ij(til)+αδ(j,il;til)∑r≠lwir<c<n-wp(i1)+wp(i2)α+⋯+wp(ik)αk-1,for alll=1,2,…,k, all terminal nodesj∈til, and all cyclic permutations p of the finite sequencei1,i2,…,ik.In a wheel of trees there are only two possible types of best response for a player other than the one that s/he is currently playing: that of a player in the wheel deleting her/his link in the wheel, and that of a player not in the wheel initiating a link with any player in the wheel. For the first action not to be a best response the condition is similar to the one obtained for the wheel in Proposition 1, but now each of the nodes in the wheel has a “weight” other than 1 if a tree hangs from it. In order for a player, sayi1, in the wheel to lose by deleting her/his link in the wheel the following inequality must holdwi1-1+wi2α+⋯+wikαk-1<n-1-c,or equivalentlyc<n-(wi1+wi2α+⋯+wikαk-1).Thus, this condition must hold for all the nodes in the wheel (i.e. replacingi1by any otheririn the role of “deleter”). In other words, it must hold for any cyclic permutation ofi1,i2,…,ik, which yields the upper bound for c in (8).As for the players not in the wheel, since each of them is in one of the tributary trees a condition similar to the one obtained in Proposition 2 for trees emerges, but now the root, sayik, accumulates a weight ofwi1+wi2+⋯+wik-1. Again the most demanding condition is for some of the terminal nodes. Namely, the following condition is needed: for any nodeilin the wheel and any terminal node j in that treetilwhose information received from the tributary tree that it belongs to isIj(til), inequalityIj(til)+αδ(j,il;til)∑r≠lwir>n-1-cmust hold, or equivalentlyc>n-1-Ii(til)+αδ(j,il;til)∑r≠lwir,which yields the lower bound for c.□(i)Note that a wheel of trees shares the natures of both a tree and a wheel to some extent. Thus we obtain for c both a lower bound (as for root-oriented trees) and an upper bound (as for the oriented wheel).In fact, Proposition 3 contains Propositions 1 and 2. To see this note that when the central wheel collapses into a node (i.e.k=1), only the lower bound for c remains in (8) and becomes exactly that for terminal nodes in Proposition 2. When no tree hangs from any node in the central wheel (i.e.k=n) only the upper bound for c remains in (8) and, as all weights are 1, this bound becomes exactly that in (i) in Proposition 1.At first sight the bounds for c between which a wheel of trees remains strict Nash may seem somewhat obscure. However, it is easy to see by exploiting their polynomial form that both bounds lie within region II in Fig. 5 (between the straight linec=n-1-(n-1)αand the polynomial functionc=n-1-α-α2-⋯-αn-1) where the wheel and the center-sponsored stars are strictly stable. In other words, the region where a wheel of trees is strictly stable is contained within the region where both the wheel and the center-sponsored star are strictly stable.It may well be the case that for a certain wheel of trees the lower bound for c is greater than the upper bound for anyα, in which case it is never a strict Nash network. For instance, in the three-player case the wheel of trees where one player supports a link with each of the other two and only one of them supports a link with her/him is not a strict Nash network whatever the values of the parameters.A delicate balance is required for the interval defined by (8), within which a wheel of trees is strictly stable, not to be empty. Some examples may help to understand this better.Consider them(n+1)-node wheel of trees consisting of m nodes arranged as an oriented wheel, with each of them supporting links with n different nodes. Given the symmetry of the network, condition (8) yields the following conditions on the parameters for such an architecture to be a strict Nash network:(mn+m-1)(1-α)<c<mn+m-(n+1)(1+α+α2+⋯+αm-1).Which, for instance, ifm=6,n=3andα=0.97, means that this architecture is strict Nash for any cost in the interval14In fact, the upper bound given by (8) is1.729, but the model assumesc<1.140.69<c<1.Consider the(m+n)-node wheel of trees consisting of m nodes arranged as an oriented wheel, with only one of them supporting links with n nodes. In this case (8) yields the following conditions on the parameters:(mn+m-1)(1-α)<c<m-(1+α+α2+⋯+αm-1).By comparing the two curves within the interval0<α<1, it is easy to conclude that there is room between them only ifm3-3m>2n-2. Thus, for instance, ifm=6, then it must be thatn<10for the above interval to be nonempty. As a numerical example, ifm=n=6andα=0.95, this architecture is strictly stable within the interval of cost0.55<c<0.70184.Proposition 3 gives the range of parameters for which a wheel of trees is strict Nash. We now show that this is the only possible architecture of a strict Nash asymmetric flow network. The following straightforward lemma is most useful in characterizing strict Nash networks.If g is a strict Nash network then no three nodesi,j,kexist such thatgik=gjk=1.Assumegik=gjk=1withi≠j. Then all the information that reaches k also reaches j without decay through linkjk←, and player i can replace linkik←by linkij←without loss. Therefore g is not a strict Nash network.□In the asymmetric flow model a network is strict Nash if and only if it is a wheel of trees that satisfies(8).Sufficiency was established in Proposition 3, so it only remains to show necessity. Let g be a strict Nash network. Assume that g contains a sequence of playersi1,i2,…,ik, arranged as a wheel (i.e.g¯ilil-1=1forl=2,…,k,g¯i1ik=1). From Lemma 1 it follows that they must form an oriented wheel. If it contains all players the proof is complete. Otherwise, as g is strict Nash andc<1, any other node must be connected to the wheel and, again by Lemma 1, this connection must be by anil-oriented path with anilin the wheel. Moreover, for each player not in the wheel the oriented path connecting her/him to the wheel must be unique, otherwise Lemma 1 would be contradicted. Thus the architecture implied is that of a wheel of trees. Now assume that g does not contain a sequence of players arranged as a wheel. As g is strict Nash andc<1, there must be a path connecting any two players i and j. From Lemma 1, necessarily eitheri←gjorj←gior there is a third player k s.t.i→gk←gj. In other words, for any two players there is a common predecessor. But then there must be a predecessor of all players. Such a common predecessor must be unique, otherwise a set of players would be arranged as a wheel in g. Therefore there is a unique playeri0such that for every other player j there is a pathi0←gj. And again from Lemma 1 that path must be unique. Thus g is ani0-oriented tree.□Summarizing the study of strict Nash asymmetric flow networks the following picture emerges as one moves from south-west to north-east in the rectangle containing all pairs of values of the two parameters of the model (or fromα=0toα=1along any horizontal straight linec=constant). First only the oriented wheel is strict Nash (region I in Fig. 5), then the center-sponsored star also becomes strict Nash. Then, as one moves further right, other root-oriented trees also become strict Nash until the last tree, i.e. the oriented line, also becomes strict Nash. In this range of values for the parameters (region II) where wheels and trees coexist as strict Nash some wheels of trees also appear as strict Nash but, unlike root-oriented trees, which remain strict Nash asαincreases, these hybrid structures remain strict Nash only for a narrow subset15Note that this “narrowness” particularly concernsα, but for eachαwithin that narrow interval it may well be the case that a wheel of trees remains strictly stable for a relatively wide range of cost. See, for instance, Example 1.15of values within region II. Finally, as soon as the last tree (the oriented line) joins the set of strict Nash networks the wheel abandons it. All root-oriented trees remain strict Nash in region III, but whenα=1a discontinuity occurs and only the center-sponsored star survives as strict Nash.It is worth noting the different images of the two limiting cases,α=0andα=1, from the point of view provided by the asymmetric flow model. The caseα=0appears as just the case of maximal asymmetry and the conclusions about strict Nash networks for this case (i.e. the one-way flow model) remain unchanged for a wide range of values of the parameters. By contrast, when asymmetry disappears forα=1a discontinuity occurs: for values ofαslightly smaller than 1 all root-oriented trees are strict Nash, but only the center-sponsored star remains strict Nash forα=1.Note that Lemma 1 can be rephrased like this: if g is a strict Nash network then the outdegree of any node in g is 0 or 1. In Derks and Tennekes (2009), a network where all nodes have outdegree 0 or 1 is called proper.16This notion is instrumental in the proof of existence of Nash networks in their setting. Their constructive proof yields a proper network, but they do not pay special attention to the architecture of such networks.16Thus, Lemma 1 establishes that every strict Nash network is proper. In fact, a careful examination of the proof of Theorem 1 shows that it is entirely based on Lemma 1, that is, on the proper character of g. Thus the proof of sufficiency in Theorem 1 can easily be adapted almost intact to prove the following.Corollary 1A weakly connected proper network is necessarily a wheel of trees.Nevertheless, we prefer the term “wheel of trees” to that of weakly connected “proper network” because this architecture emerged in our constructive process in search of strict Nash networks. Moreover, the characterizing theorem requires that architecture to be made explicit for the formulation of condition (8).We now address the structure of non-strict Nash networks. Asc<1, the obvious first conclusion is that Nash networks are weakly connected. The following weak version of Lemma 1 is rich in implications about their architecture.Lemma 2If g is a Nash network andgik=gjk=1for three nodesi,j,k, then linkik←is part of an oriented wheel and linkjk←is part of another oriented wheel.Let g be a Nash network and assumegik=gjk=1. As all the information that reaches k also reaches j without decay through linkjk←, player i can replace linkik←by linkij←without loss, but also without gain given that g is a Nash network. This implies that k receives the unit of j’s worth without decay in g. Thus, there is a pathj→gkthat withjk←completes a wheel. The same conclusion is obtained similarly for linkik←.□The following lemma provides information about the structure of Nash networks.Lemma 3Let g be a Nash network. If g contains two oriented wheels, W andW′, there is a sequence of oriented wheelsW1,…,Wks.t.W∩W1≠∅,W′∩Wk≠∅, andWl∩Wl+1≠∅(l=1,…,k-1).IfW∩W′≠∅the proof is complete. AssumeW∩W′=∅. As g is weakly connected, there must exist a nodei∈Wand a nodei′∈W′connected by a pathi0,i1,…,ik, s.t.i=i0,i′=ik, and for alll=0,…,k-1,g¯ilil+1=1. Assume first that this path is oriented, say, without loss of generality,i′-oriented, theni=i0is linked by a node in W and byi1. Then, by Lemma 2, linki1i0←is part of an oriented wheelW1. By reiterating this step, applying Lemma 2 repeatedly, the desired sequence of wheels is proved to exist. If the path connecting i andi′is not oriented, then at a nodeilon the path eithergil-1il=gil+1il=1(case 1), orgilil-1=gilil+1=1(case 2). In the first case Lemma 2 applies to both links, and can be repeatedly applied in either direction as far as the links have the same orientation as the preceding ones until either W orW′is reached or an inverted link is met, but then the second case arises. In this case the reversed link has its tail closer to a wheel than its tip, so the subsequent links either all have this orientation until the wheel is reached and Lemma 2 can be applied as in the oriented case, or at some point case 1 re-emerges. Thus, whatever the path connecting i andi′, each of its links belongs to an oriented wheel.□Thus, a Nash network either contains no oriented wheel or wheels that are all interconnected. A maze of oriented wheels within a network is referred to as a subnetwork consisting of a set of oriented wheels such that for any two wheels W andW′in this set there is a sequence of oriented wheels in the set s.t. the first is W, the last isW′, and any two consecutive wheels in the sequence share at least one node. In order to simplify the statement of the result below the degenerate case of a single node is included as a maze of oriented wheels. This gives the following result.Theorem 2In the asymmetric flow model the only possible architecture of a Nash network is that of a weakly connected network with at most one strong component consisting of a maze of wheels which is minimally strongly connected plus a number of root-oriented trees whose roots belong to the maze.First assume that g contains an oriented wheel. Therefore, from Lemma 3 all oriented wheels are interconnected and form a maze of wheels. If the maze contains all nodes the proof is complete. Otherwise, by reasoning exactly as in Theorem 1, the conclusion is that any other player lies in a root-oriented tree whose root belongs to the maze. If the network does not contain any oriented wheels, in view of Lemma 2 no three nodesi,j,kexist such thatgik=gjk=1. But this was the conclusion of Lemma 1 for any strict Nash network. So by reasoning exactly as in Theorem 1, it can be concluded that g is a root-oriented tree.□(i)Theorem 2 establishes the only possible architecture of a Nash network in the asymmetric flow model,17For instance, for the three-player case discussed in the introduction the only non-strict Nash network (forc⩽1-α) consists of four links, where one player links with the other two and is linked by both, but note that this is a maze consisting of two two-player wheels.17but not every network with this architecture is a Nash network. As was the case for strict Nash networks, for this to be true some conditions involving the parameters must hold. First, every terminal node of the trees sets a lower bound for c similar to the one in (8), but now with non-strict inequality. Second, every link in the maze sets an upper bound for c, but now the variety of mazes makes it impossible to formulate them as precisely as for a strict Nash network beyond the following general condition: for every node i in the maze, and everyj∈Nd(i;g),Πi(g-ij)=Ii(g-ij)-c(μid(g)-1)⩽n-1-cμid(g),or equivalently,c⩽n-1-Ii(g-ij).Observe that a strict Nash network is a Nash network whose “maze” consists of at most one single oriented wheel.In a Nash network the nodes in the maze receive all the information from the network without decay (i.e.Ii(g)=n-1for all i in the maze), while in the periphery of tributary trees each node receives without decay only the information from the nodes in the lower part of the tree that it belongs to, while information from all other nodes is received with decay.A comparative study of the relative efficiency of the oriented wheel, the center-sponsored star and the oriented line such as the one in the introduction yields the following results. In an n-player society the aggregate payoff of the oriented wheel isW=∑wheelui=n(n-1-c),the aggregate payoff of the center-sponsored star isS=∑starui=(n-1)(n-1)α+(n-1)(1-c),and the aggregate payoff of the oriented line isL=∑starui=(n-1)α+(n-2)α2+⋯+2αn-2+αn-1+n(n-1)2-(n-1)c,which forα≠1can be rewritten asL=n(n-1)2+(n-1)α1-α-(1-αn-1)α2(1-α)2-(n-1)c.Comparing these figures,W,Sand L, the situation described on Fig. 7emerges. The rectangle of possible values of the parameters is divided into four regions. In region I, whenα<α‾, whereα‾is the solution ofn-1n-2-2(n-1)2α2+(n-1)α1-α-(1-αn-1)α21-α2=0,18Equating L and S yields this equation, which has a unique solution in the interval(0,1).18we haveW>L>S.In region II, whenα>α‾andc<n2-2n+1-(n-1)2α:W>S>L.In region III, whenn2-2n+1-(n-1)2α<c<n(n-1)2-(n-1)α1-α+(1-αn-1)α2(1-α)2:S>W>L.In region IV, whenc>n(n-1)2-(n-1)α1-α+(1-αn-1)α2(1-α)2:S>L>W.Thus, the oriented line is always beaten by the wheel or the star but, unlike in the three-player case discussed in the introduction, it may be that none of these structures is efficient. For instance, forn=5and a certain range of values, the efficient network is a root-oriented tree of length 2 where the root supports only one link. A comparison with the two models by Bala and Goyal (2000a) is pertinent here. In the two-way flow model (α=1) all Nash networks, strict or not, are efficient, while in the one-way flow model (α=0) not all Nash networks are efficient, but the strict Nash networks (i.e. the oriented wheels) are.19A certain similarity is perceptible here. In the asymmetric flow model, any non-strict Nash network is less efficient than the strict Nash network that results by replacing the central maze by a single oriented wheel connecting its players.19In contrast, as seen in the three-player case and as is the case in general, in the asymmetric flow model Nash and strict Nash networks may not be efficient and efficient networks may not be stable. In other words, efficiency and stability do not in general go hand in hand in the asymmetric flow model.We now consider Bala and Goyal (2000a) dynamic model in this setting. Namely, starting from any initial network g, in each period each player i responds, independently from the others, with a positive probability with a best response tog-i(this includes any strategy that yields the same payoff to i as the current one when no strategy can improve i’s payoff), or randomizes across them when there are more than one. Otherwise, player i exhibits inertia, i.e. keeps her/his links unchanged. Note that in this model “miscoordination” is possible as a result of simultaneous best responses. We call this model simultaneous best response dynamics, by contrast with sequential best response dynamics, where in each period a single player chosen at random plays a best response while all other players keep their links unchanged, thus eliminating the possibility of miscoordination. In both cases, a Markov chain on the state space of all networks is defined. Bala and Goyal (2000a) prove that the sequential best response dynamic model converges to the oriented wheel for the one-way flow model, while the simultaneous best response dynamic model converges to the center-sponsored star for the two-way flow model. They prove this by showing that a finite sequence of best responses exists starting from any network, that leads to a strict Nash network.In the current setting, with0<α<1and0<c<1, any network which is the result of a best response of a player is necessarily weakly connected. Note that, sincec<1, the player that plays it must be connected by a path with any other player in the resulting network, which, as0<α<1, must be weakly connected. This simple fact plays a role in the sequel.As seen in Section 4, depending on the parametersαand c and on the number of players, beyond the region where the oriented wheel is the only one there is a rich family of strict Nash networks. Nevertheless, we are able to prove the following result.Theorem 3In the asymmetric flow model:(i)Sequential best response dynamics converge generically (i.e. except for at most a subset of zero measure of the rectangle of feasible values of the parametersαandc) to a strict Nash network with probability 1.Simultaneous best response dynamics converge to a strict Nash network with probability 1.(i)It suffices to show that starting from any network, a sequence of best responses exists where at each stage a single node plays a best response while the others exhibit inertia that ends up generically at a strict Nash network. Given the complexity of generating such a sequence, we provide an algorithmic proof organized in three steps. First, we show that from any network a finite sequence of best responses exists which yields a network where at least one player receives all the information without loss (Lemma 4). We then prove that from any such network a sequence of best responses exists which yields a wheel of trees (Algorithm 1). Finally, we show that starting from any wheel of trees a sequence of best responses exists which generically yields a strict Nash network (Algorithm 2).20The criticism and suggestions of a referee who pointed out some flaws in earlier versions of this work helped us to correct and simplify considerably the proofs and strengthen the results, as is precisely acknowledged in different parts of the proofs.20The output of Algorithm 2 may not be a strict Nash network if the parameters satisfy equation1+α+α2+⋯+αn-1=n-c, which is the boundary where both the oriented wheel and the oriented line are Nash networks, but neither is strict. In this case, sequential best response dynamics would perpetually oscillate between these two architectures, but allowing for simultaneous moves convergence to a strict Nash network is guaranteed (Remarks after Claim 6 and Corollary 2).□The following lemma provides the first step.Lemma 4Let g be any network, then either there is a player that receives all the information without loss (i.e.Ii(g)=n-1for at least onei) or there is a finite sequence of best responses that yields a network where at least one player receives all the information without loss.LetIi0(g)denote the set of nodes that are observed by player i in g without loss union{i}. Assume i is a player among those that observe the largest number of nodes without loss in g, i.e. the cardinality ofIi0(g)is maximal. IfIi0(g)=nthe proof is complete. Otherwise, we have a partition{T,N⧹T}withT=Ii0(g). Note that the choice of T implies that no player in T supports a link with a node inN⧹Tin g. Then, let all players inN⧹Tplay a best response sequentially in a random order, and letg′be the resulting network. Note that there must be at least one player j inN⧹Tsupporting a link ing′with a node in T, otherwiseg′would not be weakly connected, which is impossible after any best response as has been observed before. Let now j play a best response in which j replaces all her/his links with players in T by a single link with i, and letg″be the resulting network. Note that the set of players that are observed by i ing″without loss continues to be T, and therefore the set of players that are observed by j ing″without loss isIj0(g″)⊇T∪{j}≠T. Therefore, starting in an arbitrary network, a sequence of best responses exists such that in the resulting network at least one node receives all the information without loss. Note thatn2is an upper bound for the number of best responses in the sequence described in the proof.21We gratefully acknowledge the contribution of an anonymous referee who provided this proof, much shorter and more elegant than ours.21□In view of Lemma 4, in order to prove the existence of the desired sequence of best responses, it is sufficient to prove it for networks where at least one player receives all the information without loss. The following algorithm takes one such network as its input and its output is a wheel of trees. The algorithm exploits this idea: if a player receivesn-1, a best response of any other player consists either of supporting a link with that player and deleting all links that are not necessary for receivingn-1, or deleting all links but those whose deletion would mean a loss.Algorithm 1(Fig. 8): The algorithm involves the following variables: the current network g, a current reference node v s.t.Iv(g)=n-1, a partition of N into two sets of nodes: W (s.t.g|Wforms an oriented line rooted at v if#W>1),V=N⧹W, and a subsetV∗⊆Vof nodes already tested.START: Letg0be the initial network andi0a player such thatIi0(g0)=n-1, then makeg≔g0,v≔i0,W≔∅,V≔NandV∗≔∅.Q0:V=V∗? If Yes, END, otherwise go to Selection Procedure.Selection Procedure: Select a node j from those inV⧹V∗for which the length of the shortest v-oriented path to v in g is the greatest and go to Q1.Q1: Does j have a best response in whichjv←is one of the links?:– If Yes, (Procedure 1) then let j form (or keep) linkjv←and sever all links that do not disconnect the network, i.e., all except those that are critical for j to receiven-1. Update g and makev≔j(new reference node),W≔W∪{j},V≔N⧹W, and go to Q0.– If No, (Procedure 2) then let j delete all its links except those that would disconnect the network, makeV∗≔V∗∪{j}, update g and go to Q0.Let us see first that both procedures specify best responses after which the reference node keeps receiving all the information without loss.Claim 1Let v be the current reference node, and letj∈V⧹V∗be the node selected. Then either j has a best response which includes linkjv←and then Procedure 1 specifies a best response of j, or no best response of j includes linkjv←and then Procedure 2 specifies a best response of j. In both cases, after the procedure, the (same or new) reference node keeps receiving informationn-1from the network.22Note that in both cases such a best response may coincide with j’s current strategy. In this case the network remains unchanged, but W and V (in Procedure 1) orV∗(in Procedure 2) are updated, and the process continues.22Assume j is selected by the Selection Procedure, so that j is a node from among those inV⧹V∗for which the length of the shortest v-oriented path to v in g is the greatest. Then j can delete all links with nodes inV⧹V∗without damaging v ’s information.Procedure 1: The input is g s.t. j has a best response which includes linkjv←. In that case, given the choice of j, this node can delete all links with nodes inV⧹V∗without damaging v’s information and linkjv←will recover their information for j intact. Moreover, once j establishes a link with v, any other links with nodes in W are superfluous and can be deleted. As for links with nodes inV∗, once j establishes a link withv,jcan delete all but those whose deletion causes damage to j (and a fortiori to v). The output consists of a new network g, a reference nodev≔j, which joinsW,V≔N⧹W=V⧹{j}, andg|Wforms an oriented line rooted at v (unless perhaps ifV=V∗, which we discuss later). Note that for the new reference nodev,Iv(g)=n-1.Procedure: 2 The input is g s.t. j has no best response which includes linkjv←. This means that a best response of j consists of only deleting links. Which ones? Surely, those with nodes in W, otherwise a best response would includejv←. For the same reason, j deletes all links with nodes inV⧹V∗, and, given the choice of j, deletions of links with nodes inV⧹V∗cannot damage v ’s information. Finally, j deletes all its links with nodes inV∗except those that would cause a loss to j (and a fortiori to v ). Then the output consists of an updated g, while W and the reference node v keep unchanged, so thatg|Wcontinues to form an oriented line rooted at v, and node j joinsV∗. Note that for the unchanged reference nodev,Iv(g)=n-1.□Finally, let us see that the algorithm always ends up yielding a wheel of trees.Claim 2At END the output ofAlgorithm 1is a wheel of trees.At the end of each iteration via Procedure 1, a new node enters W linking the former reference node and deleting all other links with nodes in W and inV⧹V∗, and perhaps keeping some necessary links with nodes inV∗. At the end of each iteration via Procedure 2, no node enters W, and the selected node joinsV∗after deleting all links with nodes in W andV⧹V∗, and perhaps keeping some necessary links with nodes inV∗. WhenV=V∗the algorithm ends. At this point N is partitioned into two sets, W andV∗. Let us see that at this point the outdegree of any node in g is 0 or 1. Leti,j,ksuch thatgji=gki=1. Assume firsti∈W. When joiningV∗, a node deletes all its links with nodes in W andV⧹V∗. Thereforej,k∈W. But all other nodes in W, when joining W, link the preceding reference node and delete all other links with nodes in W andV⧹V∗. Thus there is no possibility ofj,k∈Wandj≠k. Assume now thati∈V∗. IfW≠∅at some point an oriented path connecting i with a node in W has been made and in this case any possible link with i would be subsequently broken. IfW=∅, this occurs when the cycle is never carried out via Procedure 1. Then the resulting network is a root-oriented tree whose root is the initial nodei0. Thus in all cases the outdegree of every node in g is 0 or 1. As established in Claim 1, the reference node receives all the information intact, therefore g is surely weakly connected. This along with Corollary 1 yields that g is a wheel of trees.□Algorithm 1terminates after a finite number of iterations.The algorithm involves one cycle that can be completed either via Procedure 1 or via Procedure 2. After each completion via Procedure 1, W contains a new node andV=N⧹Wone less. After each completion via Procedure 2,V∗contains one more node. Therefore, after n iterationsV=V∗and the algorithm ends.□Therefore the sequence of best responses generated by Algorithm 1 yields a wheel of trees which is the input of a second algorithm. The following lemma23The idea of this lemma was suggested to us by a referee, who also detected an important mistake in the first version of this second algorithm. With the help of this simple fact we were able to overcome the difficulties and prove a stronger result.23is useful.Lemma 5In a wheel of trees such that1<k<n, where k is the number of nodes in the wheel (i.e. the central wheel is not a single node and there is at least one tributary tree), if breaking the wheel is a best response of a node i that does not support a tributary tree, then the node in the wheel supporting a link with i has a greater incentive than i to break it. Consequently, in these conditions, at least one of the nodes whose best response is to break the wheel roots a tributary tree.Without loss of generality, let1,2,…,kbe the k (1<k<n) nodes in the central wheel, withgii-1=1fori=2,…,k, andg1k=1, and assumew1=1, wherewidenotes the weight of the tributary tree at node i(i=1,2,…,k). In view of Proposition 3, a best response of player 1 is to break her/his link if1+w2α+⋯+wkαk-1⩾n-c.We prove that then player 2 has a greater incentive to break the wheel (i.e. its link with 1) than 1. This would be so ifw2+w3α+⋯+wkαk-2+αk-1>1+w2α+⋯+wkαk-1.To see this denoteA≔w2+w3α+⋯+wkαk-2. Then1+w2α+⋯+wkαk-1=1+αA.whilew2+w3α+⋯+wkαk-2+αk-1=A+αk-1.We show thatA+αk-1>1+αA. This is equivalent toA(1-α)>1-αk-1, which is true if and only ifA>1-αk-11-α=1+α+α2+⋯+αk-2.But this is true, given thatA=w2+w3α+⋯+wkαk-2, with allwj⩾1and by hypothesis for at least onei≠1,wi>1. Then, at least one node j in the wheel s.t.wj>1supports a link with anotherj′in the wheel s.t.wj′=1, and consequently is interested in breaking it.□(Fig. 9): The algorithm involves the following variables: the current network, g, and a set of nodesV⊆Nthat support a single link in g.START: Letg0be the initial wheel of trees. Makeg≔g0andV≔∅.Q0:V=N? If Yes, END-1, otherwise go to Q1.Q1: Is breaking the wheel a best response for any node in the central wheel?– If Yes, (Procedure 1) let a node in the central wheel which roots a tributary tree break the wheel and go to Q2. Otherwise (i.e. g is an oriented wheel), let any node inN⧹Vdo so and go to Q2.– If No (note this is also the case if g is a tree), go to Q2.Q2: Is linking the central wheel (root if it is a tree) a best response for any terminal node?– If No, END-2 (g is a strict Nash network).– If Yes, go to Q3.Q3: Is g a tree?– If Yes, (Procedure 2) let any such terminal node j link up the root, makeV≔V∪{j}, and go to Q0.– If No, (Procedure 3) let a terminal node, j, for which this is a best response, belonging to tributary treeti, where i belongs to the central wheel, link up the nodei′in the central wheel linked by i. Let then i play a best response consisting of deleting its link withi′. MakeV≔V∪{j}and go to Q0.Procedures 1–3 are well-specified best responses when receiving their inputs.Procedure 1: Its input isV≠Nand a wheel of trees g where breaking the wheel is a best response for a node in the central wheel. By Lemma 5, unless g is an oriented wheel, there exists a node in the central wheel that supports a tributary tree for which breaking the wheel is a best response. Such a node plays that best response. Otherwise, g is an oriented wheel and any node inN⧹Vbreaks the wheel. In both cases the output is a tree which is the result of a node playing a best response.Procedure 2: The input isV≠Nand a tree g where linking the root is a best response for a terminal node. Such a node plays that best response and joins V. The output is a wheel of trees which is the result of a best response and V contains one more node.Procedure 3: The input isV≠Nand a wheel of trees g such that: (i) g is not a tree; (ii) breaking the wheel is not a best response for any node in the central wheel; and (iii) at least for one terminal node linking the central wheel is a best response. Then, a terminal node j for which this is a best response, belonging to tributary treeti, where i belongs to the central wheel, links up the nodei′in the central wheel linked by i and joins V. Deleting its link withi′and keeping the rest of its links is therefore a best response for i. To see this, note that once j has linked upi′, linkii←′is superfluous and severing it yields a new wheel larger than the previous one. Since breaking the wheel was not a best response for i in the previous wheel it cannot be one now either. Thus, the output of Procedure 3 is a wheel of trees which is the result of a sequence of two best responses, and V contains one more node.□(i) At END-2 the output ofAlgorithm 2is a strict Nash wheel of trees. (ii) END-1 can only occur if1+α+α2+⋯+αn-1=n-c,(i.e. the oriented line and the oriented wheel are Nash but not strict Nash networks) and its output is an oriented wheel.(i)At Q2 the input g is either a tree or a wheel of trees where breaking the wheel is not a best response of any node in the wheel. In both cases at END-2 linking the root/central wheel is not a best response for any terminal node. Thus, g, the output, is a strict Nash network by Propositions 2 and 3.For any pair of values ofαand c within the range considered s.t.c≠n-1-α-α2-⋯-αn-1, and whatever wheel of trees comprises the input, the algorithm ends at END-2. For this, note that on the right-hand side of this curve all trees and only trees are strict Nash, so a single iteration of the algorithm yields a strict Nash network at END-2. And on the left-hand side of the curve, after each iteration of Procedures 2 or 3 a new node in the central wheel joins V. Therefore at some point the algorithm necessarily stops at END-2 yielding a strict Nash network. When1+α+α2+⋯+αn-1=n-c, the oriented wheel and the oriented line are both Nash networks but neither of them is strict. Thus, sequential best response would oscillate for ever between these architectures, and so would the algorithm, but the clause “ifV=Nstop” atQ0is just a way of forcing the algorithm to stop in this case. WhenV=N,gis an oriented wheel, and the algorithm stops at END-1.□It only remains to prove that the algorithm necessarily terminates in finite time.Claim 6When its input is a wheel of trees, Algorithm 2terminates in finite time.First note that every time a new wheel of trees is formed from another wheel of trees, a new node in the new central wheel supporting a single link joins V, and links in V never again have a chance to break a wheel in the algorithm. This means that the cycle that follows Q3 in either of the two possible ways cannot be repeated more than n times. Therefore the algorithm is certain to finish.□(i)Observe that inertia has played an implicit role in the algorithms, as it has been implicitly assumed that at each best response in the sequence all other players maintain their strategies, but miscoordination has played no role. In other words, it has been proved that sequential best response dynamics converge to a strict Nash network except perhaps when the parameters are within the curvec=n-1-α-α2-⋯-αn-1, where both the oriented wheel and the oriented line are Nash but not strict Nash networks. This case may yield an oriented wheel at END-1 in Algorithm 2. Nevertheless, in this case a miscoordination simultaneous move in the wheel where more than one node deletes its only link followed by a best response of an appropriate single node would yield an oriented tree which is strict Nash throughout the curve.Note that in Procedure 2 of Algorithm 2, if linking the root is a best response of a terminal node i in the tree, and i is indifferent between playing it or not, then unless the resulting wheel of trees is an oriented wheel Lemma 5 ensures that in the new central wheel at least one player will strictly improve her/his payoff by breaking it. Similarly, again by Lemma 5, when in Procedure 1 breaking the wheel is a best response of a node i which roots no tributary treeti, and i is indifferent between playing it or not, then any terminal node intiwill strictly improve its payoff by linking up the root in the resulting tree. This means that indifference, i.e. best responses which do not entail a strict improvement, do not entail any risk of circularity, i.e. the process goes ahead. In fact, circularity only could occur between oriented line and wheel architectures for a zero-measure set of values of the parameters, but in that case the clause “ifV=N, then stop” prevents it.This concludes the proof of Theorem 3. Moreover, in view of the preceding discussion, we have the following strengthening of its part (i).All absorbing sets of sequential best response dynamics are singletons ( the strict Nash networks) for all values of the parameters, except when1+α+α2+⋯+αn-1=n-c, in this case, in addition to all singletons consisting of oriented trees different from the line, there aren!absorbing sets, each of them consisting ofn+1non-strict Nash networks: an oriented wheel and the n different oriented lines that result from it by a node severing its link.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We provide a new model of non-cooperative network formation with asymmetric flow which bridges the gap between two benchmark game-theoretic models so far seen as “orthogonal”, and gives rise to a significant variety of stable architectures. The beauty and elegance of Bala and Goyal’s results for their two models, yielding two primary and emblematic architectures, the wheel and the star, as strict Nash networks gives rise at the same time to a certain uneasiness as one feels that other structures should also arise from simple assumptions. It turns out that just a little asymmetry opens the door to another remarkable structure – root-oriented trees – as strictly stable, and also, within a margin for the parameters, the interesting wheels of trees, which are midway between the wheel and the star and include both as particular cases.From the point of view provided by the asymmetric flow model, the two-way flow model appears as an extreme and somehow pathological case: in a center-sponsored star one player pays everything and everybody sees everything, while in the asymmetric flow model in a center-sponsored star the center pays everything but receives more information than anybody else, and in other stable architectures players receive more or less information depending on their position. Thus stability and asymmetry yield a clear hierarchy from the point of view of the amount of information received. In both Nash and strict Nash architectures, one set of players, the root in the tree, the central wheel in the wheel of trees and the maze in a Nash network, receives all the information intact from the network, while the rest, plugged into tributary trees, receive it with a certain decay. It is remarkable how such simple premises yield these structures in equilibrium, which embody logic from the informational point of view and appear as meaningful information-processing proto-structures. As for efficiency, it turns out that, by contrast with Bala and Goyal’s models, efficiency and stability do not in general go hand in hand in the asymmetric flow model.Finally, it has also proved possible to produce a smooth extension of Bala and Goyal’s results about dynamics, although the greater complexity of the new setting requires a lengthy algorithmic constructive proof.The model opens up several lines for further research. Note that if a certain decayβ⩾αis also assumed in the flow through a link towards the player that supports it, then the model includes also as limit cases the one-way and two-way flow models with decay. Namely, in this model with “asymmetric decay”, the case0<β<1andα=0is the one-way flow model with decay, while the case0<α=β<1is the two-way flow model with decay. Here again the two-parameter (αandβ) model covers all intermediate situations between the two models. Therefore, all the extensions explored in the literature for either of the two models of Bala and Goyal (2000a) can be studied taking the asymmetric flow model as the point of departure. One of these extensions consists of introducing different forms of heterogeneity. In this respect, the asymmetric flow model studied assumes homogeneity for the two parametersαand c, but it may be worth exploring the effect of introducing heterogeneity for the first, i.e. a different return decay for different pairs of playersαij(0<αij<1). It is easy to check that Lemma 1 continues to hold in this more general setting, which seems a promising starting point. It may also be interesting to study the caseα<0, as a model of a form of parasitism, possibly under different assumptions about network formation. Still within the framework of the model considered here, it may be of interest to introduce mistakes into the dynamic model in order to study the stochastic stability of strict equilibria.24See Feri (2007), also Jackson and Watts (2002).24Finally, it may also be interesting to examine the effects of asymmetric flow on models based on pairwise stability à la Jackson and Wolinsky (1996).