@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Choosing the optimal intervention method to reduce human-related machine failures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We quantify human-related factors that affect risk of failure.Develop a proportional hazards model with human-related factors as covariates.Develop a model to perform cost-benefit analysis: risk reduction of intervention vs. its cost.Use model to select optimal intervention method to reduce operator-related risk.A case study of a manufacturing environment to clarify discussions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Performance analysis,Failure risk,Human factors,Cost-benefit analysis,Manufacturing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel method to quantify the effects of human-related factors on the risk of failure in manufacturing industries. When failures can be caused by operators, the decision maker must intervene to mitigate operator-related risk. There are numerous intervention methods possible; we develop a revenue model that provides the decision-maker with a systematic tool to perform a cost-benefit analysis, balancing the advantage of risk reduction, against the direct cost of the intervention method.A method is developed to incorporate human-related factors, in addition to machine-related factors, in machine failure analysis. This enables the revenue model to use the expected uptime and the probability of failure, given the operator skill level and working conditions, to calculate the expected revenue associated with each intervention method. A case study of a manufacturing company is considered incorporating two possible intervention methods: reducing the production rate to provide more cognition time and adding a shift expert to guide the operators. Different courses of action are chosen for the various skill-shift scenarios presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The performance of a human–machine system is a factor of the performance of the hardware, as well as the correct operation of the hardware by the operators. One indicator of performance is reliability and to assess reliability, we can analyze the risk of failure of the system. The “risk of failure” is widely used and well understood by practitioners but is often not clearly defined (Zuashkiani, Banjevic, & Jardine, 2009). In our case, we define risk as the potential for a machine to become non-operational and quantify it by probability. Within this context, there are many reliability and failure risk models that deal with the machinery. But there are few that incorporate the role of human operators on uptime and overall performance. The first step in our analysis is to have a model to incorporate both Machine-Related (MR) and Human-Related (HR) factors. This can provide us with an all-encompassing assessment of failure risk. To achieve this, we use the Proportional Hazards Model (PHM), a commonly used tool to model the time of failure of equipment (Ghasemi & Hodkiewicz, 2012; Si, Wang, Hu, & Zhou, 2011). A PHM yields the hazard rate which can be affected by factors specific to the machine, the environment, or the humans within the human–machine system. The PHM has most often been used with quantifiable MR covariates, such as readings from vibration sensors or oil analysis. However, this usage can be expanded by including non-MR type factors (Centrone, Kiassat, Garetti, Banjevic, & Jardine, 2010; Kiassat & Safaei, 2009). The fact that this common and versatile model accommodates the inclusion of HR covariates, in addition to MR factors, makes the PHM an excellent model for our analysis.Once we evaluate the risk facing the system, we may choose to intervene and reduce or eliminate it. Any intervention method pursued should have the benefit of reducing failure risk; it would also have the disadvantage of incurring a direct cost. Given the trade-off between risk reduction and direct cost, we develop a revenue model to perform a cost-benefit analysis for choosing the best intervention method. Given the machine factors, such as working age; operator factors, such as skill level; and the direct cost of the intervention method as well as its risk reduction factor, the best intervention method is selected as the one that results in the highest system revenue. In the absence of an analytical method for choosing among intervention methods, subjectivity and personal biases enter into the decision-making process, distancing it from being an evidence-based process. Providing a systematic tool to a Decision-Maker (DM) to choose the optimal intervention method is the main contribution of this paper.The general framework of the methodology discussed in our paper is portrayed in Fig. 1. Skill quantification is a necessary component but is not a part of our contribution. The loopback is not discussed in the paper; however, it is a necessary component if additional impactful HR factors are identified.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we perform a literature review, laying out the existing related work and pointing to the gap in the existing knowledge. Section 3 introduces the PHM, used as our failure analysis model to incorporate HR factors. This leads to Section 4 which discusses the development of the revenue model. Section 5 considers the case study of a manufacturing company and applies the revenue model to the data set. Section 6 provides a recap and suggests possible directions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
