@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Harvest planning in the Brazilian sugar cane industry via mixed integer programming

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model tactical and operational planning as a mixed integer programming model.We propose new valid inequalities to reduce the integrality gap.We propose heuristic pre-processing techniques to speed-up the resolution time.We solve the problem instances in short cpu times to optimality gaps below 5%.The solutions suggested hold a potential to improve the total profit by 2.5%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in agriculture,Sugar cane harvesting,Mixed integer programming,Valid inequalities,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work addresses harvest planning problems that arise in the production of sugar and alcohol from sugar cane in Brazil. The planning is performed for two planning horizons, tactical and operational planning, such that the total sugar content in the harvested cane is maximized. The tactical planning comprises the entire harvest season that averages seven months. The operational planning considers a horizon from seven to thirty days. Both problems are solved by mixed integer programming. The tactical planning is well handled. The model for the operational planning extends the one for the tactical planning and is presented in detail. Valid inequalities are introduced and three techniques are proposed to speed up finding quality solutions. These include pre-processing by grouping and filtering the distance matrix between fields, hot starting with construction heuristic solutions, and dividing and sequentially solving the resulting MIP program. Experiments are run over a set of real world and artificial instances. A case study illustrates the benefits of the proposed planning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sugar cane is one of the most important commodities in the world (FAO, 2012), commonly being further processed to sugar or agro fuel. With more than 420 million tons of harvested sugar cane in the year 2005, Brazil is by far the largest producer of this crop worldwide, followed by India, China and Thailand. Among all agricultural commodities produced in Brazil, sugar cane is its most produced measured in biomass and its fourth most lucrative. Internationally, sugar cane production is a highly competitive market. Recent studies such as the ones by Higgins et al. (2007) and Bezuidenhout and Baier (2009) indicated great opportunities to improve the value chain and reduce costs in the operational planning to remain competitive.On the level of sugar cane harvest planning, there are commonly two major planning objectives. First, the highest possible profit in terms of quantity and quality of the harvested cane, respecting certain industrial, social and environmental constraints. Such constraints include limited cutting capacities as well as constant cane supply at the mills. Second, the reduction of all costs involved. The profit strongly depends on the sugar content when harvesting the cane. Due to limited resources and constraints, harvesting at each field at its maturation peak is commonly not feasible.Based on the experience of a large Brazilian sugar producer, this work aims at providing mathematical models for tactical and operational harvest planning, focusing on the objective and constraints pointed out above. In the following, we explain the problem in more detail and outline the structure of this paper.The problem, denoted by the Sugar Cane Cultivation and Harvest Problem (SCHP) throughout this work, is now described. One of its most important decisions is the moment to harvest the plantation fields. Clearly, it is desirable to harvest each field at the peak of its sugar content, as the sugar content indicated by the percentage of sucrose in the sugar cane (Pol) and the reduced sugar, vary as the cane grows. The cane at each field possesses a certain initial age and can only be cut within a given interval of its age.Sugar cane is harvested by cutting crews, chopping down the stems but leaving the roots to re-grow in time for the following harvest. Even though most cutting crews are mechanical, federal working agreements oblige Brazilian harvesting companies to contract a certain minimum of manual harvesting, i.e., a group of human workers. One of the Brazilian sugar cane companies involved in this research currently holds five mechanical and one manual harvesting crews, which is referred to be a representative proportion. Each cutting crew may be eligible to cut only a certain subset of the fields. Cutting crews may not work every day and work a limited time at each day. Individual characteristics of each cutting crew must be taken into account: minimum and maximum cutting capacities, transportation speed as well as cutting and relocation costs.Once the sugar cane is cut, the harvest is immediately transported to the industrial sector, i.e. the sugar cane mills. In Brazil, transportation is mostly performed by trucks (a single mill is known which additionally uses river shipping). Fig. 1exemplifies routes for cutting and transportation. Cutting crews commonly follow a certain route from one field to another harvesting the cane. Transportation crews commute between the fields and the mills. Each transportation crew possesses individual properties such as a transport capacity, speed and cost. Exactly one transportation crew must be assigned to each field that will be harvested.In the mills, the sugar cane is crushed and the cane juice is extracted, being further processed either to ethanol or sugar, also denoted by the total recoverable sugar (ATR, Açúcar Total Recuperável, in Brazil). The mills operation is one of the most important constraints as they must not interrupt sugar cane processing. Minimum and maximum process capacities must be respected for each mill. Plantation fields that have been selected for harvesting are assigned to exactly one sugar cane mill. Furthermore, the processed sugar cane must contain a certain minimum quantity of fiber used to generate electricity to operate the mills. Some mills may not be available during certain periods (e.g., for maintenance). This is reflected in the capacities for such mills given in the input data.Some sugar cane varieties allow the use of growth regulators to anticipate its harvest. In general, such products slow down the growing process of the cane mass, whereas the growth of the sucrose within the cane is not affected. Their influence of growth regulators on these properties can be fairly well predicted based on past data recorded at mills. Growth regulators can only be applied on fields with certain cane varieties and when the cane reaches minimum age. One of the most important and most difficult tasks to maximize the total profit is thus to determine the ideal moment to apply growth regulators and to harvest each field.A side effect of the alcohol distillation process is a residual liquid called vinasse. Vinasse is a corrosive contaminant that contains high levels of organic matter, potassium, calcium and moderate amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus. However, vinasse is an efficient fertilizer, thus its application to harvested plantation fields has become common practice. To allow for frequent application, a sufficiently large field area must be harvested within certain time periods.This work is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature that is most related to this subject. Section 3 focuses on the tactical and operational planning. The Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) models for both planning are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 deals with the problem instances, computational experiments and further techniques applied to the operational problem in order to facilitate its solution. Finally, Section 6 illustrates the benefits of the proposed operational planning on a case study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An approach for the tactical and the operational planning of an important agricultural activity has been presented. The principal concern in both planning is to harvest the fields close to their maturation peaks, i.e., when the sugar content is highest. The evaluation of a near-optimal solution for an industrial instance showed that the proposed planning holds a significant potential to increase the total profit. By harvesting fields close to their maturation peaks, cutting crews increase their relocation distances. However, in the studied context, the total profit increased by 2.6%.As most of the medium and long term planning problems, the tactical planning is well handled by current commercial MIP solver within the (short) computation time required. For the operational planning, the problem gets significantly more difficult to solve. The time limit of thirty minutes demanded the application of techniques currently in use in most Operations Research centers. A deeper study of the proposed formulation resulted in the proposal of valid inequalities to strengthen it. Preprocessing and tailored reduction of the instances information were applied to reduce the model size. Hot start solutions were provided to make better use of the MIP solver within the allowed computation time. Finally, the matheuristic technique of splitting and assembling the problem helped the MIP solver finding feasible integer solution. With all this, the proposed method was capable to consistently find feasible solutions with integrality gaps below 5%. Mathematical decomposition such as Lagrangean Relaxation or Benders Decomposition may be promising directions for future research.Provided that almost all application oriented research are restricted to a single research group, we try to change this by making all the instances used available on the web.