@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Combining stochastic DEA with Bayesian analysis to obtain statistical properties of the efficiency scores: An application to Greek public hospitals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a methodology that aims to enhance statistical inference in data envelopment analysis.We use a Bayesian perspective to improve result robustness by increasing parameter accuracy and reducing the effect of outlying observations.This model incorporates the uncertainty in DEA by means of a probabilistic analysis.We extend the use of the combined stochastic DEA–Bayesian model to examine the statistical properties of efficiency scores generated through the metafrontier.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Stochastic DEA,Bayesian inference,Metafrontier,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper describes a methodology that aims to enhance statistical inference in data envelopment analysis (DEA). In order to incorporate statistical properties in a DEA analysis we propose a combined application of a chance constrained DEA (CCDEA) model that is integrated with a stochastic mechanism from Bayesian techniques. The proposed method is conducted in two basic steps. In a first step we make use of Bayesian techniques on the data set to generate a statistical model and to simulate a large number of alternative data sets that can be observed as realizations. In a second step we solve the CCDEA problem for each and every one of the alternative samples, compute efficiency measures, and use the sampling distribution of these measures as an approximation to the finite sample distribution. The paper discusses the statistical advantages of this method using cross-sectional data from a sample of 117 Greek public hospitals. In testing the model we use homogeneous groups of hospitals in various sizes according to the hierarchical structure of the Greek health system (primary, secondary and tertiary care). In order to measure the overall technical efficiency of hospitals that are classified into different groups we introduce the concept of metafrontier analysis on the developed model. The results show that the tertiary and secondary hospitals operate with similar production technologies while a large technology gap is observed between the primary care hospitals and the metafrontier.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA), in its original settings, is a non-stochastic tool that assumes all input and output data to be quantitative, with specified numerical values. In real world applications, however, there are cases that the effort (input) indices and the performance (output) indices are both of a stochastic nature. The DEA literature has often acknowledged the need to incorporate data variability and uncertainty within the deterministic DEA models with the aim to address measurement errors, as well as the inherent stochastic nature of production processes (Bruni, Conforti, Beraldi, & Tundis, 2009). Here in lies a major and frequent criticism of traditional DEA studies.One way forward to enhance statistical properties in DEA is through bootstrapping along the lines of Simar and Wilson (1998). Bootstrapping methodology allows the researcher to keep the advantages of DEA, and also performs statistical hypothesis testing on the DEA efficiency scores. This approach simulates the original sample B times, each time recalculating the parameter of interest which is the DEA efficiency score. This will allow B estimates of the parameter, and thus makes it possible to generate an empirical distribution for the parameter of interest. The empirical distribution can then be used to construct confidence interval of the efficiency scores calculated via DEA attempting to capture the true efficient frontier within the specified interval. The implementation of the bootstrap in the non-parametric data envelopment analysis (DEA) models while being a relatively recent methodology is an increasingly popular practice in DEA applications. On the other hand their statistical properties remain to be explored further (Simar & Wilson, 1999). Among the shortcomings of the bootstrapping method is that it makes justifications only asymptotic (Kneip, Simar, & Wilson, 2008). The absence of any particular statistical distribution limits the inferences made from bootstrapping methods since accuracy and precision of the bootstrap method depends greatly on the sample size and the specific dataset.The other possible way to enhance statistical properties in DEA is by developing stochastic non-parametric frontier models (Petersen & Olesen, 1995). Chance Constrained DEA (CCDEA) does not require all the input and output values to be known exactly by allowing part or all of those values to be represented by some probability function. The development of CCDEA model is of significant value as it is able to incorporate stochastic variation in efficiency measurement. A major weakness of the existing stochastic DEA models is the simplifying distributional assumptions on random data that mostly consider a multivariate normal distribution with known means and variances.For a comprehensive discussion of the recent literature on statistical inference and nonparametric efficiency measures, see the excellent review of Dyson and Shale (2010) which highlight the strengths and weaknesses of the above mentioned methods. Ceyhan and Benneyan (2011) also compare the performance of Bootstrapping DEA and CCDEA by using an illustrative application.A more recent approach that could potentially provide a formal way of accounting for uncertainty in DEA is the use Bayesian methods. These methods provide an internally consistent and proper statistical basis in DEA analysis. The main advantage of the Bayesian approach is that it allows the inclusion of “prior” information about parameters in inferences. Two recent studies have used Bayesian methods to account the sampling error in DEA. Friesner, Mittelhammer and Rosenman, (2013) used Bayesian methods to derive appropriate posterior distributions for the incidence of inefficient production units, based on information calculated by DEA when sampling from a finite population. Their method interprets the true incidence of inefficiency as a latent variable and as a result the noise and potential mismeasurement of efficiency inherent in the DEA scores can be explicitly integrated into the analysis and properly accounted for in the definition of posterior distributions. Tsionas and Papadakis (2010) used Bayesian methods to adjust the error and random noise of a panel data set. They derive the finite-sample posterior distribution of efficiency measures via simulation techniques, by using the posterior distribution of data parameters. More simply, the simulated means and covariances are obtained from the data set by using Bayesian techniques entered into a CCDEA model which finally produces the efficiency scores.In this study we aim to account for the impact of statistical noise in DEA that arises from measurement errors by combining stochastic DEA models and Bayesian analysis. Following the approach of Tsionas and Papadakis (2010) we modify and extended it to account for cross-sectional data.The proposed method provides new opportunities for stochastic extension of DEA. Following the recommendations of Cooper, Huang and Li (2011, p. 211) the Bayesian-CCDEA methodology can still go further into characterizations of efficiency using two probabilistic indicators. First, a unit can characterized as “fully efficient” or “sufficiently efficient”, if it is subsequently efficient in all or in a part of the problem realizations. Second, based on the marginal distribution of scores we are able to construct finite-sample Bayes probability intervals for efficiency scores. Using these two indicators, we obtain the associated probabilities of being correct in making inferences regarding the unit efficiency. Essentially, since the Bayesian-CCDEA model is based on a formal statistical inference technique requires fewer assumptions than does bootstrapping.The paper concludes with an empirical application, which utilizes a sample of 117 Greek public hospitals operating in 2009. The model is compared and further discussed according to three homogeneous groups of hospitals that based on their operations characteristics and concerns 17 primary care hospitals, 71 secondary hospitals and 29 tertiary hospitals.In order to measure the overall technical efficiency of hospitals that are classified into different groups, we utilize the concept of metafrontier (O'Donnell, Rao, & Battese, 2008). This approach can ensure that all heterogeneous hospitals or groups are assessed according to their distance from a common and identical frontier. The impact of operational characteristics of hospitals (or other environmental variable) can then be measured more accurately by assessing the distance of a hospital belonging to a certain environmental group from the metafrontier. Therefore we extend the use of the combined Bayesian-CCDEA model to examine the statistical properties of efficiency scores generated through the metafrontier.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the DEA methodology centered at CCDEA model and metafrontier approach. Section 3 introduces the Bayesian-CCDEA methodology. Section 4 illustrates the input–output data that are used in this paper. Section 5 shows the results obtained and, Section 6 discusses the general properties of the model. Finally, our conclusions are given.DEA is a linear programming technique for estimating the relative efficiency of a homogeneous set of production units by considering multiple input and output factors. In the output-orientated case, the DEA method holds inputs constant and seeks to identify inefficiency as a proportionate increase in output production. The most appropriate use for output orientation is in cases where there are limited or fixed resources and/or maximization of output production is most important. We assume that there are n units to be evaluated. DEA constant returns to scale (CRS) model considers the following optimization problem to determine relative efficiency of r0 unit among R production units.(1)maxφs.t.∑rXirλr−Xir0≤0i=1,…,I∑rYjrλr−φYjr0≥0j=1,…,Jφfree,λr≥0,r=1,…,Rwhere φ is the radial output contraction factor measuring the level of efficiency for the r0 unit, Yjris the amount of the jth output produced by rth unit, Xiris the amount of the ith input produced by rth unit and λris the non-negative input/output weights that determine the best practice for the unit being evaluated. The variable returns to scale (VRS) model is obtained by simply adding the convexity constraint ∑ λr= 1 to the above linear program.In order to permit stochastic variation around the efficiency frontier we can incorporate the stochastic considerations into the model to account for the measurement and specification errors. Land, Lovell and Thore, (1993) first introduced the basic CCDEA model to measure productive efficiency in the case of stochastic inputs and outputs. In the formulation of the optimization problem, variation due to noise in the data is accounted for by the inclusion of the standard deviation of the linear combination of independent and identically distributed variables.The chance constraints indicate that the observed inputs–outputs must not exceed best practice inputs–outputs more than a given probability α (Petersen & Olesen, 1995). The basic DEA model in (1) can be transformed into stochastic DEA model that allows the constraints to hold with probability level, as follows:(2)maxφs.t.Pr[∑rXirλr−Xir0≤0]≥αi=1,…,Is.t.Pr[∑rYjrλr−ϕYjr0≥0]≥αj=1,…,Js.t.φfree,λr≥0,r=1,…,RThe stochastic linear programming problem can be then transformed into a deterministic non-linear programming problem according to the procedure of Charnes and Cooper (1959). Thus, the deterministic equivalent of the above problem can be rewritten as:(3)maxφs.t.∑rRXirλr+∑rR(E[Xir]−Xir)λr−z[∑rR∑kRλrλkCov(XriXks)]0.5s.t.≤Xir0i=1,…,Is.t.∑rRYjrλr+∑rR(E[Yjr]−Yjr)λr+z[∑rR∑nRλrλnCov(YrjYnt)]0.5s.t.≥ϕYjr0j=1,…,Js.t.φfree,λr≥0,r,n=1,…,Rwhere E stands for the for mathematical expected value, z for the one-tailed standard normal distribution statistic and Cov for the covariance operator that is obtained for all i,s = 1,…, I inputs and for all j,t = 1,…, J outputs. The assumption of normality is justified by the Gauss–Markov theorem, however Land et al. (1993) note that it would be possible to use some other joint probability distribution that has a well-defined cumulative density function such as the lognormal distribution.In formulation (3) we observe that it is possible to adopt both stochastic input and outputs, however the practical side of the problem suggests that this is intractable (Dyson & Shale, 2010). Therefore, the majority of applications of CCDEA consider stochasticity only on outputs (Chen, 2002; Talluri, Narasimhana, & Nairb, 2006; Wu, 2010). Olesen and Petersen (2002) have also applied a CCDEA model with stochastic outputs in hospitals' evaluation.While technical efficiencies of production units measured with respect to a given frontier are comparable, this is not normally the case among hospitals that operate under different technologies. The challenge for policy makers is to pay for efficiency however, this calls for filtering out differences that are caused by inefficiencies rather than heterogeneities due to exogenous influences.In this paper we use the metafrontier technique in order to ensure that heterogeneous units are compared under a single homogenous technology. This technique introduced by Battese and Rao (2002), permits efficiency measurements of various groups that might differ in terms of technology and other production environments, relative to a common wide metafrontier. In other words the metafrontier can be described as a function that “envelops” separate group frontiers, each having their own technology and environmental factors (O'Donnell et al., 2008). In that case, the total distance of a production unit from the metafrontier, is attributed in two major components: (a) the unit's relative position to its group frontier and (b) the group's frontier relative position to the metafrontier. Thus, (a) and (b) indicate the metatechnical efficiency that is a composite measure which encompasses both the group frontier characteristics.To illustrate this method we consider the case where there are k(>1) groups where each group operates under a specific technology. The technical efficiency of a production unit r relative to its technology (frontier) k is denoted byTErkand the technical efficiency of the same unit evaluated at the metatechnology (meta-frontier) is denoted byTEr*. Therefore the ratio of the frontier score of a production unit r and the metafrontier represents technology gap ratio (TGR) for that unit:(4)TGRr*=TEr*TErkThe meta-technology ratio measures how close a group frontier is to its meta-frontier and represents the restrictive nature of the production environment. The lower the TGR score is the higher the efficiency in operations that can be achieved.Eq. (4) suggests that the technical efficiency of a production unit relative to the metafrontier function is equal to the product of the technical efficiency of that unit relative to the frontier and the technology gap for that group. This shows that the technical efficiency measured with reference to the metatechnology can be decomposed into the product of the technical efficiency measured with reference to the technology of the production unit, and the technology gap ratio between the production unit technology and the metatechnology. According to the original DEA given that the technical efficiency relative to the metafrontier is always less than the technical efficiency relative to the frontier, the TGR is bounded between zero and one.The metafrontier analysis can also be adapted for use in empirical contexts where relatively advanced efficiency measurement techniques that are based on either parametric or non-parametric frontiers are applied (O'Donnell et al., 2008). Recent applications of the metafrontier analysis have also successfully used the bias corrected scores that were obtained from DEA bootstrapped procedures (Assaf, Barros, & Josiassen, 2012;Fallah-Fini, Triantis, Garza, & Seaver, 2012).In the CCDEA model the uncertainty is handled by allowing a production unit to lie outside the efficient frontier with a pre-determined probability. Likewise, in the metafrontier framework, there is a certain chance for every unit to lie outside the efficient frontier or the metafrontier. Taking into account the convexity of the DEA frontier we illustrate this approach in Fig. 1, where the ellipse around the efficient units is an equi-probability contour of unspecified probability level representing the joint distribution of that unit.It should be noted that the CCDEA itself does not yield confidence intervals around the average. The effect of the chance-constraint is to rise to new frontiers that represent a violation of the original constraints. The confidence region is created by solving the CCDEA problem with the alternative data sets obtained from the Bayesian techniques. Each replication will give an estimate for the frontier and a distribution of the efficiency of each unit will be generated.Moreover it can be seen from Fig. 1, that it is possible or the group 3 frontier to override the metafrontier producing some units with TGR > 1. However, this not an unexpected situation when we extend the use of metafrontier in more advanced efficiency models. The results obtained, for instance in the study of Assaf and Matawie (2010) from a bootstrap DEA model, also produce TGRs which are greater to one in several cases. O'Donnell et al. (2008) also discuss this issue and several other ways for relaxing some of the assumptions of metafrontier framework.Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are simulation techniques that can be used to generate a dependent sample of population parameters of interest, or unobserved vector quantities, from certain distributions of interest (e.g. marginal distributions).MCMC methods are based on Bayes' rule, which relates the posterior density of model parameters to a prior density and the respective likelihood of those parameters (Gamerman & Lopes, 2006). MCMC methods avoid the difficulty of calculating the likelihoods directly (and integrating over the parameter space) by creating a Markov Chain where the stationary distribution is the posterior distribution. MCMC methods for estimation from a Bayesian perspective are believed to improve result robustness by increasing parameter accuracy and reducing the effect of outlying observations. In this paper we adopt the MCMC method to explore the output probability distributions. According to this procedure we will determine the required means and covariances that will be used to run the CCDEA model.Working from the Bayesian perspective, a well-defined statistical model for the data generating process is clearly required. Simulation of the marginal distribution of our data set is obtained by utilizing the Gibbs Sampler (GS) algorithm. This estimation procedure allows draws to be made on the marginal posterior distribution without having to calculate the density, by iteratively sampling on the conditional posterior for different blocks of parameters. The use of Gibbs sampling techniques in cross-sectional data is discussed further in Koop, Steel and Osiewalski, (1995).In the remainder of the paper we simplify the notation used in Eq. (3), by setting Xr, as the I × 1 vector of input observations, and Yras the J × 1 vector of output observations for the rth production unit that can be displayed as Zr= (Xr,Yr)΄ for each r = 1,…, R. We can subsequently assume that Zrhas a multivariate normal distribution (MVN) with unknown mean μ and unknown covariance matrix Σ were ZrMVN (μ,Σ).However in order to solve the CCDEA model we need to identify both the means and covariance matrices. A key assumption of the analysis conducted herein is that all outputs are stochastically independent where the performance of each production unit is independent of that of another (see also: Land et al., 1993). This assumption gives a covariance matrix that has a diagonal form with zero off-diagonal elements. According to the above in Eq. (3) we need a statistical model that will display the vector of mean output values μy= (μ1,…, μj) = (E[Y1r], E[Yjr]) and the diagonal covariance matrix Σy= diag (σ12,…,σj2) = diag (Var(Y1), …, Var(Yj)).These unknown means and covariance matrices can only be observed by using MCMC that draw posterior μ and Σ from the posterior predictive distributionZr*∼ MVN (μ,Σ).In the absence of any prior information, we define essentially non-informative priors on all of the model parameters (Gelman, 2006). The non-informative or uniform prior treats all possible parameter values as being equally plausible a priori. Therefore, the posterior state of knowledge is influenced only by the data through the likelihood. For the multivariate normal parameters, the prior distributions are MVN (μprior,Σprior) were μprior= 0 andΣprior= 100Ι. More specifically the unknown mean vector μ follows a multivariate normal distribution itself, with mean μpriorand covariance matrixΣpriorwhere the prior distribution is:(5)μprior∼MNV(0,100I)The covariance matrixΣis distributed as inversed-Wishart with scale matrix I and ν ≥ I + J degrees of freedom:(6)Σ∼Inverse−Wishart(I,ν)In order to represent a vague prior knowledge, we have chosen the degrees of freedom of the inverse-Wishart distribution to be as small as possible (ν = I + J). Herein, it is worth to notice that the Inverse-Wishart, is a probability distribution defined on real-valued positive-definite matrices. In Bayesian statistics it is used as the conjugate prior for the covariance matrix of a multivariate normal distribution.Using the above procedure as a first step, we are able to draw from the posterior distribution a large number of alternative data sets. The next step is to solve the non-linear programming problem of CCDEA in Eq. (3) for each one of the draws. In the last step, these solutions are used as an approximation of the marginal distributions to calculate the marginal posterior densities and confidence intervals.In Greece, the usage of DEA in hospitals assessment has also gained the attempt of both researchers and policy makers (see: Athanassopoulos, Gounaris, & Sissouras, 1999; Mitropoulos, Mitropoulos, & Sissouras, 2013).In this paper the assessment of hospitals is used as an example to illustrate the methodology and it is not an attention to motivate the paper as a case study. That is why we used data that have already been validated by the decision makers in a real planning process (Maniadakis & Kyriopoulos, 2011). This case study was convenient to us in order to test our method in different samples (hospitals groups). With the use of metafrontier framework we actually evaluate each unit twice: with lower variability (group frontier) and with higher variability (metafrontier), in order to make comparisons and value judgments about the Bayesian-CCDEA model. Since our application is illustrative, we do not give much details about the Greek hospitals and we also make several simplifying assumptions concerning for example the technological change.Maniadakis and Kyriopoulos (2011) applied the DEA method to identify opportunities for improvement in public hospitals according to their operation targets. These results have been used by the Greek Government to make administrative mergers in the structure of hospitals in order to increase hospital efficiency. A primary assumption of that study was that technological heterogeneity exists among Greek hospitals as the sample contains hospitals of different sizes and operational characteristics with different mixes of medical specialties that serve different clusters of patients. Therefore the sample of hospitals was divided in three homogenous groups according to the hierarchical structure of the system and each group evaluated separately.The hierarchical groups of Greek hospitals were specified as follows:(i)Primary care hospitals known as hospital-health centers (HHCs) offering mainly primary health care and dealing with rather trivial treatments of the secondary health care. Their capacity is rather small (<100 beds) and they are located in remote rural areas, serving relatively small local populations.Secondary care hospitals offering all ranges of secondary health care. Their capacity is medium (<400 beds) and are located in central urban areas providing services on a regional basis.Tertiary care hospitals are equipped with advanced technology and are staffed with specialized personnel to offer highly specialized services. Tertiary hospitals are all large hospitals (>400 beds) and they are located in large urban centers providing care to multiple regions.In this paper we evaluate the Greek public hospitals using the same variables and hospitals groups with the above mentioned study, as it represents the most recent, reliable and verifiable available data set. This data set represents cross-sectional data recorded in 2009 by the Greek national school of public health which includes a total of 117 general public hospitals that were operating in Greece at that time. According to their hierarchical structure the 117 hospitals were divided in 17 primary, 71 secondary and 29 tertiary hospitals.The four input variables used in the DEA model to measure the hospitals' efficiency were: (a) doctors (number of doctors as an aggregation of all specialties of doctors in the hospital), (b) other personnel (number of other personnel as an aggregation of nurses, administrative and support staff in the hospital), (c) beds (number of beds per hospital as a proxy for capital investment) and (d) operating cost (total operating expenses, excluding payroll, capital and depreciation). The two outputs that were selected to reflect the production responsibilities of hospitals were: (e) annual numbers of inpatient admissions, (f) aggregated scheduled and emergency outpatient visits. The sample means and standard deviation of all DEA variables in hierarchical groups and in overall sample of hospitals are presented in Table 1.Due to the unavailability of data we do not make any case-mix adjustments in model outputs. This limitation could be problematic and have an impact on the results by changing efficiency scores and rankings. To some extend this effect is controlled by evaluating hospitals of the same hierarchical group.In this study we assume that the unpredictability of patient demand makes the hospitals' input–output relationship stochastic. More specifically, the inputs are considered as deterministic variables while the outputs are considered as stochastic variables. The main sources for output uncertainty are errors caused by:(i)transfers of patients between hospital clinics (i.e. one admission with multiple treatments),transfers of patients between hospitals (i.e. a patent have two admissions but may reserve treatment only in the latter hospital),miscoding of patient diagnosis, inpatient/outpatient status, etc., andwrong admissions (people who submitted to the emergency department of a hospital but they leave without receiving any treatment).In Greek hospital sector, the staffing capacity of each public hospital is determined centrally by the Ministry of Health, and thus individual hospital managers do not have any control over the size of the health workforce. The Greek hospitals are funded on the basis of global budgets rather than the targeted outputs they produce, and therefore of their inputs. In addition, hospital managers have no control over the size of the hospitals they run, and therefore of their inputs. For that reason an output-orientated DEA Model was used to examine the potential level of outputs a hospital should achieve given the actual level of its inputs. Furthermore, the Greek hospitals operate in a non-market environment with imperfect competition and budgetary constraints, as well as regulatory constraints that often result in organizations operating at an inefficient scale size (Jacobs, Smith, & Street, 2006). For this reason we used a VRS model which is the appropriate model when it is impossible to assume that all observed units are operating at an optimal scale (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984).DEA models are meaningful when they are applied to sets of units or organizations using similar resources and providing similar services. Considering however that the overall sample is heterogeneous, both in resources and production characteristics we introduce the metafrontier concept. The attractive feature of metafrontier model is that it takes into account any heterogeneity between production units in the comparison of efficiency. Analyzing the gap between a group frontier and the metafrontier indicates the potential improvements that can be made in the efficiencies of the hospitals of that group, when one removes the restrictions/regulations and uses the best practices that are associated with all hospitals in the sample. Hence, in our case the metafrontier analysis ensures that heterogeneous hospitals are compared based on a single homogenous technology. More specifically, the group frontier is a representation of the state of knowledge/technology pertaining to the transformation of hospitals inputs into outputs in their operational level, while the metafrontier represents the state of the knowledge/technology in evaluating hospitals of the whole health care system in an organizational level.In our planning exercise we utilize the metafrontier framework to examine if a technological gap between the hierarchal groups of hospitals actually exists or in other words if the hospitals operate with different conditions relative to their planned mission (primary, secondary and tertiary care). With regards to the metafrontier analysis in the three groups of the Greek public hospitals, it is important to note that the hierarchical structure of their services also impose different rules in the management of patient admissions and different regulations with respect to their financial and administrative autonomy and different resources (Economou, 2010). We can refer two studies that have already used a metafrontier analysis in hospitals evaluation. Watcharasriroj and Tang (2004) shown that large and small hospitals may have different frontiers. They claim that this effect may be because, at any level of outputs, large hospitals may practice more sophisticated production technology by using advanced medical equipment or experienced specialists. Asmild and Hollingsworth (2013) investigate the capacity as an exogenous factor and claims that large and small hospitals have different characteristics in terms of economies of scale, market share and access to advanced technologies.Consequently, the Bayesian-CCDEA model was tested and solved for each hospital twice. Firstly the hospitals efficiencies were evaluated with respect to the group frontier by comparing only the hospitals that belong to the same hierarchical group. Then, the estimation of the metafrontier would follow, by applying the Bayesian-CCDEA model on the obtained data set by pooling all hospitals observations from all groups.The Bayesian statistical model was implemented in R. More specifically, in order to estimate parameters and conduct a simulation study to ascertain parameter recovery with the Gibbs sampling algorithm we used the WinBUGS software. The Bayesian-CCDEA model was implemented using 1000 draws from the posterior distributions illustrated in Fig. 2. For each one of the draws, the non-linear programming problem of stochastic DEA is solved at the significance level a = 0.05 (i.e. z = 1.645). Then the optimization problems are solved by using a state of the art interior point non-linear programming solver (KNITRO). In our computations this commercial solver was able to solve all the optimization problems without any convergence problems.The Bayesian-CCDEA frontier is naturally a ‘soft’ frontier, at which the output observations of hospitals are in some cases allowed to cross the envelope. We can then move closer to make any observations. If a hospital achieves an efficiency score equal to 1 with no slack then the unit is considered to be efficient. If it achieves a score below to 1 then it is considered to be inefficient. Moreover one hospital can characterized as “fully efficient” or “sufficiently efficient”, if it is subsequently efficient in all runs or in a part of runs respectively. For each hospital this probability can simply be obtained as a result of the number of times that appears to be efficient across the simulations over the number of simulations itself. Second, based on the marginal distribution of scores, we can construct their 95 percent probability intervals. Using these two indicators, we obtain the associated probabilities of being correct in making inferences about the hospital efficiencyThe descriptive information for group frontier and metafrontier models are shown in Table 2 and the analytical results for each hospital assessment are shown in Table 3. The left part of these tables represents the group frontiers while the right part represents the metafrontier. In each part the first column indicates the original technical efficiencies (TE) and the next four columns depict the average stochastic technical efficiencies (STE) from the combined Bayesian-CCDEA model, the lower (LB) and upper boundary (UB) of the 95 percent probability interval as well as the probability of a hospital being efficient (π). The last column of these tables expresses the technology gap ratio (TGR).While we are referring primarily on the Bayesian-CCDEA efficiency estimations Tables 2 and 3 also report the original DEA values, in order to allow for comparison of results. The Bayesian-CCDEA model constructs production frontiers that incorporate both inefficiency and stochastic error. For this reason, the Bayesian-CCDEA frontier associates extreme outliers with the stochastic error term and consequently moves the frontier closer to the bulk of the producing units. As a result, the measured technical efficiency of the production units is raised relative to the deterministic model. Hence, in most cases the average STE scores are close or above the average TE scores. These results suggest that we have gained a better understanding of the efficiency of hospitals, and have increased our ability to identify hospitals are fully efficient and which ones are not. In the cases in which the hospitals are not fully efficient, our method provides researchers with probability intervals that reflect the associated uncertainty. In addition to the probability of a hospital being efficient (π), we can obtain “most probable” occurrences, in order to tentatively determine whether this probability is sufficiently high.We initially explain and discuss the obtained efficiency scores with respect to the three group frontiers. The average TE from the group of primary care hospitals was 0.91 with 2 units of them being fully efficient. The secondary care hospitals produce an average score of 0.73 with 32 units being fully efficient and the tertiary hospitals produce an average score of 0.86 with 10 units being fully efficient. As mentioned above these groups may not share the same operation environment/technology and subsequently these results cannot be compared with each other.Considering now the technical efficiency of the metafrontier scores we observe that their estimated efficiencies vary from 0.05 to 1 with 50 out of 117 hospitals to be fully efficient. If we focus on the percentage of efficient hospitals, the greater proportion (0.65) was found in tertiary hospitals, followed by the secondary care hospitals (0.43), while in the primary care there are no efficient hospitals. From Table 2 we observe that the primary care hospitals are the less efficient group relative to the metafrontier. On the other hand the primary care hospitals are producing on average 0.57 of their potential output with respect to the metafrontier technology. Given that the increase in the TGR implies a decrease in the gap between the group frontier and the metafrontier, we then conclude that the primary care hospitals operate under unfavorable environments (beyond managers control) compared to other hospital groups. The TGR ratio is clearly higher in the secondary and tertiary hospitals with an average of 0.99 and 0.98 respectively indicating that they operate with similar technologies and close to metafrontier. Subsequently the TGR measures illustrate the advantage of secondary and tertiary hospitals that achieve approximately 30 percent higher potential outputs compared with primary care hospitals. In Fig. 1 we can also observe a graphical representation of each hospital group relative to the metafrontier wherein the group frontiers numbering with 1, 2 and 3 represents the primary, secondary and tertiary hospitals respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
One of the major drawbacks of the DEA method is that it has no statistical properties and hence it is not possible to account for measurement errors in the estimation of efficiency. DEA is particularly sensitive to unreliable data because the efficient units determine the efficient and consequently the efficiency scores of those units under this frontier. Incorporation of random variations into DEA analysis has received significant attention in recent years. However the estimation of efficiency is a very challenging issue especially in cross-sectional setting. This article addresses this limitation by applying a combined Bayesian-CCDEA model in a cross-sectional data set to construct production frontiers that incorporate both inefficiency and stochastic error.The Bayesian-CCDEA model formulation has been illustrated by considering a case study related to the evaluation of the performance of a sample of 117 Greek public hospitals. Extensive computational experiments have been conducted by examining the three homogenous groups that reflects the hospitals’ operation technology as well as the heterogeneous entire sample of hospitals. Our findings in all cases have confirmed the efficacy of the proposed model.In order to obtain meaningful results and taking into account the heterogeneity between hospitals in the comparison of efficiency we introduced the metafrontier concept in our model. The results achieved show that the Bayesian-CCDEA model can be also applied when there exist data uncertainty to provide comparison between the technical and technology gap ratios of the different groups.When we estimate the efficiency for every sample separately, the highest average scores are achieved by tertiary hospitals followed by hospital-health centers. After that we consider the total sample of hospitals showing that the highest average efficiency scores still appeared in tertiary hospitals followed at this time by secondary hospitals. The metafrontier analysis has shown however that a relatively large gap exists in reported scores for the primary care hospitals while the secondary and the tertiary hospitals operate with similar technologies. Unfortunately, we did not discuss more elaborated policy implications that are nevertheless out of scope of this paper.A natural extension to our research is to use this framework to account the efficiencies in DEA to other forms of uncertainty, such as missing data from a subset of variables in the DMUs that we sampled. Another research direction is to express the uncertainty in parameters of the DEA model by using credible intervals constructed from the quantiles of the posterior distribution and then incorporate these estimated values in interval or fuzzy DEA models. With regards to the metafrontier framework, a possible research direction would be to apply the approach of O'Donnell, Fallah-Fini and Triantis, (2011) that also reflect the technological gap of the scale efficiencies.