@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Contract designs for energy-saving product development in a monopoly

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study two types of contracts (fixed amount and price discount) for a budget-constrained government.We capture the firm’s responce to the contracts in terms of pricing and product design.We consider two types of environmental performance and show that they have the same effect on contract designs.The impacts of the budget and consumers’ environmental awareness are explored.No contract type is always dominating or dominated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sustainable operations management,Contract designs,Subsidy,Product design and pricing,Environmental performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We discuss two types of contracts for energy-saving products in a monopoly with the government’s budget constraint. These contracts specify the subsidy, either a fixed amount (referred to as F-type contracts) or a discount (referred to as D-type contracts), and the threshold of the energy consumption level of products, below which the products are labeled as certified products and qualified for the subsidy. We model a three-stage game and give optimal design of the contracts under two different objectives of the government: minimizing the total energy consumption and minimizing the average energy consumption. Our results show that: 1) The optimal contract designs are the same under the two objectives; 2) If the subsidy budget is relatively low, the F-type contract is more preferable than the D-type contract, and vice versa; 3) The contracts’ function of certification enables the government to take the advantage of the consumer environmental awareness to improve the environmental performance even when the government’s subsidy budget is zero; 4) Both contracts benefit the environment. Under the F-type contract, only the government pays for the environmental improvement. In contrast, under the D-type contract, both the government and consumers pay.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the increasing awareness of environmental protection and sustainable development, governments are encouraging businesses to adopt green technologies and produce energy-saving products (Tang & Zhou, 2012). As we well know, accommodating new techniques and materials is vital to produce energy efficient products, which, however, makes energy efficient products usually more costly to produce and so more expensive in the market than conventional products (Conrad, 2005). To encourage both production and purchase of energy efficient products, governments on the one hand provide energy consumption certifications to distinguish energy efficient products from the ordinary, and on the other hand provide financial subsidies to manufacturers or consumers. For instance, in May 2012, China State Council announced that 26.5 billion Renminbi (4.1B dollar) is earmarked to subsidize energy-saving home appliances for a one-year period, mainly covering five home appliance categories: flat-screen TV sets, refrigerators, air conditioners, washing machines and water heaters.Generally speaking, the energy efficient products have designed energy-efficiency attributes, which is differently defined based on different kinds of home appliances. For example, there is an attribute of electricity consumption per hour for washing machines, energy efficiency index (EEI, which is defined as the quotient of actual energy input and related energy) for fridges, and coefficient of performance (COP, which is defined as the quotient of actual heat output and actual power input of heating) for water heaters. It is easy to see that all these attributes are equivalent to the energy consumption per unit time of the products. Therefore, we refer to these energy-efficiency attributes as designed energy consumption of the products throughout this paper.In this paper, we consider two types of contracts for the energy-saving products: fixed amount contracts (referred to as F-type contracts) and discount contracts (referred to as D-type contracts), in which the government specifies the subsidy and requirement for the products’ designed energy consumption. When a firm accepts a contract, the energy consumption level of its products must be below the specified, and its products are labeled as “certified products”. Moreover, the consumers who purchase the certified products will receive the subsidy specified in the contract. Hence, there are two roles of the contract. One, they help consumers distinguish the energy efficient products from the ordinary via certifications. Two, they provide subsidy to consumers for efficient product promotions. Table 1shows the detail rules of the fixed amount subsidy contract for energy-saving home appliances issued by the Chinese government in 2012. We take washing machines as an example. If a consumer purchases a cylinder washing machine with electricity consumption less than 0.23 kilowatt hour, she gets a subsidy of 70–260 Renminbi from the government. The discount subsidy contracts for energy-saving products are also implemented in China. For instance, in December 2007, a home appliance subsidy scheme offering rural consumers equal to 13 percent of the price of designated types of home appliances was launched in Shandong, Henan and Sichuan provinces and subsequently extended to 14 provinces and regions in December 2008. In fact, similar subsidy programs are implemented in other countries as well. In the United States, a tax credit ranging from 2500 dollar to 7500 dollar is available to the purchase of a new qualified electric drive motor vehicle. And in 2012 and 2013, a federal tax credit of 10 percent of cost up to 500 dollar is provided for biomass stoves, water heaters, and other home appliances.11http://www.energystar.gov/index.cfm?c=tax_credits.tx_index .The motivation of this paper is to answer the following questions: How does the firm respond to the contracts adopted by the government? What are the differences in the market equilibrium and optimal contract design under different objectives of the government? Which type of contract is preferable for the government? How does the optimal contract affect the firm and consumers? To this end, we model a three-stage game involving the consumers, firm and government. We solve this game problem and show that, for each type of contract, the optimal contracts are the same under the different objectives. Furthermore, through numerical study, we find that no contract type is always dominating or dominated: if the subsidy budget is relatively low, the F-type contract is more preferable than the D-type contract, and vice versa. Moreover, if the F-type contract is adopted, only the government pays for the environmental improvement; if the D-type contract is implemented, both the government and consumers pay for the environmental improvement. We also consider the case with no subsidy and highlight the contracts’ role of certification in energy-saving product development.Our paper is related to several research streams, including: green product design and pricing, subsidy, and effect of environmental regulation on operation management. We now briefly review each of the research streams below. Regulations force the manufacturers to produce environmental friendly products; see Tang and Zhou (2012), Gouda, Jonnalagedda, and Saranga (2016) for examples. On the other hand, two pieces of reason for why manufacturers choose environmental friendly products are as follows. one is the increasing consumer awareness of environmental protection, by which the consumers are willing to pay more for the environmental friendly products; and the other is the subsidies offered by governments. In other words, both the environmental awareness and subsidies significantly affect firms’ decision on product design and pricing. Moorthy (1988) examined the role of consumer preferences, costs, and price competition in determining the competitive product strategy of a firm by a two-stage game, in which two firms first decide their product attribute and then post a price. This is one of the earliest researches considering both product design and pricing. Liu and Anderson (2012) considered consumer environmental awareness and production competition between partially substitutable products made by different manufacturers to capture the optimal product design and pricing strategies in a duopoly. Similarly, Chen (2001) viewed the environmental attribute as a quality and evaluated the effects of environmental standards on the economic and environmental consequences of green product development with considering consumers’ different preference to different quality. Obviously, consumers’ new attitudes towards environmental value contributes to the promotion of green products (Simon, 1992). Because of this, The Roper Organization (1990) and Bureau (1992) had proposed to segment consumers according to their environmental awareness and attitudes. Besides, Chitra (2007) also showed that the higher the consumer environmental awareness, the more the consumers are willing to pay higher prices for eco-friendly products. Considering the consumer environmental awareness, Zhang, Wang, and You (2015) discussed the channel coordination problem with two substitutable products. In this paper, we consider the effect of environmental awareness on the joint decision of product design and pricing.When the consumer environmental awareness is quite low, the subsidy is perhaps only one effective incentive and plays a vital role in the development of green products. Lobel (2012) studied the problem from the perspective of the policy maker, where the goal is to find the optimal subsidy value to offer consumers willing to adopt the rooftop solar panels. More specifically, they assumed the government has a particular adoption target, within a given time frame, and is able to offer a rebate to the consumers adopting the technology. Likewise, Cohen, Lobel, and Perakis (2013) considered a setting where the supplier adjusts its production and price depending on the level of subsidies offered by the government, whose goal is also to achieve the adoption of certain green products with the smallest subsidy. In terms of subsidy types, a vast amount of research has been done. Krass, Nedorezov, and Ovchinnikov (2013) considered a leader-follower Stackelberg game between two key players: a profit-maximizing firm (the follower) and a social welfare-maximizing regulator (the leader), in which the regulator aims to maximize the social welfare, the sum of firm’s profit, consumer surplus and environmental impact, by the policy consisting of taxes, fixed cost subsidies, and consumer rebates. In particular, the subsidy to firm is fixed, while the rebate to consumer is a certain discount of retail price. Under the price-setting newsvendor setting, Ovchinnikov and Raz (2013) considered two intervention mechanisms (rebates and subsidies) to improve the welfare that consists of the firm’s profit, consumer surplus, and externality benefit net the government cost. In this paper, we also consider two types of contracts, fixed amount contracts and discount contracts. Moreover, we further make comparison between these two types of contracts not only in terms of environmental performance, but also in the aspect of the firm and consumers. To our best knowledge, our work is perhaps the first to address contract designs for durable products with considering the budget constraint.As more and more regulations on environment protection are issued in practice, there is a large number of researches to address how the regulations affect the environmental performance and operations management, e.g., Lombardini-Riippinen (2005), Taylor and Yadav (2011), Atasu and Subramanian (2012), Chen, Benjaafar, and Elomri (2013), Benjaafar, Li, and Daskin (2013), Zhou, Huang, and Zhou (2015) etc. Among these, many of them consider the social welfare. The government in our paper, however, consider the environmental performance. The paper closest to ours is the work of Chen (2001), who investigated how the standard set by the government will affect the environmental performance. Speaking of environmental performance, a suitable measurement is very necessary. Just like Chen (2001) and Chen et al. (2013), we measure the environment performance by the product of the environmental feature per unit of product and the total output volume, that is the total energy consumption in this paper, which is also adopted by Agrawal and Van Ülkü (2013) and Zhang et al. (2015). Apart from it, we also consider another measurement, namely, the average energy consumption, which indicates the level of environmental technology in an industrial (Wang, 1999; 2006). Finally, Chen (2001) showed that stricter environmental standards might not necessarily benefit the environment. In this paper, apart from the effect of subsidy on environment performance, we also investigate the effect of subsidy on the profit of the firm and the consumer surplus.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the assumptions, notation and model. Solution procedure is derived in Section 3. Section 4 makes comparisons between the two types of contracts in terms of the output volume and the profit of the firm, as well as the consumer surplus. Numerical analysis on environmental performance under these two contracts is presented in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper. All the proofs are provided in the Appendix.We consider a capacity-unconstrained firm, which offers a specific kind of durable products, such as, TV, washing machine, vehicle and so on. The durable products consume energy when being used. There is a designed energy consumption per unit time for the products, denoted by e (e > 0). In other words, once the products are designed, all the products consume e energy per unit time. In practice, e is related to the electricity consumption per hour for washing machines, the EEI for fridges and the COP for water heaters. There is a market admission for energy consumption, saye¯,which is exogenous. Only when the energy consumption per unit time of the products are designed to be smaller than or equal to the admissione¯,i.e.,e≤e¯,the products are permitted to be produced and sold in the market. For example, in China, any cylinder washing machines with electricity consumption per hour larger than 0.35 kilowatt hour, any fridges with EEI greater than 80 percent, and any solar water heaters with COP less than 10 percent are banned from selling. We assume the production cost per unit product is a convex and decreasing function of e, namely,c0+c(e),where c0 > 0, c′(e) < 0 and c′′(e) > 0, which is satisfied by the commonly used hyperbola, exponential, logarithmic functions. This cost structure is consistent with the principle of a diminishing marginal rate of return. Furthermore, we assume that the firm produces only one type of product and then posts a uniform price p > 0 for its products.To promote the energy-saving products, the government offers contracts with certification and subsidy. In this paper, we consider two types of contracts: F-type subsidy contracts and D-type subsidy contracts. At first, the government sets a threshold valuee(e̲<e¯), for example,e̲=0.23kilowatt hour for cylinder washing machines in China, such that if the energy consumption per unit time of the products is designed to be smaller than or equal toe, then the products can get the certification and be labeled with energy-saving label indicating them “certified products” (e.g., Energy Guide in US, Energy Rating in Australia, Energy Conservation Certification in China). In this paper, we assume that there is perfect information and no cost in third-party certification process. In this case, the government completely knows the energy consumption per unit time of the products. Meanwhile, the government subsidizes the consumer who purchases a certified product. Specifically, if the government adopts a F-type contract, the consumer would get a fixed subsidy s (s > 0). That is, that consumer only need to payp−sfor the product, and the government pays s to the firm. On the other hand, if the government adopts a D-type contract, the consumer gets a subsidy that is in proportion to the price. To be more specific, the consumer only need to pay(1−d)p(0<d<1)for that product, and the remainder dp is paid by the government. Moreover, the government’s budget constraint for the subsidy is assumed to be B(B > 0). The case withB=0is also discussed separately. We consider two objectives of the government: one is to minimize the average energy consumption per unit product, and the other is to minimize the total energy consumption.On the demand side, the market size is assumed to be Λ, which is further normalized as 1 without loss of generality. The consumers are heterogeneous and differ in their perceived value for the products, i.e., their willingness to pay for the products. An arbitrary consumer is assumed to have perceived value v for the products without certification and βv(β > 1) for those with certification, where v draws from a uniform distribution on [0, V] with p.d.f.1Vand β characterizes consumers’ willingness to pay price premiums for green products. For convenience, we refer to β as the consumer environmental awareness in the sense that consumers have higher environmental awareness are willing to pay a larger price premium for green products (Yenipazarli & Vakharia, 2015). Consumer surveys (for example, Chattaway, 2008) show that most of consumers report their willingness to pay a premium price for green products. For instance, consumers have revealed a willingness to pay price premiums of 30 dollar per night for hotel services that have certain eco-labels (Rivera, 2002). Note that the products will get the certification only when their energy consumption level meets the requirement specified in the contracts. In words, the contracts provide both subsidies and certifications. We further assume that there is no repeat purchase in the short term, i.e., consumers leave the market in quite some time after they have bought a product.We model this problem as a three-stage game. In the first stage, the government sets a contract, including the type of contract and its specified content, which then becomes a common knowledge among the firm and consumers. In the second stage, the firm simultaneously decides the energy efficiency of its products and its price. Finally, the consumers decide whether or not to purchase the products. Before our analysis, we first give the following assumption, which ensures that the firm can survive in the market when it chooses to produce uncertified products. Whether or not to take the contract provided by the government thus becomes one of the firm’s decisions.Assumption 1V>c0+c(e¯).As said above, the government acts as a Stackelberg leader, and the firm as well as the consumers act as followers, respectively. To solve this problem, we use backward induction.In this section, we discuss the consumer behavior. When consumers make their decision, the information of the firm and the government, i.e., the design and price of products, and the fixed subsidy s in F-type contracts or the discount d in D-type contracts, is common knowledge. For the sake of analysis, we introduce the consumer net utility, denoted by u, which is described by the difference of the value of product and the money consumers actually pay for this product. Specifically, if a consumer purchases a certified product, his/her net utility will beu=βv−(p−s)(for F-type contracts) oru=βv−(p−dp)(for D-type contracts); while he/she purchases a uncertified product, the net utility will beu=v−p. We assume consumers are rational; that is, consumers make their purchase decision to maximize their net utility. We also assume that the utility value for not purchasing any product is normalized to zero. Therefore, a consumer purchases the product if and only if his/her expected utility value is nonnegative. According to the consumer behavior, we can easily get the sales quantity of the products, which is denoted by qF(p) if the government implements F-type contracts and qD(p) if the government implements D-type contracts. For notational convention, let[x]+=max{x,0}.Theorem 1With the given product type, subsidy and price, the firm’s sales quantity is specific inTable 2.No matter which kind of products the firm produces, only the consumers with high value for the products purchase the products. Furthermore, the subsidy encourages more consumers to purchase products. In particular, when the subsidy is high enough, all the consumers purchase the products if the firm chooses to produce certified products. Besides, when the firm has decided which kind of products should be produced, the energy consumption e has nothing to do with its sales quantity (also known as demand), which means improving the energy-saving attribute of the products does not increase the demand.In this stage, the firm should make a decision on its product design and its sales price with the knowledge of the contract claimed by the government. In other words, given the subsidy contract, the firm sets p and e to maximize its expected profit. Let πF(p, e) and πD(p, e) be the expected profit of the firm under F-type contracts and D-type contracts, respectively. According to Theorem 1, we can easily obtain that(3.1)πF(p,e)={(p−c0−c(e))min{[1−p−sβV]+,1},e≤e̲,(p−c0−c(e))[V−pV]+,e̲<e≤e¯.,and(3.2)πD(p,e)={(p−c0−c(e))[1−(1−d)pβV]+,e≤e̲,(p−c0−c(e))[V−pV]+,e̲<e≤e¯..Theorem 2Given the contract type, if the firm chooses to produce certified products, i.e., e ≤e, then the optimal decision on the designed energy consumption of the products ise, i.e.,e*=e̲. Conversely, if the firm chooses uncertified products, i.e.,e̲<e≤e¯,then the optimal decision on the designed energy consumption ise¯,i.e.,e*=e¯.The above theorem reports an interesting and useful property: the decisions on designed energy consumption can only be eithereore¯. This is because the designed energy consumption does not directly affect the sales quantity as shown in Theorem 1. Meanwhile, it increases the production cost. Hence, the firm just set the designed energy consumption at the threshold, such that to get the admission or subsidy with the least production cost. The result reported in Theorem 2 greatly simplifies the analysis of the firm’s strategy. With Theorem 2, Eqs. (3.1) and (3.2) can be rewritten as follows:(3.3)πF(p)={(p−c0−c(e̲))min{[1−p−sβV]+,1},e≤e̲,(p−c0−c(e¯))[V−pV]+,e̲<e≤e¯.,and(3.4)πD(p)={(p−c0−c(e̲))[1−(1−d)pβV]+,e≤e̲,(p−c0−c(e¯))[V−pV]+,e̲<e≤e¯..Eqs. (3.3) and (3.4) show that if the firm produces uncertified products, the profit function has nothing to do with the contract, neither (e, s) nor (e, d). For convenience, we denotep0*,pF*(e̲,s)andpD*(e̲,d)as the optimal price when the firms produces uncertified products, certified products with F-type contracts, and certified products with D-type contracts, respectively. Then, the following theorem gives the optimal price strategy of the firm.Theorem 31.Given any contract, if the firm produces uncertified products, then the optimal price isp0*=V+c0+c(e¯)2;Given F-type contracts with (e, s), if the firm produces certified products, then the optimal price ispF*(e̲,s)=max{βV+s+c0+c(e̲)2,s};Given D-type contracts with (e, d), if the firm produces certified products, then the optimal price ispD*(e̲,d)=βV2(1−d)+c0+c(e̲)2.If the firm chooses (to produce) uncertified products, regardless of the contract type, the optimal strategy stays the same despite the contract content. On the contrary, if the firm chooses certified products, the optimal price for the products is decreasing in the thresholde. In other words, the lower the energy consumption of the product is, the higher the price posted by the firm will be. Furthermore, under F-type contracts, the optimal price is increasing with respect to the subsidy s; under D-type contracts, the optimal price is increasing with respect to the subsidy discount d. That is, a bigger subsidy offered by the government induces the firm to post a higher price. Finally, it is worth to point out that given that the firm produces certified products, the energy consumption requirementehas the same effect on the optimal price in the contracts, which is reflected in the production cost, i.e.,c0+c(e̲). The subsidy terms, s and d, however, affect the optimal prices differently: under F-type contracts, the price is adjusted linearly in the subsidy term s; under D-type contracts, the adjustment is not linear in the subsidy term d.Letπ0*andq0*be the largest profit and the corresponding production quantity to realize this profit when the firm chooses uncertified products, πF(e, s) (πD(e, d))and qF(e, s) (qD(e, d)) be the largest profit and corresponding production quantity to realize this profit when the firm chooses certified products under F-type (D-type) contracts. In the following theorem, we respectively conclude the contract content in each type of contract, with which the firm chooses certified products or uncertified products respectively. For ease of exploration, we denoteS1(x)=(β−β)V+(1−β)c0+c(x)−βc(e¯);d̲=1−2βV22V(c0+c(e̲))+(V−c0−c(e¯))2+(V−c0−c(e¯))(V−c0−c(e¯))2+4V(c0+c(e̲)).Theorem 41.Given F-type contracts with (e, s), if s ≥ S1(e), then the firm will produce certified products, i.e.,e*=e̲; otherwise, the firm will produce uncertified products, i.e.,e*=e¯.Given D-type contracts with (e, d), if d ≥d, then the firm will produce certified products, i.e.,e*=e̲; otherwise, the firm will produce certified products, i.e.,e*=e¯.Theorem 4 shows that to motivate the profit-oriented firm to produce certified products, the government should offer a subsidy which is larger than or equals to a threshold (s ≥ S1(e) for F-type contracts and d ≥dfor D-type contracts). In this case, the firm could obtain a larger profit or at least would not lose its profit by producing certified products in comparison with producing uncertified products. In particular, when the subsidy exactly equal the threshold, the profit of the firm by producing certified products is the same as the one by producing uncertified products. It is easy to verify that ∂S1(e)/∂e<0 and ∂d/∂e<0. That is, while setting a smaller value ofe, the government must offer a larger subsidy accordingly, i.e., a larger value of s or d, to motivate the firm to choose certified products. However, since the government faces the limitation of budget, the subsidy cannot always rise. In the following section, we give the appropriate design for each type of contract.In this section, we give the optimal design of the energy-saving contract for the government, who aims to improve the environmental performance and faces the limited budget B. Here, two kinds of environmental performance are considered. Correspondingly, there are two objectives for the government: one is to minimize the total energy consumption, denoted by ET; the other is to minimize the average energy consumption, denoted by EA. For ease of presentation, we denote(e̲TF,sT*)((e̲TD,dT*)) as the optimal F-type (D-type) contract to minimize the total energy consumption, and(e̲AF,sA*)((e̲AD,dA*)) as the optimal F-type (D-type) contract to minimize the average energy consumption.In this scenario, government aims to reduce the total energy consumption. Also, the government can only offer financial subsidy in total no more than B. Thus, the decision models for the government under F-type contracts D-type contracts are respectively given by:(T1)mine̲,sET(e̲,s)=eqs.t.sq≤Bs≥0,e̲≤e¯(T2)mine̲,dET(e̲,d)=eqs.t.dpq≤Bs≥0,e̲≤e¯The first constraints in both decision models are the financial budget constraint. For ease of exploration, we denotee0=c−1((β−β)V+(β−1)c0+βc(e¯)+2βBVV−c0−c(e¯)).Theorem 5The optimal F-type and D-type contracts to minimize the total energy consumption are respectively given as follows:1.the optimal F-type contract ise̲TF=e0andsT*=2βBVV−co−c(e¯);the optimal D-type contract ise̲TD=c−1((β1−d0−1)(β1−d0V+c0)+β1−d0c(e¯)),anddT*=d0,where d0is the unique root of(3.5)2β1−d0(V−c0−c(e¯))−Bd0−(V−c0−c(e¯))2V=0.As we can see, the contract contents in the optimal contract design,(e̲TF,sT*)or(e̲TD,dT*),have a certain relationship, i.e.,sT*=S1(e̲TF)ore̲TD=c−1((β1−dT*−1)(β1−dT*V+c0)+β1−dT*c(e¯)). Recall that the latter equation is equivalent todT*=d̲. According to Theorem 4, this relationship indicates that whether to produce certified products or uncertified products makes no difference to the firm in terms of profits. In other words, the optimal subsidy contract ensures that the firm chooses certified products and invests all the subsidy on the promotion of energy-efficient technology.In this scenario, the government aims to reduce the average energy consumption under the financial budget constraint B. Thus, the decision models for the government under F-type contracts and D-type contracts are respectively given by:(A1)mine̲,sEA(e̲,s)=es.t.sq≤Bs≥0,e̲≤e¯(A2)mine̲,dEA(e̲,d)=es.t.dpq≤Bs≥0,e̲≤e¯Theorem 6The optimal F-type and D-type contracts to minimize the average energy consumption are given as follows:1.the optimal F-type contract ise̲AF=e0andsA*=2βBVV−co−c(e¯);the optimal D-type contract ise̲AD=c−1((β1−d0−1)(β1−d0V+c0)+β1−d0c(e¯)),anddA*=d0,where d0is the unique root ofEq. (3.5).Likewise, the optimal contract guarantees the firm to choose certified products and use all the subsidy on the promotion of energy-saving technology. By far, the optimal contract design has been captured in respective type of contract. In next section, we will make comparisons between the optimal F-type contract and optimal D-type contract in terms of the firm’s profit, consumer surplus and environmental performance, as well as to investigate the effect of budget B and environmental awareness β on these optimal contracts. Before that, we show some finding in a special case where the government invests nothing in the subsidy policy, i.e.,B=0. That is, the contracts provide certifications only. WhenB=0,from the budget constraints, it is clear thatsi*=di*=0,i=T,A. Moreover, according to Theorems 5 and 6, it is easy to see that fori=T,Aandj=F,D,c(e̲ij)>c(e¯). We thus immediately conclude as follows.Corollary 1IfB=0,thensi*=di*=0ande̲ij<e¯fori=T,A,j=F,D.There is no doubt that when the budget is zero, no subsidy can be offered. Furthermore, it turns out that the optimal designs under the two objectives are the same in this case. More importantly, Corollary 1 shows that even when the budget is zero, the government can still improve the environmental performance through implementing the contracts without any subsidy. Note that consumers value the certified products more than the uncertified. Thus, for the same energy consumption level of the products, producing certified products brings the firm more profit than producing uncertified products despite of the amount of the subsidy (e.g., even when no subsidy is offered). Knowing this, the government would lower the energy consumption level of the products appropriately so that the environmental performance will be improved and the firm will accept the contract at the same time. Corollary 1 thus highlights the effect of certifications.In this section, we investigate the effect of the budget and environmental awareness on the optimal contracts, as well as the effect of contracts on the firm and consumers. To this end, we regard the profit as the firm’s performance indicator, and consumer surplus as the consumers’ performance indicator. In particular, consumer surplus is defined as the difference between willingness to pay and the cost consumer has paid for the products. We denote w0 as the consumer surplus when the government does not offer any subsidy contract, andwF(e̲iF,si*)(wD(e̲iD,di*)) as the consumer surplus under the F-type (D-type) contract and objective i,i=T,A. Hence, the consumer surplus is calculated as follows:w0=∫p0*Vv−p0*Vdv=V2[q0*]2;wF(e̲iF,si*)=∫pF*(e̲iF,si*)−si*βVβv+si*−pF*(e̲iF,si*)Vdv=βV2[qF*(e̲iF,si*)]2;wD(e̲iD,di*)=∫(1−di*)pD*(e̲iD,di*)βVβv−(1−di*)pD*(e̲iD,di*)Vdv=βV2[qD*(e̲iD,di*)]2.For ease of exploration, we further define m0,mF(e̲iF,si*),mD(e̲iD,di*),i=T,Aas the marginal profit per product when no subsidy is offered, the F-type contract is offered and the D-type contract is offered, respectively, andhF(e̲iF,si*),hD(e̲iD,di*),i=T,Aas the money consumers actually pay for the products under the F-type contract and the D-type contract, respectively.Proposition 11.e̲TF=e̲AF,sT*=sA*,e̲TD=e̲AD,dT*=dA*;Fori=T,A,qD*(e̲iD,di*)<qF*(e̲iF,si*)<q0*,mD(e̲iD,di*)>mF(e̲iF,si*)>m0,πF*(e̲iF,si*)=πD*(e̲iD,di*)=π0*;Fori=T,A,hD(e̲iD,di*)>hF(e̲iF,si*)>p0*,wD(e̲iD,di*)<wF(e̲iF,si*)=w0.Surprisedly, for each type of contract, the optimal contracts under different objectives of the government are the same. This is because when the government aims to minimize the total energy consumption, the sales quantities of the firm under different types of contracts and different objectives areqF*(e̲iF,si*)=q0*βandqD*(e̲iD,di*)=1−di*βq0*,which are constant with respect toeand so minimizing the total energy consumption is tantamount to minimizing the average energy consumption.For the firm, the production quantity under the F-type contract or the D-type contract is less than the one without any contract. This is because the quantity is indirectly “controlled” by the government for its own sake (environmental performance). On the other hand, thanks to the subsidy, the firm obtains a larger marginal profit per product under these contracts, and eventually makes the same profit as the case without any subsidy. In other words, the subsidy is completely used to improve environmental performance. Moreover, comparing to the F-type contract, the D-type contract leads to a lower sales quantity but a larger marginal profit.To consumers, as we can see, consumers pay more under the subsidy policy. Particularly, consumers pay far more for a product under the D-type contract. However, recall that consumers value the certified products more than the uncertified products22We models this by β( > 1) in the sense that consumers are willing to pay price premiums for green goods., then if consumers pay more does not necessarily means the consumer surplus would decrease. For the F-type contract, the consumer surplus is the same as the one under no subsidy, i.e.,wF(e̲iF,si*)=w0. In other words, if the government adopts the F-type contract, consumers do not pay for the environmental improvement. However, this is not true for the D-type contract. Note thatwF(e̲iF,si*)<w0,which means that if the government implements the D-type contract, then not only the government, but also consumers will pay for the environmental improvement.Proposition 21.Fori=T,A,e̲iFande̲iDdecrease in B, whilesi*,di*,pF*(e̲iF,si*)andpD*(e̲iD,di*)increase in B;Fori=T,A,∂πF*(e̲iF,si*)∂B=0,∂πD*(e̲iD,di*)∂B=0,∂qF*(e̲iF,si*)∂B=0,∂qD*(e̲iD,di*)∂B<0;Fori=T,A,∂wF(e̲iF,si*)∂B=0,∂wD(e̲iD,di*)∂B<0.ET(e̲TF,sT*),ET(e̲TD,dT*),EA(e̲AF,sA*),EA(e̲AD,dA*)decrease in B.Proposition 2 shows how the budget affects the optimal contract, the firm’s profit, price, sales quantity, consumer surplus and environmental performance. For both types of contracts, a larger financial budget leads to a severer requirement on energy consumption of the product, a larger subsidy to the consumers and a larger retail price. If the government chooses the F-type contract, the increasing budget does not affect the profit and the sales quantity of the firm, neither the consumer surplus. In contrast, if the government adopts the D-type contract, with the increasing budget, the profit of the firm is still the same. However, it is surprising that both sales quantity and consumer surplus decrease in budget B. In the end, as we may expect, no matter which type of contract the government chooses, the increasing budget benefits environment more.Proposition 31.Fori=T,A,e̲iF,e̲iDanddi*decrease in β, whilesi*,pF*(e̲iF,si*)andpD*(e̲iD,di*)increases in β;Fori=T,A,∂πF*(e̲iF,si*)∂β=0,∂πD*(e̲iD,di*)∂β=0,∂qF*(e̲iF,si*)∂β<0,∂qD*(e̲iD,di*)∂β<0;Fori=T,A,∂wF(e̲iF,si*)∂β=0,∂wD(e̲iD,di*)∂β>0.ET(e̲TF,sT*),ET(e̲TD,dT*),EA(e̲AF,sA*)andEA(e̲AD,dA*)decrease in β.Proposition 3 presents the effect of the consumer environmental awareness. Consistent with intuition, a higher environmental awareness reduces the energy consumption of products, increases the price and environmental performance, and has no effect on the firm’s profit. Interestingly, while the subsidy amount of the F-type contract (si*) is increasing in the environmental awareness, the discount of the D-type contract (di*) is decreasing. This is different from how the budget affects the optimal prices. Such difference comes from the fact that while the budget does not affect consumers’ utility, the environmental awareness increases consumers’ utility. Thus, to make products attractive to the consumers, it is unnecessary to offer a larger subsidy even though the prices are increased. Furthermore, fromβv+s−pandβv+dp−p,it is clear that fix s and d, an increase in β has a larger positive effect on D-type contracts with noting that p is increasing in β at equilibrium. To mitigate such difference, one may increase s and decrease d. Finally, in contrast to∂wD(e̲iD,di*)/∂B<0,Part 3 of Proposition 3 shows that∂wD(e̲iD,di*)/∂β>0. That is, under the D-type contract, as the consumer environmental awareness increases, the consumer surplus are increasing. Even so, one should keep it in mind thatwD(e̲iD,di*)<wF(e̲iF,si*)=w0fori=T,A. That is, the D-type contract hurts the consumers.In this section, we first conduct a numerical study to compare the two contracts’ performance under different objectives of the government. Subsequently, we use the empirical data in China to investigate the implementation of the energy-saving subsidy scheme in China in 2012.In this part, we try to identify the condition under which the government prefers the F-type contract to the D-type contract and vice versa. To this end, we take Haier XQG60-B1226A washing machines as an example. Based on some survey reports,33http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/consumer-interest-in-green-products-expands-across-categories-123473189.html .we estimated the parameters as follows:V=2300Renminbi,e¯=0.35kilowatthour,c0=260c(e)=300/e.Fig. 1shows the comparisons between the two contracts when the budget (B) and consumer environmental awareness (β) vary with horizonal axis indicating the value of the budget, vertical axis indicating the value of the consumer environmental awareness, and white region indicating the F-type contract conducts a better performance than the D-type contract. See Fig. 1(a) for the comparison in terms of total energy consumption. When the budget is low, the F-type contract results in a lower total energy consumption than the D-type contract; when the budget is high, the D-type contract, however, results in a lower total energy consumption; when the budger is moderate, which contract conducts a better environmental performance depends on the consumer environmental awareness: if the environmental awareness is high, then the F-type contract is better than the D-type contract in term of reducing the total energy consumption, and vice versa. These indicate that as the budget increases or the consumer environmental awareness decreases, the D-type contract becomes more attractive than the F-type contract. According to Fig. 1(b), similar results are easy to see when we focus on the average energy consumption. The difference between these two figures is that the F-type contract conducts a better performance than the D-type contract more frequently in Fig. 1(b).Observation 1(1)For both objectives, when the government’s budget is low (high), the F-type (D-type) contract benefits the environment more; when the budget is moderate, if the consumer environmental awareness is high (low), then the F-type (D-type) contract benefits the environment more.The number of instances in which the F-type contract is preferable is larger when the government’s goal changes from the total energy consumption minimization to the average energy consumption minimization.In this part, we use the empirical data to analyze the implementation of the energy-saving subsidy scheme in China in 2012 by taking the washing machines for example. As said in the Introduction, the Chinese government invested 26.5 billion Renminbi in promotion of the green home appliances by offering F-type contracts to home appliance companies. However, after a year, the Chinese government had only spent 12.2 billion Renminbi (almost 50 percent of the budget) on the energy-efficient home appliances.44http://www.mof.gov.cn/zhengwuxinxi/caijingshidian/zgcjb/201306/t20130603_900338.html .In other words, the government had not used up the budget. How could this happen? Is it because the contract is not appropriate? In the following, we use the results of our paper to find out the reason. According to Theorems 5 and 6, there are two principles for the government to design the optimal subsidy contract:s=S1(e̲)andsq(e̲,s)=B. The former indicates that the government should ensure the firm to invest all the subsidy on energy-saving technology development and consequently the firm would neither obtain a larger profit nor lose its profit if producing certified products. The latter one requires the government to use all of the budget. In the practice, the first principle is more easy to be implemented, as long as the government has enough information on the cost of energy-saving technology, which could be achieved by doing some data collection and research. Therefore, we assume that the Chinese government realized the first principle in this empirical example, i.e.,s=S1(e̲). Furthermore, we adopt the same product cost function as that in the numerical study, i.e.,c(e)=300/e. According to the detailed rule of subsidy scheme issued by the Chinese government, the government subsidized the washing machines with e ≤ 0.23 kilowatt hour with 100 Renminbi and subsidized the washing machines with e > 0.23 kilowatt hour nothing. On this occasion,e̲=0.23andS1(0.23)=100.In fact, by Eq. (6.5) (defined in Appendix),s=S1(e̲)also means the sale quantity is constant with respect to s,eand B. To use up the budget, the government should first double the amount of subsidy actually used. That is to double the subsidy per product (namelys=200Renminbi), since the subsidy is in proportion to the budget for any given sales quantity. Hence, the optimal requirement for electricity consumption per houre* is given by the following equations:{S1(e̲*)=200S1(0.23)=100.Using the former equation to minus the latter one, we getc(e̲*)−c(0.23)=100,that is,e̲*=0.21. In summary, this adjustment for the government seems simple: enlarging the subsidy per product and correspondingly setting a severer certification requirement. Finally, it is interesting to mention that both the total energy consumption and average energy consumption are reduced by 9 percent (=0.02/0.23) if the government doubles (increases by 100 percent) its amount of subsidy actually used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
