@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Shadow pricing of undesirable outputs in nonparametric analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We contribute to a methodological debate in the nonparametric literature.Way of modeling undesirables as inputs or outputs, or by transformation functions.We point out a current error in the modeling of weak disposability under VRS.We introduce a new hybrid model with an economically meaningful interpretation.We introduce a Law of One Price rule for shadow prices of undesirable outputs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis,Undesirable outputs,Weak disposability,Shadow prices,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For three decades a growing interest in the modeling of desirable and undesirable outputs has led to a theoretical and methodological debate in the nonparametric literature on production technology and efficiency. The first main discussion is about the way of modeling ‘bad/undesirables’ as inputs or outputs, or by transformation functions. The second debate concerns the implications of the weak disposability assumption in the modeling of bad outputs, in particular the possibility of assigning unexpected signs to shadow prices of bad outputs. In addition, we point out a current error in the modeling of weak disposability under a variable returns to scale technology. In this paper we introduce a hybrid model to ensure the economically meaningful jointness of good and bad outputs while constraining shadow prices of bad outputs to their expected sign. We argue that it is a sound compromise to model undesirable outputs with a meaningful primal/dual economic interpretation. Finally we propose an extension to define shadow prices for undesirable outputs following the Law of One Price (LoOP) rule.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The amount of literature on bad or undesirable outputs in nonparametric analysis has been extensively increasing since the 1980s. In a recent survey on Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) in energy and environmental studies, Zhou et al. (2008a) listed a total of 100 studies published from 1983 to 2006 and the tendency has not yet decreased. Zhou et al. (2008a) classified DEA methods for modeling bad outputs in two groups namely those based on data transformation and the use of traditional DEA and those using the original data but relying on the weak disposability assumption. Based on this classification, Sahoo et al. (2011) clearly summarized the approaches in modeling bad outputs.Among the first group, Lovell et al. (1995) and Athanassopoulos and Thanassoulis (1995) transformed the values to their reciprocals as discussed by Liang et al. (2009). Scheel (2001) and Seiford and Zhu (2002) modeled undesirable outputs as desirable using a linear monotone decreasing transformation. A variant was the approach directly dealing with bad outputs as inputs, such as that introduced by Reinhard et al. (2000), Hailu and Veeman (2001) or more recently by Mahlberg and Sahoo (2011) and Mahlberg et al. (2011).The second group is composed of the studies starting from the model introduced by Färe et al. (1989). The modeling of bad outputs is based on the assumption of a joint production between outputs that relies on the weak disposability axiom introduced by Shephard (1970, 1974). Intuitively this axiom states that any decrease in bad outputs necessarily implies a decrease in good outputs for efficient Decision Making Units (DMUs). Therefore the bad outputs are not freely disposable and cannot be reduced without affecting the production of desirable outputs. This approach has been widely used in nonparametric literature. We can cite among others, Färe et al. (1996, 2001, 2004), Chung et al. (1997), Tyteca (1997), Boyd and McClelland (1999), Boyd et al. (2002), Zaim (2004), Arcelus and Arocena (2005), Picazo-Tadeoa et al. (2005), Mandal (2010), Zhou et al. (2007, 2008b, 2012). Other authors like Kuosmanen (2005) and Kuosmanen and Podinovski (2009), Kuosmanen and Matin, (2011) proposed alternative ways of modeling undesirable outputs.An additional question concerns the direction used in order to reach the efficient frontier. Hyperbolic, radial input, radial output or directional distance measures have been proposed in the literature. Moreover, a surprisingly ignored pitfall in this literature is the modeling of weak disposability under various assumptions on returns to scale. Currently, constant returns to scale (CRS) and non-increasing returns to scale (NIRS) models lead to ‘ready to use’ linear programs. However, variable returns to scale (VRS) and non-decreasing returns to scale (NDRS) models are more complicated. Nonlinear in their original form, as defined for example by Färe and Grosskopf (2003), they have led to an incorrect linearization used in many studies. It is only recently that correct linearizations have occurred in the literature. We will discuss this issue while proposing a primal/dual formulation with a relevant economic interpretation of the weak disposability.The above classification is essentially methodological but recently, a more theoretical discussion has emerged on the ‘good modeling of bad outputs’. Two inspiring papers have been proposed by Førsund (2009) and Murty et al. (2012). In the latter, they argued that: “many commonly used models of pollution-generating technologies, which treat pollution as a freely disposable input or as a weakly disposable and null-joint output, may generate unacceptable implications for the trade-offs among inputs, outputs and pollution”. They also argued that: “the correct trade-offs in production are best captured if pollution-generating technology is modeled as an intersection of an intended-production technology of the firm and nature’s residual-generation set.” Another theoretical question is related to the inclusion of a material balance condition in the modeling. A deeper discussion can be found in Pethig (2006) while its application into a nonparametric framework is discussed by Coelli et al. (2007), Førsund (2009) and Murty et al. (2012).While these approaches seem promising, we still confine our work to the ‘reduced form’ for which we propose a hybrid model. It appears to be a good compromise between the necessity to model jointness of good and bad outputs and the expectation of getting shadow prices on bad outputs that define them as a cost. Our approach can be viewed as the nonparametric counterpart of the Färe et al. (1993) approach in which they constrained shadow prices of bad outputs in a parametric translog output distance function.Finally we propose an extension to define shadow prices for undesirable outputs following the Law of One Price (LoOP) rule. This extension proves useful in the case for example where a bad output is a pollutant and by taking the point of view of Society who wants to define a unique price for the pollutant in order to implement a pollution tax.We start with the definition of the weakly disposable Shephard’s technology as given in Färe and Grosskopf (2003). We denote inputs byx=(x1,…,xN)∈R+N, desirable or good outputs byv=(v1,…,vM)∈R+Mand undesirable or bad outputs byw=(w1,…,wJ)∈R+J. The technology consisting of all feasible (v,w,x) and the corresponding output set are denoted respectively by:(1)T={(v,w,x):xcan produce(v,w)}(2)P(x)={(v,w):(x,v,w)∈T}Next we turn to the definition of weak disposability as defined by Shephard (1970, 1974). Outputs are weakly disposable if proportional reductions of outputs are feasible:(3)If(v,w)∈P(x)and0⩽θ⩽1then(θv,θw)∈P(x)In most cases, the null-jointness condition is also assumed (e.g. Färe and Grosskopf, 2004):(4)If(v,w)∈P(x)andw=0thenv=0The null-jointness property describes the pollution problem, namely that the good output cannot be produced without the production of the bad output.By considering a sample of K observed DMUs the specification of the activity analysis model satisfying constant returns to scale and weak disposability is given by:(P1) Bads defined as weakly undesirable outputs (CRS)(P1)maxδ,μδs.t.∑k=1Kμkvm,k⩾vmk′+δgmvm=1,…,M∑k=1Kμkwj,k=wjk′-δgjwj=1,…,J∑k=1Kμkxn,k⩽xnk′n=1,…,Nμk⩾0k=1,…,Kwhereg=(gv,gw)∈R+M+Jis the direction vector.(P1) is the classic model as introduced by Färe et al. (1989) except for the fact that we use a directional distance function here instead of the hyperbolic measure. The main feature of (P1) is the constant returns to scale assumption. Currently, the weak disposability axiom (3) is necessarily verified when constant returns to scale or non-increasing returns to scale are assumed (see Färe and Grosskopf, 2009). Therefore the abatement factor θ as defined in (3) does not occur in (P1) which remains a linear program. (P1) has been appropriately and extensively used in nonparametric literature. Some of the authors who have done this include Chung et al. (1997), Tyteca (1997), Weber and Domazlicky (2001), Färe et al. (2004, 2012), Färe and Grosskopf (2004), Arcelus and Arocena (2005), Mandal (2010), Zhou et al. (2007, 2008b, 2012).The issue is more sensitive when dealing with variable returns to scale. As a matter of fact, the VRS assumption does not imply the weak disposability axiom (3) which therefore needs to be explicitly introduced in the model. The specification of the activity analysis model satisfying VRS, output directional distance function and weak disposability is discussed for example by Färe and Grosskopf (2003, 2009).(P2) Bads defined as weakly undesirable outputs (non-linear VRS)(P2)maxδ,μ,θδs.t.θ∑k=1Kμkvm,k⩾vmk′+δgmvm=1,…,Mθ∑k=1Kμkwj,k=wjk′-δgjwj=1,…,J∑k=1Kμkxn,k⩽xnk′n=1,…,N∑k=1Kμk=1μk⩾0k=1,…,K0⩽θ⩽1The main feature of (P2) is its non-linearity. We will see below how to correctly linearize this program. However a host of papers have incorrectly modeled the VRS case as (P3):(P3) Bads defined as weakly undesirable outputs (incorrect VRS)(P3)maxδ,μδs.t.∑k=1Kμkvm,k⩾vmk′+δgmvm=1,…,M∑k=1Kμkwj,k=wjk′-δgjwj=1,…,J∑k=1Kμkxn,k⩽xnk′n=1,…,N∑k=1Kμk=1μk⩾0k=1,…,K(P3) is merely the CRS program (P1) where the constraint∑k=1Kμk=1has been added with the purpose of modeling the VRS assumption. However, this approach is incorrect. As we previously stated, the CRS assumption implies weak disposability but it is not the case for the VRS assumption. Therefore, weak disposability is not imposed at all in (P3). This inappropriate formulation is not rare and can be found in the literature of Jeon and Sickles (2004), Picazo-Tadeoa et al. (2005), Hua and Bian (2007), Piot-Lepetit and Le Moing (2007), Kjærsgaard et al. (2009), Bilsel and Davutyan (2011). Another improper modeling has come from an error in the book by Färe et al. (1994). They defined the VRS model under weak disposability with the abatement factor on the bad output but omitted to apply it to the good output (Eq. (6.1.22), p. 163). Ferrier et al. (2006) and Clement et al. (2008) reproduced this error as noted by Kuntz and Sülz (2011).The correct linearization of (P2) has been proposed by Zhou et al. (2008b), Sahoo et al. (2011), Lozano and Gutierrez (2011) or Kuntz and Sülz (2011). It is based on a change of variables in (P2):λk=θμk.(P4) Bads defined as weakly undesirable outputs (correct VRS)(P4)maxδ,λ,θδs.t.∑k=1Kλkvm,k⩾vmk′+δgmvm=1,…,M∑k=1Kλkwj,k=wjk′-δgjwj=1,…,J∑k=1Kλkxn,k⩽θxnk′n=1,…,N∑k=1Kλk=θλk⩾0k=1,…,K0⩽θ⩽1In (P1), (P2), and (P4) the bad output constraint occurs with an equality sign meaning that unconstrained shadow prices are associated with bad outputs. This is a key feature of the traditional approach of Färe and Grosskopf starting from their initial paper in 1989. However Hailu (2003), Førsund (2009) or Murty et al. (2012) have vigorously criticized the possibility of allowing positive and negative shadow prices for bad outputs. Naturally, undesirable outputs produced by a firm are a cost to Society, the consumers or the firm itself (if the firm have to pay a pollution tax for example). Hailu and Veeman (2001) proposed an alternative model in which the bad outputs are considered as inputs. This way, the shadow prices are forced to be non-positive when good output shadow prices are non-negative. This option follows the influential approach of Baumol and Oates (1975) and Cropper and Oates (1992). Based on other considerations, several authors also introduced bad outputs as inputs in the modeling: Scheel (2001), Yang and Pollitt (2009), Hongliang and Pollitt (2010), Liu et al. (2010), among others. By keeping the notation we introduced, the specification of the DEA program in which bad outputs are strongly disposable inputs is given by:(P5) Bads defined as strongly disposable inputs (VRS)(P5)minδ,μδs.t.∑k=1Kμkvm,k⩾vmk′m=1,…,M∑k=1Kμkwj,k⩽wjk′j=1,…,J∑k=1Kμkxn,k⩽δxnk′n=1,…,N∑k=1Kμk=1μk⩾0k=1,…,KFäre and Grosskopf (2003) offered a detailed comparison between (P2) and (P5). Here we emphasize the main strengths and weaknesses of both approaches. The Färe and Grosskopf model relies on the weak disposability assumption. As such, the jointness of good and bad outputs is explicitly modeled by the mathematical axiom given in Eq. (3). Intuitively this axiom states that any decrease in bad outputs necessarily implies a decrease in good outputs for efficient DMUs. Therefore bad outputs are not freely disposable and cannot be reduced without affecting the production of good outputs. This seems economically sound. However as we can see in (P2) an equality constraint is imposed on bad outputs. As correctly analyzed by Hailu (2003) or Murty et al. (2012) this means unconstrained shadow prices on bad outputs. This is definitely not intuitive when defining undesirable outputs from an economic point of view. If we see bad outputs as pollutants we naturally consider that they have to be treated as a (shadow) cost for firms or society and then we cannot accept either non-positive or non-negative shadow prices on undesirables. This point of view has also be used in the work of Färe et al. (1993) in which they estimate a parametric output distance function modified to allow for non-positive shadow prices for undesirable outputs.By looking at (P5) the objective function is a minimization and bad outputs appear with an inequality sign (⩽) meaning they are treated as traditional inputs in DEA. Therefore, we obviously get non-positive shadow prices in the dual model. However, the assimilation of bad outputs as inputs is problematic. Färe and Grosskopf (2003) have already pointed out that the latter approach does not satisfy the jointness condition on good and bad outputs, a condition which seems rather intuitive and economically well-founded. This approach has also been criticized by Murty et al. (2012).As a means to reconcile both arguments, Färe and Grosskopf (2003) seem to argue that the use of an output directional distance function, which seeks to decrease bad outputs, is sufficient to ensure that shadow prices will get the right sign. By using a directional distance function, the objective function is a maximization as in (P1) for the CRS case or in (P4) for the VRS case. The expected shadow price for the bad output is therefore positive: by increasing the bad output the inefficiency measured in the objective function is increased. As shown in the following figure (as used by Färe and Grosskopf, 2003) observation (e) is inefficient and is projected on the efficient segment [ab] where a positive shadow price prevails concerning the bad output. However it is not always the case and we show this by simply adding an observation to the figure in order to strengthen the point. In Fig. 2, we have added observation (d) and now, any observation such as (e) is projected on the segment [bd] given the chosen direction and presents a negative shadow price on bad output. Thus, the use of the directional distance function is not sufficient enough to ensure the expected shadow price on bad outputs. Moreover, we note that only one direction always projects DMUs on the part of the frontier where the expected positive shadow price prevails. It is the radial measure in the bad output dimension. We clearly illustrate this property in Fig. 3.Recently Leleu (2013) proposed a slightly different but equivalent linearization of the VRS technology under the weak disposability assumption as defined in (P4). This leads to a relevant dual economic interpretation of the weak disposability axiom. The corresponding primal/dual programs are given by:(P6) and (P7) Primal/Dual programs for the weakly disposable VRS technology(P6)maxδ,λ,σδs.t.-∑k=1Kλkvm,k-vmk′+σvmk′+δgmv⩽0m=1,…,M∑k=1Kλkwj,k-wjk′-σwjk′+δgjw=0j=1,…,J∑k=1Kλk(xn,k-xnk′)⩽0n=1,…,N∑k=1Kλk+σ=1λk⩾0k=1,…,Kσ⩾0(P7)minϕ,πv,πw,πxϕs.t.∑m=1Mπmvvm,k-∑j=1Jπjwwj,k-∑n=1Nπnxxn,k-∑m=1Mπmvvmk′-∑j=1Jπjwwjk′-∑n=1Nπnxxnk′⩽ϕk=1,…,K∑m=1Mπmvgmv+∑j=1Jπjwgjw=1∑m=1Mπmvvmk′-∑j=1Jπjwwjk′+ϕ⩾0πmv⩾0m=1,…,Mπjwunconstrainedj=1,…,Jπnx⩾0n=1,…,NThe economic content of (P7) is meaningful. The first set of K constraints computes the differences of profit between each DMU k=1,… ,K and the evaluated DMU k′:∑m=1Mπmvvm,k-∑j=1Jπjwwj,k-∑n=1Nπnxxn,k-∑m=1Mπmvvmk′-∑j=1Jπjwwjk′-∑n=1Nπnxxnk′∀k=1,…,KWe then seek the least upper bound for these profit differences ϕ which is therefore interpreted as the minimum profit inefficiency of the evaluated DMU. The optimization is based on dual prices and we therefore seek those that lead to the minimal profit inefficiency of the evaluated firm. This is the classical ‘benefit of the doubt’ interpretation of DEA models. The next constraint is the tradition normalization constraint to solve the problem of homogeneity of degree 1 of costs, revenues and profits in dual prices. The last constraint is the real novelty of our approach. This constraint does not appear in a traditional DEA program. As it stands,∑m=1Mπmvvmk′-∑j=1Jπjwwjk′+ϕ⩾0means that the efficient revenue from the good outputs and the bad outputs must be positive. It is quite an unrestrictive constraint from an economic point of view, simply saying that the total efficient revenue must be positive. It is crucial to note here that the dual variables of undesirable outputsπjware unconstrained and the value-∑j=1Jπjwwjk′can be considered as revenue if they are negative or as a cost if they are positive. Firstly, following Hailu (2003), Førsund (2009) or Murty et al. (2012) in considering expected positive dual prices for the bad outputs, it means that the revenue from the good outputs must at least compensate the cost (negative revenue) of the bad outputs. This is the main result of our model. The economic content of this result is relevant and intuitive: a producer can develop any activity producing good outputs coming together with bad outputs if and only if the benefit from the good outputs exceeds the cost of the bad. Otherwise inactivity is preferable. Secondly, if the dual prices of the bad outputs are negative then obviously the producers revenue will be positive from both good and bad outputs and undesirable outputs are no longer ‘bad’ outputs in the economic sense.As mentioned above neither treating bad outputs as weakly disposable outputs nor as inputs appears to be fully satisfactory. An easy solution emerges from the programs (P6) and (P7). By using Färe and Grosskopf’s approach in order to rightly model the jointness of desirable and undesirable outputs, we can impose non-negativity on the dual prices of undesirable outputs as a mean to reconcile the two views. This is done in the following pair of primal/dual linear programs.(P8) and (P9) Dual/Primal linear programs for a constrained weakly disposable Shephard’s technology(P8)minϕ,πv,πw,πxϕs.t.∑m=1Mπmvvm,k-∑j=1Jπjwwj,k-∑n=1Nπnxxn,k-∑m=1Mπmvvmk′-∑j=1Jπjwwjk′-∑n=1Nπnxxnk′⩽ϕk=1,…,K∑m=1Mπmvgmv+∑j=1Jπjwgjw=1∑m=1Mπmvvmk′-∑j=1Jπjwwjk′+ϕ⩾0πmv⩾0m=1,…,Mπjw⩾0j=1,…,Jπnx⩾0n=1,…,N(P9)maxδ,λ,σδs.t.-∑k=1Kλk(vm,k-vmk′)+σvmk′+δgmv⩽0m=1,…,M∑k=1Kλk(wj,k-wjk′)-σwjk′+δgjw⩽0j=1,…,J∑k=1Kλk(xn,k-xnk′)⩽0n=1,…,N∑k=1Kλk+σ=1λk⩾0k=1,…,Kσ⩾0On the dual side, we merely impose non-negative dual (shadow) prices on the bad outputs. On the primal side, we simply use the inequality sign (⩽) instead of equality on the bad output constraints. This hybrid model appears to be a good compromise and offers an unambiguous economic interpretation of the weak disposability assumption: the revenue from good outputs must at least compensate the cost of those that are bad.This new model could face one main criticism from the view point of the axiomatic properties of the technology. Since we allow strong disposability on bad outputs, the output set P(x) is not bounded in the bad output dimension. This is similar to the graph of the technology in the input/output space. The set T(x,y) is not bounded in the input dimension, either. However, for each finite level of inputs, the output set is bounded. Here for each finite level of bad outputs, the good output set is bounded. The same arises in the Murty et al. (2012) approach. Even if the output set is unbounded from an axiomatic point of view, we do not observe infinite level of bad outputs in real life and an upper bound necessarily occurs in the data. Furthermore, it is clear that the model always seeks to increase good outputs whilst decreasing bad outputs and thus the chosen direction always projects observations on the left side of P(x). In comparison to Figs. 1 and 2, we get the following picture (Fig. 4) of the new technology.Under the traditional DEA framework, dual prices in program (P7) or (P8) are specific to each of the evaluated firms. Each firm has its own set of shadow prices for good and bad outputs (and inputs) which are computed in such a way that they make the firm as efficient as possible. It is the benefit of the doubt principle of DEA which corresponds to imperfect competition where a bunch of prices may exist for the same good in the economy. However, following the Law of One Price (LoOP), in an efficient market, all identical goods must have only one price (Kuosmanen et al., 2006). It means that the same dual prices must be applied to all firms evaluated by (P8). From an environmental perspective, we may adopt Society’s point of view for the pricing of the bad outputs and consider that the shadow price of the latter must be the same for all DMUs. It is the relevant approach if we want to estimate for example the value of a tax for a pollutant as the shadow price of that in model (P8).The solution as developed by Kuosmanen et al. (2006) or Leleu (2009) is to estimate a meta-model in which all DMUs are evaluated simultaneously and in which we can impose global constraints. This approach allows us to consider a ‘LoOSP’ for any output (or input). The corresponding models are defined by:(P10) and (P11) Dual/Primal linear programs for a ‘Law of One Shadow Price’ (LoOSP) model for bad outputs(P10)minϕ,πv,πw,πx∑l=1Kϕls.t.∑m=1Mπm,lvvm,k,l-∑j=1Jπjwwj,k,l-∑n=1Nπn,lxxn,k,l-∑m=1Mπm,lvvm,l-∑j=1Jπjwwj,l-∑n=1Nπn,lxxn,l⩽ϕlk=1,…,K;l=1,…,K∑m=1Mπm,lvgmv+∑j=1Jπjwgjw⩾1l=1,…,K∑m=1Mπm,lvvm,l-∑j=1Jπjwwj,l+ϕl⩾0l=1,…,Kπm,lv⩾0m=1,…,M;l=1,…,Kπjw⩾0j=1,…,Jπn,lx⩾0n=1,…,N;l=1,…,K(P11)maxδ,λ,σ∑l=1Kδls.t.-∑k=1Kλk,l(vm,k-vm,l)+σlvm,l+δlgmv⩽0m=1,…,M;l=1,…,K∑l=1K∑k=1Kλk,l(wj,k-wj,l)-σlwj,l+δlgjw⩽0j=1,…,J∑k=1Kλk,l(xn,k-xn,l)⩽0n=1,…,N;l=1,…,K∑k=1Kλk,l+σl=1l=1,…,Kλk,l⩾0k=1,…,K;l=1,…,Kσll=1,…,Kδl⩾0l=1,…,KBefore interpreting (P10) and (P11), we note that we need to impose non-negative scoresδl∀l=1,…,Kin (P11) and to put an inequality sign (⩾) in the normalization constraint in (P10) in order to avoid negative efficiency scores. These two constraints are unnecessary in a traditional DEA model when only one DMU is evaluated at any one time because positiveness of the efficiency score is ensured by the non-negativity of the data. However when all DMUs are evaluated simultaneously these constraints become necessary.It is clear from (P10) that dual prices for good outputs and inputs are different from one evaluated DMU to another and are computed as the most favorable for each DMU. Quite the contrary, dual prices for the bad outputs are constrained to be the same for all DMUs. They can be considered as ‘market’ prices or ‘LoOSP’. If for example a bad output pollutes, a simple way to implement a public policy for reducing this type of pollution is to tax the production of the bad output and the level of tax can be based on the dual price. In (P11) individual DEA models are piled up except for the set of constraints on bad outputs where elimination of bad outputs slacks among firms are feasible. This results in unique shadow prices for each bad output.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
