@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessing dynamic inefficiency of the Spanish construction sector pre- and post-financial crisis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Overall dynamic cost inefficiency is decomposed into the contributions of technical, scale and allocative inefficiency.Dynamic cost inefficiency and its components are compared with static cost inefficiency and its components.Dynamic cost inefficiency is larger before the financial crisis than during it.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Dynamic inefficiency,Construction sector,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper undertakes the full decomposition of dynamic cost inefficiency into technical, scale and allocative inefficiency based on the dynamic directional distance function. The empirical application estimates dynamic inefficiency in the Spanish construction industry before and during the current financial crisis over the period 2001–2009. Static inefficiency measures are biased in a context of a significant economic crisis with large investments and disinvestments as they do not account for costs in the adjustment of quasi-fixed factors. Allocative inefficiency is smaller, while technical inefficiency is larger when using the dynamic compared to the static framework. Results further indicate that overall dynamic cost inefficiency is very high with technical inefficiency being the largest component, followed by allocative and scale inefficiency. Moreover, overall dynamic cost inefficiency is significantly larger before the beginning of the financial crisis than during the financial crisis. Larger firms are less technically and scale inefficient than smaller firms on average, but have more problems in choosing the mix of inputs that minimizes their long-term costs. Firms that went bankrupt, on average, have a higher overall dynamic cost inefficiency and scale inefficiency than continuing firms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A competitive sector often depends on its firms meeting their production potential and minimizing waste. Focusing on the growth in returns to factors employed, more competitive firms are able to attract resources away from less competitive firms. Sustaining competitiveness over the long run involves attention to growth prospects associated with the innovations needed to keep pushing the competitive envelope, and the efficiency gains needed to ensure that implemented technologies can succeed. The construction sector in both emerging and mature economies is a classic case in point. In most cases, the expansion in a nation’s economic fortunes are fueled by the construction sector. The sector draws on a significant capital base as well as is an economy’s significant employer and an important contributor to the nation’s GDP. The construction sector is also known for its cyclicality movement. The downturn of the Spanish construction sector after the beginning of the current financial crisis provides a case in point. Given this sector’s central role in promoting Spain’s competitiveness and economic growth, this study focuses on characterizing the Spanish construction sector’s economic performance over the recent past.The literature on inefficiency measurement in the construction sector presents a diverse picture. Country studies report a wide range of inefficiency levels employing production- and financial-based frameworks. These range from a high of 68% of inefficiency for Spanish firms (Kapelko & Oude Lansink, 2014), around 50% for Canadian firms (Pilateris & McCabe, 2003), approximately 40% for Portuguese firms (Horta, Camanho, & Da Costa, 2012), to lower estimates of 7% for Greek firms (Tsolas, 2011) and 2% for Chinese firms (Xue, Shen, Wang, & Lu, 2008). El-Mashaleh (2010) assessed safety efficiency of construction contractors in Jordan and found an average inefficiency score of 0.68. Odeck (2001) analyzed the inefficiency of the road construction sector in Norway and found the sector’s potential for efficiency improvement in the range of 19–59%. The case of Korea in the late 1990s presents an interesting case in contrast to the Spanish case. The Korean construction sector was impacted by an economic crisis starting in November 1997. Using a Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) approach for the period 1996–2000, You and Zi (2007) focus on leverage ratio, export weight, institutional ownership, asset size and receivables overdue turnover and find these factors impact all efficiency measures. However, declining allocative efficiency is the major component leading to lower efficiency over the crisis, which together with the strong relationship between institutional investors and efficiency suggests the agency problem between managers and owners is at fault.The literature on assessing inefficiency in the construction sector has so far only focused on static measures of inefficiency. Unlike dynamic measures, static measures ignore the presence of adjustment costs associated with investments in quasi-fixed factors of production like capital. The adjustment costs can be viewed as transaction or reorganization costs and may be either internally driven (for example learning costs) or externally driven (for example expansion planning fees) (Brechling, 1975; Nickel, 1978). Adjustment costs are not observed, but are implicit in higher costs of inputs and lower revenues of output. In the presence of adjustment costs in quasi-fixed factors of production, static measures do not correctly reflect inefficiency. Only recently we observe a number of important contributions to dynamic inefficiency modeling in the adjustment-cost technology framework. Using stochastic frontier analysis, Rungsuriyawiboon and Stefanou (2007) propose a shadow cost approach to estimate allocative and technical inefficiency measures in the framework of the dynamic duality model and apply it to the US energy sector, and Serra, Oude Lansink, and Stefanou (2011) parametrically estimate the structural dynamic inefficiency measures in the Dutch agricultural sector. In the nonparametric setting, Silva and Stefanou (2007) develop measures of dynamic inefficiency using hyperbolic measures based on their earlier work of nonparametric dynamic dual cost approach to production analysis (Silva & Stefanou, 2003), and apply them to data from Pennsylvanian dairy farms. Silva and Oude Lansink (2013) extend the adjustment cost framework to the directional distance function and its dual cost function. Several others take on a network approach to account for dynamic effects of a production process into inefficiency measurement. Färe and Grosskopf (1996) account for storable inputs that can be used over multiple time periods and intermediate outputs. Chen (2009) proposes a network model where dynamic effects refer to the situation when intermediate outputs consumed may affect future output level, while Chen and Van Dalen (2010) develop a dynamic DEA model allowing for the presence of lagged production effects in efficiency evaluation. Skevas, Oude Lansink, and Stefanou (2012) apply a network DEA approach to account for intermediate outputs in the current period impacting the output in the future period. Kao (2013) proposes a dynamic DEA model to simultaneously assess the system and period efficiencies for multi-period systems. The other dynamic DEA modeling studies consider quasi-fixed inputs as outputs in the current period, while being treated as inputs in the next period (Nemoto & Goto, 2003; Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2005).This paper builds on the earlier literature on dynamic inefficiency analysis in the adjustment-cost technology framework (Silva & Stefanou, 2003; Silva & Stefanou, 2007; Silva & Oude Lansink, 2013). However, previous works did not make a full decomposition of dynamic cost inefficiency into technical, scale and allocative inefficiency in the directional distance function context. Against this background, the objective of this paper is to estimate dynamic cost inefficiency and its decomposition into technical, allocative and scale inefficiencies in the Spanish construction industry before and after the beginning of the current crisis. The results are compared with cost inefficiency and its decomposition based on static models. Furthermore, the dynamic inefficiency results are compared for different size classes as well as firms that are active and that disband in the time-period considered. The paper employs a non-parametric DEA approach to measuring dynamic inefficiency. Although both parametric and non-parametric approaches have evolved in the literature, non-parametric approaches are more flexible as they do not impose a functional specification on the production frontier and ensure that regularity conditions are satisfied.This paper builds also on the existing literature by undertaking the first empirical application of the dynamic inefficiency framework to the construction sector. A dynamic approach is particularly relevant in sectors undergoing rapid changes in the capital stock. The Spanish construction sector was facing periods of large investments and disinvestments, and a rapid change in economic conditions in the past decade. With the construction sector being heavily embodied in capital, the adjustment of these stocks is sluggish and cannot be expected to change instantaneously to revised long-run equilibrium levels that come about from the changing macroeconomic environment. Hence, a dynamic rather than a static inefficiency analysis is an appropriate method for analyzing the evolution of inefficiency.The paper proceeds with the next section presenting background information on the crisis in the Spanish construction sector. This is followed by the elaboration of the conceptual model based on the intertemporal cost minimization and the presentation of the dynamic cost inefficiency measures. The subsequent sections describe the data of Spanish construction firms and the empirical results. The final section offers concluding comments and some potential policy implications.Spain has the largest construction sector among the European Union (EU) countries (Eurostat, 2012). Until recently, the Spanish construction sector enjoyed a period of constant growth, reaching a 10% share of national GDP in 2006, which is twice the comparable EU-wide share, and employing 13% of the labor force. During the last decade, the expansion of this industry was a driving force behind the Spanish economic growth. Until 2007, Spain was recording higher annual new home construction completions than France, Germany and Italy combined. In the face of rising interest rates, oversupply, oversize, stricter lending conditions, and the emerging global financial crisis, Spain’s construction industry collapsed in 2007 with many firms exiting the sector (Spanish Ministry of Public Works and Transport, 2012; Bielsa & Duarte, 2010). The construction downturn negatively impacted output and employment with both contracting by about one third through the end of 2009 (Eurostat, 2012).Fig. 1presents the pattern of construction permits granted and construction completion in Spain between 2001 and 2010. The emerging crisis is clearly foretold during 2006 by the building permits granted which is a leading economic indicator of macroeconomic performance. Conversely, the pattern of construction completion presents a lagging indicator of economic performance. The declining value of buildings to be built and buildings finished reflects the onset of financial stress when construction firms’ ability to acquire credit was diminished and costs for firms of acquiring and repaying the loans dramatically increased. The difficulty of loans repayment was associated also with decreasing demand of finished space (both residential and nonresidential), resulting in huge stocks of unsold buildings (Vergés, 2011). Several economic policy levers are available to stimulate this sector’s economic activity. Examples include monetary policy impacting interest rates changes, banking policies that can impact mortgage activity, zoning regulation, investment in amenities complementing building activities (such as green space and entertainment opportunities).Consider a data series representing vectors of the observed quantities of M outputs (denoted as y), N variable inputs (denoted as x), F gross investments i.e. dynamic factors (denoted as I), F quasi-fixed factors (denoted as K), and N and F prices of variable and quasi-fixed factors (denoted as w and c, respectively) of j=1, … , J firms at time t. At any base period t∊[0,+∞), the firm is assumed to minimize the flow of future costs over time (discounted at rate r), subject to an adjustment-cost technology. The intertemporal cost minimization problem is given by:(1)W(y,K,w,c)=minx,I∫to∞e-rsws′xs+cs′Ksds,s.t.K̇=I-δK,K(to)=k,Di→(y(s),K(s),x(s),I(s);gx,gI)⩾0,s∈[t,+∞),where W(·) represents the discounted flow of costs in all future time periods, δ is a diagonal matrix with depreciation rates andK̇reflects net investments (i.e. gross investments minus depreciation rate×capital). The subscript s denotes the (future) time periods; subscripts of variables have been suppressed if they represent the current time period t. The dynamic directional input distance functionDi→(·)measures the distance of x and I to the frontier in the direction defined by the directional vectors gxand gI, respectively. Silva and Stefanou (2003) develop the characterization of the dynamic production technology under adjustment costs in the case of the input requirement set. Silva and Stefanou (2007) build on the Silva and Stefanou (2003) framework to develop characterization and measurement of dynamic inefficiency. For the dynamic directional input distance function, Silva and Oude Lansink (2013) develop the full characterization of the duality between the directional technology and the optimal value function of intertemporal cost minimization.Expressing (1) in terms of the current value yields the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (H–J–B) equation:(2)rW(y,K,w,c)=minx,I,γw′x+c′K+WK′(1-δK),s.tDi→(y,K,x,I;gx,gI)⩽0,whereWK=WK(y,K,w,c)is the vector of shadow values of quasi-fixed factors. Note that the shadow value of quasi-fixed factors is determined endogenously in the model. Eq. (2) is represented by the following DEA model:(3)rW(y,K,w,c)=minx,I,γw′x+c′K+WK′(I-δK)s.t∑j=1Jγjymj⩾ym,m=1,…,M;xn⩾∑j=1Jγjxnj,n=1,…,N;∑j=1Jγj(Ifj-δfKfj)⩾If-δfKf,f=1,…,F;γj⩾0,j=1,…,J;xn⩾0,n=1,…,N;If⩾0,f=1,…,F;where the constraints reflect the technology properties of the feasible input–output bundles forming a convex set exhibiting strong disposability of input and outputs presented in Silva and Stefanou (2003) with γ denoting the (J×1) intensity vector. A solution of (3) requires a value for WK. In this paper, the shadow values of dynamic factors are generated using a quadratic specification of the optimal value function and rewriting it as:w′x=rW(y,K,w,c)-c′K+WK′(I-δK). After fitting this specification, the shadow values of quasi-fixed factors are obtained using the parameter estimates.Using the solution of (3) a dynamic cost inefficiency (OE) measure is generated as (Silva & Oude Lansink, 2013):(4)OE=w′x+c′K+WK(.)′(I-δK)-rW(y,K,w,c)w′gx-WK(.)′gIThis measure is the normalized deviation between the shadow cost of the actual choices and the minimum shadow cost (rW(y, K, w, c)). The normalization is the shadow value of the directional vector, making the dynamic cost inefficiency a unit-free measure. The overall dynamic cost inefficiency relates to the firm’s ability to minimize production costs in order to produce a given level of outputs. For example, a dynamic cost inefficiency of 0.1 suggests that the same quantity of output can be produced at reduced long-run costs in the order of 10% of the value of the directional vector (w’gx−WK(.)gI).The dynamic directional input distance function, measuring dynamic technical inefficiency for each firm is quantified using DEA as follows:(5)Di→(y,K,x,I;gx,gI|C)=maxβ,γβs.t.ym⩽∑j=1Jγjymj,m=1,…,M;∑j=1Jγjxnj⩽xn-βgxn,n=1,…,N;If+βgIf-δfKf⩽∑j=1JγjIfj-δfKfj,f=1,…,F;γj⩾0,j=1,…,J.where β is a measure of dynamic technical inefficiency and constant returns to scale (CRS) is assumed, indicated with C in theDi→(·C). It represents the maximum contraction in the variable input vector x in the direction of gxand simultaneously the maximum expansion in the dynamic factor vector I in the direction of gI. For example, a dynamic technical inefficiency of 0.1 implies that a firm can reduce variable inputs and increase dynamic factors by 10% of the value of the directional vector, at a given level of outputs. The dynamic directional input distance function under variable returns to scale (VRS) (i.e.,Di→(y,K,x,I;gx,gI|V)) is obtained by adding the constraint∑j=1Jγj=1to (5). The DEA specifications in (3) and (5) show that the measurement of dynamic inefficiency requires data from only one year. Hence, unlike other dynamic DEA approaches (e.g. Färe & Grosskopf, 1996), there is no need to have data over long time period, nor there is a need to use balanced panel data for computing dynamic inefficiency.The difference betweenDi→(y,K,x,I;gx,gI|V)andDi→(y,K,x,I;gx,gI|C)is a measure of dynamic scale inefficiency (SE) which indicates how much the producers would save in terms of long-run costs if they produce according to constant returns to scale. For example, a dynamic scale inefficiency of 0.1 implies a 10% reduction of the difference of long-run CRS costs and VRS costs expressed in terms of the value of the directional vector due to a reduction of variable inputs and expansion of investments.Finally, dynamic overall cost inefficiency is decomposed into the contributions of technical inefficiency under variable returns to scale, scale inefficiency (SE) and a residual term defined as allocative inefficiency (AE)1Silva and Oude Lansink (2013) confirm the dynamic overall cost inefficiency measure relative to the dynamic directional input distance function.1:(6)OE=Di→(y,K,x,I;gx,gI|V)+SE+AEwith AE⩾0.Dynamic allocative inefficiency refers to the firm’s ability to choose the optimal mix of variable and dynamic factors, given their respective prices, i.e. the mix which minimizes long-run costs. For example, a dynamic allocative inefficiency of 0.1 suggests that a firm can reduce costs by 10% of the value of the directional vector through a better mix of variable and dynamic factors in the light of prevailing prices.Some explanation is required regarding the comparison between the approach developed in the paper and network DEA approach taken in Färe and Grosskopf (1996), Nemoto and Goto (2003) and Chen and van Dalen (2010). The approach taken in the paper employs the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation approach in contrast to the network DEA approach. Network DEA is a computational decision process framework that is well suited to multistage production systems when an output in one stage feeds into the next stage as an input. A balanced panel is suitable for the network approach. In our approach, we have time-specific input decisions and the production of time-specific (intermediate) outputs. The constraints from one stage (or decision period) to the next can be input constrained just as capital-like factors can be in the dynamic problems addressed in this paper. This is a mathematical programming problem where the optimization takes place over all stages (periods) to generate the optimal trajectories for the control variables. There are two clear points of difference between the network DEA and the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation framework. The Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman approach solves for the current period choice variables while looking to the impact of the flow of profits or costs into the future and is more akin to decision making process where firms make decisions in the short-run as they look to the future. Since both approaches are consistent with dynamic optimization theory, they yield the same answers. As the network DEA framework solves for the current period forward, a trajectory is generated for the future periods; thus, clearly, linking current decisions to the future flow of profits or costs.The SABI database, managed by Bureau van Dijk, is the source for the data used in this study. This dataset contains the financial accounts of Spanish companies. The study sample includes the firms belonging to the category of firms in construction of residential and non-residential buildings (NACE Rev. 2 code 4120). This study focuses on the medium-sized firms which are among the most adversely impacted by the crisis as reflected by the significant reduction in the number of firms (Laborda, 2012). Also, focusing on medium-sized firms results in a data set with firms that are more comparable in size. Yet, there are still substantial differences between firms, since the medium-sized firms are those employing between 50 and 249 employees with an annual turnover between 10 and 50million euros, following the EU definition.After filtering out companies with missing information and after removing the outliers,2Outliers were removed because solutions could not be obtained for dynamic cost inefficiency. Following Geylani and Stefanou (2013), outliers were determined using ratios of output to input. An observation was defined as an outlier if the ratio of output over any of the three inputs was outside the interval of the median plus and minus two standard deviations. After cleaning procedures there were 2690 observations left, out of which 230 (8.6% of the sample) were identified as outliers.2the final data set consists of 775 medium-sized firms that operated in Spain in at least one year during the period from 2001 to 2009. Choosing this time span we are able to analyze the years before and after the start of the financial crisis in Spain. The panel is unbalanced and sums to 2460 observations.One output and three inputs (material costs, labor costs and fixed assets) are distinguished, following You and Zi’s (2007) and Kapelko and Oude Lansink (2014) studies of the construction sector, and efficiency studies of different industries (Kapelko & Oude Lansink, 2013; Soboh, Oude Lansink, & Van Dijk, 2012). Output was defined as total sales plus the change in the value of the stock and was deflated using the price index of residential buildings (2000=100%). Material costs and labor costs were directly taken from the SABI database and were deflated using the price indexes of materials of residential buildings and labor costs in construction, respectively. Fixed assets are measured as the beginning value of fixed assets from the balance sheet (i.e., the end value of the previous year) and are deflated using the industrial price index for capital goods. All prices used to deflate output and inputs are obtained from the Spanish Statistical Office (various years). Gross investments in fixed assets in year t are computed as the deflated beginning value of fixed assets in year t+1 minus the deflated beginning value of fixed assets in year t plus the deflated beginning value of depreciation in year t+1. Table 1provides the descriptive statistics of the data used in this study, for the whole period 2001–2009 and for the periods before and after the start of the financial crisis (from 2001 to 2006, and from 2007 to 2009).Table 1 indicates that the values of output and material costs have been shrinking by almost 10% in the period after the start of the financial crisis compared to the period before the financial crisis. The cost of employees remains largely unchanged. Furthermore, Table 1 indicates that the size of fixed assets is larger in the post- financial crisis period, which may reflect the change in the composition of the group of medium-sized firms. Operations categorized as large firms before the crisis have scaled down and enter the medium-sized firm category after the crisis. However, the financial crisis is reflected in the ratio of investment over fixed assets. This ratio decreased from 29%, on average, before the crisis to 17% after the crisis. Also, the volatility, as measured by standard deviation of investments normalized by the mean, is much larger after the crisis than before the crisis, reflecting that firms reacted very differently to the crisis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper contributes to the literature by undertaking a full empirical decomposition of overall dynamic cost inefficiency into technical, scale and allocative inefficiency based on the dynamic directional distance function and comparing these measures to their static counterparts. The dynamic approach, unlike the static approach, accounts for the presence of adjustment costs of investments and provides a better assessment of inefficiency, particularly for firms undertaking large investments and disinvestments. The empirical application nonparametrically estimates dynamic and static cost inefficiency of Spanish construction firms before and after the beginning of the financial crisis. The performance is compared for firms of different sizes and for firms that went bankrupt versus those that continued operation. The results show that incorporating dynamic factors into inefficiency measurement modifies the analysis of inefficiency. We find that dynamic allocative inefficiency is lower and technical inefficiency is higher than static allocative and technical inefficiency, respectively.Overall dynamic cost inefficiency is almost 50% in the period under investigation with technical inefficiency being the largest component, followed by allocative and scale inefficiency. Overall dynamic inefficiency is significantly larger before the beginning of the financial crisis than during the financial crisis; the improvement is mainly due to lower allocative inefficiency. Large medium-sized firms are, on average less technically and scale inefficient than small medium-sized firms, but have more problems in choosing the mix of inputs that minimizes their long-term costs. In the period after the beginning of the financial crisis, large medium-sized firms have a lower technical and allocative inefficiency, whereas small medium-sized firms have a lower technical and scale inefficiency. Firms that went bankrupt in the period 2001–2009, on average, have a higher overall dynamic cost inefficiency and scale inefficiency than continuing firms.The implications of our results for the construction firms are that these firms have a substantial scope for improving their technical performance with the current technology. Better management of their resources can contribute to a reduction of technical inefficiency. Further research is needed though to investigate the factors that are underlying poor technical performance. Also, our results imply that particularly larger firms suffer financial losses due to a poor allocation of resources at given input prices. Big firms and firms pursuing a growth strategy need to pay more attention to this source of inefficiency, e.g. by choosing less costly combinations of inputs.Our results on scale inefficiency imply that firms need more flexibility in adjusting the size of their operation. The lack of flexibility in adjusting the firm size due to legal and regulatory constraints contributes to the persistence of scale inefficiency. For instance, policy makers can increase the flexibility of firms to adjust the size of the labor force by introducing labor market reforms that enable firms to more easily lay off people or reduce salaries in times of financial distress such as the reforms that have been implemented recently in Spain (Noblet & Regojo, 2012).Our study has some limitations. Although we are confident that our results reflect the main trends in the industry severely impacted by the crisis, other forces may have contributed to our findings. For example, uncertainty in construction delivery could explain the high level of inefficiency found in this study. Future research could address production uncertainty along the proposals of Skevas et al. (2012), Chambers, Hailu, and Quiggin (2011) or O’Donnell et al. (2010) and distinguish between inefficiency due to factors under managers’ control and this related to the factors out of control of the firm. However, we are not able to account for production uncertainty due to the lack of appropriate data on e.g. the number of days of construction delays or the number of frost-free days experienced by individual firms. Also other sources of dynamic inefficiency of Spanish construction firms could be considered such as the ownership structure, the age of the firm or the intensity of competition. For the sample at hand this requires the collection of additional data. We leave the exploration of these topics for future research.