@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of long-term expansion on the evolution of electricity price: numerical analysis of a theoretically optimised electricity market

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The long-run impact of expansion to the evolution of electricity price is sought.Endogenous and stochastic exogenous models are compared.Optimised markets lead to moderate electricity prices and carbon emissions.The assigned load levels are raised in profitable producers.Endogenous models exhibit lower levels of uncertainty.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimisation,Electricity price,Generating mix,Expansion planning,Merit order effect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A decision support tool is proposed for optimising the expansion planning of a semi-liberalised electricity market, whilst the underlying interaction of the generating mix with electricity prices is researched, in the long-run. A nonlinear stochastic programming algorithm is used for handling multiple uncertainties, optimising the power sector characteristics, both in terms of financial and environmental performance. Two endogenous models and an exogenous one are analysed and compared. The endogenous model results indicate that consumers might benefit by the moderate electricity prices in case the optimal loads and capacity orders are rendered. The exogenous model is insensitive to generating mix variations. The long-term actions suggested for system operators are comprised of the permits issued for new entries. They are affected by the evolution of electricity prices, since the permits granted for conventional technologies are maintained when their profits are rising. The permits granted for renewable technologies are also maintained, thus allowing cleaner electricity production to be induced to the grid. The optimal bid strategies of generators interact with their dispatching schedule and the diversification of their load curves. The relevant bids are primarily driven by the merit order, the plants are dispatched in. The assigned load levels may be raised in profitable producers so that their profit is maximised. They might be restrained instead, in case there are no significant prospects for individual profits. The lognormal distribution of electricity price results is characterised by increasing variance over time, indicating that the model is more robust in the most imminent solutions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electricity markets are characterised by multiple uncertainties, which may have an impact to the evolution of electricity price. These uncertainties may be identified in the volatility of fuel and CO2 allowance prices, in the variations of power generating mix and/or in the displacement of mature workhorse technologies by emerging ones. The liberalised energy market progressively needs to respond to many challenges, which in turn make it more uncertain. This is the context of the evolution of System Marginal Price (SMP) i.e. the price paid by the Transmission System Operator (TSO) to the producers for generating an additional kilowatt hour of electricity. To an extent this price is partially transferred to civilian or industrial users and it is mainly influenced by the power generating mix.The power sector may be considered as an integrated system, not necessarily limited to the borders of domestic electricity market. Different forms of interaction may exist between system agents, either internal (domestic fuel resources, power producers, providers and users) or external (international fuel trading markets, carbon trading markets etc.). A social planner would ideally try to find an optimal point of operation where the internal agents (power producers and users) would be satisfied: the producers should be profitable whilst the users should be able to buy cheap electricity. The research for that optimal point would probably entail the following query: “Let us suppose that fuel and CO2 allowance prices are somehow estimated for the following periods; what long-term actions should be realised in order to lead to highest yields or—more desirably—to optimal system's Net Present Value (NPV)”? These actions might be comprised of the permits foreseen for energy investments, based either on emerging or older technologies. An estimate of the impact of those strategic interventions to the evolution of SMP might be important: in case this is reduced, as a result of optimised expansion, then the cost transferred to civilian or industrial users is lower. Normally, the optimisation of system NPV has a two-fold advantage: (a) it would reduce the probability for individual producers to experience suboptimal yields (b) it would lead to the reduction of SMP. The former is a direct effect of optimisation, whilst the latter yet remains to be proved.The present work focuses on the detailed description of a decision support model, proposed for the optimised generation expansion planning (GEP) of electricity market. Primarily, it has been adjusted to the case of the Greek Power Sector but it might be applied to other markets with similar characteristics. The operational research (OR) algorithm attempts to maximise the power sector's NPV. A non-linear, stochastic programming approach has been implemented to handle the multiple uncertainties of the optimisation problem. The optimal orders of power capacity (in megawatt electric (MWel)) are estimated annually. They correspond to licences (permits), granted by the State for approving the installation of power producing facilities based on different technologies/fuel types. The optimal load intensity factors are derived as well, for each technology, on an annual basis. The optimisation process implies meeting certain demand and environmental targets. Multiple constraints, related with the availability of energy recourses and grid stability are also imposed. The evolution of SMP is modelled, by simulating its mutual, recent interaction with power generating mix and fuel prices. Two endogenous approaches are used for this reason: an explicit and an implicit one. Additional constraints are imposed to simulate the current bidding system. The results of the endogenous methods are compared with those of a different, exogenous approach: representing the evolution of SMP by a Wiener process (Geometric Brownian Motion, GBM). The objectives and the contribution of the article may be summarised in the following points:-To analyse the underlying mechanism of recent, endogenous interaction of power generating mix with the anticipated SMP evolution and extrapolate it in the long-run.To investigate the robustness of the optimisation under multiple uncertainties and compare the endogenous SMP behaviour with the exogenous GBM approach.Short term analyses of spot electricity prices, including sophisticated simulations of jumps and spikes, have been recently published (e.g. Amjiady & Keynia, 2011; Serinaldi, 2011). Medium to long-term simulation has been also effectively used in the analysis of the structure of year-ahead forward contracts (e.g. in Redl, Haas, Huber & Böhm, 2009). The evolution of electricity prices and other key energy commodities like fuel and carbon allowance prices has been simulated using stochastic Wiener processes i.e. the GBM (Blyth et al., 2007; Yang et al., 2008) and mean reverting (MR;Tseng & Barz, 2002; Weber, 2005). These are special cases of a more generic class of stochastic processes, namely the ARMA and ARIMA models (Box et al., 1994), which have also been used for the simulation of the aforementioned commodities (Bowden & Payne, 2008). More recently, the wavelet transform has been effectively used for filtering reasons in conjunction with GARCH (Generalised Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity) models able to handle the dynamic volatility of electricity prices, as shown by Schlueter (2009). Fuzzy systems and neural networks were increasingly appreciated during the last decade for long-medium-term simulations (Filik Gerek & Kurban, 2009; Kiartzis, Bakirtzis, Theocharis & Tsagas, 2000).Unlike the traditional Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) method, which has been extensively used in the past for the analysis of energy investments, the method proposed hereby, follows the recent trend for time-varying approaches. Previously irreversible investment decisions have been progressively displaced by flexible planning, subject to optimisation processes. Early GEP studies focused primarily on the cost minimisation and not on the NPV maximisation (e.g. Park, Lee, & Youn, 1984): the expansion planning was optimised using the maximum principle, but without accounting the NPV over the entire operational life-time of the power sector. Progressively, the optimisation of the power sector required the utilisation of algorithms able to handle more effectively the underlying, non-linear, functional relationships of multi-variable sets. Particle swarms are recently used for GEP optimisation (Tafreshi, Shayanfar, Saliminia, Rabiee & Aghaei, 2011).In modern, liberalised electricity markets, decision making depends not so much on centralised State or utility-based procedures, but rather on decentralised decisions of energy utilities, as stated in the article of Most and Keles (2010). In this work, a detailed review of commercial, decision-support tools is presented, regarding the O.R. modelling (either stochastic or deterministic) of liberalised electricity markets. Effective software like the AURORAxmp, the EMCAS and the GTMmax are described, though with few details about the solvers developed and the price modelling of commodities. Agents’ behaviour in oligopolistic markets has been traditionally represented by equilibrium models. Some works based on conjectural variations equilibrium models have been published, representing agents’ behaviour in electrical power markets under multiple uncertainties. These models provide insight of market equilibrium sensitivity to agents’ strategies and external variables, and therefore, they are widely applied (Rong & Lahdelma, 2007; Wang, Mazumdar, Bailey & Valenzuela, 2007). In other studies (e.g. Lise & Kruseman, 2008), deterministic models were used for the investigation of long-term investment decisions in power sectors. Other approaches replicate the system structure and the linkage among system components (Olsina, Garces & Houbrich, 2006). Thus, the dynamic response of the system is derived showing that the behaviour of power markets may differentiate from the results of more classic approaches. The introduction of uncertainties may somehow complicate the modelling of electricity markets. However, its importance is identified and various algorithms and computational techniques were lately used, as pointed out in the review of Foley, Gallachóir, Hur, Baldick and McKeogh (2010). Basically, they all end up in some form of stochastic programming, meaning the optimisation of multiple discrete scenarios, each one corresponding to a different input. Stochastic Programming based on Monte-Carlo algorithms has been effectively used in past researches of power generation planning under uncertainty (Fleten & Kristoffersen, 2007; Heinrich et al., 2007; Tanabe, Yasuda, Yokoyama & Sasaki, 1993). Nonetheless, different SMP modelling and linear solvers were mainly used in these studies, instead of the non-linear SQP solver of the present research.The power sector of Greece was the market model for this research. Currently it experiences a transition from a regulated to a semi-liberalised form whereby the system marginal prices are modulated through day-ahead, double-auction processes. This bidding system is responsible for the formation of the electricity price through which the conventional technologies are compensated, whilst—on the other hand—the prices for renewable energies are regulated following a fixed path. Since, the profit of individual companies is not researched here, the power producers are grouped by their technology/fuel type. The power sector is considered to be operating for a 38-year period forward. The research is carried out on an annual basis: The energy variables are yearly averaged whilst the year 2013 is used as a reference for comparing fiscal values. Domestic electricity market, internal producers and external fuel and carbon trading markets constitute the agents of the model. The methodological approach is based on the non-linear optimisation of system's NPV. The mathematical model is transferred to a computational algorithm in order to produce the numerical results required for the analysis. Stochastic programming with recourse has been performed for this task, meaning that multiple scenarios of uncertainties were introduced as inputs and further optimised, one-by-one. The scenario generator was based on the reconstitution of commodity uncertainties through a Monte-Carlo method. This method leads to multiple strategies, operating on each one of the stochastic input states, respectively. Convexity may offer significant advantages when the optimisation of non-linear objective functions is considered and therefore a Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) solver of the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) equations has been applied (Waltz, Morales, Nocedal, & Orban, 2006).In a yearly averaged model, the generating mix might be simulated, using the load duration curves of the exemplary schematic shown in Fig. 1 (left side). The aggregate demand d(t) (blue curve) is sorted in descending order over time. The loads delivered by any technology, follow this order, but they are further regressed and smoothed. The resulted power lines simulate the merit order (Sensfuß, Ragwitz, & Genoese, 2007), in which the technologies are progressively dispatched starting from the cheapest fuels (i.e. lignite in black) and gradually proceeding to the more expensive ones, e.g. NG units in yellow and marginal, diesel-fired generators in red.The electricity energy produced from each technology is known before each iteration of the optimisation algorithm (see Section 3.2.3). Pi,z(given in megawatt hour electric (MWhel)) denotes that energy, produced from the power plants of type (i) during year z, linked with their relevant average factors (see Table 1for a list of symbols used):(1)Pi,z=Li,zθi,zaa,iac,i·8760∀i,zThe peak and the lowest production from renewable energy units are considered to be equal, since they operate whenever their energy source is available, depending on natural conditions:(2)PPRES·Tzmax=PRES(3)PPRES=PyRESThe peak productions of conventional plants are approximated by their installed capacity (also known from the previous optimisation's iteration), accounting a spinning reserve (mr) for grid stability:(4a)PPLiG=LLiG/(1+mr)(4b)PPNG=LNG/(1+mr)(4c)PPOIL=LOIL/(1+mr)The energy produced from each conventional technology may be approximated by the area between its power line and the preceding one. It is derived by either the triangle or the trapezoidal formula, depending on the operating time. Usually the operation of base-load (e.g. lignite) plants is prolonged, whilst the marginal plants are temporarily dispatched for serving peak loads. Initially, the trapezoidal formula is supposedly used and investigated as follows:(5)(PPi+Pyi)2·Tzmax=Pi→(1,4a,4b,4c)(Li1+mr+Pyi)2Tzmax=Li·aa,i·ac,i·θi·Tzmax⇒Pyi=Li·(2·aa,i·ac,i·θi−11+mr)The Pyi,should not be negative, and thus, only(2·aa,i·ac,i·θi−11+mr)> 0 corresponds to an acceptable, meaningful condition. In that case, the operating time of technology (i) in the schematic is the maximum possible, (Tzmax = 8760 hours) and the energy produced annually is approximated using the trapezoidal formula, as initially supposed. Otherwise, if(2·aa,i·ac,i·θi−11+mr)< 0, then Pyi< 0, which is not acceptable and therefore, the operating time of technology (i) in the schematic should be shorter than Tzmax. In that case, the energy produced annually might be approximated using the triangle formula, (since the other side of the trapezoid is negative and therefore meaningless) leading to the annually operating time:(6)[PPi·ti]2=Pi→(1,4a,4b,4c)Li·ti2·(1+mr)=Li·aa,i·ac,i·θi·Tzmax⇒ti=2·(1+mr)·aa,i·ac,i·θi·TzmaxIn the exemplary Fig. 1, the marginal plants are indicatively approximated using the triangle area formula, due to the analysis leading to Eq. (6). On the other hand, the base-load and the NG-fired plants are approximated using the trapezoidal formula (Eq. (5)). It is noted, that the model investigates and eventually decides the appropriate modelling for each technology.In the right part of Fig. 1, the interaction of demand (blue) and supply (red) curves is shown. The supply curve comprises of the marginal costs, which correspond to the bids offered by the various power generating technologies as a function of the offered capacity (approximated with successive linear segments). Any bid, if accepted, will be further compensated at a price defined by the intersection of demand and supply curves. In a uniform pricing system, this price would be at least equal to the bids of the most expensive plants so that their corresponding costs would be fully remunerated. The remaining cheaper plants would normally realise that price as a chance for profits, since it is higher than their unitary costs. Thus in Fig. 1, the part of the annual production corresponding to the tOIL period should be remunerated at a price close to the bids offered by marginal plants despite that RES, base-load and NG-fired plants are also used to produce it. I.e. the red shaded trapezoid (energy) E1z:(7)E1z=∫t=0t=tOILd(t)dt→4a,4b,4cE1z≅tOIL2·(∑i=1I−RELi(1+mr)+dOIL−PPRES)should be paid at a price, which at least compensates the unitary costs of the most expensive marginal technology (oil in our example) comprising of its fuel, CO2 and fixed costs:(8)SMP1z=CfOIL,z+fCO2OILnOILpCO2z+CvOIL,zaa,OIL·ac,OIL·θOIL,z·TzmaxSimilarly, the part of the annual production corresponding to time period [Tzmax-tOIL] corresponds to the yellow-shaded area (energy) E2z, produced by lignite and NG-fired plants:(7a)E2z=∫t=tOILt=Tzmaxd(t)dt≅(Tzmax−tOIL)2·(∑i=1I−RE−1Pyi+dOIL−PPRES)This should be paid at a price close to the bids of NG units, despite that RES and lignite are also engaged in that time, so that the more expensive ones (NG-plants) are fully compensated:(8a)SMP2z=CfNG,z+fCO2NGnNGpCO2z+CvNG,zaa,NG·ac,NG·θNG,z·TzmaxIn Eqs. (7) and (7a), the dOIL level of production, used for the approximation of E1zand E2z, is the intersection of the red and yellow lines, which correspond to oil and NG power lines. This intersection may be defined following a linear decrease from∑i=1I−RE−1Li(1+mr)to∑i=1I−RE−1Pyilevels. The latter edge is modelled using Eq. (5)(for the tOIL, Eq. (6) is used). Hence:(9)dOIL=∑i=1I−RE−1Li1+mr−tOILTzmax(∑i=1I−RE−1Li1+mr−∑i=1I−RE−1Pyi)+PPRESThe lowest price used for remunerating each technology is assumed to coincide with the higher of the previous cheaper one (e.g. SMP1z: lowest for oil, highest for NG, Fig. 1 right) for diversifying the costs among the units of the same technology. Also, partly linear segments of SMP over time were assumed for the various technologies, since both power-time (left) and SMP-power (right) graphs were linearly modelled. Thus an annual, average SMP may follow:(10)SMP¯z=∫t=0t=tOILSMP(t)dt+∫t=tOILt=TzmaxSMP(t)dtTzmax≅tOIL·(SMP0z+SMP1z2)+(Tzmax−tOIL)·(SMP2z+SMP1z2)TzmaxThe SMP constitutes the compensation rate for conventional power plants, which are normally paid by the State (TSO). The evolution of SMP over time may be also implicitly modelled using an alternative method, namely a time-sliding technique which constitutes an internal loop within each one of the optimisation iterations (Fig. 3). Electricity prices are primarily assumed to be linked to the generating mix and fuel prices.11A neural net structure would be ideal for identifying the functional relationship of those linked vectors. Initially, this was the modelling approach for the required pattern recognition: The elements ofP¯andCf¯constitute the input pattern whilst the elements of pe constitute the target pattern. Unfortunately, the computational time spent on the minimisation of neural net weights was crucial: the external optimisation loop was considerably delayed and moreover, its convergence rate was compromised.More specifically, the SMP may be written in implicit matrix form as a function of generating mix and fuel prices:(11)(P¯⊗Cf¯·Sx)=pewhere ⊗ denotes the multiplication of matrices on an element-by-element basis, whilst (.) denotes the algebraic matrix multiplication. The unknown weight vector Sx is resolved over time. The elements of matrix (P¯), in the left part of the system, are recalled from the previous iteration of the optimisation, hence they are known for any year. They are also normalised in respect of their annual total. BothP¯andCf¯may be formulated in explicit form, as follows:(12)Pi,z¯=Pi,z∑i=1I−REPi,z∀z∈(2013−2050)(13)Cfi,z¯=Cfi,z∑i=1I−RECfi,z∀z∈(2013−2050)As for the elements of matrix (P¯), corresponding to historical data of previous years, they were averaged to their annual totals recorded by HTSO, (2013):(14)Pi,z¯=Pi,z∫t=0t=TzmaxPoz(t)dt∀z∈(−2013)where, the hourly energy consumption (retrieved by the HTSO) is denoted by Poz(t). The above system is iteratively resolved for successive year-sets. In each set, the number of years equals to the number of technologies participating in the current bidding system and compensated through SMP-driven rates. More analytically, the system of Eq. (11) may be analytically formulated for the time range k + 1 →k + m as follows:(15)[P1,k+1¯·Cf1,k+1¯,P2,k+1¯·Cf2,k+1¯,…,Pn,k+1¯·Cfn,k+1¯P1,k+2¯·Cf1,k+2¯,P2,k+2¯·Cf2,k+2¯,…,Pn,k+2¯·Cfn,k+2¯…P1,k+m¯·Cf1,k+m¯,P2,k+m¯·Cf2,k+m¯,…,Pn,k+m¯·Cfn,k+m¯]·[Sx1Sx2…Sxn]k+1−>k+m=[pek+1pek+2…pek+m]The vector pe of the right part corresponds to the target vector. Apparently, the following condition is required for a well-posed algebraic system:(16)m=nThe resulted weight vector Sx (valid for time-window k + 1 → k + m) is assumed to remain unchanged for the next set of years, which are further advanced by 1 (k + 2 → k + m + 1), thus following a time-sliding pattern. Then the system is being reconstituted for this next set (k + 2 → k + m + 1), meaning that the vectorP¯⊗Cf¯(corresponding to k + 2 → k + m + 1) is multiplied to the weight vector Sx in order to generate the next vector pe (with the SMPs of years k + 2 → k + m + 1). All but the last element (pek+m+1) are dumped; this last element is kept and restored in the next iteration, considering that this is known from this point and forwards.In that successive iteration the system is resolved for the time-window (k + 2 → k + m + 1):(17)[P1,k+2¯·Cf1,k+2¯,P2,k+2¯·Cf2,k+2¯,……,Pn,k+2¯·Cfn,k+2¯P1,k+3¯·Cf1,k+3¯,P2,k+3¯·Cf2,k+3¯,……,Pn,k+3¯·Cfn,k+3¯…P1,k+m+1¯·Cf1,k+m+1¯,P2,k+m+1¯·Cf2,k+m+1¯,…,Pn,k+m+1¯·Cfn,k+m+1¯]·[Sx1Sx2…Sxn]k+2−>k+m+1=[pek+2pek+3…pek+m+1]A new Sx vector is produced, which is considered to remain fixed until the next set of years (k + 3 → k + m + 2). This technique is iterated successively until the end of time considered for this research (year 2050). The technologies affected by this pricing model include plants fuelled by lignite, natural gas (NG) and oil. Hydroelectric plants as well as hydro-pumped depots are also assumed to be paid using the aforementioned SMP rates. The algorithm is customisable and other technologies might also be used, constricted though to a moderate number of proven conventional as well as emerging renewable technologies and their variants. An exemplary application of the preceding analysis is given in Appendix A.The aforementioned two endogenous methods used for the modelling of SMP, are processed within each one of the iterations of a typical power-sector optimisation algorithm which is described, in detail, in recent works (Tolis, Doukelis, & Tatsiopoulos, 2010; Tolis & Rentizelas, 2011). An enhanced version, adjusted to the endogenous SMP modelling is adopted though, and it is presented hereby. The objective function, representing the aggregate system NPV, is formulated using either Eq. (18) or (18a), which correspond to the explicit and implicit endogenous SMP modelling, respectively. If the explicit SMP model is used, the average electricity prices, valid for each discrete period and remunerating the energy parts E1z, E2z, should be taken into account in the objective function (see Section 3.2.1, Eqs. (7) and (7a)):(18)NPV(Xi=1,v.,…,Xi=I,v,θi=1,z.,…,θi=I,z)=max{∑z=1Y[SMPz1−0¯·E1z+SMPz2−1¯·E2z]·Dz+∑i=1RE∑z=1Yprez·Pi,z·Dz+∑z=1YSMPz¯·(dz,f−∑i=1REPi,z−E1z−E2z)·Dz−∑v=0Y∑i=1IIi,v·Xi,v−∑i=1I−RE∑z=1YPi,zfCO2inipCO2z·Dz+∑i=1RE∑z=1YPi,z∑i=1I−REECO2i∑i=1I−REPi,zpCO2z·Dz−∑i=1I∑z=1YCfi,z·Pi,z·Dz−∑i=1I∑z=1YCvi,z·Li,z·Dz}Where:SMPz1−0¯=SMP0z+SMP1z2andSMPz2−1¯=SMP2z+SMP1z2, whilst SMP0zdenotes the highest diesel-oil-variant price (see Eq. (10)). On the other hand, if the implicit SMP model is used, the electricity price pezis derived as explained in Section 3.2.2, additionally accounting the constraint-inequality (26):(18a)NPV(Xi=1,v.,…,Xi=I,v,θi=1,z.,…,θi=I,z)=max{∑z=1Ypez·(dz,f−∑i=1REPi,z)·Dz+∑i=1RE∑z=1Yprez·Pi,z·Dz−∑i=1I∑z=1YCfi,z·Pi,z·Dz−∑i=1I∑z=1YCvi,z·Li,z·Dz−∑v=0Y∑i=1IIi,v·Xi,v−∑i=1I−RE∑z=1YPi,zfCO2inipCO2z·Dz+∑i=1RE∑z=1YPi,z∑i=1I−REECO2i∑i=1I−REPi,zpCO2z·Dz}The optimisation constraints are modelled through inequalities (19)–(27).(19)Li,z≤Eni∀i,z(20)(1+e)·dz,f≥∑i=1IPi,z≥dz,f⇒︷(1),(28)(1+e)·dz,f≥∑i=1I(∑v=1z−TliXi,v+∑v=−400Ci,v−∑v=1zX¯i,v−∑v=−400C¯i,v)×θi,zaa,iac,i·8760≥dz,f∀z,e≪1(21)∑i=1Iaa,i·Li,z≥Pcz·(1+mr)[∀z,aa,i=1,∀iexceptwind,hydroandsolarforwhichaa,i≤1]⇒︷(28)∑i=1Iaa,i·(∑v=1z−TliXi,v+∑v=−400Ci,v−∑v=1zX¯i,v−∑v=−400C¯i,v)≥Pcz·(1+mr)(22)∑i=1REPi,z≤1·dz,f∀z(23)∑i=1REPi,z>(0.201)·∑i=1IPi,z∀z<2022(24)∑i=1REPi,z>(0.3)·∑i=1IPi,z∀z≥2022(25)Xi=1,v≥350(a),Xi=2,v≥350(b),Xi,v>0∀v&i≠1,2(c)tmarginal,z<tpeak:projectedduration,z∀z(d)(26)pez≤SMP¯z·(1+fm)∀z(27)profitsi,z=[θi,minaa,iac,i·8760·(pez−Cfi,z−fCO2inipCO2z)−Cvi,z]−IDz,i≥0(27a)Important notes concerning the objective function are pointed out in Appendix B. Its non-linear characteristics are identified in the first left and last right terms of the second line. They are also analysed in Appendix B together with the rationale of its structure and its discrete sub-functions. The independent variables of the optimisation problem are: the capacities ordered in the year v (Xi,vin megawatt electric), and the dimensionless load intensity factor θi,z(in percent) of the power plants of technology (i), operating during year z (z≠v). The capacity additions (either ordered in the past Ci,v, or planned for the future Xi,v) are linked with the total installed capacity (Li,zin megawatt electric) of current year (z), using the formulation of Eq. (28). The dashed symbols denote capacity additions exceeding their operational life time:(28)Li,z=∑v=1z−TliXi,v+∑v=−400Ci,v−∑v=1zX¯i,v−∑v=−400C¯i,v∀i0≤z≤Ywhere:X¯i,v=0,C¯i,v=0v+Tli≤z≤v+Tli+ToiX¯i,v=Xi,v,C¯i,v=Ci,vv+Tli+Toi≤zThus, it is ensured that the plants exceeding their operational life-time, cannot contribute anymore to the power production process. The model's constraints are explained in Tolis et al. (2010) and in Tolis and Rentizelas (2011) but some improvements are proposed hereby:Each technology should not produce more power than the aggregate potential Eni(in megawatt electric) of its corresponding natural resources, statistically recorded (inequality (19)).The average electricity energy production has to meet the simulated demand projection including transmission and distribution losses. Moreover, it should not exceed the demand by more than a very small value (e), since any excessive production may not be exploited by the system (inequality (20)). The installed capacities should also be able to serve the peak power demand (linearly projected) in order to avoid a generic power outage. An additional reserve margin has been further multiplied to the projected peak-power demand in order to account for the possibility of some plants’ failure or fuel unavailability (inequality (21)). The constraints above may affect either power or energy supply depending on which one proves to be stricter.It is assumed that in the far future, the penetration of RES in total power production may be allowed to approach the 100 percent of the actual demand (inequality (22)) (ISE, 2012; SRU, 2011).These constraints are applied in every country participating in the Kyoto Protocol. Greece is required to meet these targets imposed by the EU directive 2001/77/EC (Zhang & Wei, 2010): the renewable energy technologies should obtain a share of more than 30 percent of total electricity production by the year 2020. A future tightening of the aforementioned constraint may also be opted in the executable algorithm. In this work, the originally scheduled environmental constraints have been imposed in order to reveal the impact of generating mix on the evolution of electricity prices, under the pre-determined environmental obligations.The annual capacity orders Xi,vare imposed to be positives. Especially, lignite and NG plant orders (i = 1, 2) should exceed 350 megawatt electric, in order to achieve individual scale economies, otherwise, such an investment would not be feasible and thus it should be postponed. Higher or lower capacity thresholds may be opted in markets other than the investigated one (inequalities (25a)–(25c)). Moreover, an upper bound has been imposed on marginal plants’ load-factor, based on historical peak-load durations, linearly projected to the future (inequality (25d)). Otherwise, the operation of marginal plants would be prolonged in order to generate more profits from technologies fired by cheaper fossil fuels (i.e. base-load and borderline plants). This would be a direct consequence of the modelling, based on the merit order of dispatching and on the uniform pricing of conventional producers. On the one hand, these profits might contribute to the increasing of the optimised system's NPV. On the other hand, they would be unrealistic, despite their modelling, which is based on the aforementioned standard practices of pricing. More specifically, while these profits may be interesting for individual borderline and base-load producers of conventional energy, their linkage to prolonged operation of expensive marginal plants' would reflect (and finally lead) to constantly high SMPs. However, this is an unrealistic, unacceptable condition, as the high SMPs would further be transferred to the final users at a very high social cost. Unrealistically high SMPs may be avoided, by using the aforementioned constraint: the marginal plants (i = imarginal: index resulted by merit order), only produce the supplementary energy needed for serving high peak-loads. By constricting their operation, to be less than the projected duration of peak-loads (25d), peers equivalently to imposing an upper bound in marginal plants' θi,z.In the implicit method, the resulting SMP should not exceed the average levels foreseen by the explicit method, through Eq. (10), (inequality (26)). A fluctuation margin (fm∼5–10 percent) is applied in that constraint, since there is no specific reason for the implicit results to lie necessarily below the explicit ones. This constraint prevents the optimised implicit evolution of SMP from driving in an uncontrolled, chaotic path. If the explicit method is directly used, there is no need for engaging this constraint within the optimisation model.Each plant should be operational for at least some minimum time period in order to ensure a viable business plan. At an average, this might be reflected to the load factor (θi,z) of the corresponding technology's group (i). As formulated by the constraint-inequality 27 (or 27a), the profits of each technology should be at least zero (break-even state). The inquired minimal θi,minzshould comply with this state. It is noted that, the fuel, CO2 and fixed costs, as well as the capital cost repayment annuities are different among the various technologies and therefore, their corresponding θi,minzshould also be different. The unitary constraints—inequalities (27) or (27a) should be applied to the implicit or explicit endogenous SMP models respectively. The SMP levels, derived by Eqs. (8)and (8a), are engaged in the latter case. The time-periods, during which the aforementioned SMP levels are valid, are used in accordance with the analysis leading to Eq. (6). The term (1-δij) is multiplied toSMPz2−1¯meaning that this term should only appear in case the constraint applies to any technology except the marginal plants. If the minimal profits of marginal plants are researched, then the first term of revenues (tOIL·SMPz1−0¯) should only appear. In that case, tOIL constitutes the operating time-period22As analysed in Section 3.2.1, this time period is not about to be meant as a continuous one, but instead, as a set of time-points following the descending order of power production (as depicted in Fig. 1).of marginal plants and θi,minzis additionally engaged as an unknown inside tOIL, using Eq. (6): θi,minz= θi=marginal,minz(i = imarginal: the index is resulted by the merit order of dispatching; here, indicatively (i) corresponds to the diesel-oil-fired units). Note that, in the calculation of profits, the average SMP levels additionally include the relevant PSPs (Power Subsidy Premiums), subsidising each megawatt hour electric produced. The PSPs are varying among the generating technologies. They have been incorporated as a motive for private investors to engage in the market. The user may opt for the level of PSPs (if any), depending on the investigated market regulations or retrieve them by the relevant TSO.The optimisation is performed using a hybrid algorithm split in three steps:(I)The initial guess of the independent variables is selected from a pool of randomly generated values. The optimal multivariate set is selected, as the one leading to the highest NPV. The duration of this procedure is short, despite the numerous numerical experiments.The optimal annual orders and load intensities of Step I, constitute an initial guess for the second optimisation; the evolution of SMP over time is simulated through GBM. The optimisation solver is based on the KKT formulation of the objective function, performed through an SQP technique. This optimisation is executed once (stochastic programming without recourse): an average path for each one of the uncertainties is introduced to the input set thus forming the scenario to be further optimised.The optimal load factors and capacity orders resulted from Step II are used as a first guess in the third optimisation. The same (SQP-KKT) solver is used, but now, the SMP is endogenously derived from the power generating mix and the fuel prices. The third optimisation is recursively repeated for multiple input scenarios, each one corresponding to a different uncertainty set. A Monte-Carlo method is therefore performed by implementing a stochastic programming algorithm with recourse for different states of fuel and CO2 allowance prices, interest and inflation rates, which are modelled by appropriate stochastic differential equations (SDE; see Appendix B). The SDEs are solved for random, normally distributed, Brownian differential vectors producing thousands of scenarios, which in turn are optimised one-by-one. Optionally, only two steps might be performed (I and III, omitting Step II), producing less biased, but equivalently robust solution vectors. The flow-chart of the hybrid three-step stochastic programming algorithm, is depicted in Fig. 2whilst the endogenous, iterative time-sliding procedure used for the simulation of SMP evolution is depicted in Fig. 3. One may alternatively opt for an algorithm without recourse in the third step: the Monte-Carlo is implemented prior to optimisation, for defining one, single input scenario to be further optimised. By resolving the SDEs of the multivariate uncertainty sets, the average solution is derived, thus constituting a single input state. The user may opt for one of those two strategies in the expense (with recourse) or in favour (without recourse) of the computational work.The numerical data used for the determination of the optimal power generating mix required: (a) Retrieving technological and economical inputs and (b) retrieving historical time-series of stochastic variables. The techno-economic inputs are shown in Table 2. They can be easily customised and adjusted on a case-by-case basis, according to the generating mix of the power sector examined, but also, according to any future technological progress. The historical data of the stochastically fluctuating variables have been acquired by various sources. The historical demand loads and SMPs, as well as the regulated prices for renewable producers, have been acquired by the national grid operator (HTSO, 2012). The actual demand data for 2012 are depicted in the blue curve of Fig. 1. The historical data of fuel prices have been provided by the Statistical Service and the International Energy Agency. The recent CO2 allowance prices were retrieved from Point-Carbon. For the case of biomass, lacking historical pricing data, their current gate fees were estimated using a holistic Activity Based Costing procedure (Tatsiopoulos & Tolis, 2003). From the above historical time series, the statistical correlations of the relevant data were extracted and further used to the reconstitution of their evolution, by solving their corresponding SDEs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Electricity market modelling is usually based on one of the following discrete categories of OR models, namely: (i) the optimisation of an individual plant, (ii) the market equilibrium of the entire power sector on a firm-by-firm basis and (iii) the long-term simulation of grouped agents. The research presented in this article may be classified in the third class: a decision support tool is proposed for the optimised expansion planning of a semi-liberalised power sector, assuming plant types, which are grouped by their power generating technology, whilst a moderate number of investigated technologies are only supported. The effect of expansion to the price of electricity is investigated in the long-run. The contribution of this research focuses on the long-term actions of individual plants and the TSO, in order to optimise the market while keeping social cost to a low level. As shown by the—relatively—low electricity prices anticipated over time, liberalisation may help consumers benefit by competition.The results from two models, endogenous and exogenous, are compared. The former indicates moderately increasing nominal values of electricity prices (or slightly decreasing present values), in case the optimal loads and capacity orders are rendered. The latter is insensitive to generating mix variations, but it is only sensitive on historical parameters’ data. The long-term actions, suggested for the TSO, are comprised of the permits granted for new facility entries. On the other hand, the behaviour of generators is based on their dispatching schedule and on their load intensity curves, diversified over time. The endogenous models proved that both strategies are linked to the formation of SMPs. The objective of generators is to maximise their profit in two steps. The first step implies rising of bid prices, as much as needed, in order to render profits for individual producers. This process is mainly driven by marginal producers with the highest fuel prices, which have to reach, at least, the break-even point. The second step is to raise the assigned load levels in the profitable producers so that the gap between the revenues (driven by electricity prices) and the production costs is maximised. The actions of the TSO are also affected by the evolution of electricity prices, since more permits are issued for conventional technologies when their profits are prone to rise, whilst more permits are issued for renewable technologies, in the expense of less conventional orders, when the profits of the latter are decreasing. These strategies, undertaken by the agents, essentially reveal the mechanism of market's long-run interactions.The statistical analysis of the results indicates the robustness behaviour, as the endogenous SMP model proves to be slightly more robust than the exogenous GBM–SMP. Also, the lognormal profiles are characterised by moderately increasing variance (expansion) over time, indicating that the model is more robust in its most imminent solutions.It might probably be implied that the SMPs resulted by the model, are influenced by the implicit-cap, set through the upper-bound imposed on marginal plants' load factor. In general, any restriction of the time for which some units are operational, might possibly (in the actual operation of the power system) reflect to load curtailment, in which case the SMP would escalate to the Value of Lost Load (VOLL). In this work, an average of the historical operating time of marginal units has been assumed to form its upper bound, whilst, any larger, otherwise acceptable value of operating duration, might be excluded in the results, due to the aforementioned upper bound. If an average duration is applied as upper bound of the optimisation process, then a new average should be expected, less, in theory, than the original one. In this context, the operating time of some units might be restricted that much as potentially causing load curtailment. However, it is noted that the marginal units’ load factors are notably low, whilst the historical range of their operating duration constitutes an even lower fraction of total time. As a result, the deviation of the excluded, higher values of operating duration from their resulting average is relatively minimal and therefore, the effect of this simplifying assumption on the anticipated SMPs is not substantial.The proposed decision-making tool was proved to be able to optimise the power sector characteristics, both in terms of financial and environmental performance, despite the strict two-fold convergence criterion. The objective functions were strongly non-linear, and therefore optimality might not be global, despite the convexity properties of the SQP solver. The main handicap of the model may be identified in the prolonged CPU-time required for execution, especially in the cases of recourse models, which was though significantly decreased in the no-recourse scenarios. An inherent limitation of the model, originates on the usage of average, annual capacity-availability factors, which inevitably absorb the volatile noise from spot variations (i.e. loads, costs, RES feed-in etc.) over a year. What's more, the matrix-oriented, time-sliding method might be displaced by neural-nets, in order to better simulate the functional relationship of generating mix with electricity prices, without restricting the number of technologies. The anticipated results might then converge at a higher degree, with the ones of the analytic and more straightforward, explicit endogenous approach.