@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The what, the why and the how of behavioural operational research—An invitation to potential sceptics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
BOR can help to bridge the gap between academic and professional OR.The BOR agenda should be advanced empirically and theoretically.Social science theories can help in generating more realistic accounts of OR interventions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavioural operational research,OR process,Behavioural science and OR,Social science and OR,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Primarily this paper addresses those members of the OR community who remain unconvinced that widening the Behavioural Operational Research agenda beyond decision behaviour modelling to encompass research on the modelling process itself, is a desirable and/or necessary step for the parent discipline to take. Using a process perspective that emphasises human activity and the temporal evolution of OR projects, the paper shows that the appeal of this particular strand of BOR lies in its ability to strengthen the bridge between academic OR and its professional practice in which the human and social challenges can be just as important as the intellectual and technical ones. In so doing, this wider remit for BOR better positions practitioners to reduce the reliance that they currently have on apprenticeship and the gradual accumulation of craft skills in meeting the various challenges that they face. An immediate priority outlined in this paper is for academic and practitioner authors to turn further in the direction of relevant theory in an attempt to communicate process understandings of OR interventions through the literature that better resonate with experience.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
‘Behavioural Operational Research’ (‘BOR’ hereafter) is positioned as a new area of specialisation that is interested in aspects of behaviour that are deemed to be relevant to the use of OR in problem solving and decision support. The espoused aim is to provide a better understanding of how these affect the conduct of, and interaction with, model-based processes that support problem solving and decision-making. Whilst recognising that for some time behavioural issues have been studied by particular OR communities the claim is that more such research is needed to sustain the overall purpose of BOR which is: “ . . . to make better use of OR by both experts and users, so that the intended benefits of OR are effectively realized in practice” (Franco & Hämäläinen, 2014).While this paper seeks to be of interest to a wider audience, its main aim is to appeal to those from the mainstream mathematical modelling community who might be wondering why BOR is now attracting so much attention. The motivation for offering this commentary reflects a belief that broadening the current footprint that BOR has in the parent discipline not only offers tangible benefits to those who may not have engaged with it previously, but can also expedite its shift from OR's periphery to a position closer to its central core. For some time OR researchers have sought to better understand some of the less rational aspects of human decision making; they have also examined how human behaviours intersect with the technical aspects of the regularly recurring problem situations that attract so much OR attention. The current agenda, however, foreshadows extending BOR's jurisdiction to include research on the myriad of human/social forces that initiate the use of OR in the first place, that influence what components of OR are used, how they are used and for what purpose, and, as a result of all of this, largely determine the overall outcomes. The critic might claim that focusing on these kinds of issues is not a central concern for the discipline, and/or that when they arise in professional practice they are best left in the capable hands of clients, decision makers, change agents, OD experts, professional managers and anyone else who for example, might be responsible for implementation. In response it is worth remembering that long standing debates have sought to impress upon the OR community the need to better align the largely technical agendas pursued by the academic wing of the core discipline with the client-oriented nature of its professional practice; the argument being that a prolonged imbalance between the two is detrimental to the longer term sustainability of the discipline (see, for example, Ackoff, 1979; Checkland, 1989; Dando & Bennett, 1981).In order to demonstrate why BOR is important, it is first necessary to be clear about what it is. Here, the paper takes a deliberately broad view that covers the long standing interest that OR has had in adding behavioural components to models, as well as the more recent interest in examining the human and social influences that intersect with the modelling process. As Franco and Rouwette (2014) note, this distinction between models and modelling can be taken to reflect the long standing ontological conundrum of whether reality is best understood as an aggregation of noun/objects or, as verb/processes. Here however, I am using the idea of process in a less philosophically sophisticated manner. Essentially it is to indicate that instead of seeing OR practice as a discrete analytical/technical event carried out by one or more analysts, it is better to think of it as a wider set of iteratively linked activities that occur over time, and which often involves a range of other actors including clients, decision makers and various other stakeholders. It is suggested that this is where many of professional OR's human and behavioural complications and challenges originate.In covering the ‘what’ and the ‘why’ of BOR it makes sense to also ask the ‘how’ question. Looking at how something is done, in this case how BOR is currently configured, is very much defining of what it is. Beyond that, looking at the gaps in its provision and thinking about how these might best be plugged could hold the key to convincing the critics that what is proposed is beneficial.The structure of the paper is as follows. It begins by taking a quick look at the aforementioned distinction between research that investigates the human behaviours that pertain to specific OR phenomena, and that which is more interested in how human behaviours intersect with the process of modelling. Both of these aspects, which are nicely captured through Robinson's (2014) distinction between research that ‘models behaviour’ and research on ‘behaviour with models’, sit comfortably with the view that BOR is: “ . . . the study of behavioural aspects related to the use of operational research methods in modelling, problem solving and decision support.” (Hämäläinen, Luoma, & Saarinen, 2013:623). As I have already indicated, academic OR has had a sustained interest in the former aspect primarily in a quest to help managers better problem solve and provide effective decision support. The paper takes this to signify its general acceptance, and for that reason only a short commentary is provided at the beginning. The main purpose is to flesh out the distinction between the two categories and to provide some illustrations.In coming up with an argument for more research on the second aspect, i.e. the human and social aspects of the OR process, the most strident opponent might first want to know why any such research is necessary. Since OR's historical constitution, and its strong connection with the philosophy of objectivist science and its methods of inquiry would almost certainly crop up as part of such an argument, these aspects are outlined next. Following that, in illustrating how human particularities mediate the relationship between abstract models and their application and outcomes in concrete settings, participants’ biases and predispositions and the social dynamics that circumscribe their involvement in projects are singled out for attention. This part of paper pieces together and elaborates upon views that have been expressed about OR for some time, so while they are not new, they are central to the case for BOR.In the final ‘how’ section, the paper argues that much can be done in both the logical-positivist and interpretive BOR research paradigms to make it a more attractive proposition. Particular attention is paid to the need for more theoretically informed accounts of the human and social aspects of modelling interventions, and the role that social scientists, OR academics, and most importantly, OR practitioners themselves might play in this.In very simple terms what here is referred to as ‘type 1’ BOR, involves building human behaviour, particularly so-called ‘non-rational’ behaviour, into models. The origins of this can be traced back to Simon's (1947) seminal work on the behavioural and cognitive processes of human decision making, and later on, Kahneman and Tversky's (1973) work on decision biases and heuristics. Extending this, OR has long been interested in understanding how behavioural factors such as weight judgements impact upon decision making (see, for example, Ho, Xiaowei, & Prasanta, 2010; Liu, H. & G. Wang, 2007). In similar vein, OR scholars have sought to capture, model, and simulate a range of human behaviours that arise alongside OR's recurring problems. The decision ‘games’ that people play in the well-known ‘beer game’ (Sterman, 1988; Strozzi, Bosch, & Zaldivar, 2007), their ‘stopping behaviour’ in the ‘secretary’ or ‘fiance’ problem (Corbin, 1980; Seale, 1997), and their interactions in queuing theory (Squazzoni & Boero, 2005) are good examples of this.Even though BOR is described as a relatively new area of specialization, this type of behavioural research has generated literally hundreds of published articles, including several EJOR special issues (see, for example, Bisdorf, R. & G. Lundberg, 2007). For that reason there is little need to press its case further. If there remains opposition, which I doubt, then it is too late; the horse has well and truly bolted.‘Type 2’ BOR, i.e. research that is interested in the behavioural aspects of modelling is an entirely different proposition; it is newer, there is less of it, and since there are aspects of it that do not sit too comfortably with some of the understandings, traditions and cultures of OR, its case needs to be laid out and more persuasively argued.It is generally agreed that OR originated out of the attachment of mathematically astute scientists to support the efforts of military planners during World War II. From there the discipline has spread its wings across all sectors of the public, private, manufacturing, and service economies. Subsequent developments highlighting the manifest inability of optimizing methods to cope with ‘messy’ or ‘wicked’ ill-defined problem situations ushered in a range of what are now known as ‘soft OR’ non-mathematical methods that target areas such as strategic planning as well as problem structuring more generally (see, for example, Checkland, 1981; Rosenhead, 1989; Eden, 1989; Friend, 1989). Fundamentally though, OR is mainly about using mathematical models to promote supposedly rational decision-making and optimize system design. From an applied mathematics skill base, this is achieved using a ‘scientific method’ model of practice that, in a nutshell, and through controlled experimentation, involves testing hypotheses about the nature and strength of relationships between entities in a manner that leads to repeatable results and generalisable theory.Although it is hard to escape the essential fact that OR is something that is done by particular human beings, a critic of BOR might want to debate how much significance one might want to attach to this aspect. Witness for example, constitutional documents such as the historically significant US Operations Research Society's ‘Guidelines for the Practice of OR’ (Berger et al., 1971; see also Mason, 1994). Its portrayal of the emotionally detached and inter-changeable analyst working diligently to establish the essential ‘facts’ of the situation, to build models with scientific precision and then to ‘objectively’ evaluate the range of possible solutions, surely implies that providing the analyst has the requisite skills, it does not overly matter who, how and where they are involved (for discussions on this, see Checkland, 1981; Rosenhead, 1989). On this account of OR, the case against BOR might simply be that it is an unnecessary distraction and that the discipline would be better advised to continue developing and fine-tuning the undoubtedly impressive and very often highly effective technical weaponry upon which its reputation has been built.Integral to the case being made here to better integrate the human, social, and technical aspects of OR is to think about it in process terms. What this means however, is subject to varying interpretations and, as a result, there are varying degrees of difficulty attached to doing it. As was alluded to in the introduction, if this is taken to reflect the perennial philosophical question of whether ontological primacy is accorded to either substance or process it can be a complicated matter and certainly shifting from the former, which is our normal everyday way of relating to our circumstances, to the latter, can be an intensely personal transition that some will undoubtedly be unwilling to take. Certainly in the academic world, such a shift has been shown to have major ramifications for research, theory development, and indeed for practice, as debates in other disciplines: organisation studies, strategic management, operations management, psychotherapy, to name but a few, have shown lately (see, for example: Carter, Clegg, & Kornberger, 2008; Jarzabkowsi, 2004; Langley, 2007; Pettigrew, 1997; Efran, Lukens & Lukens, 1990). In passing, it is worth noting that Franco and Rouwette (2014) have recently categorised different approaches to BOR on this basis.In the current context however, ‘thinking process’ does not have to be overly complicated. It simply involves focussing on the dynamic aspects of organisational and professional life and considering how and why ‘things’ – contexts, activities, practices, strategies – change and evolve over time. This is not difficult: thinking about OR in such terms is an almost inevitable conclusion that one would draw through even a cursory glance at its practice. Rarely does OR's involvement result in decisions being made or actions taken through some one-point-in-time snapshot ‘measurement’ of a problem situation, akin in science for example, to the way in which a seismograph might measure the intensity and magnitude of an earthquake, or the triple-beam balance might measure the mass of an object. As many have pointed out (Boothroyd, 1978; Tomlinson & Kiss, 1984; Mason, 1994; Little, 1994; Pidd, 1996; Wallace, 1994; Ormerod, 2010), OR is not like this; it is almost always an iterative sequence of analysis, formulation, decisions and actions that is inextricably tied to the interactions of real people, to particular events, and to evolving contexts. In other words it is a process where the activity – modelling – captures just as much, if not more about what is important and what really matters, as does the ‘object’ or ‘entity’ – model.While thinking about OR in these terms inevitably forces consideration of how human agency intersects with and operates on OR's models, it does not undermine the pivotal role these play in defining the discipline for what it is. If there are no models and/or no tools for measurement, and if there is no analysis that aspires to be objective, or decisions that aspire to be rational, then what we are observing is undoubtedly something else, perhaps action research, management or systems science. But without these things one would be hard pushed to say that it is OR.All that is being said here is what most practitioners will already know, namely that focusing exclusively on the technical aspects of OR cannot account for the fundamental nature of its practice; nor can it foreshadow the many human, social and organisational challenges that crop up on a regular basis. Making some sense of these, which is really all BOR seeks to do, and signalling ways of alleviating their worst excesses can only be done by studying the situation-specific interaction between the models and associated technology on the one hand, and the human/social processes and organisational context in which they are used on the other. So while the discipline of OR is quite justifiably rooted in the natural and mathematical sciences, its professional practice inescapably also places it as a discipline of the behavioural and social sciences. The caveat is that this is not some new revelation; whole conferences have been devoted to the topic (Lawrence, 1966; Jackson, Keys & Cropper, 1989), and for decades writers have often warned of dangerous ‘imbalances’ in OR, for example between its ‘solution’ and ‘client-oriented’ aspects (Eden, 1989); between the ‘knowledge discovery’ motivations of the analyst and wider purposeful ‘human intentions’ of managers (Checkland, 1989); between the ‘technical’ and the ‘social’ (Keys, 1998), and between the ‘intellectual’ aspects and the ‘action’ ones (Lesourne, 1990). What is new here, is the proposition that a well conceived, well organized, and appropriately researched and reported-on BOR, might at last allow the parent discipline to start making some real progress in dealing with these issues.In technical OR, the idea that a regularly recurring problem situation can have a ‘logic’ of its own that can succumb to standardized analytical and modelling techniques is not only intuitively compelling but, in part correct; there are indeed many areas of intersection when a particular problem keeps cropping up on a regular basis. Yet experienced practitioners also know that while OR algorithms are formulated on the basis of aggregating the results of repeated operations, this does not mean that ostensibly similar situations can be addressed in a uniform manner; situations almost always contain some degree of novelty which means that individual unique solutions often have to be found that are adapted to the particular problem and setting, and not least, as some have rightly argued (see, for example Midgley, 2000), to the needs of the particular people involved. In OR, even seemingly straightforward product mix and other related problems in linear and goal programming cannot be appropriately and effectively addressed without striking up a decent relationship with the client, and possibly other stakeholders, in order to tailor the model to their needs and the specific situation at hand (Mabin & Davies, 2003). Indeed for the client, it can be as much his/her unique requirements and the ‘content details’ of a situation that makes it problematic as it is the form that makes it general (Checkland, 1989; Pidd, 2010). As such it is the ‘to-ing and fro-ing’ human processes of working these aspects through that is often critical to the success of the entire venture. To the extent that BOR is interested in this aspect of practical OR clearly speaks to its relevance.Even if there is sufficient similarity across situations to imply that there might be something of a ‘situation logic’ that can produce common outcomes, BOR sends the message that practical OR always occurs in the context of human meanings so what actually happens still depends upon the significance that people attach to the situation as it evolves through time. What arises as salient and in need of urgent attention in one situation, or at one point in time, can easily go unseen, non-prioritised and not acted upon elsewhere, or even later in the same situation. Even if recognised and acted upon, the response still depends upon people's worldviews, their personal agendas and/or those of the host organisation. It surely follows that OR's problems, its problem formulations, and therefore its problem solutions are inextricably part of a human process.The notion that human particularities can have a significant impact on outcomes, stands in stark contrast to the traditional view of OR, which as Tomlinson (1998:404) points out, was often thought about as being to “ . . . discover the truth, to present that truth to the decision-maker . . . (and) that the OR analyst had to remain scientific, objective and separate.” (Tomlinson, 1998:404). On this account, the analyst is taken to be a “universalistic, ahistorical, acultural, disembodied anyone” (Mingers, 1997:427; see also: Taket, 1994; Taket & White, 1993), and not, in any way, as a particular someone.While the analyst can clearly aspire to deal with the situation in the sort of dispassionate arms-length manner about which Tomlinson speaks, accomplishing this in practice is by no means easy. Why would the OR community want to believe otherwise? In modelling decision making behaviour the discipline has had a long-term interest in the role played by human biases, heuristics, perceptions of risk, and so on. On that basis alone it would surely be anomalous to believe that the agent, or anyone else, can engage in a project in a manner akin to an ‘objective’ scientist entering a laboratory, or even following some framework (see, for example, Jackson & Keys, 1984; Mingers and Brocklesby, 1996) that some might mistakenly interpret as providing a set of rules for dealing with particular kinds of situations in particular ways.In OR, Churchman (1971) is generally recognised as being the first to highlight the tacit ‘positioning’ that influences how people frame problems; how they make decisions about who will be involved and how they will be involved; about what technology will be used and how will it be used; about what variables will, and will not be included in the model (see also Brocklesby, 1995a; Brocklesby and Cummings, 1995b; Carrier & Wallace, 1994; Wilby, 1997). BOR can provide a context for further investigating the impact of these kinds of enabling and constraining predispositions, as well as their origins which in most cases are likely to arise through some combination of educational, training, and professional socialisation processes, and even personal characteristics such as age, personality, gender and ethnicity.None of this is to say that the analyst or any of those involved arrive at a situation with a ‘hard-wired’ set of predispositions, merely that there is no such thing as a ‘clean slate’. Neither is it to say that participants are incapable of reflecting upon how their predispositions translate into what are now often referred to as ‘boundary judgments’ (Ulrich, 1982; Midgley, Munro, & Brown, 1998). It is to say however that nullifying the worst excesses of one's positioning is not easy. The analyst can certainly have some awareness of their biases and predispositions and genuinely make an effort to proceed in as objective a manner as possible. However since it is clients or key decision makers who initiate the OR work in the first place, it is they who determine the broad parameters within which the work is carried out, if not necessarily the finer outcome details. As Eden (1989) points out ‘success’ in OR terms is not measured through the varacity or elegance of technical solutions; what counts is how OR is practiced in the meaningful context in which it occurs. ‘Factual analyses’ then, have to confront personal and organisational biases and prejudices and not all scientific approaches pass the quality test of practical applicability and usefulness (see also Bardmann, 1996; Keys, 1989, 1991, 1998; Mingers, 2001; White & Taket, 1994). Considered purely from an intellectual perspective an OR project can be a great success, but if clients/decision makers do not see it that way, it will almost certainly fail to gain traction.Under these circumstances it would be erroneous to suggest that professional OR practice could ever be entirely conducted in an objective manner that is akin to the scientist's dispassionate search for ‘the facts’, under an ethic of truth and for the general good. This squarely ties the ethical concerns of BOR to daily OR practice. When OR is largely thought about as depersonalised knowledge discovery in support of rational decision making about situations that have a singular logic, the agent is relieved of the ethical imperative to take an appropriate share of responsibility for outcomes. Under the conception of OR provided here there is no such relief.Although the biases and predispositions that the various parties bring to OR may mean that certain choices have already been made and some options effectively already either ruled in or out, the substantive character of a project is invariably shaped by the social dynamics of the situation as the process unfolds through time. Indeed in Soft OR where key stakeholders work collectively to reach accommodation and a common view on how to proceed, this is the whole point of the exercise. While Soft OR's organised and purposeful interactions are usually less evident in technical OR, its social dynamics can be just as pivotal in determining the shape, content and success of the project. Using the central idea that practical OR (and organisations more generally) is more ‘negotiated order’ than an embodiment of a unifying purpose or single rationality respectively, Eden (1989) claims that the success of OR depends upon the ability of the analyst to understand the nature of this order and to continually negotiate and ‘manage meanings’ such that any ‘objective analysis’ that does take place is considered relevant by the key players.The extent to which social dynamics exert themselves in a project is, of course, highly contingent. In all likelihood, even though personality clashes, communication difficulties and power plays can radically alter the shape of any project, if the analyst is working alone modelling a regularly recurring situation according to some perceived standard procedure, the overall effect will likely be much less than when teams of analysts and other actors are involved in less structured and more drawn-out investigations. In situations such as these, while initial predispositions may constrain the range of possibilities, what actually happens will depend upon an evolving ‘present’ as people interact, as experiences are reflected upon, and as actions are negotiated or determined by key decision makers. Often these interactions can be a highly positive thing, shared experiences and opinions leading to better decisions through the process and better outcomes beyond it. However negative tensions in social interaction, personality clashes and irreconcilable opinions on what needs to be done can also seriously undermine the process. Delving beneath observable behaviours the sometimes explicit but often more subtle and less visible manner in which power relations shape all aspects of the process can also be pivotal in determining outcomes.Not only does this client-focused and social process perspective on OR speak to the relevance of BOR, but it also has major ramifications for its research agenda. And while it would be reasonable to claim that the ‘softer’ regions of OR have always thought about interventions in these terms, advocating, for example, that streams of ‘political’ and ‘cultural’ analyses be conducted alongside the ‘logic-based’ (see, for example, Checkland & Scholes, 1990), there is a world of difference between doing this to facilitate the accommodation of diverse viewpoints in a particular setting, and doing it as a part of a wider BOR project to develop a better all-round social science of OR practice.In outlining this process perspective on OR, the writer is hopeful that, in principle at least, the sceptic is now beginning to better appreciate the role that BOR might play not only in drawing together existing work that has been done on the human and social aspects of OR, but also charting a more orderly course for the future that will bring it from the periphery of the parent discipline to a position closer to its central core. From there it will be better placed to have a real impact on professional practice. ‘In principle’ approval however, does not necessarily translate into support, so in order to press the case further some consideration must be given to the challenges and difficulties that, in the eyes of the critic, might prevent what appears to be a decent enough idea from delivering on its promise.Foremost amongst the difficulties facing BOR in developing a strong behavioural/social science of OR, is the challenge of prioritising amongst a seemingly unlimited set of possibilities. These possibilities cover different levels of analysis each one of which opens up multiple potential strands of research with a commensurate number of logical connections to other disciplines and fields of study. For example, research propositions formulated from economic and political perspectives can help to better elucidate some of the macro-level constraints on OR practice. Systems theory, while strictly speaking not a social science, has plenty to say about human and social processes, and it is potentially useful for understanding how the self-organising tendencies of OR contexts are enabling or constraining whatever the analyst is seeking to accomplish. Social psychology has a vast body of empirical knowledge and theory that specifically bears upon the social and organisational dynamics that, as we have suggested, characterise, colour and shape particular interventions. As we can deduce from OR's past work in behaviour modelling, at finer levels of granularity, cognitive and decision science, as well as psychology more generally, can help in exploring the individual cognitive biases and decision processes of those involved in the process. Moreover, neuro-scientific researchers are now exploiting the capabilities of sophisticated imaging technology to observe patterns of brain activation as individuals make choices thereby allowing some, admittedly tentative, conclusions to be drawn about what might underlie observed behaviour (see, for example, Naqvi, Shiv, & Bechara, 2006; Rilling & Sanfey, 2011).While disciplinary connections such as these provide a rich source of knowledge that bears upon the BOR project, different sets of principles exist about how research questions should be formulated, investigations conducted, data analysed, and findings written up. Ultimately many of these differences can be traced back to various paradigm-related assumptions that are made about the nature of reality, about what constitutes ‘valid’ knowledge, and about how these assumptions translate into different forms of ‘research praxis’ (for a BOR perspective on this, see Franco & Rouwette, 2014). Here however, the discussion is going to avoid the intellectual minefield that inevitably characterises paradigm-related debate and instead just concentrate on what are most likely to be the main methodological options that BOR researchers will draw upon. These provide a basis for thinking about where the key gaps in current BOR provision lie and what might be done to plug them.Understandably, since it aligns well with OR's traditional scientific grounding, research conducted in the so-called logical-positivist tradition has been the most widely used approach in BOR thus far. Hence the basic praxis of logical-positivism is well understood: formulate hypotheses, test these empirically and then develop theory that specifies the directionality and strength of interactions between two or more entities.Franco and Hämäläinen (2014) specifically highlight the need for more of this type of research; speaking, for example, of research that examines the effect of individual and group behavioural characteristics on model-based interactions. Amongst other possibilities one could include research that examines the impact of age, gender, ethnicity, and organisational and cultural variables on various OR processes and outcomes. A project along these lines might simply investigate the impact of one variable on another; alternatively so-called ‘complexity’ studies (Franco & Rouwette, 2014) can use sophisticated mathematical and simulation modelling to explain more complex interactions and their dynamic consequences across a wider range of variables.Generally speaking the expertise that is required to conduct these kinds of investigations aligns well with that used in OR's behaviour modelling outlined earlier, so capability does not immediately arise as a critical issue. Since the possibilities are vast however, a critic might want to know more about how BOR will go about prioritizing from among the myriad of opportunities that exist for this type of research. This is a very good question that the BOR community will have to address. One logical priority is to construct relevant frameworks that can organise, provide bridges across, and integrate the findings of different research projects. Franco and Rouwette's (2014) ‘two by two’ matrix that identifies four basic types of BOR characterised according to the underlying ontology of the research on the one-hand, and ‘variance’ versus ‘socio-material’ research on the other, provides a useful starting point. More needs to be done however; compared with cognate disciplines such as behavioural accounting and behavioural economics (see, for example, Birnberg, 2011; Wilkinson, 2008) this aspect of BOR is relatively under-developed. Without frameworks that are capable of organizing and making things coherent, the whole exercise could easily turn into a highly fragmented and disconnected set of projects and individual agendas with little cross-project learning and no shared vision for future research directions. One way of thinking about this might to suggest that BOR needs some plausible and useful ‘jigsaw puzzles’ in order to fit and connect the various ‘pieces’. Without these, the BOR research agenda runs the risk of being developed in an ad hoc fashion as and when researchers respond to specific behavioural conundrums that, from time to time, get thrown up from within OR's various specialisms. This is unlikely to enhance the standing of BOR in the parent discipline.Longer term, developing BOR through a coherent logical-positivist research agenda can deliver a corpus of evidence-based knowledge that has the potential to assist practitioners in foreshadowing some of the human/social challenges that they might face out in the field. The caveat however is that developing useful knowledge of this sort is not easy; indeed causal explanation of human/social behaviour is notoriously difficult, especially when it requires disentangling multiple behavioural interactions. Relatedly, since the generalizable propositions of this form of research are formulated out of the aggregated results of large data populations, and are typically limited to a small number of variables, they are not always going to be applicable under particular circumstances where the overall behavioural ‘outcome’ is both complex and emergent.Generally speaking, when the analyst is looking to successfully navigate a route through the often convoluted stages of a project, their engagement is not with particular ‘types’ of people who can be relied upon to act in a stereotypical manner; rather it is with real people whose response to events and circumstances will reflect whatever meaning they attach to the situation at hand. So while variance theories are very good at identifying and measuring general patterns of relationships between, for example, personal characteristics and behavioural outcomes, they do not tell us much about how, in particular situations, these patterns come to be. And this matters because, in the often messy reality of professional OR, understanding the often complex process steps that are required to achieve particular results with real people, is what really counts.Despite their lack of generalizability, compared with the relatively ‘thin’ representations of the OR process provided by variance-type research, projects that incorporate narrative, interpretive and qualitative data are more immediately appealing for the ‘thick’ or ‘rich’ process detail that they provide. In placing situational specifics and human meanings at the forefront of investigation, this kind of research generally adopts observational and ethnographic-type methods. Where such research is conducted with a particular theory in mind, this is much more about providing a language and a set of concepts that allows people to look at, grasp, represent, and generate insight into complex phenomena and particular situations (Abend, 2008; Midgley, 1998), than it is about testing the relationships between or the dynamic consequences of interacting variables. This is surely important in professional OR. Indeed knowing how to look at, think about, and grasp the novelty and complexity of situations, and as a result, act in a manner that will maximise the chances of a project being successful in the context where it occurs, will often be a much more pressing requirement than striving to cobble together and integrate the insights of a vast array of cause-effect theories in a vain attempt to figure out ‘what might be going on.At this point the yet-to-be-convinced critic of BOR might want to argue that the many published case accounts of OR interventions provides sufficient evidence that a distinctive interpretive form of research and reporting already exists, and that nothing more needs to be done. But does it? As has been said, the social aspects of the OR process can be pivotal in determining outcomes, so this immediately raises questions about the relevance of the typical intervention account which: “. . . is deliberately centred upon the individual and hence is limited in that it has not given sufficient attention to the way analysts act as part of wider social groups and the influence that these may have upon them……” (Keys, 2000:311). Adding to the chorus of criticism, Franco and Rouwette (2011) consider the typical intervention account that merely highlights the context, rationale and chronology of the intervention to be equally unenlightening. Examples cited by these authors include Barcus and Montibeller (2008); Connell (2002); Franco, Cushman, and Rosenhead (2004); Ormerod (1995); Vennix et al. (1996). In the interests of consistency and fairness, case accounts provided by Brocklesby (1995b); and Brocklesby and Cummings (1996), are equally culpable, and can be added to the list.Against this background, Ormerod's (2014a) analysis of OR case research published in the main OR journals makes for interesting reading. The most common cases, it seems, mainly focus on the technical aspects of the model used, less common ones report on why it was used, and, even less commonly, there are those that report on outcomes. While case reports such as these have their place, earlier the lack of attention to social process, including the non-linear, iterative, and often delicately negotiated aspects of the model-use-in-practice prompted Ormerod (1998:428) to issue the plea that the discipline desperately needs to “coax more practitioners with a good story to tell into the open”. Echoing that theme, and borrowing a turn of phrase from Watson (1994:778), my sense is that one of the key things that BOR can do is to encourage researchers and/or practitioner authors to produce a type of research, a reflexivity and a style of writing that ‘lets the audience see the puppet's strings as they watch the puppet show’ (Watson, 1994:78). Whether the critic will consider this to be necessary will I suppose depend upon his/her experiences. My own sense is that in OR and similar interventions, the ‘strings’ are always ‘being pulled’, to some extent, somewhere, somehow and by, at least, someone.All of this raises the question as to why research/writing of this sort is rarely seen in the OR literature. Most obviously some authors may simply be blind to their own culpability in influencing outcomes and cling to the view that what they do is an exercise in objectivist science; hence they report on it using the accepted scientific convention of an observer-independent reality. If not, maybe they are coerced into such reporting at the behest of reviewers/journal editors. Maybe it is because the journal guardians of the discipline's reputation believe that publishing richer descriptions of interventions that sheds light on its interpretive ambiguity, its ‘messiness’, its politics, and the more-than-occasional failure of OR to have any sustained impact, would destroy the image of a clear-cut heroic story of success. Maybe it is just that the overall discourse of the literature has encouraged publishing OR researchers to deepen their training and personal investment in quantitative methods and statistical analysis; in other words to stay in the comfort-zone of what they already know rather than consider other approaches that may illuminate other aspects and be helpful from a practice point of view, but which require a very different set of skillsFor practitioner authors it may simply be that they lack the inclination and/or the time to systematically investigate and report on the intervention in this more discursive manner. Certainly compiling real time diary notes that describe and reflect on the processual aspects of a project adds significantly to the demands, especially for the sole analyst who is concurrently working on a substantive technical issue, often with limited resources and under severe time constraints. Admittedly, once the writer is removed from the heat of the battle the task becomes more manageable. But even then, for someone who has been intensively engaged in all the twists and turns of a project there is the problem of ‘sifting the wheat from the chaff’; and as Ormerod (2014b:1254) rightly points out, much of what is interesting about the dynamics of OR projects lies in the ‘discarded chaff’. This resonates very strongly with the view, long held in philosophy, that much of what is critically important about expert practice is concealed in unrecognised ‘commonsense’ understandings (see, for example, Dreyfuss, 1996; Merleau-Ponty, 1961; Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991). In an ideal world, this might signal the need for BOR to engage the services of a dedicated social science-trained ‘outsiders’ who can work alongside analysts to record and make sense of qualitative data as an intervention proceeds. Something similar often happens in technology-mediated Soft OR interventions that have separate content and process facilitation roles (see, Eden, 1989b). While this kind of approach is entirely possible for particular BOR projects, it would not be feasible on a larger scale.From a BOR agenda-setting perspective, there is perhaps another explanation as to why there are so few accounts of OR interventions that communicate process understandings well in ways that resonate with experience. Returning to the metaphor used earlier, if you want to even begin to understand the various ‘puppet strings’ that surreptitiously direct social action, you need to know where to look. Therein lies one of the main value propositions of good theory: it brings into view that which otherwise remains out of sight, hidden away in the background. For the practitioner, good theory at least generates an awareness, if not a complete understanding of things; for the researcher it delineates phenomena that can be investigated with an eye on explanation. And OR is not exactly short of situations that need to be better understood. Witness, for example, Peter Checkland, who in response to questioning about how his conceptual modelling process can promote accommodations among stakeholders with divergent worldviews, admits that such “mysterious processes” are deliberately obscured because “ . . . they defy description, let alone prescription.” (Checkland & Stowell, 2012). Likewise Franco (2013), refers to the micro-dynamics of facilitated model building interventions as a “black box”. On these accounts the implied blindness may be as much a theoretical and conceptual problem as it is an empirical one.What advice then might be given to the OR academic or practitioner who is a potential contributor to the BOR agenda, but is unsure as to what aspects of process might be worth paying particular attention to, either through targeted research, or more commonly perhaps, conducted in parallel with a substantive intervention. By now it ought to be clear that for both scholarly and performative reasons it is vital that OR be understood, not just in scientific/technical terms, but also in the context of a broader set of theories and discourses from the behavioural and the social sciences. Both of these areas are critical to the overall BOR agenda and both provide a rich source of potentially useful conceptual and theoretical knowledge. There are important differences however. Generally speaking, whereas the core capability of the behavioural sciences is to develop theory through controlled cause-effect empirical investigation, that of the social sciences is to develop frameworks and theories that provide a much broader window on, and into, the unerringly complex processes of social systems. In that regard, the social sciences are better equipped for the specific task under discussion here. The caveat, issued particularly for social psychology which has a foot in both the behavioural and social science camps, is that the difference can be a matter of emphasis, and it is undoubtedly the case that both broad fields can provide concepts and a language that can better illuminate the OR process, as well as advance knowledge and develop theory through empirical methods.Because its predominantly positivist approach to empirical investigation is a continuation of what is taught in the natural sciences, it is probably reasonable to conclude that many OR researchers will initially have a greater natural affinity with the behavioural sciences than they do with the social. Yet OR's recent history reveals plenty of scientifically-trained writers who have turned to the social sciences, and social theories in particular: Habermas, Foucault, Marx, to name but a few. Sometimes this has been to outline distinctive approaches to OR, or raise questions about its practice; sometimes it has been to provide greater clarity on the philosophical underpinnings of different OR research paradigms, and/or to integrate them within various meta-level frameworks (Brocklesby & Cummings, 1996; Jackson, 1991, 1993; Mingers, 2001; Ormerod, 2008; Rosenhead & Thunhurst, 1982). Others have turned to the social sciences in order to tease out the theoretical underpinnings of particular methodologies. The interest of Checkland and Casar (1986) and Eden (1989), in Vickers’ notion of the ‘Appreciative System’ and Kelly's ‘Personal Construct Theory’ respectively, stand as good examples of this.Despite such theoretical engagement, there are relatively few examples of work that use social science theory to frame and conduct research on the modelling process. This stands in stark contrast to cognate disciplines where there is now a long tradition of drawing upon the social sciences in a quest to better understand professional practice in the various contexts in which it occurs. In Accounting for example, a ‘collective non-positivist enterprise’ (Baxter & Chua, 2003), has variously converged around ‘Naturalistic Research’, ‘Structuration Theory’, ‘Institutional Theory’, as well as different ‘schools of thought’ such as ‘Foucauldian’, and ‘Latourian’. Investigations have explored a wide range of process-related phenomena: examples include the manner in which practice is constrained by the ‘habits of mind’ of its exponents, the different rationalities of practice and the ways in which these are enacted and given meaning, the receptiveness to and potency of particular techniques in particular contexts and the role that accounting practices play in buttressing organizational power relations (see, Hopwood, 1983; Boland & Tenkasi, 1995; Baxter & Chua, 2003; Hopwood & Miller, 1994; Miller & O'Leary, 1987). As an aside, it is worth noting that these perspectives on Accounting have also filtered through into the tertiary level teaching of the subject which clearly links the conceptualization of professional practice with its competency requirements. The paper returns to this issue in the concluding section.What then can be said about the few examples in OR that have looked at its processes in similar ways. Here I highlight four contributions. The first uses ‘Actor Network Theory’ to study the socially constructed interpretations of multiple stakeholders in an OR intervention concerned with the development of a regional biofuels industry (White, 2009). ‘Narrative analysis’ is used to reveal the hidden patterns and themes of communication that characterise these networks. In this case, which broadly rehearses the conception of OR portrayed in Section 3, a storyline is developed that shows how networks provide a mechanism through which the technical and social aspects of OR become are inextricably interwined, as well as how they are formed and how they can fall apart.A second example uses Maturana's ‘Theory of the Observer’ to analyse the processes through which senior executives worked with analysts in re-modelling organisational structures in a national telecommunications company (Brocklesby, 2009). The main theoretical proposition here is that language and emotions are ‘braided’ each one affecting the other in continually flowing conversations that become the source of people's rationalities and conceptions of actions that are deemed to be ‘sensible’ or otherwise. In the case in question, the early emergence of broad consensuality among a relatively small and tightly knit group of people, and a strong ‘emotional flow’ in support of a particular course of action generated premature cognitive closure in which key conversations became circular and self-referential, each one solidifying a potentially dangerous commitment to proceed in a particular direction that, had it not been curtailed through Government intervention, could have led to major social dislocation.The third example draws upon Carlile's work on organizational knowledge management to examine the role played by OR's models in drawing attention to some of the key barriers that can stand in the way of successful collaboration (Franco, 2013). The theoretical contribution here is to show that models are not static intervention tools but play highly specific roles in the OR process. On this particular account, case vignettes, taken from facilitated model-building workshops, are used to illustrate the different roles that models, as ‘boundary objects’, can play in developing shared language, shared meaning, and shared commitment to action respectively. Depending upon the context, different models have different ‘affordances’, or capabilities that facilitate or constrain the interaction that is necessary for successful collaborationThese kinds of accounts of the modelling process are interesting because they illustrate the distinctive insights generated by particular theories. By now one hopes that the sceptic will agree that these kinds of insights are important, i.e. that networks, language, peoples’ emotions, and models with distinctive capabilities can play key roles in the negotiation of meanings that can make or break OR interventions. What is interesting though is that these papers were written by OR academics all of whom have had a long standing interest in its behavioural and/or its social aspects. So while it is eagerly anticipated that BOR will provide a context for more research of this type, doubts remain about whether it is possible to build a sustainable new sub-discipline purely around the interests and efforts of a few like-minded scholars; others need to get involved.This brings us to the fourth example. The case in question is Ormerod's (2014b) application of Pickering's (1992, 1995) so called ‘sociology of science as practice and culture’ to reflect upon the development of the National Coal Board (NCB) UK Energy Model in the 1970’s and 80’s. In short, Pickering conceptualizes scientific/technical practice as a dynamic of intertwined elements that involves action over time, the forward momentum of which arises out of the interplay of human, material, and cultural forces. While expressed in different terms all of this is consistent with the portrayal of OR throughout this paper. Methodologically, the task facing the researcher is to identify how these elements combine to initiate a project in the first place, and then to examine how what is described as the ‘mangled’ intersection of people, technology, and concepts is adjusted as a result of problems being met, and/or change occurring in people, their activities, new goals, new ideas, new technology and so on.In terms of the argument being developed here the significance of Ormerod's contribution is less the specific theoretical aspect, rather it is the manner in which this has been translated into some relatively straightforward research and writing protocols that, irrespective of their area of specialization, are well within the capabilities of most academic and practitioner OR professionals. Whereas the approach taken in the first three examples sits comfortably within the BOR agenda, the investment and time required in getting to grips with the theory, organizing the logistics of the research, designing the methodology, collecting and analysing data is likely to be of interest to and feasible for a relatively small number of researchers.Ormerod's approach however, which provides clear guidelines such as writing up accounts of projects that describe the wider context, that identifies the roles of the authors and other key actors, describes the managerial and technical processes and progress of the intervention including ‘blind alleys’, and so on, is a much more feasible proposition for a wider population. This is important, because as Ormerod rightly points out, you can't expect scientifically-trained OR practitioners to fully immerse themselves in the complexities of social theories just for the sake of writing a more informative case study. In these aspects, his self-proclaimed ‘modest move’ towards more theoretically-informed but experience-resonating work signals very strongly a direction that BOR might now usefully extend to other areas of the social sciences that offer a myriad of other lenses on the OR process.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
