@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient two-stage algorithm for decentralized scheduling of micro-CHP units

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an efficient algorithm for scheduling CHP units with electric vehicles.Our method is tested within a case study of two German households.We apply individual short-term load forecasting approach implemented as an ANFIS.The computing time could be reduced to about115compared to the MILP.The deviations from the MILP solution regarding the annual supply costs are small.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in energy,PEMFC micro-combined heat and power,Predictive scheduling and optimization,Mixed-integer programming,Algorithmic approach,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we present an efficient two-stage hierarchical decomposition algorithm aiming at determining economically improved operation schedules for residential proton exchange membrane fuel cell micro-combined heat and power (PEMFC micro-CHP) units and optimizing local charging of electric vehicles (EV) in the same household. Based on an individual short-term load forecasting (STLF) approach (imperfect forecast) for households implemented as an adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), a mixed-integer linear program (MILP) and a two-stage greedy algorithm are used for determining optimized schedules based on a rolling-window approach. The results of the case study performed for eight variants in exemplary German households reveal that with both the MILP and the algorithmic approach, significant economic savings can be achieved compared to the standard heat-led strategy. Compared to the MILP, however, the two-stage algorithm has the additional advantage of a reduced computing time of only about115. Deviations from the MILP solutions are mostly smaller than 3 percent regarding the annual supply costs. Moreover, the comparison between the use of perfect and imperfect demand forecasts quantifies additional average losses due to forecasting errors of 2 percent and 3.3 percent at the maximum. Altogether, the algorithmic approach seems to be convincing for real applications in households due to its good results, high reliability, easy implementation, and short computing times. The combination of a micro-CHP unit and an EV is highly synergetic.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ongoing extensive research, development, and funding activities regarding micro-combined heat and power units (micro-CHP units) are likely to enhance their distribution in small and medium-sized households. In Germany this is supported by legal measures designed to leverage the governmental target of doubling the share of CHP electricity generation from about 12 percent in 2012 to 25 percent by 2020 (Federal Republic of Germany, 2012). The target will only be reached if the share of domestic micro-CHP units will grow above average compared to large-scale and industrial CHP (Westner & Madlener, 2011). To reach this ambitious goal, profitable micro-CHP solutions have to be developed. These are also highly efficient in terms of emission reduction. With proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC)-based micro-CHP units, the coupled generation of electricity and heat allows for a more efficient use of primary energy due to their comparably high power to heat ratio (ρ). A PEMFC micro-CHP includes a reformer for generating hydrogen and a PEMFC for generating electricity and heat (cf. Fig. 2). While PEMFC systems reach values of ρ ≈ 0.6, other technologies like mostly applied gas engines (ρ ≈ 0.4) or Stirling engines (ρ ≈ 0.3) only reach lower values (Pehnt & Colijn, 2006; Thomas, 2011). However, especially the promising and efficient PEMFC systems suffer from a limited operational flexibility (Hawkes, Brett, & Brandon, 2009) leading to economic disadvantages and, hence, to the necessity of special methods to address the challenge of reaching economically optimized operation.The key advantages of domestic micro-CHP mentioned above are only valid, if two important aspects are fulfilled:1.The unit is operated to such an extent only that all thermal energy produced can be used in the local building either directly or with the help of a thermal buffer storage andthe electricity generated on-site is used by the household to the largest possible extent (which also is economically reasonable).The legal framework in Germany accounts for these two key requirements by funding the whole electricity generated with micro-CHP units via a CHP-bonus within the first half of the expected lifetime of 20 years, while the co-produced thermal energy is to be used locally and not allowed to be dumped (Federal Republic of Germany, 2012). From the micro-CHP operator’s point of view, it is therefore economically reasonable to maximize the own consumption rate of self-generated electricity. This is due to the CHP-bonus payments and the generated savings that correspond to the electricity purchase price (≈0.25 € /kilowatt-hour, estimated conservatively) which are higher than the total feed-in tariff ( ≈ 0.11 € /kilowatt-hour) paid to the unit’s owner, if the electricity produced is fed into the grid. However, most micro-CHP units in Germany are still operated in heat-led based modes (cf. Section 2), because there is a lack of intelligent control algorithms providing for an optimized operation with respect to the time-dependent local demand of electric energy, which is not necessarily correlated perfectly with the local heat demand (particularly in times of low heat consumption).Beyond scheduling the operation of a PEMFC micro-CHP unit tailored to the temporal characteristics of the local electricity demand, the presence of an electric vehicle (EV) which is mainly charged at home can influence the unit’s profitability. The latter might possibly become more common due to a predicted increasing market share of EV between 3 and 30 percent until 2030 (Kay, Hill, & Newman, 2013). As a result of the vehicle’s commonly high electricity demand and long parking times at home, significant degrees of freedom are generated, which may be utilized by a load shifting approach in order to maximize own consumption of locally produced electricity (Grässle, Becker, Knapp, Allerding, Schmeck, & Wagner, 2011). The methods used in the following case study take all these case-specific aspects into account by an integrated modeling approach which includes both the optimization of PEMFC micro-CHP operation and the charging time of an EV aiming at minimizing a household’s total supply costs. To do so, an online optimization of the operating strategy is developed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
