@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mitigating the impact of drug shortages for a healthcare facility: An inventory management approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a hospital’s inventory system that is subject to supply disruptionsWe propose a practical solution approach that would maximize the quality of serviceThe optimal inventory allocation is somewhat controversial but is consequentialHospitals are likely to benefit from inventory pooling

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Heuristics,Inventory management,Markov chain,Drug shortages,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite the importance and value of the pharmaceutical market, a significant portion of procurement spending including pharmaceuticals are lost. Coupling poor and reactive management practices with the inevitable national drug shortages, leads to lack of medicines causing patient suffering and direct life or death consequences. In this paper, we propose a stochastic model to find the optimal inventory policy for a healthcare facility to proactively minimize the effect of drug shortages in the presence of uncertain disruptions and demand.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the United States has the highest healthcare expenditure in the world with $750 billion spent in the global pharmaceuticals market (Boerma, AbouZahr, & Ho, 2009). The United States pharmaceutical market itself is valued at around $306 billion (mar, 2010), with an annual growth of approximately 5 percent. However, a significant percentage of procurement spending (including pharmaceuticals) is known to be lost due to poor management practices around the world (Boerma et al., 2009). Inline with this report, Landry and Philippe (2004) estimate that 48 percent of the costs in the pharmaceutical supply chain can be avoided by better management.Poor management practices in pharmaceutical supply chain also lead to significant shortages and inefficiencies in the delivery of critical healthcare supplies. A shortage occurs when a product is not commercially available in a sufficient quantity to meet the demand. Arbitrary selection of inventory policies, combined with national drug shortages, cause unavailability of drugs which pose a direct threat to the quality of care received by a patient. Unavailability of drugs also result in patient treatment times being prolonged or procedures (e.g., surgeries) being canceled. Specific examples of medical consequences for critical shortages can be found in Landis (2002).The majority of the experienced shortages impact oncology drugs and inpatient pharmaceuticals. Recently, National Analysts Worldwide, a marketing research and consulting company, has conducted a survey on the impact of drug shortages on cancer care (Maas, 2012), that reveals 40 percent of oncologists had seen patients die sooner and 95% of physicians had a patient who was unable to receive timely treatment due to drug shortages.Shortages of drugs can also have serious monetary implications. Medical professionals devote substantial time to find alternatives for drugs in shortage by investigating effects of substitute drugs. Meanwhile, medical staff spends additional time for finding drugs in shortage from other institutions or making new contracts with wholesale distributors for substitute drugs.Considering the importance of the shortages both from quality of care and cost standpoint, our goal is to minimize the impact of national shortages for hospitals. A national drug shortage occurs as a result of raw material unavailability, manufacturing/regulatory issues, inventory practices, unexpected increases/shifts in demand, and natural disasters (Fox et al., 2009). As most of these causes are inevitable, we aim to better manage inventory in a hospital to minimize shortages and maximize quality of care. In this paper, we highlight the positive effect of minimizing the cost of shortage and substitution in conjunction with conventional costs (ordering, inventory holding) by adjusting the inventory related parameters for a hospital.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews relevant approaches in the supply chain management and inventory control literature. Section 3 presents our mathematical optimization framework that aims to minimize the expected total cost under the presence of uncertain national shortages on both mainstream drugs and substitutes. A heuristic solution algorithm for the model is presented in Section 4. Section 5 provides computational results and compares the proposed inventory policy with currently employed policies of two healthcare facilities. Concluding remarks are presented with directions for future research in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
