@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supply chain structure in a market with deceptive counterfeits

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Deceptive counterfeits lower the price and the sales of authentic products.The general retailer will carry counterfeits as long as the quality is high enough.A company can change its channel structure to mitigate the risk of counterfeits.It may be optimal to sell through the general channel along with a certified one.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Deceptive counterfeit,Channel structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Deceptive counterfeits differ from non-deceptive ones in that they are packaged and sold as authentic brand name products so that consumers may buy counterfeits unknowingly. When a distribution channel, referred to as the general channel, has been penetrated with deceptive counterfeits, a brand name company may need to restructure the way its products are distributed and rely on reliable channels such as certified stores or manufacturer-owned stores to guarantee 100% authenticity. In this paper, we first identify the conditions under which the general channel will carry deceptive counterfeits, and then analyze the optimal supply chain structure in the presence of counterfeits as well as by incorporating the wholesale price decisions, consumers’ risk attitude towards counterfeits and consumer loyalty towards the reliable stores. Our main finding is that the brand name company should continue to sell, sometimes exclusively, through the general channel despite deceptive counterfeiting under various conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Once called “the world’s fastest growing and most profitable business” (O’Donnell, 1985), the counterfeiting business covers almost all economies. According to a recent study by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), counterfeits and pirated goods in international trades grew steadily and doubled during the period 2001–2007 (OECD, 2009). Counterfeits are often categorized into two types: non-deceptive and deceptive (also referred to as counterfeits in the primary and secondary markets by the OECD, 2008), first defined by Grossman and Shapiro (1988a, 1988b). Non-deceptive counterfeits are those which consumers are able to distinguish from the authentic products due to the price, quality and location of sales, e.g., $1 DVDs and $20 Louis Vuitton handbags. They are typically sold through channels independent of the brand name companies’. On the contrary, deceptive counterfeits, the focus of this paper, sneak into a brand name company’s supply chain with very similar packages and are sold as the authentic products at similar prices. Under these circumstances, consumers may purchase counterfeits unknowingly. A deceptive counterfeit usually causes more harm to consumers as it may involve health and safety risks. For example, counterfeiting medicines, which are “deliberately and fraudulently mislabeled with respect to identity and/or source”, may cause therapeutic failure or adverse events observed in patients as they include wrong or insufficient active ingredients (Reggi, 2007). Although counterfeiting medicines are traditionally more of a concern in developing countries, the discovery of a fake version of the widely used cancer medicine Avastin recently raised new fears of fake medicines in US and other developed countries (Perrone, 2012).Different counterfeits call for different fighting strategies. According to the OECD (2008), “The policies and measures to combat counterfeiting and piracy in the two markets differ; it is therefore important to know how much of a threat each poses when considering product-specific strategies.” For instance, improving the authentic product’s quality has been proved to be a successful strategy to compete with non-deceptive counterfeits in the Chinese shoe market (Qian, 2008). However, the same strategy may not be as effective in fighting deceptive counterfeits as a high-quality product tends to attract more counterfeits. Instead, in a market with deceptive counterfeits, a brand name company may need to monitor and control its supply chain more closely. Green and Smith (2002) show that an international spirit company which once failed to stop deceptive counterfeits through quality improvement eventually succeeded by strengthening the control on its supply chain in the Thailand market. However, few study has been conducted to analyze the restructuring of supply chains as an anti-deceptive-counterfeiting strategy, which is the focus of the paper.To protect its brand name and guarantee 100% authenticity in the presence of deceptive counterfeits, a brand name company, e.g., a manufacturer of luxury goods, may have to establish and sell all of its products through reliable distribution channels such as an independent certified retail store or a manufacturer-owned one, e.g., a flagship store or an online store in its official website. However, many brand name companies continue to sell through their existing distribution channels exclusively despite the counterfeits, while others adopt a dual channel structure by selling through both a reliable and its existing unreliable channel. While dual channel structures have been widely studied in the literature of operations management, they have not been considered as a means of mitigating counterfeiting activities.Since counterfeits are so widely spread in certain markets despite the efforts by both brand name companies and governments, our focus is not on strategies to eliminate deceptive counterfeits. Rather, we examine from operations perspective, given that deceptive counterfeits have already penetrated into a brand name company’s supply chain, whether and how a brand name company should restructure its supply chain to counter counterfeiting. Furthermore, given that deceptive counterfeits will soon follow, we examine how the brand name company should structure its supply chain when it enters a market. Specifically, we try to answer the following questions: (1) To what extent will a general channel sell counterfeits, referred to as the rampancy level of the counterfeits? (2) Knowing that a general distribution channel has been penetrated by deceptive counterfeits, should a brand name company completely abandon it and only rely on a reliable channel that can guarantee 100% authenticity? (3) What supply chain structure should a brand name company adopt when entering a market where deceptive counterfeits will soon follow?Adopting the vertical differentiation model (Mussa & Rosen, 1978; Shaked & Sutton, 1982), we describe consumers’ utility towards the brand name product as a function of the price and their perceived quality towards the product. We define the rampancy of the counterfeits as the probability that a consumer purchases a counterfeit at the general channel. We first try to understand the impact of deceptive counterfeits when the product is sold exclusively through the general channel. Since mixing deceptive counterfeits with the authentic ones lowers the overall cost, the retailer is able to charge a lower price which increases the total sales. However, since only a portion of the total sales is the authentic product, the sales as well as the profit of the brand name company is most likely lowered in the presence of counterfeits. We characterize the rampancy level that maximizes the general store’s profit and provide the conditions under which the retailer will carry none, some, or all counterfeits.We then consider channel restructuring as a means to counter counterfeiting at the general channel. Suppose that the brand name company has access to a reliable distribution channel, either a certified one or a self-owned store. The key difference between a certified store and a manufacturer-owned one is that the certified store is an independent outlet and will decide the selling price while the brand name company is able to set the selling price in the manufacturer-owned store. We show that it may be optimal for a brand name company to continue selling through the general channel even when a certified or a manufacturer-owned store exists. The brand name company may even let the general store sell the product exclusively despite the existence of a certified store. However, selling exclusively through the general store is never optimal with a manufacturer-owned store as a self-owned store is not only more efficient than a certified store but also allows the brand name company to decide its selling price. Thus, it can better compete with the general store and the brand name company should always carry its product at its own store.Finally, we extend our model to take into consideration of (1) brand name company’s optimal wholesale price decision; (2) consumers’ risk attitude towards the products sold at the general channel; and (3) consumers’ loyalty towards the reliable store. If the brand name company is able to adjust its wholesale price, we show that the brand name company is more likely to sell through dual channels since the flexibility in its wholesale price allows it to better control the general channel. With risk averse consumers, although the brand name company is in general more likely to rely on its reliable channel, it may still sell exclusively through the general channel with a certified channel. Finally, with loyal consumers, the brand name company has some profit guarantee if it sells through a reliable channel. Thus, selling through dual channels is almost always a dominant strategy with a certified store. However, with a manufacturer-owned store, selling through dual channels is less likely to be optimal since fewer consumers will buy at a general store at a relatively high rampancy level.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the existing research on counterfeiting and related literature on channel management. Section 3 analyzes the impact of counterfeits on the brand name company’s profit and the optimal rampancy level at the general store. Section 4 examines the brand name company’s channel structure in response to counterfeits and Section 5 studies the brand name company’s channel decision when entering a new market where counterfeits will soon follow. Some extensions are discussed and analyzed in Section 6 and the paper is summarized in Section 7. The proofs of the propositions can be found in the online appendix.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we study a market with a brand name product and its deceptive counterfeits. Although counterfeits lower consumers’ perceived quality of the authentic product, they cost less and allow a general retailer to charge a lower price to attract more consumers. Thus, it is possible that a general retailer may simply replace the brand name product with its counterfeits if the quality of the counterfeits is relatively high and the penalty for doing so is low. We show that even if a brand name company is able to increase the penalty to the general retailer for selling counterfeits, which can be quite costly in reality and hard to do without government involvement, such an approach cannot eliminate counterfeits, only reduce the rampancy level, if the quality of counterfeits is relatively high.To protect its profitability, a brand name company can establish a reliable distribution channel with 100% authenticity guarantee, e.g., a certified store or a manufacturer-owned store. Then, consumers can make purchases at the general store at a low price with some risk of buying counterfeits, or at a reliable store at a higher price. We show that, the brand name company may continue to sell, sometimes exclusively, through the general store even if a reliable channel is available. However, selling exclusively through the general store is never optimal with a manufacturer-owned store. The brand name company should sell through dual channels when counterfeits’ quality is relatively high and the rampancy level at the general store is moderate, and sell exclusively through its own store otherwise. In practice, many brand companies sell their products through dual channels even if the general channel (e.g., unauthorized B2C and C2C websites over the Internet, many small independent shops in Hong Kong) has been penetrated by counterfeits. Our analysis provides justification of such practices. As long as the rampancy level is not too high, selling through dual channels enable brand name companies to reach more consumers and is still more profitable for a brand name company.We then investigate a brand name company’s optimal channel decision when entering a new market where counterfeits will soon follow and show that it should be more cautious and is less likely to sell through the general channel unless the penalty cost is high enough. Our analysis also shows that selling through dual channels may encourage the general retailer to sell more counterfeits in order to protect its profitability. Thus, a brand name company must carefully evaluate the tradeoff between its profitability under the dual channel structure and the rampancy of the counterfeits.We also consider several extensions of our basic models. First, we incorporate into the channel decisions the brand name company’s wholesale price decision. We show that with the flexibility of adjusting the wholesale price, the brand name company can better control the general channel and thus is more likely to sell through dual channels. The dual channel structure can still be optimal even if the brand name company can charge different wholesale prices to different channels as long as the rampancy level is not too high. Secondly, we study the channel decision by considering when consumers are risk averse and show that the brand name company may still sell exclusively through the general store even with a certified store, although it is more likely to sell exclusively through its reliable stores. Finally, in the presence of loyal consumers, especially of products whose counterfeits involve health and safety risks such as medicines, selling through dual channels becomes almost a dominant strategy with a certified store, while it is less likely to be optimal with a manufacturer-owned store. Loyal consumers make a reliable store more competitive over the general store.