@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Public facility location using dispersion, population, and equity criteria

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Population, Dispersion and Equity Criteria in public facility location.Generation of good, implementable solutions for a location problem.Modeling a problem from the viewpoint of an OR/MS practitioner.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Location,OR in societal problem analysis,Health care,Public policy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
From a practical perspective, the paper demonstrates that the appropriate use of dispersion, population, and equity criteria can lead to fairly good solutions with respect to the p-median objective. The only stipulation is that the decision maker verifies (through simple constraint checks) that the chosen locations meet the dispersion, population, and equity criteria. An empirical investigation is conducted to obtain appropriate values for these parameters. From a location science perspective, a new location model that accounts for equity and efficiency simultaneously is studied and analyzed. Specifically, the p-maxian problem with side constraints on dispersion, population, and equity is developed, its NP-completeness established, and valid inequalities and bounds derived. Computational tests show encouraging results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the OR/MS literature, several researchers have developed models and solution methodologies for locating public facilities such as emergency vehicles, libraries, hospitals, and fire stations. The focus usually is on minimizing a single objective function, but there also has been a focus on obtaining efficient solutions satisficing several objectives. The objectives used are usually some function of the response time; typical functions are the average response time and the maximum response time. There are many review articles for location theory and application papers. These include those by Daskin (2008), ReVelle and Eiselt (2005), Hale and Maberg (2003), Avella, Benati, Martinez, and Dalby (1998), Owen and Daskin (1998), and Brandeau and Chiu (1989). For a good review of recent trends specifically in the context of public facility location modeling, see Serra and Marianov (2004). Despite the impressive list of citations in these papers, there is a significant gap between model development and analysis and usage of these models to make actual locational decisions. There are, of course, some notable exceptions. Dell et al. (2009) discuss location of new schools combined with closing of existing schools as a strategy to improve transportation access to school children in Chile. Their work is helping shape the school access debate in the Chilean Education Ministry. Antunes (1999) developed a model for locating waste management facilities in Portugal. The model he developed was a variant of existing location models and provided a good starting point for policy makers in Portugal. Mehrez, Sinuany-Stern, Arad-Geva, and Binyamin (1996) discussed the location of a hospital in a rural area of Israel. They tried various models though none fit exactly to the specifications of the problem at hand. Finally, they ended up using a screening method to suggest alternatives. A well documented success story is Larson’s Hypercube queuing model which is used by several police departments to suggest locations and deployment strategies for vehicles (Larson, 1974). Another successful application of public facility locational analysis is due to Eaton, Daskin, Simmons, Bulloch, and Jansma (1985) who employed the Maximal Covering Location problem due to Church and ReVelle (1974) to deploy ambulances in Austin, Texas.We now focus on practical public facility location studies to motivate our work. The paper by Price and Turcotte (1986) discusses their work as consultants for locating a blood bank in Quebec City. They adopted an intuitive approach, using a simplistic gravity location model to make a comparison between the five sites that they had shortlisted. The reasons that they cited for not using a scientific approach were the lack of data availability and time for the analysis. The work of Carson and Batta (1990) is a good example of a failed locational project. They adopted a scientific approach, which led to an interesting model for locating a campus ambulance but required considerable effort in terms of data collection. Despite the fact that the model was empirically validated, the results were not implemented because of a change of administration and reluctance on part of the students to wait in the cold for so few calls. The project suffered from its inability to capture “political” constraints and from the “vanishing advocate” phenomenon discussed in Larson and Odoni (1981). In a recent talk (Berman & Krass, 2010) the median problem with unreliable facilities was presented. An interesting result of the analysis was that the facilities tend to colocate (or draw together) when the reliability level drops. At the same time, facilities tend to be dispersed when in less populated areas. The authors examined empirical data of hospital locations in the City of Toronto, Canada, and found that both dispersion and population criteria are present when unreliable public facilities are in question.In this paper, we attempt to answer the following question in the context of the p-median problem on a network: How bad can a locational choice be provided that the decision makers use dispersion, population, and equity criteria. Six other papers that the authors are aware of which address similar questions are: (1) Larson and Stevenson (1972), who performed calculations with spatially homogeneous demands which suggest that the mean travel time resulting from totally random distribution of facilities in the region served is only reduced by 25% when the facilities are optimally located; (2) Larson and Odoni (1981), who performed calculations to show that ignoring the size of a city block in computing travel distances induces an average error of no greater than 1/3 the size of the block; (3) Batta and Leifer (1988), who demonstrated that restricting facility location to demand points and barrier vertices gives good results for the p-median problem on a Manhattan plane both with and without travel barriers; (4) Love and Walker (1994), who show that using a combination of norms yields an accurate approximation to actual road distances under a variety of circumstances; and (5) Francis, Lowe, and Tamir (2004) who study the loss in accuracy when demand points are aggregated so as to make the problem more computationally tractable, and provide a summary of the work of several researchers in this area; and finally (6) Burkey, Bhadury, and Eiselt (2012) who demonstrated that actual locations of hospitals in four states in the US yielded median and equity values very close to the optimal p-median value and equity value implied by the optimal p-median solution, respectively. This last paper provides the motivation for our study by suggesting that typical criteria used by decision makers in practice may in fact yield optimal solutions that would be suggested by traditional median based location models.This paper makes two types of contributions. The first is practical (intended for policy makers with little knowledge or belief in quantitative solution methods for public facility location problems) and the second is methodological (intended for location scientists desiring the development and analysis of a location model which simultaneously accounts for efficiency and equity).Practical aspects: From a practical perspective, the main aim of this paper is to demonstrate that appropriate use of dispersion, population, and equity criteria can lead to fairly good solutions with respect to the p-median objective. Thus a decision-maker who has little knowledge or belief in quantitative solution methods can select the location of the p facilities in any manner they wish. The only stipulation is that they verify (through simple constraint checks) that the chosen locations meet the dispersion, population, and equity criteria. To facilitate this, an empirical investigation is conducted to obtain appropriate parameter values for these criteria.Methodological aspects: The methodological contributions result from the worst-case analysis used to validate the practical approach. Specifically, the p-maxian problem with side constraints on dispersion, population, and equity is formulated and analyzed. After demonstration that the model when location is restricted to a finite set is NP-complete, valid inequalities are developed and used to improve its solvability. Effort is also devoted to the development of bounds. Thus a location problem that accounts for efficiency and equity simultaneously is studied and analyzed, resulting in the identification of parameter values that decision makers can then use to generate good quality solutions.Lastly, some comments are in order regarding the choice of the three criteria that we focus on in our analysis, and a limitation of our study. The dispersion and population criteria are proxies for measures of efficiency, that are typically focused on minimizing the costs of providing the service. On the other hand, the equity criterion accounts for fairness of the service, and addresses an important consideration that arises often in the location of public facilities. The importance of examining the tradeoffs between efficiency and equity objectives in public facility location has been well established in both theory and practice dating back to McAllister (1976), and more recently by Burkey et al. (2012) specifically in the context of hospital locations. The main aim of this paper is to demonstrate that appropriate use of dispersion, population, and equity criteria can lead to fairly good solutions with respect to a widely used efficiency measure in the location literature, namely the p-median objective. We are not attempting to establish that these three criteria are the three most important criteria in a given location problem. Clearly, other criteria (such as a covering criterion) may be relevant in a given context, and it would be interesting to study the quality of solutions generated by the proposed criteria with respect to such criteria. We suggest this as a future area of study.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Notations are introduced in Section 2, and in Section 3, we develop formulations to study the worst-case performance of location problems that employ the population, dispersion, and equity criteria with respect to the median performance measure. In Section 4, we discuss our computational results and present a sensitivity analysis with respect to a range of values of the parameters used in these three criteria. In Section 5, we present our conclusions.Consider a network G=(N,L) in which N is the set of nodes and L is the set of links. Let ∣N∣=n and the elements of N be labeled 1,2,…,n. Let l(i,j) denote the length of a link (i,j)∈L and d(x,y) denote the length of a shortest length path between two points x and y in G. On any link (i,j) we define a node k breakpoint as a point xksuch that d(xk,k) through node i and node j are exactly equal. Note that a link may have at most (n−2) breakpoints. The total arrival rate of calls into the system is λ, with the arrival from node i being λi. Thus the relative frequency of calls from node i is wi=λi/λ. There are p facilities to be located on the network. Facility locations can be made at nodes and at any point along a link, and facilities are assumed to be of infinitesimal size. Response units are housed in these facilities.There is a natural tendency to favor choices that spread or disperse emergency facilities in the geographical region that they service. To capture this dispersion criterion mathematically, we assume that the distance between any pair of facilities in a candidate solution is greater than or equal to a threshold λ, or d(xi,xk)⩾λ for i, k=1,…,p, i≠k. Dispersion alone is probably not the only criterion that decision makers would use when making public facility location decisions. If the population is not evenly distributed, decision makers are likely to assign more facilities to heavily populated areas. To capture this population criterion, we assume that the distance of the closest facility to a population center is less than or equal to a threshold, where the threshold itself is inversely proportional to the population center’s weight. Mathematically, if βsis the distance of the closest facility to a node s, then we impose the constraint βs⩽A/ws, where A is a factor of proportionality. A high value of A implies that the decision makers are not too concerned by choosing locations that do not account for population variations in the geographical region. A low value of A implies much concern for population variations in facility location decisions. A third criterion that is often relevant in the context of public facility location is fair or equitable access to the facilities, where decision makers have to ensure that no demand point is beyond an established threshold distance (B) from its closest facility. This is especially true in contexts that involve emergency response (see, for example, the Oklahoma City Fire Department Fire Station Location Study, 2006). Mathematically, we impose the constraint βs⩽B, where βsis as defined earlier. For a discussion of the use of these criteria in the context of undesirable facility location, see Murray, Church, Gerrard, and Tsui (1999).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, our analysis suggests that when location is restricted to nodes, parameters based on the population, dispersion, and equity criteria seem effective in eliminating most of the poor solutions. Prescriptions derived in this manner based on the p-median solution may serve as a useful prescriptive aid for decision makers to help generate/assess a number of good quality solutions that they can choose from. In the context of larger problem instances, if the p median itself is hard to solve, a question arises as to how good values for the parameters can be generated? Preliminary testing using the NY and SE networks with parameter values implied by solutions that are within a specified small% (25%) of the p-median solution suggests that the worst case median value is often close to the optimal p-median value, and within 100% in almost all cases. This suggests the use of a heuristic to get a good solution based on which the parameter values can be derived. For example, one option is to use values based on a solution found using a heuristic such as the 1-opt interchange (Rosing & Hodgson, 2002; Rosing & ReVelle, 1997; Teitz & Bart, 1968). If the objective is to actually generate a set of solutions to present to the DMs for consideration, we could employ a modification of the Teitz and Bart heuristic to generate, say, the k best solutions starting with the best heursitic solution that would satisfy the parameters. The modification would be to consider the swap in the 1-opt interchange on the basis of two conditions, (1) that the new solution satisfies the parameters, and (2) the new solution results in the smallest increase with respect to the p-median value. It would be interesting to assess the average and worst solution among the generated solutions relative to the p-median. Another area for future research would be to extend the analysis in this paper to locations on a plane.