@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of the expected makespan of a set of non-resumable jobs on parallel machines with stochastic failures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Simultaneous maintenance and production scheduling.Exact computation of the expected makespan for non-resumable jobs in case of stochastic machine failures.Reveal the complexity of the problem and the objective function.Derivation of two approximations of the objective function with excellent performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance,Scheduling,Stochastic failures,Non-resumable,Approximation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we consider a production process at operative level onmidentical parallel machines, which are subject to stochastic machine failures. To avoid long downtime of the machines, caused by unexpected failures, preventive maintenance activities are planned and conducted, but if a failure could not be averted a corrective maintenance has to be performed. Both maintenance activities are assumed to restore the machine to be “as good as new”. The maintenance activities, the number of jobs and their allocation to machines as well as their sequence have a large impact on the performance of the production process and the delivery dates.We study an order ofnjobs, scheduled for a frozen period on the machines. It is assumed that jobs, interrupted by machine failure, have to get repeated right after the corrective maintenance is finished (non-resumable case). We first derive an exact formula for the expected makespan. Since the exact evaluation of a schedule is highly complex, we propose two approximations for the expected makespan. The excellent performance of the approximations is illustrated in a numerical study.In literature lots of scheduling problems are discussed under the assumption that machines are always available. However, machine failures and maintenance activities can have a considerable impact on the performance of a manufacturing facility. If a maintenance activity is planned, a machine is unavailable for production during this time period. But, the other way around, if no preventive maintenance activities are scheduled, unexpected machine failures may occur, resulting in unplanned maintenance activities causing even longer downtime of the machine. Thus, the decision if and when to plan preventive maintenance (PM) activities to avoid machine breakdowns has a large impact on the performance of the production process, especially if jobs are non-resumable and therewith have to get repeated in case of a machine failure during the production of a job. Such situations can, for example, be observed in pharmaceutical industries, where highly sensitive ingredients are handled. If a failure takes place during the production of such a job, the ingredients will be destroyed and the job has to get restarted after the repair of the machine. Due to long production times in pharmaceutical processes this can have a considerable impact on the completion time of the job and the makespan of a set of jobs.In this paper we study situations where a given order of jobs is scheduled on m identical parallel machines. These machines are affected by stochastic breakdowns. If a machine fails, an unplanned corrective maintenance (CM) activity is performed to restore the original condition of the machine. But, the interrupted job has to get repeated after machine repair, since it is not possible to continue a job in process after a machine breakdown. In order to avoid unplanned production stops, long downtime of machines and repetitions of jobs, PM activities are also inserted in the production schedule. The aim is to evaluate a given schedule of non-resumable jobs and maintenance activities, in order to be able to find the best schedule with respect to the expected makespan.The evaluation of a given schedule is the prerequisite for solving the scheduling problem described asPm|nr-pm|E(Cmax)according to the classification scheme (αc|βc|γc) created by Pinedo (1995).αc=Pmdenotes the use of parallel identical machines.γcdefines the objective function of the problem, which is in our case the expected makespan influenced by the schedule as well as the stochastic machine failures. For the determination ofβcwe use a formulationnr-pmto describe a problem with non-resumable jobs and the insertion of multiple variable preventive maintenance activities. In Lee and Lin (2001) for example the termnr-ais used, which declares non-resumable jobs and an availability constraint. In contrast to them, we do not consider “a priori” known and therewith fixed unavailable periods. Thus we introduce the new termnr-pmfor variable PM activities.A lot of research is done for the scheduling and the machine maintenance problem independently. As representative overviews shall be mentioned Pinedo (1995) for production scheduling and Wang (2002) for a review of maintenance optimisation models.One approach to combine both problems is presented in literature about scheduling problems under the condition of availability constraints. The unavailable periods can be caused by PM activities or other events, but are fixed and known “a priori”. Overviews for these deterministic problems are given in Lee (1996), Sanlaville and Schmidt (1998), Schmidt (2000) and Ma, Chu, and Zuo (2010).Other authors assume the unavailability periods to be flexible in a given time interval and determine the actual maintenance starting time dependent on the production process. Examples are: Qi, Chen, and Tu (1999), where multiple unavailability periods have to be inserted, each after a given maximum ofT∗time units a machine was in progress. Graves and Lee (1999) consider semi-resumable jobs and Lee and Chen (2000) allow for parallel machines and one unavailability period on each machine, which has to get included in the schedule between time unit 0 andT∗. In Chen (2008) and a note on this paper (Xu, Yin, and Li (2009)) an earliest starting time and a latest ending time are given for multiple unavailability periods and a heuristic is developed to solve the problem in polynomial time. Although these contributions consider flexible maintenance, with the presented approaches it is not possible to model the consequences of a late preventive maintenance activity, namely a higher probability for unexpected breakdowns.In contrast, Adiri, Bruno, Frostig, and Rinnooy Kan (1989) consider stochastic failures, but do not include PM activities. In Berrichi, Amodeo, Yalaoui, Châtelet, and Mezghiche (2009), PM activities are inserted after a variable time interval and instead of inserting CM activities a second objective function is introduced to minimise the unavailability.Only few articles address the integrated problem of planning corrective and preventive maintenance and scheduling jobs on machines, when failures can occur stochastically. Cassady and Kutanoglu (2003) investigate a model for the integrative problem minimising the weighted job tardiness on a single machine, if jobs are resumable. Their paper is focused on deriving formulae to evaluate a schedule and they illustrate with small examples the advantage of solving the job scheduling and the maintenance scheduling problem simultaneously instead of sequentially. Kuo and Chang (2007) prove analytically some policies for nearly the same problem while assuming an “as good as new” state after a repair and having no weights for tardiness. Another model is established in Cassady and Kutanoglu (2005) for integrated schedules and the total weighted completion time as a performance measure. The same model is extended by Yulan, Zuhua, and Wenrui (2008) to five objective functions. In a recent article Cui, Lu, and Pan (2014) present an integrated model with similar assumptions as in Cassady and Kutanoglu (2003). They investigate the insertion of buffer times to obtain robust schedules.Other articles which integrate quality control with maintenance and production scheduling decisions based on the model of Cassady and Kutanoglu (2003) are Pandey, Kulkarni, and Vrat (2010) and Pandey, Kulkarni, and Vrat (2011). They minimise expected cost and show the advantage of integrated problem solving. An overview of literature dealing with partial and complete integration of maintenance and production scheduling as well as quality control is given in Hadidi, Al-Turki, and Rahim (2012).The non-resumable case is seldom discussed in literature for the integrated problem with stochastic failures. Adiri et al. (1989) prove the optimality of priority rules on a single machine, if one failure is expected, but no PM activities are allowed. Lee and Lin (2001) discuss a similar problem, but with the opportunity to insert just one PM activity and modified job length after a maintenance activity.The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: In the next section the model for the described situation, its parameters, variables and assumptions are introduced. The model is able to reflect the trade-off between the number of preventive maintenance activities and the number of unexpected failures. In Section 3 we derive an exact expression for the expected makespan making it possible to evaluate a given schedule. We show that the effort to evaluate a given schedule increases exponentially as compared with the length of the input string, namely, the number of jobs in the worst case scenario. The corresponding problem of finding a schedule minimising the expected makespan is therefore not in the class of NP problems. As a consequence, we derive two approximations for the computation of the expected makespan which are presented in Section 4. Their performance is tested in a numerical study in Section 5. The paper ends with a summary and an outlook for further research.We consider an order of n jobs to be processed on m identical parallel machines. The processing time of a job j (denoted bypj) is known, constant and independent of the machine it is assigned to. Each job is scheduled once and each machine can process maximally one job at a time. It is not possible to split a job to different machines. The whole job order is available at time zero and all machines are assumed to be “as good as new” at the beginning of production. Since the problem evolves at the operative level, we incorporate the existence of a frozen period in the way that the schedule is determined before production starts and its sequence is not changed during the process. These periods of unchanged production are of practical relevance to steady production planning and ensure material availability.We further assume that machines are not always available. Machine breakdowns can occur during the production of the jobs, resulting in unplanned production stops. Since the machines are assumed to wear out with ongoing production process, the time to failure (T) of a new machine is modelled in an Increasing Failure Rate (IFR) mode. If a machine fails during the production of a job, this job has to get started anew. This is called the non-resumable case.Two kinds of maintenance activities are considered in this paper: preventive and corrective maintenance. Because of the IFR it is reasonable to insert PM tasks in the production schedule to avoid machine failures and therewith long production stops. The mean duration of a PM activity is denoted bytp. A PM is not allowed to interrupt a job, thus the non-preemptive case is assumed. If a failure cannot be averted, a CM is performed to restore the machine and to replace broken parts or modules. Since corrective maintenance activities cannot be planned in advance, it is reasonable to assume that the mean duration of a CMtcis longer than that of a PM activity (tc>tp).Both maintenance activities are supposed to restore the machines to be “as good as new”. If a repair activity would be allowed, which only restores the machine in a working state but not in an “as good as new” state, then it may happen that the failure probability after a repair is still quite high. Due to the assumption that the interrupted job has to restart right after the repair, an endless loop of failures and restarted jobs can be created. Therefore, renewals of the machine seem to be more reasonable and we can additionally assume that repeated jobs do not fail again. Thus, each job is allowed to fail just once. A discussion of the impact of this assumption can be found in Section 5.In order to describe a given schedule mathematically, we introduce the following binary variables. The variablexijlspecifies the allocation of a job j to a machine l on position i (the ith job) and is defined as(1)xjil=1ifjobjisscheduledattheithpositiononmachinel0otherwise.j,i=1,…,n,l=1,…,mThe preventive maintenance activities are presented by the variablesyil, which are defined as:(2)yil=1ifaPMisperformedjustbeforetheithjobonmachinel0otherwise.i=1,…,n,l=1,…,mWe are interested in the performance of a given schedule, measured as the expected makespan, which is defined as the expected completion time of the latest scheduled job with respect to all machines. Letnlbe the number of jobs on machine l:(3)nl=∑j=1n∑i=1nxjill=1,…,mwith∑l=1mnl=n, then the expected makespan can be defined as(4)E(Cmax)=maxl(E(Cnll))withE(Cnll)denoting the expected completion time of the last scheduled job in the schedule of machine l.To the best of our knowledge, we are the first who derive an analytical expression for the evaluation of a given schedule for the above described situation.For the described problem environment the expected makespan of each machine is composed of four essential parts:the processing times of jobs allocated to the considered machine l+the time units spent for all scheduled PM activities on this machine+the expected time units spent for the CM activities on machine l+the expected time units for the jobs which have to be produced twice due to job interruption on machine l.The processing time of the ith job on machine l can be written as:(5)pil=∑j=1nxjil·pji=1,…,n,l=1,…,m.The first part of the expected makespan and therewith the sum of processing times up to the ith job in the schedule of machine l is then(6)∑g=1ipgll=1,…,m.The second part of the expected makespan, namely, the time units of scheduled PM activities up to the ith job on machine l, is determined by:(7)tp∑g=1iygll=1,…,m.Due to the stochastic failures, the third term, namely, the expected time units for CM activities, is quite complex. The expected time for CM activities depends on the expected number of failures during the schedule, which is influenced by the sequence of jobs and the preventive maintenance tasks as well as the distribution of the time to failure. Let k denote the number of failures in the schedule of machine l up to the ith job withk=0,…,iandπiklthe probability of k failures up to the ith job in the schedule of machine l. Then the expected time units for CM activities can be computed as(8)tc∑k=0ik·πikll=1,…,m.The main difficulty arises in the derivation of a formula for the probabilityπikl, because we have to consider every possible scenario of failed jobs up to the ith job, which are in totalikfor each k (withk=0,…,i).We illustrate the problem by means of a small numerical example. We consider a machine with two scheduled jobs (i=2) with sequence{12}. The processing times of the jobs are denoted byp1,p2and no preventive maintenance is planned. Three different values of k have to be considered (k=0,1,2). There is only one possible scenario of the first situation, where no failure occurs (k=0). One failure can evolve during the production of the first job or during the production of the second, resulting in two different possibilities fork=1. Finally, there is only one possibility of having two failures, namely the machine fails during the production of each job. We illustrate how the probability of two failures is calculated:The probability of a machine failure during the first job isP(T⩽p1|T⩾0)and should be quite small. However, we will integrate it in our formula, since it simplifies the notation. If the first job fails, this job has to get repeated right after a CM activity, where after the machine becomes “as good as new”. Due to our assumption that the machine does not fail during the production of a repeated job, we just have the failure probability of job 2 left. Because of the revision of the first job, the failure probability of job 2 isP(T⩽p1+p2|T⩾p1). Therewith the probability of 2 failures becomesP(T⩽p1|T⩾0)·P(T⩽p1+p2|T⩾p1). The probabilitiesπ2klfor allk=0,1,2are presented for any machine l in Table 1.To generalise these calculations, we introduce several sets. LetNi={1,…,i}consist of all jobs scheduled so far and letNikcontain all distinct k-element subsets ofNi.Nikis used to determine the jobs interrupted by a failure and its negotiationN‾ikto determine the jobs, which are not interrupted, for all possible breakdown scenarios. Let furtherNhik(N‾hik) be the hth subset ofNik(N‾ik) withh=1,…,ik. For the above mentioned exampleNh2kandN‾h2kare listed in Table 2.In order to get an expression for the probability of k failuresπikl, we have to sum up the probabilities for all possible scenarios to result in k failures. For each job t in the subsetNhik, we denote the probability for a machine failure during the production of this job, if k failures are observed on machine l asδhtkl. Then it holds:(9)πikl=∑h=1ik∏t∈Nhikδhtkl·∏t∈N‾hik(1-δhtkl)k=0,…,i,i=1,…,n,l=1,…,m,which can also be denoted as the conditional probability function, having a failure after T time units under the condition of having k failures.In order to determineδhtkl, a general formula is needed depending on the time the machine is in progress since the last maintenance activity. Letzhtklbe the working time of machine l since the last maintenance, right in front of the tth job in subset h, if k failures occur. Then(10)δhtkl=P(T⩽ptl+zhtkl|T⩾zhtkl)h=1,…,ik,t=1,…,i,k=0,…,i,i=1,…,n,l=1,…,m.zhtklis equal to the starting time of its predecessor plus the starting time of the(t-1)th job, if this predecessor does not fail and no PM is performed in front of the tth job. The starting time becomes 0, ifytl=1, because the machine becomes “as good as new” after a PM activity. Additionally, also the last CM activity is relevant forzhtkl. To regard, if the predecessor of the tth job fails in this scenario, we introduce two other sets:IfMt={1,…,t-1|t∈Ni}thenDthik={1,Mt⋂Nhik|t∈Ni}contains all jobs, which are interrupted by a breakdown and scheduled previous to the considered tth job, but at least the first job, if we look for subset h and k failures. Thenmax(Dthik)gives us the last job previous to the tth job, which is interrupted by a machine failure. The termmin(|(t-1)-max(Dthik)|,1)is 0, if the(t-1)th job fails and 1 otherwise. Thus, if the(t-1)th job is interrupted, just its repetition is accounting for the starting time of the tth job. Regarding both maintenance occurrences, the starting time of the tth job becomes:(11)zhtkl=(1-ytl)(zht-1,kl·min(|(t-1)-max(Dthik)|,1)+pt-1,l),h=1,…,ik,t=2,…,i,k=0,…,i,i=1,…,n,l=1,…,mandzh1kl=0.In summary, the probability of k failures up to the ith job on machine l can be computed by inserting Eqs. (10) and (11) into (9).The last term missing to determine the expected makespan is the sum of expected time units of the interrupted jobs, which have to get produced twice. LetE(Ril)be the expected number of repeated time units up to the ith job in the schedule of machine l. Since repeated time units just evolve, if a job is interrupted by a machine breakdown, the expected number of repeated time units is derived as:(12)E(Ril)=∑k=0i∑h=1ik∑t∈Nhik∫zhtklptl+zhtklu-zhtklf(u)F(ptl+zhtkl)-F(zhtkl)du·∏t∈Nhikδhtkl·∏t∈N‾hik(1-δhtkl)i=1,…,n,l=1,…,m.LetF(t̃)be the cumulative distribution function of T. Then we get the expected repeated time units per interrupted job weighted by the probability of the specific breakdown scenario, summed up for each possible breakdown scenario and each possible number of failures.After the derivation of the formulas for all four terms (Eqs. (6), (7), (8) and (12)), the expected completion time of the ith job on machine l is given as:(13)E(Cil)=∑g=1ipgl+tp∑g=1iygl+tc∑k=0ik·πikl+E(Ril)i=1,…,n,l=1,…,m.Since we have derived an expression for the expected completion time of the ith job on the machine l, we are now able to compute the expected makespan for a given schedule of n jobs.The effort of computing the expected makespan with the approach presented in Section 3 can be written asmaxl∑k=0nlnlk=maxl2nl. The length of the input string isL(I)=O(n·log(max(I))). Thus, in the worst case the evaluation of a given schedule needs exponential time. As a consequence, the problemPm|nr-a|E(Cmax)is not in the class of NP problems. Since this high complexity results in long computation times for large problem instances, the exact evaluation is not suitable for practical utility. Therefore, we derive in the sequel approximations for the expected makespan.For the first approximation (E(Cmaxcut)) the number of incorporated possible failures for each machine is restricted. Since the occurrence of many failures is quite unlikely, we neglect those scenarios which only occur with small probabilities. If the probability of having many failures is large, then the production process would be inefficient and an investment in new machines might be a more appropriate decision. We conjecture that these scenarios only have a small impact on the expected makespan. Thus, instead of computing the failure probabilities for all values ofk=0,…,nlfor a machine l, we just include the scenarios with a small number of failures (k=0,…,cutl). LetBbm,lbe the set of jobs in batch bm on machine l, if a batch consists of the jobs scheduled between two PM activities, andbm=1,…,BmlforBml=∑i=1nlyil+1. Letcutbm,lbe the maximal incorporated number of failures during the batch bm of machine l, with(14)cutbm,l=min∑j∈Bbm,lpjMTTF+1,|Bbm,l|bm=1,…Bml,l=1,…,mand MTTF as the mean time to failure of the IFR distribution, then(15)cutl=∑bm=1Bmlcutbm,ll=1,…,m.The upper limit for the number of failures to be considered is then the rounded expected number of failures during a batch plus one and summed up over all batches of a machine.The advantage of this approximation is, that it reduces the number of steps during the computation in dependency of the problem parameters and the schedule to be evaluated.The disadvantage of this approach is, that the complexity can still show an exponential behaviour, which is dependent on the MTTF. However, the change to2nl-∑k=cutl+1nlnlkcan result in a large reduction in computation time.Since the first approximation can still have a high complexity, another approximation is presented. We replace the complicated expression for the average number of failures with a simplified one. This approximation for the expected makespan (E(Cmaxpol)) consists of the expected completion of a machine l:(16)E(Cpolnll)=∑i=1nlpil+tp∑i=1nlyil+tc∑i=1nlF(pil+zil|zil)+E(Rlnll)l=1,…,m.In this approximation we sum up the failure probability for each job under the assumption that the machine does not fail before this specific job, resulting in an approximation for the number of expected failures during the whole schedule. Without any further restrictions, this could lead to unrealistic high failure probabilities for the later jobs since we are not incorporating each breakdown scenario anymore. For example in a scenario where previous jobs might fail with high probability, in the exact calculation a restart becomes very likely leading to low failure probabilities for the later jobs. To avoid this disadvantage of the approximation, we include an artificial renewal of a machine after a failure in the calculation of the starting time of a job:(17)zil=(1-yil)(zi-1,l·gil+pi-1,l)i=2,…,nl,l=1,…,mwith(18)gil=1ifF(pi-1,l+zi-1,l|zi-1,l)<0.5i=2,…,nl,l=1,…,m0otherwiseandz1l=0.The starting time of the ith job is determined by the starting and processing time of its direct predecessor if the probability for a failure during the production of the (i-1)th job is smaller than 0.5. Otherwise, if it is very likely that a failure occurs and results in a CM, the “as good as new” state is assumed and the starting time of the ith job is only determined by the processing time of its predecessor. Additionally, if a PM is inserted in the schedule in front of the ith job, its starting time becomes zero.According to the discussion above, the expected additional processing time for failed and repeated jobs is adapted as well:(19)E(Rlnll)=∑i=1nl∫zilpil+zil(u-zil)f(u)F(pil+zil)-F(zil)du·F(pil+zil|zil)l=1,…,mwhich can be reduced to(20)E(Rlnll)=∑i=1nl∫zilpil+zil(u-zil)f(u)(1-F(zil))dul=1,…,m.The advantage of the approximation pol is the reduced complexity, which is now polynomial bounded. Thus the problemPm|nr-a|E(Cmaxpol)is in the class of NP problems.In this section we investigate two different research questions:1.What is the impact of the assumption that a job is allowed to fail just once?What is the performance of the two approximations of the expected makespan?In order to answer these questions we conducted a simulation study. The numerical results are presented in this section.The time to failure is assumed to be Weibull distributed with shape parameter β, scale parameter α and the cumulative distribution function:(21)F(t̃)=1-e-(t̃α)βt̃⩾0withβ>1to ensure an increasing failure rate. Therewith the MTTF in Eq. (14) becomes(22)MTTF=α·Γ1+1βwith Γ being the complete Gamma function.In order to answer the first question we compare the analytical calculations (Cal) of the expected makespan with the results obtained by simulation (Sim), where the occurrence of failures is not limited to maximal one failure per job. We can regard a single machine, since the assignment to the machines does not have any effect on the comparison. We consider a worst case scenario with relatively long processing times for the jobs (pj=50,∀j=1,…,n) compared to a small mean time to failure (α=100,β=7). Further, no preventive maintenance is included and the time for a corrective repairtcis set equal to 20. We simulated 100,000 runs for the system for different sizes of the job sets (n={1,2,3,5,10}) in order to estimate the expected makespan with a high accuracy, represented by a small half width of the corresponding confidence intervals (Halfwidth). Besides the expected makespan we also measured the average number of failures during the production of n jobs (Av. No. fail.) and we especially determined the average number of jobs failed more than once (Av. No. mult. fail.). In order to illustrate the impact of the multiple failures on the expected makespan, we also computed the relative difference of the exact and the simulated values (ΔCmax). All results are presented in Table 3.Except forn=1, the difference of the expected makespan is not caused by inaccuracies of the simulation study, but by the above mentioned assumption. Since we neglect the additional failures, the expected makespan is always underestimated with our analytical calculations.It can be seen that the impact on the time difference increases with the number of scheduled jobs, but the growth is not linearly. We maximally setn=10, because larger values would result in very long computation times for the exact evaluation. Based on the above mentioned numerical results we can extrapolate the relative time difference using a logarithmic model (ΔCmax(n)=0.1488·ln(n)+0,0723). Then the impact of the assumption can be estimated for larger job sets (for example, we get forn=100a relative difference of 0.76%) However, it is very unlikely, that no preventive maintenance activity would be conducted for larger job sets, since the expected number of failures forn=10is already 6.55. Therefore, we conclude that the impact of our assumption on the numerical results is very low and the ability of a job to fail more than once can be neglected. We use in the sequel the term exact expected makespan for our analytical computation.The second part of the numerical study is devoted to the performance of the proposed approximations of the expected makespan. For this part of the study a full factorial design is constructed and examined similar as in Cui et al. (2014). We fixed the value ofβ=7and varied α, which is set equal to 100, 110 and 120 to gain a compromise between relatively stable machines and therewith realistic settings and the ability to show the effect of machine failures also in small problem instances. The time for a preventive maintenance activity is chosen astp=7and the time for a corrective repairtccan attain the values 10 and 20. We consider six different scenarios related to the number of machines and the number of jobs (m,n): (2,10), (2,20), (3,20), (3,40), (5,40), (5,60). For each scenario ten different job sets are considered where the processing times of the jobs are drawn from a uniform distribution on the interval[1,50], resulting in 360 problem instances. Further, for each parameter setting we generated 1000 random schedules and evaluated them with each approximation as well as with the exact expected makespan presented in Section 3.We estimated the correlation between each approximation and the exact evaluation by a linear regression, resulting in anR2for each of the 360 instances. An averageR2is determined by taking the mean of the 10 different sets of processing times for each set of parameter values(α,tc,m,n). Table 4shows the average values and standard deviations of theseR2averaged over all possible values of a parameter indicated by “∗”. The precision of the induced data is ensured by setting the sample size of randomly generated schedules to 1000, resulting in half 95% – confidence intervals of the correlation coefficient smaller than 0.5% of the estimator.AnR2close to one and therewith a high correlation is an indicator for similar performances of the evaluations as well as for their ability to find the optimal schedule. Therewith, both approximations are highly correlated with the exact value independently of the parameter setting.As a result of this correlation study, we can claim, that both approximations are able to replace the exact expected makespan in terms of their performance and their ability to detect the optimal schedule. Since the complexity and therewith the computation time of the approximation pol is much smaller, we recommend to use the simple approach pol, especially for large problem instances, in terms of optimisation approaches or if the solution space is scanned to find a good heuristical solution with improvement heuristics.Since the expected makespan of an order is an important key performance indicator, which can also be used to determine delivery dates, it is of interest to get insights into the accuracy of our approximations for the expected makespan. To do so, we have used the expected makespans for the 1000 randomly chosen schedules from the correlation study above and calculated the relative percentage deviation between the approximations and the exact expected makespan for every schedule S as follows:(23)Δ(S)=E(Cmax(S))-E(Cmaxap(S))E(Cmax(S))·100%ap∈{cut,pol}To be able to link the deviations to the quality of a schedule, we divided the set of schedules in three parts. The first part (I) consists of the best third evaluated schedules orientated on the exact expected makespan, part two (II) of the second third best evaluated schedules and part three (III) of the worst third. We have computed the absolute relative deviations|Δ|averaged over all parameter settings (av|Δ|) for each part separately. The results are listed in Table 5as well as the overall maximum and minimum values of Δ.The mean of the absolute relative deviations of pol over all of the instances used in the correlation study is 0.51%. Separated in the three parts, the mean|Δ|increases for groups of schedules further from the optimal schedule. The maximal overestimation is quite high, for all parts. The maximal overestimation is 14.12%, which evolved in the setting with 10 jobs and two machines,α=100andtc=20and one of the 10 sets of processing times. In Fig. 1the expected makespans are illustrated for this parameter setting with the schedules sorted ascending to the evaluation of the exact makespan. It can be seen that pol over- and underestimates the exact evaluation, but follows the overall tendencies. The deviation of pol toE(Cmax)can be quite high, but for schedules, which are close to the optimal one (part I), these deviations are small.The approximation cut is matching the exact values almost perfectly. Altogether, the approximation cut has a mean absolute relative deviation of 0.01%, a maximal negative deviation of 9.41% and no overestimation.Fig. 2illustrates a setting with 60 jobs and 5 machines, where cut resulted with its highest deviation. It is illustrated that cut underestimates the exact performance when rather worse schedules are considered. But in most cases the deviation is very small.These results lead us to the statement that for the evaluation of a given schedule, approximation cut is the best choice, since it has a very good matching with the exact performance and the exact value is only underestimated, simplifying the planning of further production steps.In this paper we studied the problem of evaluating a schedule of n jobs and preventive maintenance activities. The non-resumable jobs can be processed on m machines, which suffer from unexpected failures.We derived an exact analytical expression for the expected makespan of a given order of jobs. Due to the high effort of evaluating a given schedule exactly, we also proposed two approximations. By means of a detailed numerical study we tested the performance of the approximations and found very good results for approximation cut, having in mind, that it could also result in long computing times. The performance of the approximation pol is also very close to the exact values and this approximated expected makespan can be computed much faster. Therefore, we recommend the fast approximation pol for optimisation or search algorithms and cut for the evaluation of a single schedule to give instructions to further production or delivery processes.Our formulae enable the fast evaluation of a schedule for the described production environment. Thus, in a next step it is possible to develop algorithms to find the optimal schedule. The optimisation problem itself is still NP-hard, since it can be reduced to the classical parallel machine problem minimising the makespan (Pm||Cmax) (see Garey and Johnson (1979)). Therefore, both presented approximations can be a very valuable contribution when optimal integrated production and maintenance schedules have to be determined. Even heuristical approaches can benefit from our results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
