@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Inventory sharing and coordination among n independent retailers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a coordination mechanism (nRCM) for a n-retailer inventory sharing system.nRCM leads to only grand coalition and induces complete residual sharing.Retailers may not share information with all others and would not share true info.nRCM does not require information sharing and still ensures an almost first-best result.Each retailer is ensured a higher profit under nRCM as the system size increases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Inventory sharing,Coordination,Asymmetric information,Coalition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Inventory sharing among decentralized retailers has been widely used in practice to improve profitability and reduce risks at the same time. We study the coordination of a decentralized inventory sharing system with n (n > 2) retailers who non-cooperatively determine their order quantities but cooperatively share their inventory. There has been very limited research on coordinating such a system due to the many unique challenges involved, e.g., incomplete residual sharing, formation of subcoalitions for inventory sharing etc. In this paper, we develop a coordination mechanism (nRCM) that simultaneously possesses a few important properties—leading to formation of only grand coalition, inducing complete residual sharing, and ensuring each retailer obtains a higher profit as the system size increases. We also consider the impact of asymmetric demand distribution parameter information on the coordination mechanisms when the retailers privately hold such information. We show that although true coordination requires complete information sharing, under any n-retailer inventory sharing coordination mechanism, retailers may not have incentives to share information with all other retailers and will not share true information even if they do so. In this regard, nRCM possesses another important property: it can be implemented under asymmetric information and retailers can obtain profits very close to their first-best profits even if they do not share demand information. Such nice properties of nRCM also hold when retailers have correlated demands. This paper is the first to study coordination mechanism for an n-retailer (n > 2) inventory sharing system considering asymmetric information.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the help of internet and information systems, collaboration among firms (even independent firms) has become more attractive and popular as firms make every effort to improve profitability by reducing risks and uncertainties. Inventory sharing (or transshipment) among decentralized firms is one of these examples. With the express delivery at relatively low costs, inventory collaboration, in particular, inventory sharing (or transshipment) has drawn increased attention from retailers and manufacturers as they seek to succeed in a highly competitive market. For example, a leading heavy machine manufacturer has taken the initiative to establish service parts inventory sharing among its dealers who are independently owned and operated (Zhao, Deshpande, and Ryan, 2005). By transshipping inventory from a location with excess stock to satisfy the demand of another location with insufficient stock, dealers obtain the benefits of risk pooling with reduced inventory and higher service level at the same time in this capital intensive industry that faces high uncertainty in its demand. Such practices of inventory sharing have also been prevalent in the service parts of automotive and machine tool industries (Kutanoglu and Mahajan, 2009; Narus and Anderson, 1996), and routinely performed in the apparel, music, high-tech products, and electronics industries. There are also examples of inventory sharing among un-related firms through online platforms, e.g., Inventory Locator Service.To obtain the maximum benefits from sharing inventory, independent retailers modify their order quantities, depending on how the additional profit resulted from transshipment will be allocated among them, in order to take into consideration the inventory transshipment opportunities with other retailers. There has been a stream of literature on the inventory stocking and transshipment decisions in the decentralized inventory sharing system, mostly focusing on two-retailer systems (e.g., Hezarkhani and Kubiak, 2010; Hu, Duenyas, and Kapuscinski, 2007; Rudi, Kapur, and Pyke, 2001; Zhao, Deshpande, and Ryan, 2006, and the references therein). Much less literature has looked at the more realistic n-retailer (n > 2) decentralized inventory sharing systems and even lesser on coordination of such systems, due to their complexities.This paper considers an n-retailer inventory sharing system (n > 2), in which the n independent retailers non-cooperatively determine their order quantities but cooperatively share inventory with each other. Several unique issues arise in the n-retailer system that make the analysis more complicated. First, depending on the transshipment profit allocation rule, retailers may not completely share their residual demands or residual supplies. As Granot and Sosic (2003) point out, depending on the transshipment profit allocation rule, retailers may hold back their residuals in order to obtain higher profits. Second, depending on the transshipment profit allocation rule, retailers may not want to share inventory with everyone in the system, i.e., they may form subcoalitions when sharing inventory residuals. Third, coordination is much more complicated and profitability of each retailer under coordination may depend on the size of the system, n.Due to the many challenges involved, previous literature on coordination of an n-retailer inventory sharing system is quite scarce. Review of the coordination allocation rules existent in the literature (Section 3) reveals further difficulties involved: Although being a core allocation rule (i.e., formation of only grand coalition) for the inventory sharing game and inducing complete sharing of residuals are important issues to consider when developing coordination allocation rules, these properties cannot be easily achieved simultaneously. In fact, Granot and Sosic (2003) show that based on the conventional game framework, no completely sharing core allocation rule exists for an n-retailer inventory sharing game (n ≥ 4).In this paper, we develop a novel approach to the coordination of the n-retailer inventory sharing system, which possesses the above important properties simultaneously, i.e., all retailers will completely share residual supply/demand and will form only grand coalition. The key of this mechanism is the involvement of a third party, e.g., the manufacturer, as a facilitator of retailers’ transshipment, through payments between the facilitator and the retailers. Such involvement requires us to extend from the conventional framework. Specifically, in the conventional cooperative game framework, the core allocation rule is defined (in the transshipment context) given that the sum of all retailers’ allocated transshipment profits equals the total transshipment profit. We propose a different mechanism (nRCM) in which a third-party (e.g., manufacturer) is involved to coordinate the n retailers, who subsidizes the transshipment profit allocation such that the sum of the retailers’ allocated transshipment profits is twice as much as the original total transshipment profit. The subsidy is provided/offset by a premium fee collected by the manufacturer before each retailer makes ordering decisions. nRCM not only leads to coordination, complete sharing, but also ensures formation of only grand coalition (i.e., no retailers will form subcoalition of inventory sharing, which is similar to the stability property of conventional core allocation rules). Although manufacturer is the natural candidate as the facilitator, third-party logistics partners or even a finance arrangement of transshipment fund could fulfill such role as well, as will be discussed.In addition, most of the previous work related to coordination in an inventory sharing system has assumed that retailers’ demand parameters are known to all participating retailers in the inventory sharing network and hence has used such information in making each retailer’s inventory stocking and inventory sharing decisions. Such an assumption can be unrealistic for decentralized supply chains. In designing the coordination mechanism, we also take into consideration of the issues of asymmetric information on demand parameters.Yan and Zhao (2011) are the first to consider decentralized inventory sharing with asymmetric information. They focus on a system with two retailers and analyze the coordination of such a system when the two retailers hold private demand distribution parameter information. Studying the coordination of an n-retailer inventory sharing with asymmetric demand parameter information is not a simple extension of the two-retailer system due to the many unique issues arising for n-retailer systems as we discussed earlier, and also their intermingling with information asymmetry, another layer of complexity. In addition, since true coordination can only be achieved with complete demand parameter information, under information asymmetry, we consider the cases when retailers share their information and also when retailers do not share information. Specifically, when retailers share information, under the n-retailer system, they not only need to decide whether they will share true information (the issue of incentive compatibility) as they do under the two-retailer system, but also need to decide whether they have incentives to share demand information with all other retailers, which is unique in the n-retailer system.Further, when designing a coordination mechanism, how much information is required to implement such a mechanism is a key. For example, while the probability assignment coordination in Anupindi and Bassok (1999) requires all retailers to share demand distribution parameters to calculate the coordinating probability, the total profit allocation in Anupindi, Bassok, and Zemel (2001) requires all retailers to share all demand distribution parameters, realized demands, as well as retailers’ order quantities. A mechanism can only be implemented for a system where the required information is readily available.We show a few important results in our analysis of information asymmetry. First, which piece of a retailer’s demand distribution parameter information is useful to other retailers depends on how the transshipment profit is allocated among retailers in the n-retailer system. As long as the transshipment profit allocated to each retailer is only related to retailers’ residual supply/demand, a retailer will only need the other retailers’ demand standard deviation information (not mean demand) for his decisions. Second, although true coordination requires retailers share complete demand distribution parameter information with each other, under any coordination mechanism/allocation rule, retailers may not have incentives to share information with all other retailers and will not share true information even if they do so. This poses a dilemma to coordinating the system with asymmetric information. Finally, nRCM is designed to provide an indirect but effective solution to this dilemma. It minimizes the impact of information asymmetry, i.e., nRCM can be implemented without information sharing and retailers obtain profits close to their first-best solutions even if they do not share information.Our work enriches the current literature in a few important aspects. First, we design a coordination mechanism (nRCM) that possesses four important properties simultaneously—leading to formation of only grand coalition for inventory sharing, inducing complete residual sharing, ensuring each retailer obtains a higher allocated profit as the size of the system (n) increases, and deliver close to first-best results even under asymmetric information. Second, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to study the impact of asymmetric demand information on coordination mechanisms of the n-retailer inventory sharing system. We analyze important issues both with information sharing (e.g., incentives to share information with each other and truth-telling) and without information sharing (Bayesian equilibrium solutions). We also develop nRCM which deals with the asymmetric information effectively and provide a viable option for the difficult problem of coordinating a decentralized system with asymmetric information. Finally, we also extend our results to the case when retailers have correlated demands.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formally introduce the model framework of the n-retailer inventory sharing game. In Section 3, we discuss allocation rules, properties of allocation rules, and briefly review coordinating allocation rules developed in the previous literature (all under complete information) in terms of these properties. We also introduce the necessary game-theoretic terminologies there. In Section 4, we describe the coordination mechanism we design (nRCM) and analyze its properties under complete information. In Section 5, we study the impact of asymmetric information on any coordination mechanism/allocation rule and analyze the performance of nRCM under asymmetric information. In Section 6, we consider the extension with correlated demands. We conclude the paper in Section 7 with a summary of results and managerial insights obtained from this paper.Consider a decentralized system consisting of n independent retailers (he) at distinct locations, each serving his own customer base without competing in demand. Each retailer (say retailer i) faces an uncertain demand, Di, independently drawn from a standardizable distribution11Standardizable distributions refer to those whereZi=Di−μiσiare i.i.d. with E[Zi] = 0 and Var[Zi] = 1, e.g., normal distribution, uniform distribution, etc.. Such distributions are also adopted in Zhang (2005) and Yan and Zhao (2011).with a mean of μiand a standard deviation of σi. As will be discussed in the conclusion, all results (except Theorem 4 and Corollary 1) hold true for any general distribution. We first assume that each retailer’s demand distribution parameters, μiand σi, are known to the other retailers. We relax this assumption in Section 5 when we consider the impact of demand information asymmetry on coordination mechanisms. Retailers order from the same manufacturer (she) whose production cost is c per unit and who sells to the retailers at a unit wholesale price, w. Retailer i obtains revenue ri> w for each unit sold and incurs a penalty cost, pi, for each unit of unsatisfied demand. Unsold inventory has a unit salvage value of si< w.We assume a single-period model and the sequence of events is as follows. At the beginning of the selling season, retailers independently place their orders (Qi) to the manufacturer, in anticipation of future inventory sharing opportunities. Then, demands are realized at all retailers. After satisfying demand with his own inventory, each retailer decides how much of his residual supply/demand he would like to share with others. Then, the residual supplies are transshipped among retailers to meet residual demands according to some transshipment arrangements (TA), and transshipment profit is allocated among the retailers according to the transshipment profit allocation rule agreed upon. With τijbeing the cost of transshipping one unit from retailer i to retailer j, uij= rj− τij− si+ pjrepresents the net profit generated from transshipping one unit from retailer i to retailer j (a revenue rjplus a saving of pjless a loss of siand the transportation cost τij). It can be easily seen that transshipment from retailer i to j is mutually profitable if uij> 0, a very mild condition which we assume to be true.Let N = {1, 2, …, n} be the set of n retailers and let N−i= N\{i} be the set of the n retailers excluding i. We use Q = {Q1, …, Qn} to denote the set of all retailers’ order quantities and Q−i= {Qj, j ∈ N−i} to represent the set of order quantities of all retailers excluding retailer i. Let φibe the transshipment profit allocated to retailer i according to a specific transshipment profit allocation rule. Then, given Q, retailer i’s expected profit in this inventory sharing game can be written asΠi(Qi,Q−i)=E[rimin(Di,Qi)+si(Qi−Di)+−pi(Di−Qi)+]+E[φi]−wQi.As can be seen, how each retailer determines his order quantity depends on the TA, i.e., how many units are shipped from one retailer to another, and the transshipment profit allocation rule, i.e., how transshipment profits are allocated among them.Under an n-retailer inventory sharing system, the optimal TA among the retailers is determined through a linear program (LP), which maximizes the total transshipment profit. Specifically, let Tijdenote the number of units transshipped from retailer i to j and Hi/Eidenote the amount of the residual supply/residual demand that retailer i decides to share with the other retailers,0≤Hi≤(Qi−Di)+=H¯iand0≤Ei≤(Di−Qi)+=E¯i,whereH¯i/E¯idenote retailer i’s total residual supply/residual demand. Then, the LP can be written as:(1)max{Tij}∑i,juijTijs.t.∑j∈N−iTij≤Hi,i=1,2,…,n∑j∈N−iTji≤Ei,i=1,2,…,nTij≥0,i,j=1,2,…,n.Thus, the optimal TA is{Tij*},solved from LP(1). Let ν(N) be the total transshipment profit among the n retailers obtained from the solution to LP(1), i.e.,ν(N)=∑i,juijTij*.In the next section, we will focus on the transshipment allocation rules, introducing desired properties of the allocation rules, and reviewing the coordinating transshipment profit allocation rules considered in the previous literature to see whether they possess these properties.Before we introduce the allocation rules, we briefly present the necessary terminology in the cooperative game theory in the context of the inventory sharing game.A cooperative game is defined by a pair (N, ν), where N = {1, 2, …, n} indicates the set of n players andν:2N→Ris a function such that ν(∅) = 0. A subset S⊆N is called a coalition and N is called the grand coalition. ν is called the characteristic function of the game. In our inventory sharing problem, the set of players for the inventory sharing game is the n retailers. ν(S) indicates the maximal total transshipment profit obtained among the set of retailers, S, when inventory is shared among these retailers according to{Tij*},the optimal solution to LP(1). ν(S) is also called the value of coalition S.An allocation rule defines a mapping Φ which assigns a single vector,φ=(φ1,…,φn)∈Rn,to every cooperative game (N, ν). The value, φ, that an allocation rule assigns to a particular game (N, ν) is called an allocation. If ∑i ∈ Nφi= ν(N), the allocation is efficient. In the following we introduce some critical properties that an allocation rule may have in the inventory sharing game:•In the n-retailer inventory sharing game, an allocation rule induces complete sharing if it induces all retailers to share all their residual supply/demand with other retailers. A weaker form of complete sharing is that an allocation rule is value preserving, i.e., it induces all retailers to share their residual supply/demand in amounts that do not result in a decrease in the total transshipment profit.In the conventional cooperative framework, the coreis defined as the set of allocations with a stability property, i.e., an allocation φ is in the core of (N, ν) if it satisfies the following two conditions:(2)∑i∈Nφi(ν)=ν(N)(3)∑i∈Sφi≥ν(S),∀S⊆NIf Φ(ν) is an element of the core for every cooperative game (N, ν), then Φ is called a core allocation rule. Note that in the transshipment problem, while condition (2) requires that the n retailers divide the total maximal transshipment profit ν(N) under the allocation rule, condition (3) ensures that no subset of retailers has incentives to deviate from the grand coalition.In the following, we briefly review several coordination allocation rules proposed in the previous literature for the n-retailer inventory sharing system, all under complete information. We focus on whether these allocation rules possess the critical properties mentioned above simultaneously, namely, being in the core (automatically efficient) and inducing complete sharing.Anupindi and Bassok (1999) introduced a probability assignment coordination allocation rule for symmetric retailers. This allocation rule calculates coordinating probability (α) such that with probability α the total transshipment profit is allocated among retailers who have residual supply (according to how much residual supply each has) and with probability 1 − α the total transshipment profit is allocated among retailers who have residual demand (according to how much residual demand each has). This allocation rule is shown to be in the core when retailers’ demands follow normal distributions. But it may not be value-preserving, hence may not induce complete sharing.Anupindi et al. (2001) and Granot and Sosic (2003) analyzed another coordinating allocation rule for n-retailer system: the total profit allocation rule. Under this allocation rule, each retailer i obtains a pre-determined fraction, γi, i ∈ N, of the total system profit, i.e.,φi=γi{∑j[rjmin{Qj,Dj}+sj(Qj−Dj)+−pj(Dj−Qj)+−wQj]+∑j,kujkTjk}−[rimin{Qi,Di}+si(Qi−Di)+−pi(Di−Qi)+−wQi],i∈N.By definition, this allocation rule leads to the first-best solution because each retailer eventually obtains a proportion of the total system profit. Granot and Sosic (2003) show that this allocation rule is value-preserving and leads to the first-best solution. However, it may not be in the core. Anupindi et al. (2001) mentioned that adding a side payment will discourage deviation from the grand coalition, yet with the side payment, it may not be value-preserving (hence may not lead to the first-best solution).Under dual price allocation rule, the total transshipment profit is distributed among the retailers according to the dual prices from LP(1). Let λiand θibe the dual prices corresponding to constraints∑j∈N−iTij≤Hiand∑j∈N−iTji≤Ei,respectively. Retailer i’s dual allocation,φid,can be written asφid=λiHi+θiEi.Huang and Sosic (2010a) show that dual price allocation rule can lead to the first-best solution under certain conditions assuming that retailers completely share their residuals. Huang and Sosic (2010b) show that in a repeated game setting, retailers may completely share their residuals under dual price allocation rule.In addition to the above allocation rules, transfer price was also proposed as a prominent coordination allocation rule for two-retailer systems (e.g., Anupindi and Bassok, 1999; Hu et al., 2007; Rudi et al., 2001; Shao, Krishnan, and McCormick, 2011). Unfortunately, transfer price does not always exist even in a two-retailer system (Anupindi and Bassok, 1999; Hu et al., 2007) and is difficult to develop in an n-retailer system (Huang and Sosic, 2010a).The above review of the previous literature shows that none of the above coordinating allocation rules under the conventional game framework lead to formation of only grand coalition and induce complete sharing simultaneously. In the next section, we develop a coordination mechanism (nRCM) for the n-retailer system through a new approach which extends the conventional framework. We show that nRCM results in formation of only grand coalition for the inventory sharing game, induces complete sharing, and leads to coordination. We also show that nRCM ensures that each retailer obtains a higher allocated profit as the system size increases. We first introduce and analyze nRCM under complete information. Later in Section 5.2, we show that nRCM can also handle asymmetric information.The key to a coordination mechanism is aligning each retailer’s profit with the system’s total profit. We achieve this by handling inventory sharing through a third-party, e.g., the manufacturer in the context that we described, as a facilitator of the transshipment game. We first introduce nRCM in Section 4.1 and then analyze its nice properties in Section 4.2, all under complete information, as in the previous literature. In Section 5, we will deal with asymmetric information.In the following, we present the n-retailer coordination mechanism (nRCM) by describing the sequence of events:1.At the beginning of the selling season, the retailers decide whether or not to participate in the inventory sharing program (nRCM). If yes, a premium fee for joining the inventory sharing program in this season, δi, i ∈ N, is collected from each retailer i by the manufacturer. This premium fee is used by the manufacturer to coordinate the inventory sharing system. By joining the program, each retailer agrees to share inventory according to the TA to be described in step 4 and is entitled to obtain full profit of all transshipment that he/she contributes to (details later) according to the transshipment payment (TP).The retailers independently make their decisions about order quantities (with the best information they have) and place their orders to the manufacturer.Demand is realized at each retailer’s location.After satisfying demand with his own inventory, each retailer makes his inventory sharing decisions about how much residuals (surplus or shortage) he is willing to share with other retailers, and reports this information to the manufacturer. If there are surplus and shortage in the system at the same time, retailers agree to share inventory according to the transshipment arrangement (i.e.,{Tij*}solved from LP(1)) and the manufacturer agrees to implement the TP described below.TP of nRCM: Arranged through the manufacturer22Note that the physical inventory does not have to be routed through the manufacturer, but money needs to be transferred through the manufacturer according to the specified transshipment prices.such that each retailer i is ensured to obtain the net profit generated by the transshipment to which retailer i contributes, i.e., i receivesφ^i=∑j≠i[uijTij+ujiTji]. In other words, for each unit transshipped from i to j, both retailers i and j obtain the net profit generated by this unit of transshipment, uij, instead of sharing it.Notice that different from the conventional allocation rules defined in Section 3, TP of nRCM, which determines the retailers’ transshipment profits{φ^i},is arranged and subsidized by the manufacturer. There may be different ways to implement TP under nRCM as long as we ensure each retailer obtains the total net profit generated to the system by the transshipment he contributes to. That’s how we align a retailer’s profit to the system profit. Without loss of generality, suppose the manufacturer pays the transportation cost τijfor each unit transshipped from i to j. Then for each unit retailer i ships to retailer j, the manufacturer pays rj+ pj− τijto retailer i and charges si+ τijfrom retailer j. Note that without TP, retailer i loses sibut j gains rj+ pj. Hence, with TP, we guarantee that for each unit retailer i transships to j, seller i obtains a net of uij= (rj+ pj− τij) − siand buyer j also obtains uij= rj+ pj− (τij+ si). Obviously, depending on who pays for the transportation cost, we may have different transshipment payments for the transshipped units.We now provide an example to demonstrate TA and TP of nRCM. Suppose there are four retailers, A, B, C, and D. After satisfying their own demands, retailers A and B announce 2 and 3 units of residual supply, respectively, while retailers C and D each announce 2 units of residual demand. Suppose uAC = $15, uAD = $18, uBC = $19, and uBD = $20. Solving LP (1), we obtain TA for this problem to be TBC = 2, TBD = 1, and TAD = 1.The TP under nRCM will be:•Retailer A: receives1*(rD+pD−τAD)from the manufacturer for the 1 unit he transships to D;Retailer B: receives2*(rC+pC−τBC)from the manufacturer for the 2 units transshipped from B to C and receives1*(rD+pD−τBD)for the 1 unit transshipped to D.Retailer C: pays the manufacturer2*(sB+τBC)for the 2 units transshipped from B to C.Retailer D: pays the manufacturer1*(sA+τAD)for the 1 unit transshipped from A to D and pays1*(sB+τBD)for the 1 unit transshipped from B to D.Notice that since each unit transshipped from i to j brings a net profit of uijto the system, by allowing both retailers i and j to have a net profit of uijunder nRCM, the manufacturer subsidizes a net of uijfor each unit shared from i to j in step 4. The manufacturer collects the premium fees in step 1, which can be used to offset this subsidy. Therefore, different from the conventional transshipment profit allocation rules considered in the previous literature, the sum of what each retailer obtains under nRCM,φ^i,is twice of the total transshipment profit generated by the retailers, ν(N).It is worth noting that we assume by agreeing to help coordinate the retailers who decide to participate in the inventory sharing mechanism nRCM, the manufacturer also agrees to arrange transshipment payments according to TP and TA described above, i.e., the manufacturer only provides the subsidy when retailers follow TA and TP to form the grand coalition, which is shown to lead to coordination. Manufacturer will not provide the subsidy for a group of retailers who form a subcoalition for transshipment. This is because, manufacturers have incentives to help coordinate their retailers/dealers to achieve the system best to earn long-term benefits (Zhao et al., 2005) and subcoalitions will not lead to coordination. As we will show, following nRCM will indeed lead to coordination, hence system best for the manufacturer.Based on the above discussion, we formally define the cooperative inventory sharing game under nRCM among the n retailers33We do not include the manufacturer in the inventory sharing game as a player because, based on analysis (omitted here), when manufacturer is included as a player, there is no allocation rule which can lead to complete sharing and formation of only grand coalition simultaneously (for n ≥ 4), just like the other transshipment games in the previous literature.as(N,ν^).Compared to the conventional transshipment game (N, ν) specified in Section 3, the new characteristic functionν^is defined as follows: when the retailers participate in the grand coalition under nRCM,ν^(N)=2ν(N),where ν(N) indicates the total transshipment profit in the conventional transshipment game (N, ν). This implies that when all n retailers form grand coalition, the manufacturer rewards/subsidizes the retailers by a payment which equals the total transshipment profit ν(N); When a subset of retailers deviate from the grand coalition under nRCM and form their own coalition, say S⊂N, however, the manufacturer will not subsidize the retailers’ subcoalition, hence the retailers in S will share the total maximal transshipment profit among themselves without the subsidy from the manufacturer, i.e.,ν^(S)=ν(S),where ν(S) is the same as that defined in the conventional n-retailer transshipment game (N, ν). For each cooperative game(N,ν^),TP specifies the allocation of the transshipment profitν^(N)among all n retailers.Recall that the conventional core allocation rules are defined as allocation rules with a stability property that satisfies both conditions (2), i.e., ∑i ∈ Nφi= ν(N), and (3), i.e., ∑i ∈ Sφi≥ ν(S), ∀S⊆N. As will be shown, under the new setup of the cooperative transshipment game(N,ν^)and transshipment payments{φ^i},TP of nRCM still satisfies both conditions, i.e., condition (2):∑i∈Nφ^i=ν^(N),and condition (3):∑i∈Sφ^i≥ν^(S),∀S⊆N. Therefore, TP of nRCM is in the core of the transshipment game under nRCM(N,ν^). However, since the manufacturer subsidizes the transshipment profit with ν(N), the sum of all retailers’ transshipment profits allocated through the manufacturer is twice the original total transshipment profit, i.e.,∑i∈Nφ^i=ν^(N)=2ν(N). This subsidy paid by the manufacturer in step 4 is provided/offset by the premium fees ({δi}) collected by the manufacturer from the retailers at the beginning of the season (step 1). Since the fees are collected before retailers place their orders (step 2) and retailers’ transshipment (step 4), they become sunk costs and do not affect the inventory ordering or transshipment decisions. As we will show, with this new approach, TP of nRCM leads to coordination, complete sharing, and formation of only grand coalition, which cannot be achieved under the conventional transshipment game setup.Finally, although the manufacturer is a natural candidate to help coordinate retailers’/dealers’ inventory sharing system and most manufacturers also have the motivation to do so to increase their dealers’/retailers’ service level for their own long-term benefits (as highlighted in the article “Make Your Dealers Your Partners” by Donald V. Fites, ex-Chairman and CEO of Caterpillar (Harvard Business Review, 1996)), some third-party logistics partners can fill this role as well in practice (Bitran, Gurumurthi, and Sam, 2007). In fact, this role can even be played by a pure financing arrangement, i.e., transshipment fund (Hanany, Tzur, and Levran, 2010), which manages an account contributed by retailers and used for subsidizing/rewarding transshipment activities through payments between the fund and the retailers.Under nRCM, we can write down each retailer i’s expected profit,Π^i(Qi,Q−i),and the manufacturer’s expected profit,Π^m(Q),as follows:(4)Π^i(Qi,Q−i)=EDi[rimin(Di,Qi)+si(Qi−Di)+−pi(Di−Qi)+]+E[φ^i]−wQi−δi,and(5)Π^m(Q)=∑i(δi+(w−c)Qi)−∑i,jE{Dk,k∈N}[uijTij],whereE[φ^i]=∑j≠iE{Dk,k∈N}[uijTij+ujiTji]is profit allocated to retailer i after transshipment and∑iE[φ^i]=∑i,jE{Dk,k∈N}[uijTij].It is easy to see from the above functions that there are three payments between the manufacturer and each retailer i under nRCM: the premium fee paid by retailer i to the manufacturer in step 1, denoted by δi, the wholesale payment, wQi, after the retailer places the order in step 2, and each retailer’s transshipment profit allocated by the manufacturer in step 4, denoted byφ^i. Therefore, the total expected payment from manufacturer to retailer i isE[φ^i]−wQi−δi.Note that unlike the two-retailer coordination mechanism developed in Yan and Zhao (2011), under which a fixed amount per unit is given to a retailer who ships and another fixed amount per unit is charged from a retailer who receives, nRCM for n-retailer system is not a linear price scheme. This is because under TP of nRCM, retailers obtain different net profit for each transshipped unit he contributes, depending on the transshipment starting point and destination.Next we analyze the retailers’ decisions in different steps. We first consider retailers’ inventory sharing decisions under TP of nRCM in the transshipment game (step 4 in the sequence of events). These decisions are made after each retailer decides his order quantity (in step 2), demand realizes in step 3, and he has satisfied his demand with his own inventory. The following theorem formally presents the two nice properties TP of nRCM possesses simultaneously.Theorem 1For a decentralized n-retailer inventory sharing system, TP of nRCM leads to complete sharing and formation of only grand coalition in the inventory sharing game.As we mentioned, Granot and Sosic (2003) concluded that there are no complete sharing allocation rules in the core (i.e., leading to the formation of only grand coalition) for an n-retailer inventory sharing game (n ≥ 4). Note that result was obtained when transshipment is implemented among n retailers, hence each retailer is allocated with a portion of the total system transshipment profit. This is different from TP of nRCM. Next, we provide more intuition of the results in Theorem 1.First, retailers will completely share their residual supplies and/residual demands under TP of nRCM. If a retailer holds back any residual supplies/demands, it will not change the transshipment arrangement for the rest of his residuals (that he reports) because otherwise including the new arrangement into the original TA of nRCM would lead to a higher system transshipment profit, which contradicts with the fact that TA under nRCM maximizes the system transshipment profit. Therefore, if withholding any residuals, the retailer will be allocated smaller amount of transshipment profit because the number of units he contributes is smaller and the unit payment depends solely on the starting and ending points of the transshipment (not on the amount of residual supply and/or residual demand in the system). Therefore, there is no benefit for the retailer to hold back any residuals since each unit he reports will potentially bring him transshipment profit.Second, TP of nRCM leads to formation of only grand coalition in the inventory sharing game. The intuition is as follows: TA maximizes system transshipment profit and TP ensures each retailer obtains the net profit generated by the transshipment he contributes to. So, it is impossible for any subset of retailers to form a subcoalition with which retailers can obtain higher transshipment profits because (1) if transshipment arrangements within the subcoalition is already part of TA of nRCM (case 1), by forming a subcoalition, retailers will have to split the net transshipment profit among themselves instead of each obtaining that amount under nRCM; and (2) if by forming a subcoalition, the retailers within the subcoalition have a different transshipment arrangement from TA under nRCM (case 2), this transshipment arrangement cannot lead to a higher total profit for the subcoalition than for the same group of retailers under nRCM since otherwise including this transshipment arrangement within this subcoalition into the TA of nRCM will lead to a higher total transshipment profit, contradicting with the fact that TA of nRCM maximizes the total transshipment profit.To see this more clearly, we use the same example as the one presented before. Assume B and C form a subcoalition, they will transship 2 units from B to C. This transshipment arrangement is already part of TA of nRCM. With this subcoalition, B and C will have to split 2*uBC = $38 instead of each obtaining $38 under TP of nRCM for the two units of transshipment. Further, under TA of nRCM, retailer A only transships one unit to retailer D. Therefore, retailer A may have incentives to form a subcoalition with D, hoping to achieve more transshipment profit from sharing more units. However, if A and D form their own coalition, A will ship 2 units to D and they will split the total transshipment profit, which is 2*uAD = $36. Compare this total profit in the subcoalition with the total they obtain under TP of nRCM, $56, equal to what A and D obtain from the unit transshipped between themselves, i.e., 2*uAD = $36 since each of them obtains $18 under TP of nRCM, plus what retailer D obtains from the unit transshipped from retailer B under TP, i.e., uBD = $20. We see that no matter how to allocate the $36 between A and D, forming a subcoalition cannot bring more profits to both of them.From Theorem 1, we see that complete sharing and formation of only grand coalition can be achieved simultaneously with the manufacturer as the facilitator, who subsidizes ν(N) to coordinate retailers’ transshipment. Further analysis shows that ν(N) is also the minimum amount a third party facilitator has to subsidize for retailers’ transshipment under grand coalition to achieve these two properties together.Next, given the retailers’ inventory sharing decisions in the transshipment game (step 4) captured in Theorem 1, we show that nRCM indeed leads to coordination (i.e., retailers choose the first-best order quantities in step 2) and an all-win situation for all parties can be achieved through appropriate premium fees set in step 1. As mentioned, TA of nRCM maximizes the total transshipment profit and TP of nRCM guarantees that each retailer obtains the total net profit generated by the transshipment he contributes to. Therefore, each retailer i’s profit is the same as his counterpart in the system profit, i.e., the part in the system profit that is related to i. Hence, his equilibrium order quantity will be the same as that in the centralized system. Further, since the system profit is maximized, we can set appropriate premium fees that lead to an all-win situation (refer to Supplementary Appendix for an example of how to set the premium fees). Note that these premium fees are paid by retailers at step 1 of the sequence of events, so they do not impact the retailers’ inventory sharing decisions made at step 4. Thus, with the premium fees, nRCM not only ensures the retailers make the first-best order quantities through TP, but also offsets the manufacturer’s cost paid to implement TP, hence leading to an all-win situation for all parties.In the following, we show formally that nRCM leads to the first-best solution and achieves an all-win situation.Theorem 2Under complete demand parameter information, nRCM leads to the first-best solutions in both of the following scenarios:1.For any wholesale price, w, nRCM coordinates the n retailers (maximizes the total profit of the n retailers) through the manufacturer (or a third-party), and can lead to an all-win situation through appropriate premium fees.When setting w = c, nRCM coordinates the n retailers and the manufacturer, i.e., maximizes the total profit of the n retailers and the manufacturer, and can lead to an all-win situation through appropriate premium fees.Theorem 2 shows that nRCM can coordinate either the n retailers or the whole system (n retailers and the manufacturer) through TP and leads to an all-win situation for all parties through appropriate premium fees. This result is in line with the literature which shows that a two-part tariff contract with wholesale price equal to the production cost and a fixed premium can coordinate certain supply chains (Cachon and Lariviere, 2005; Kuksov and Pazgal, 2007).As we mentioned, in addition to the manufacturer, other third-party logistics partners could also fill the role as the transshipment facilitator. In that case, the third-party could also charge a fee and earn a profit for doing so (through the premium fees).From the above analysis, we know that compared with the other coordination allocation rules in the previous literature, TP of nRCM leads to complete sharing and formation of only grand coalition at the same time. Next we analyze the impact of system size (n) on system profit and each party’s allocated profit. This is a particularly important and realistic question for an n-retailer system because it relates to how many retailers should be admitted into the inventory sharing system and what is the admission criteria to allow more members. It is also not a trivial question since although a coordination mechanism/allocation rule guarantees that any additional retailer joining the system can increase the system profit (i.e., the pie is bigger), without special design, it may not guarantee that each retailer obtains a higher allocated profit as the number of retailers increases (i.e., more retailers are dividing the pie). Previous literature on inventory sharing coordination allocation rule has not provided much insight into this. In the following theorem, we show that nRCM possesses another nice property as system size increases. We define the class of population monotonic transshipment mechanisms as the set of transshipment mechanisms/allocation rules under which the manufacturer and each retailer i obtain higher profits when the size of the inventory sharing system increases, i.e.,Πin+1>ΠinandΠmn+1>Πmn,for ∀n ≥ 1 and ∀i ∈ N, whereΠin(Πmn) denote the retailer i’s (manufacturer’s) profit when there are n retailers in the inventory sharing system.Theorem 3Under complete parameter demand information, nRCM can coordinate an inventory sharing system of any size. In addition, with an appropriate set of premium fees, nRCM belongs to the class of population monotonic transshipment mechanisms.Theorem 3 shows that each party (manufacturer or retailer) can obtain a higher profit as more retailers participate in nRCM (i.e., nRCM belongs to the class of population monotonic transshipment mechanisms). Recall that once demand is realized, according to TP of nRCM, each retailer’s allocated transshipment profit is decided. Therefore, each party’s final profit and hence whether nRCM can lead to a higher profit for her/him depend on the premium fee δihe paid at the beginning. Thus, these fees can be designed to guarantee a higher profit for each party. To better demonstrate how the premium fees are designed, we provide a specific example of how to calculate premium fees{δin,∀i∈N}for any system size n in Supplementary Appendix .So far, we have looked at coordinating an n-retailer inventory sharing system under complete demand distribution parameter information,44For brevity, from now on we use demand information to indicate demand distribution parameter information.i.e., all parties know the retailers’ demand distribution parameters. In particular, we have developed a new coordination mechanism (nRCM) for the n-retailer inventory sharing system and have shown several important properties of nRCM. In this section, we will look at the impact of demand information asymmetry and analyze how nRCM performs under asymmetric demand information. Like the case under complete information, we first discuss the potential problems we face when trying to coordinate a decentralized system under asymmetric information, we then provide the solution to it through nRCM.First, note that one retailer’s demand information is useful to the other retailers because such information will help the other retailers make better decisions on their order quantities knowing that there will be inventory sharing opportunities among all the retailers. By definition, true coordination, i.e., retailers order the first-best quantities, can only be achieved when retailers have complete information about the other retailers’ demand information. Therefore, in Section 5.1, we investigate whether we can coordinate the n-retailer system with nRCM when retailers share their private information. In this case, retailers’ information sharing decisions, which will be made after they pay the premium fees in step 1 but before they make the order quantity decisions in step 2, will be considered. Then, in Section 5.2, we investigate whether nRCM can be implemented without information sharing and evaluate the loss in system profit and each retailer’s profit due to the lack of complete information.Note that under nRCM, retailers’ information of others’ demands only affects their order quantity decisions, but not their inventory sharing decisions. This is because: (1) it is the best for retailers to delay inventory sharing decisions until demand is realized and he knows how much residuals he himself has. (2) Once the demands are realized and the residuals in the system are known, the TA is determined according to LP (1) and the TP is also determined since the unit payments for transshipped units are constant, as mentioned in Section 4. Therefore, the retailers’ allocated transshipment profits and hence their inventory sharing decisions do not depend on their information related to the others’ demands.This result simplifies the analysis for nRCM and indicates that all properties we obtain for nRCM under complete information regarding inventory sharing decisions remain true when considering asymmetric information, regardless of whether or not retailers share information with each other. Therefore, TP still leads to grand coalition of the inventory sharing game under nRCM and still leads to complete residual sharing under asymmetric information, given that we have proved these properties of TP of nRCM under complete information in Theorems 1 and 2. It is not hard to see that such nice feature is only true for coordination mechanisms under which the transshipment profit allocation policy does not depend on the demand parameter information.In this section, we first investigate the many aspects involved with implementing nRCM when retailers share information. Specifically, we look at (1) which piece of the demand information is needed to share, (2) the timing of information sharing, (3) whether retailers have incentives to share information with all other retailers, and (4) whether retailers will share true information. Since all analysis and results apply to any coordination mechanism/allocation rule of the n-retailer system implemented with information sharing, in this section, we will analyze the information sharing issues for any mechanism that can coordinate the n-retailer inventory sharing system under complete information in this section .The first question is which piece of a retailer’s demand distribution parameter information needs to be shared, i.e., which demand parameter(s) is(are) useful for the retailers in making their decisions. Yan and Zhao (2011) show that for a two-retailer inventory sharing system, one retailer only needs to know the other’s demand standard deviation in order to determine his order quantity. The following theorem investigates whether this property can be extended to an n-retailer system, in which retailers need to make more complicated decisions.Theorem 4In an n-retailer inventory sharing system (n > 2), for any coordination mechanism/allocation rule, as long as the transshipment profit allocated to retailer i, φi, is only related to retailers’ residual supply/residual demand, a retailer will only need the other retailers’ demand standard deviation information for his decisions and will not need the others’ mean demands.Theorem 4 generalizes the result in Yan and Zhao (2011) to inventory sharing system with n > 2 and shows that which piece of a retailer’s demand information is useful to the other retailers depends on the transshipment payment allocation rule, {φi}, adopted in the n-retailer system. Based on Theorem 4, it is easy to verify that dual allocation rule, probability assignment coordination allocation rule for symmetric n-retailer systems (Anupindi and Bassok, 1999), and TP of nRCM all guarantee that retailers do not need to know the other retailers’ mean demands for their decisions. However, this property is not always achieved. For example, more information will be required for the total profit allocation rule (Anupindi and Bassok, 1999; Granot and Sosic, 2003) since it requires each retailer be allocated a portion of the system profit. Therefore, each retailer needs to know not only the other retailers’ demand distribution parameters, but also each retailer’s realized demand and order quantity.In the following, we focus on the n-retailer coordination mechanisms/allocation rules that satisfy the condition in Theorem 4, hence we only consider private information on retailers’ demand standard deviations. Specifically, each retailer, i, holds private information regarding his demand distribution parameters, particularly, his demand standard deviation, σi, while others have prior information (estimation) of it. We assume that retailer i’s standard deviation σitakes one of mipossible values, i.e., Si= {σi, l, l = 1, 2, …, mi}, and σi∈ Siwith Pi(σi) being the probability that retailer i’s demand standard deviation takes the value of σi. Hence,∑σi∈SiPi(σi)=1. We assume both Siand the probability distribution, {Pi(σi), σi∈ Si, i ∈ N}, are common knowledge to all players with only retailer i himself knowing his true standard deviation level, σi. Such way of modelling asymmetric information is consistent with the economics and operations literature and has been widely used (Babich, Li, Ritchken, and Wang, 2012; Cachon and Lariviere, 2001; Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991; Mas-Colell and Vives, 1993, etc.).Knowing which piece of information to share, retailers need to make two other decisions regarding information sharing: whether they have incentives to share information with all other retailers and whether they will share true information (truth-telling). Since retailers’ order quantities and profits depend on the other retailers’ demand standard deviations, these two information sharing decisions need to be made before the order quantity decisions. This is true for any coordination mechanism/allocation rule (in fact, any inventory sharing system). For example, under nRCM with asymmetric information, the difference in the sequence of events (described at the beginning of Section 4) is in step 1. Specifically, once the retailers decide to participate in nRCM and pay the premium fees, each of them makes his two information sharing decisions. Then given the demand information shared by the retailers, they decide their order quantities in step 2.Next we analyze the retailers’ information sharing decisions: whether they have incentives to share information with all other retailers and whether they have incentives to truthfully share information if they do so. Answers to both questions are related to whether coordination mechanisms/allocation rules under complete information can still lead to the first-best solutions under asymmetric information when retailers share information.First we consider the issue of whether they have incentives to share information with all other retailers. We find that under any coordination mechanism/allocation rule, although having full demand information of each other can lead to the first-best solution and hence maximize the system profit, each retailer is not ensured a higher allocated profit with full demand information. This means that retailers may not have incentives to share demand information with all other retailers (see Supplementary Appendix for more details). Next, we use the incentive compatibility analysis to show that retailers will not share true information even if they share information with all other retailers.In an inventory sharing system with asymmetric information, a complicating factor is that all retailers have private demand information and none of them may observe the others’ order quantities, a decision directly related to the demand information that the retailers share. Following Hammond (1979) and Mas-Colell and Vives (1993), “[f]or incentive compatibility, each agent must want to reveal his true characteristic when all other agents are also revealing the truth.” Hence, to find whether retailers will share true information, we conduct the incentive compatibility analysis by checking whether retailer i will report his demand standard deviation σitruthfully, given that any other retailer, j, ∀j ≠ i, reports his true standard deviation σjand trusts what retailer i reports to him as true demand information. Under this situation, if truth-telling is retailer i’s best reporting strategy, i.e., maximizes his expected profit, then the system is incentive compatible and truth-telling is a retailer’s equilibrium reporting strategy. Otherwise, we can conclude the retailers have incentives to reveal their demand distribution parameter information untruthfully.Defineσitandσiras retailer i’s true and reported demand standard deviation, respectively. The incentive compatibility (truth-telling) is guaranteed if and only if reporting true standard deviation is the optimal reporting strategy (denoted asσ^ir), i.e.,σ^ir=σit. We have the following analytical result.Theorem 5Given all the other retailers report true information, i.e.,{σjr=σjt,j∈N−i},truth-telling does not maximize retailer i’s expected profit under any mechanism/allocation rule that can coordinate the n-retailer inventory sharing system with complete information, i.e.,σ^ir≠σit.Theorem 5 demonstrates that, truth-telling is not retailers’ equilibrium reporting strategy under nRCM which coordinates the inventory sharing system under complete information. A retailer has the incentive to untruthfully report demand information to distort the other retailers’ order decisions such that he can obtain more profits through inventory sharing. Unfortunately, fully capturing retailers’ closed-form optimal reporting strategy is intractable because (1) it requires a retailer to base his optimal reporting strategy on his prior estimation of all other retailers’ demand information and (2) the complexity of TA and TP in an n-retailer system prevents us from obtaining a general form solution. In fact, it is intractable even in a two-retailer system (Yan and Zhao, 2011). However, we are able to capture the retailers’ optimal reporting strategy for a special case, which provides insights into retailers’ optimal reporting strategy in a general setting.Corollary 1Under nRCM, for a two-retailer inventory sharing system with symmetric cost parameters, if one retailer (i)’s all possible demand standard deviations are higher (lower) than the other retailer (j)’s all possible demand standard deviations, i.e., σi≤ ( ≥ )σj, ∀σi∈ Si, σj∈ Sj, then i’s optimal reporting strategy is to report the highest (lowest) demand standard deviation in his set, i.e.,σ^ir=max{σi}(min{σi}).Corollary 1 indicates that in a two-retailer system with symmetric costs when one retailer (i)’s demand volatility is for sure higher (lower) than the other retailer (j)’s, i.e., i’s all possible demand standard deviations are higher (lower) than j’s all possible demand standard deviations, it is optimal for i to report his lowest (highest) demand standard deviation in his set. Note that even though i does not know j’s true demand information, knowing from his prior estimates that j’s demand volatility is for sure lower (higher) than his, according to the result in Corollary 1, i will report the lowest (highest) standard deviation from his set. This is because, inventory sharing will most benefit both retailers if their demand volatilities are similar. By reporting the level closest to his estimates of j’s demand standard deviation, i has distorted the j’s view of future sharing opportunities for his own benefits. Corollary 1 provides the insights into retailers’ optimal reporting strategy: it is optimal for a retailer to report a demand standard deviation closest to the estimates of the others’. Although technically intractable, we expect this insight to be true for the n-retailer system. The above results hold under any wholesale price w including w = c. So, regardless of whether nRCM is applied to coordinate just the n retailers or the whole system consisting of n retailers and the manufacturer, retailers do not have incentives to truthfully share demand information.Furthermore, the fact that a retailer has the incentive to untruthfully report demand information is true for any mechanism/allocation rule that can coordinate the n-retailer system under complete information, e.g., nRCM, the other coordinating mechanisms/allocation rules in the literature, and even those unknown coordination mechanisms/allocation rules, because all coordination mechanisms/allocation rules share some common requirements. Specifically, for any coordination mechanism/allocation rule, the transshipment profit allocation ({φi}) is set in order to achieve the first-best solutions. Further, to ensure the formation of only grand coalition and complete sharing, more constraints on {φi} have to be satisfied. While it is already difficult for a transshipment profit allocation ({φi}) to simultaneously ensure the first-best solutions, the formation of only grand coalition, and complete sharing, it is generally impossible to have an allocation mechanism/allocation rule which also leads to full incentive of information sharing with all the others and truthful information sharing on top of those.So far, the analysis reveals a dilemma for coordinating an n-retailer inventory sharing system under asymmetric information: On the one hand, coordination requires true information sharing among all retailers; On the other hand, retailers do not have incentive to share information with all the others and will not share true information even if they do so.In the next section, we seek solution to the above dilemma through nRCM by conducting the analysis in a different direction: we look at whether nRCM can be implemented without information sharing and evaluate the loss in profit due to the lack of complete information. If nRCM can be implemented without information sharing and the profit loss due to the lack of complete information is insignificant, then we have provided an indirect solution to the above dilemma.Indeed, our analysis to follow shows that nRCM can be implemented without retailers sharing their demand information. More importantly, when implemented without retailers’ sharing demand information, nRCM can still lead to retailers’ expected profits very close to their first-best profits. In other words, the value of demand distribution parameter information is minimized under nRCM to an extent that information sharing is no longer necessary for its coordination. Hence, the challenges of sharing asymmetric information discussed in Section 5.1 can be avoided.In this section, we investigate the impact of demand information asymmetry under nRCM. We do this in two steps. In the first step (Section 5.2.1), we show how nRCM can be implemented when retailers do not share each other’s demand information, in particular, standard deviation. Define this scenario as CNIS, i.e., the no information sharing scenario under nRCM. In this scenario, each retailer determines his order quantity based on his estimation of the other retailers’ demand standard deviation. We solve retailers’ (Bayesian) equilibrium order quantities under CNIS. Then, in Section 5.2.2, we investigate the value of demand information under nRCM by comparing, in a numerical study, CNIS with the scenario in which retailers have complete information of other retailers’ demand standard deviation, defined as the scenario of CFIS. Note that the order quantities under CFIS are the same as the first-best quantities because nRCM leads to coordination under complete information. We also demonstrate the practicality of nRCM in Section 5.2.2, e.g., we solve for the premium fees and compare them with retailers’ profits as system size increases.Under CNIS, retailers do not share their demand information. nRCM is implemented as described in Section 4, except that all retailers will make their ordering decisions based on their prior estimation of other retailers’ demand standard deviations. Specifically, all other retailers and the manufacturer anticipate that retailer i’s demand standard deviation takes one of the values from Si= {σi, l, l = 1, 2, …, mi} with Pi(σi) being the probability that it takes the value of σi. Hence, retailers solve for their Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (NE) order quantities,{Q^iB(σi),σi∈Si,i∈N},which indicates each retailer i’s order quantity when his demand standard deviation takes the value of σi, σi∈ Si, i ∈ N.To solve for the Bayesian NE quantities, define Qi(σi) as retailer i’s order quantity when his demand standard deviation takes the value of σiand let {Qj(σj)}, σj∈ Sj, j ∈ N−irepresent the set of all other retailers’ (say j’s) order quantities for their corresponding demand standard deviation σj, σj∈ Sj. Defineσ= {σi, i ∈ N}. We can write down each retailer i’s expected profit under CNIS when his demand standard deviation is σi,Π^iB(Qi(σi),{Qj(σj)}),as follows,(6)Π^iB(Qi(σi),{Qj(σj)})=EDi[rimin(Di,Qi(σi))+si(Qi(σi)−Di)+−pi(Di−Qi(σi))+]+E[φ^iB]−wQi(σi)−δi,whereE[φ^iB]=E{σj,j∈N−i}∑j≠iE{Dk,k∈N}[uijTij+ujiTji]indicates the expected transshipment profit allocated to retailer i considering all possible realizations of all other retailers’ standard deviations, correspondingly their demand realizations, and in turn the possible transshipment arrangements, Tij, solved from LP(1). Similar to the case of complete information, the total expected payment from the manufacturer to retailer i isE[φ^iB]−wQi(σi)−δi.Hence, the retailers’ Bayesian Nash Equilibrium order quantities,{Q^iB(σi),σi∈Si,i∈N},can be solved from the following set of first-order equations,{∂Π^iB(Qi(σi),{Qj(σj)})∂Qi(σi)=0},σi∈Si,i∈NThe manufacturer’s expected profit,Π^mB({Qi(σi)}),can then be written as(7)Π^mB({Q^iB(σi)})=∑iδi+(w−c)∑iEσi[Q^iB(σi)]−Eσ∑i,jE{Dk,k∈N}[uijTij].Given how retailers make ordering decisions under CFIS and CNIS, we next investigate the value of information under nRCM through a numerical study. To focus on the impact of demand information, we assume identical cost parameters at the n retailers. Preliminary studies show that cost parameters do not much affect our main results, so without loss of generality, we set r = 40, τ = 2, s = 10, p = 0, and w = 15. We focus on coordinating the n retailers under nRCM (instead of the retailers and the manufacturer) because this is comparable to previous coordination mechanisms/allocation rules. However, if one wants to study coordinating the n retailer and the manufacturer, the only change is to set the wholesale price w to production cost c in the calculation (Theorem 2).We assume retailers’ demands follow normal distributions (a typical standardizable distribution). Since there is no impact of one retailer’s mean demand on the others’ order quantity decisions, for calculation, we set each retailer’s mean demand to be 120. We also assume that each retailer’s demand standard deviation takes one of two levels, i.e.,σHandσL. Although the probability of demand standard deviation being high,Pi(σH),may be different from one retailer to another, we setPi(σH)=0.5,∀i∈Nto better study the impact of demand information asymmetry since this impact is the highest whenPi(σH)=0.5. We choose two levels for the expected demand standard deviation,σ¯=30,18. For each level ofσ¯,we set three levels for the ratio of the two standard deviations,σHσL=1.2,1.5,1.8. For example, whenσ¯=30,corresponding to the three levels ofσHσL,we test{σH,σL}={32.7,27.3},{36,24},{38.6,21.4}.We consider five levels of the system size, i.e., the number of retailers n = 3, 5, 7, 9, 11. To specify each retailer’s profit under nRCM, we assume all retailers equally divide the extra profit under CNIS compared with what they obtain under the no inventory sharing scenario (NIS).55We did not choose to compare with the no coordination scenario, because the retailers’ profits under no coordination scenario depends on what transshipment profit allocation policy is used. Since this is only a benchmark scenario, without loss of generality, we choose to compare with the decentralized system with no inventory sharing.Therefore, if n = 3, then each retailer will be allocated one third of the total extra profit under CNIS compared with the decentralized system with no inventory sharing, i.e., the premium fees are set asδi=(Πi|CNISbeforepayingδi)−Πi|NIS−13(Π|CNIS−Π|NIS).Here Π|CNIS indicates the system profit under CNIS. The other notations have similar meanings.Table 1(all tables are shown at the end of the paper) provides the average and maximum percentage differences between the expected system profit under CFIS and CNIS over all possible realizations of retailers’ demand standard deviations, {σi}, i ∈ N, for systems of different sizes. Table 1 shows that on average, the expected system profit under CNIS is almost the same as that under the centralized system (CFIS), i.e., Δ2 ≃ 0. Further, even under all possible realizations of retailers’ demand standard deviations, {σi}, ∀i ∈ N, the expected system profit under CNIS is also very close to the corresponding profit under CFIS with the maximum difference (Δ1) less than 0.23 percent for the cases we have. Therefore, under nRCM, the system and hence each retailer can obtain a profit very close to their first-best solution even if retailers do not share information. In other words, the value of information is insignificant under nRCM, and this is true for systems of different sizes. Although we present the results through a set of numerical examples, we expect the results hold true for nRCM in general.The reasons behind this nice feature of nRCM is as follows. First, under nRCM, the only demand distribution parameter information needed is the demand standard deviation. Such small amount of information needed helps minimizing the value of information. Second, under nRCM, the unit payment for transshipped units does not depend on the demand distribution parameter information. Hence, unlike many of the other mechanisms/allocation rules where demand parameter information affects the retailers’ allocated transshipment profits through both the retailers’ order quantities (hence residuals in the system) and the transshipment profit allocation rule, under nRCM it only affects the retailers’ allocated transshipment profits through the order quantities. This partial impact of demand information on the retailers’ allocated transshipment profits also reduces the value of information.The above reasons also indicate that the nice feature of nRCM minimizing the value of demand information cannot be assumed for other coordination mechanisms/allocation rules. Without specific designs, it generally does not hold. Hence, future development of coordination mechanisms/allocation rules that can potentially be implemented in systems with asymmetric demand information should specifically take this into consideration.To explore the effectiveness and practicality of nRCM, Table 2shows further details of nRCM for the inventory sharing system with different sizes. Specifically, we present (1) each retailer’s expected net profit under NIS (no inventory sharing), i.e., A in the table; (2) each retailer’s expected profit under CNIS before paying the premium fee (B); (3) each retailer’s premium fee to join nRCM (C); (4) the percentage of the premium fee compared to his expected net profit under NIS (Δ3=CA); (5) retailer’s percentage profit improvement excluding premium fee under CNIS compared with that under NIS (Δ4=B−AA); and (6) the overall retailer’s percentage profit improvement (Δ5=Δ4−Δ3=B−A−CA). We use NIS as a benchmark for Δ3, Δ4, and Δ5 to demonstrate how much the retailers’ cost (Δ3) and the retailers’ benefit (Δ4) are when they participate in nRCM.Table 2 indicates that nRCM is effective for systems of different sizes. Premium fees increase as inventory sharing opportunities increase, but remain at a reasonable level compared to the profit improvement brought by nRCM. Specifically, as n increases, there are more opportunities for inventory sharing and hence the manufacturer needs to pay more for coordinating transshipment. Therefore, the premium fees increase. But the retailers can also be allocated higher profits. Similarly, as the demand variances increase, retailers’ expected profits and hence the premium fees also increase because the benefit of inventory sharing is higher when the system faces higher demand variances. From the values of Δ3, we see that even though premium fee increases as n increases, it remains a small percentage compared to the retailers’ expected net profit (Δ3 < 7.2 percent for all cases we tested). In addition, the positive Δ5 indicates that nRCM ensures a higher profit for each retailer as it achieves coordination.In this section, we extend our model of n decentralized retailers with independent demand distributions to the case where n decentralized retailers have correlated demand distributions. For example, when retailers’ demands are affected by some macroeconomic shock that impacts all retailers in the same way, the retailers’ demands are positively correlated.We assume the n retailers have a joint distribution on their demands with a correlation matrix \boldmath Σ, which is common knowledge to all retailers. With similar steps but more complicated analysis, we find that all results in Theorems 1–5 and Corollary 1 for the independent-demand case continue to hold for the correlated-demand case (refer to Supplementary Appendix for more details), except that the expression of the retailers’ optimal reporting strategy (Corollary 1) is more complicated, dependent on the correlation matrix \boldmath Σ, as expected.In addition, when retailers’ demand distributions are more correlated, retailers can induce more information on the other retailers’ demands based on their own demand information, hence the value of retailers’ demand information becomes smaller. Therefore, the difference between retailers’ profits with and without demand information is smaller when their demands are more correlated. This is an important result because it indicates that nRCM can be implemented without information sharing under correlated demand and retailers can still obtain close-to-first-best profits, just as in the independent demand case. This is because as we have shown, even in the case when retailers’ demands are independent (least correlated), the difference between retailers’ profits with and without demand information is already very small. Hence, this nice property of nRCM still holds in the correlated-demand case.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we study the coordination of an n-retailer inventory sharing system (n > 2). Compared with a two-retailer inventory sharing system, several challenging issues arise for an n-retailer system: (1) Retailers may form subcoalitions when sharing inventory; (2) Retailers may not completely share their residual supply or residual demand; (3) Coordination is much more complicated, and the profitability of each retailer under the mechanism may depend on the size of the system; and (4) Asymmetric information is more difficult to deal with considering its intermingling with the above issues.Due to the above challenges, there have been only a few coordination allocation rules developed in the previous literature for n-retailer (n > 2) inventory sharing system, all developed under complete information and none of which leads to complete residual sharing and formation of only grand coalition for inventory sharing at the same time. Compared with these coordination allocation rules, nRCM designed in our paper possesses four important properties: (1) It leads to formation of only grand coalition for inventory sharing; (2) It induces complete residual sharing; (3) Each retailer is ensured a higher profit as the system size increases; and (4) It can be implemented under asymmetric information and leads to close-to-first-best profit even under asymmetric information.To our knowledge, this paper is the first to consider asymmetric demand information in developing a coordination mechanism for an n-retailer inventory sharing system (n > 2). By definition, true coordination (i.e., that retailers order their first-best quantities) can only be achieved when retailers have complete information of each other’s demand parameters. Therefore, we first investigate how retailers behave under nRCM (and all other coordination allocation rules) when they hold private demand parameter information and share this information. Unfortunately, our analysis shows that retailers may not have incentive to share information with all other retailers and will not share true information even if they do so, which poses a dilemma for coordinating an n-retailer inventory sharing system under asymmetric information.Instead of going after ensuring the retailers’ incentives to share information with all other retailers and trying to induce truth-telling, which is very complicated and non-fruitful, we find an indirect and effective solution to the above dilemma through nRCM: It can be implemented in a system with asymmetric demand information without retailers sharing information and more importantly, it guarantees retailers obtain profits very close to their first-best profits even when they do not share information! Even better, this nice property of nRCM also holds in correlated-demand case. Our study has provided a viable option for the difficult problem of coordinating a decentralized inventory sharing system with asymmetric information.In the analysis, we assumed that retailers’ demand follow the so-called standardizable distribution (e.g., normal, uniform, etc.). However, all of our results, except Theorem 4 and the expression of the retailers’ optimal reporting strategy in Corollary 1, are applicable for any general distribution. In conducting our analysis for asymmetric information, instead of focusing only on nRCM (the coordination mechanism we developed), we took a more general approach to show the impact of asymmetric information on any mechanism/allocation rule that coordinates the n-retailer inventory sharing system under complete information. We believe such results provide insights to other works that aim to develop coordinating mechanisms/allocation rules for the n-retailer inventory sharing systems. Further, although the results on asymmetric information are developed for any mechanisms/allocation rules that lead to coordination under complete information, they can also be applied to any non-coordinating mechanisms/allocation rules as well. Hence, the results provide insights into the impact of asymmetric information on an n-retailer decentralized inventory sharing system. Finally, when analyzing why nRCM leads to close-to-first-best expected profit even when implemented under asymmetric information, we discuss the keys leading to such nice property. We believe such results provide insights to other works aiming to solve asymmetric information issues in a similar or different settings.Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2014.12.033.