@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On heuristic solutions for the stochastic flowshop scheduling problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method to estimate expected makespan in a stochastic flowshop.We conduct experiments that show that existing results may not be fully justified.We compare existing heuristics using the proposed method for makespan estimation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scheduling,Flowshop,Stochastic,Makespan objective,Heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We address the problem of scheduling jobs in a permutation flowshop when their processing times adopt a given distribution (stochastic flowshop scheduling problem) with the objective of minimization of the expected makespan. For this problem, optimal solutions exist only for very specific cases. Consequently, some heuristics have been proposed in the literature, all of them with similar performance. In our paper, we first focus on the critical issue of estimating the expected makespan of a sequence and found that, for instances with a medium/large variability (expressed as the coefficient of variation of the processing times of the jobs), the number of samples or simulation runs usually employed in the literature may not be sufficient to derive robust conclusions with respect to the performance of the different heuristics. We thus propose a procedure with a variable number of iterations that ensures that the percentage error in the estimation of the expected makespan is bounded with a very high probability. Using this procedure, we test the main heuristics proposed in the literature and find significant differences in their performance, in contrast with existing studies. We also find that the deterministic counterpart of the most efficient heuristic for the stochastic problem performs extremely well for most settings, which indicates that, in some cases, solving the deterministic version of the problem may produce competitive solutions for the stochastic counterpart.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The flowshop scheduling problem with makespan objective (usually denoted as Fm|prmu|Cmax) has been subject of research for more than 60 years, being one of the most comprehensively studied problems in Operations Research (see in this regard the reviews by Framinan, Gupta, & Leisten, 2004; Reza Hejazi & Saghafian, 2005 and Ruiz & Maroto, 2005). This decision problem consists of how to schedule jobs in a permutation flowshop in order to minimize the maximum completion time or makespan. A classical assumption is that the processing times of each job in each machine are considered different, but known in advance (deterministic). In contrast, our paper deals with the problem of scheduling n jobs in a permutation flowshop consisting of m machines where the processing times are not deterministic, but follow some known distribution. The objective considered is that of minimizing the expected makespan. This problem is considered to be more realistic that their deterministic counterpart, as it allows capturing part of the inherent variability present in many real-life manufacturing environments (see e.g. Hopp & Spearman, 2008). In the following, we will denote our problem as Fm|prmu|E[Cmax].The Fm|prmu|E[Cmax] problem has been much less studied than its deterministic counterpart, and it is clearly much more complex. In fact, apart from a dominance rule obtained by Makino (1965) for the case of two jobs, no exact solution is available without assumptions on the distribution of the processing times. For m = 2 and exponential distribution of the processing times, Talwar (1967) conjectured an exact solution for the problem that was later proved to be optimal by Cunningham and Dutta (1973), and is currently known as Talwar’s rule.Despite these advances, for the rest of the cases, no optimal procedure has been found. For the two-machine case, three approximate solutions have been proposed by Baker and Trietsch (2011) based both in Talwar’s rule and in Johnson’s rule (Johnson, 1954) for the deterministic flowshop, all of them with similar (near optimal) performance. For the general m machine case, (Baker & Altheimer, 2012) suggest three heuristics based on adaptations of the CDS (Campbell, Dudek, & Smith, 1970) and NEH (Nawaz, Enscore, & Ham, 1983) heuristics, again with similar and near optimal performance. Although it might seem that, from these results, the problem Fm|prmu|E[Cmax] is already solved, some issues have to be discussed:•First of all, the evaluation of sequences in a stochastic flowshop is far from being a trivial task. Since the objective is to obtain the expected makespan of a given sequence, E[Cmax] has to be estimated by running N simulations using the sequence as a solution, from which a sampleCmaxi(i = 1, …, N) is obtained. Then, E[Cmax] is estimated by averaging the sample, i.e.E[Cmax]≈C¯max=1N∑i=1NCmaxi.Up to now, there is no standardized procedure to determine N, although the authors of related contributions use a large number in order to ensure the significance of the estimation. Thus, Baker and Altheimer (2012) use N = 100,000 whereas Gourgand, Grangeon, and Norre (2003) employ N = 200,000 regardless the size and characteristics of each instance, while Portougal and Trietsch (2006) set N to 10,000 for the 2-machine case. In addition, there is no mechanism to establish the statistical significance of the so-obtainedC¯maxand, consequently, to assess the differences in the performance among different heuristics.Due to the computational complexity of the stochastic problem, the experiments in the literature have been limited to very small problem sizes (up to n = 10 and m = 6 in the most recent studies). This makes the conclusions obtained so far to be restricted to very small problem sizes.Finally, to the best of our knowledge, the necessity of heuristics specifically designed for the stochastic problem has not been yet determined. In other words, one may try to solve the stochastic flowshop scheduling problem by transforming it into its deterministic counterpart, i.e. by obtaining a flowshop with the same number of jobs and machines but with deterministic processing times equal e.g. to the means of those from the stochastic problem. Then, heuristics for the Fm|prmu|Cmaxproblem can be applied and a (possibly good) sequence for the deterministic problem can be obtained. If this sequence performs well when applied to the stochastic problem, then the need of specific stochastic heuristics can be questioned. However, such test has not been conducted so far. It is foreseeable that the so-obtained sequences perform worse that those specifically designed for the stochastic version, but maybe the differences in the quality of the results do not justify the much higher computation times required for the stochastic heuristics. Even if the deterministic heuristics are not valid for some cases, it would be interesting to quantify the degree of variability for which using them is still acceptable, as it is clear that a stochastic flowshop with low variability would resemble very much to a deterministic flowshop.With these issues in mind, we first discuss and propose a procedure for estimating the expected makespan of a sequence in a stochastic flowshop, so the error in such estimation is bounded by a given percentage. In this way, the statistical significance of the results obtained by the different heuristics can be more clearly established. Interestingly, the results show that the sample sizes (N) obtained from our procedure proposed range from very small to very high values, thus supporting the conclusion that no predetermined value can be easily found regardless the variability of the instances and the error assumed in the estimation.Next, we compare the main heuristics proposed in the literature as well as the expected makespan obtained from the application of purely deterministic procedures to the mean processing times of the stochastic problem. These heuristics are tested for problem sizes larger than those presented so far in the literature, so the conclusions from the results can be better supported. The results show that, in contrast to Baker and Altheimer (2012), there are significant differences in the performance of the heuristics, and that – perhaps not so surprisingly – the performance of the sequences obtained from purely deterministic methods in the stochastic flowshop do not differ greatly from that obtained from specific stochastic methods.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: First, the problem under consideration is formally described in Section 2, where the main contributions of the literature are discussed. Since our work is of computational nature, we devote Section 3 to discuss the key issue of the testbed in which the heuristics are to be compared, as we intend to capture different problem sizes and different degrees of variability of the flowshop. Next, we present in Section 4 the procedure to estimate the expected mean makespan of a given solution, and compare the number of iterations required with those employed in the literature. The comparison of the performance of different heuristics for the problem is done in Section 5, where the main results are also discussed. Finally, Section 6 present the conclusions and points out future research lines.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have addressed the problem of scheduling jobs in a flowshop when their processing times adopt a given distribution. Existing literature for the problem reveals that optimal solutions can be found only for very specific cases, so some heuristics with similar performance have been proposed for the general case. We first focus on the critical issue of estimating E[Cmax] the expected makespan of a sequence, and found that, for instances with a medium/large variability (expressed as the coefficient of variation of the processing times of the jobs), the number of samples (simulation runs) used in the literature to estimate E[Cmax] may not be sufficient to derive conclusive results. We propose a procedure with a variable number of iterations that ensures that the error in the estimation of the expected makespan is bounded (with a very high probability) within a small percentage. Using this procedure, we test the main heuristic proposed in the literature in a larger testbed and in many cases found significant differences in their performance, in contrast with existing studies. We also found that the deterministic counterpart of the most efficient heuristic for the stochastic problem performs extremely well for most settings, which indicates that (at least within the limitations of our study), a practical way to solve the Fm|prmu|E[Cmax] is to simplify it to its deterministic version.Several issues lie ahead as future research lines. First of all, the computational analysis can be enhanced by introducing different families of distribution, higher coefficients of variation for the log normal distribution, and bigger problem instances. However, it is to note that some families of distributions widely applied in theory due to their good properties (such as e.g. the exponential) do not match well with the processing times distributions found in practice. Analogously, very large coefficient of variations are not the norm in industry, as discussed before. Finally, there are severe computational limitations for using bigger testbeds, as the experiments carried out in this paper already amount for weeks of CPU time.A more fruitful research line may be to check whether the results obtained by the best stochastic heuristic (SNEH) are close to the optimal values, or not. Although this necessarily has to be done for small instances, it would be interesting to confirm the results by Baker and Altheimer (2012), who indicate that SNEH obtains close-to-optimal solutions. If this was not the case, ground for developing new approximate solutions for the problem may be re-opened.