@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Competition among non-life insurers under solvency constraints: A game-theoretic approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A game to model competition between non-life insurance companies is formulated.Section 1 develops the one-period noncooperative game of this paper.Existence and uniqueness of a premium equilibrium are established.Section 2 presents numerical illustrations of the game.A conclusion and perspectives are given in Section 3.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-life insurance,Market model,Game theory,Nash equilibrium,Stackelberg equilibrium,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We formulate a noncooperative game to model competition for policyholders among non-life insurance companies, taking into account market premium, solvency level, market share and underwriting results. We study Nash equilibria and Stackelberg equilibria for the premium levels, and give numerical illustrations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Insurance pricing is a classical topic for both actuaries and academics. Standard actuarial approaches for non-life insurance typically suggest to use expectation, standard deviation, or quantiles of the underlying risk to determine a suitable premium. For an overview of principles of premium calculation, see e.g. Teugels and Sundt (2004). The resulting (so-called technical) premium is then often altered by marketing and management departments, and actual deviations from the technical premium can be considerable. Affordability by customers and mutualization across the portfolio are often used as arguments to justify that policyholders do not necessarily pay the risk-based premium. But another important reason for such deviations from the technical premium is the dependency on market conditions. In order to study that factor, a market model is needed to study the economic interactions between insurers and policyholders.Basic economic models suggest that the equilibrium premium is the marginal cost, as any upward deviation from this premium equilibrium will result in losing all the policies in the next period. Other advanced economic models generally focus on moral hazard and adverse selection. The Rothschild and Stiglitz’s model (see Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976)) deals with a utility-based agent framework where policyholders have private information on their own risk. In this model, insurers provide a menu of contracts, i.e. pairs of premium and deductible, from which policyholder can freely choose. At the equilibrium, individuals with low risk aversion choose full coverage, whereas individuals with high risk aversion are more attracted to partial coverage. Note that an equilibrium price may not exist if all insurers offer just one type of contract. Picard (2009) considers an extension by allowing insurers to offer participating contracts (such as mutual-type contracts). This feature guarantees the existence of an equilibrium, which reveals the risk level of the policyholders. An important area of applications for such models is health insurance, where moral hazard and adverse selection play a major role, see e.g. Geoffard et al. (1998), Wambach (2000) and Mimra and Wambach (2010). But, in practice customers do not move from one insurer to a cheaper one as swiftly as economic models anticipate. The inertia of the insurance demand prevents policyholders to always look for the cheapest insurer, see Smith et al. (2000) for a case study in Australia. Accordingly, the customer behavior is much more complicated.Moreover, the economic models mentioned above are not able to incorporate some insurance market features. Taylor (1986, 1987) deals with underwriting strategies of insurers and provides first attempts to model optimal responses of an insurer to the market on a given time horizon, see also Kliger and Levikson (1998); Emms et al. (2007); Moreno-Codina and Gomez-Alvado (2008) for extensions. All these papers focus on one single insurer and in that way assume that insurers are playing a game against an impersonal market player, so that the market price is independent of their own actions.In this paper, we want to further investigate the suitability of game theory for insurance market modeling. The use of game theory in actuarial science has a long history dating back to K. Borch and J. Lemaire, who mainly used cooperative games to model risk transfer between insurer and reinsurer, see e.g. Section 3.1 of Brockett and Xia (1995) for a review. Among earlier work using noncooperative game theory to model the non-life insurance market, two kinds of models were pursued: the Bertrand oligopoly where insurers set premiums and the Cournot oligopoly where insurers choose optimal values of insurance coverage. Polborn (1998) considers a Bertrand model in which rational consumers maximize their utility function and for which the equilibrium premium is the expected loss. Rees et al. (1999) extend this model by requiring insurers to announce both a premium and a capital value. Under rational behavior, the premium equilibrium remains the expected loss and the capital equilibrium avoids insolvency. Powers and Shubik (1998) propose a Cournot model with two types of players. Policyholders state the amount that they are willing to pay, and insurers state the amount of risk they are willing to underwrite. Based on a clearing-house system to determine the market price, each player maximizes its expected utility. Assuming risk neutral insurers and risk averse consumers, the resulting premium equilibrium is larger than the expected loss. They also study scale effects of the number of insurers on the premium equilibrium. Powers and Shubik (2006) include reinsurers as additional players and study the optimal number of reinsurers in an insurance market.The present paper aims to model competition in non-life insurance markets with noncooperative game theory in order to extend the insurer-vs-market reasoning of Taylor (1986, 1987). We extend the Bertrand model of Rees et al. (1999) by considering a lapse model and an aggregate loss model for policyholders. The lapse model describes the policyholder behavior through a lapse probability which is a function of the premiums offered by the insurers. We also consider a solvency constraint function for insurers. As a main result, we show that incorporating competition when setting premiums leads to a significant deviation of Nash and Stackelberg equilibria both from the actuarial premium and a one-insurer optimized premium.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the one-period noncooperative game of this paper. Existence and uniqueness of a premium equilibrium are established. Section 3 presents numerical illustrations of the game. A conclusion and perspectives are given in Section 4.Consider I insurers competing in a market of n policyholders with one-year contracts (n is fixed). The policyholders are assumed to react to price changes (either stay with the present insurer or switch to one of the competitors), but do not have any other influence on the premium level (which is a realistic assumption, in particular for personal lines of business such as compulsory third-party motor liability). In view of the one-year time horizon and the randomness of claim sizes, this model focuses on non-life insurance products (i.e. products for which the claim event is not linked to the life of the policyholder).The “game” for insurers is to set the premium for which policies are offered to the policyholders. Let(x1,…,xI)∈RIbe a price vector, with xjrepresenting the premium of Insurer j. Once the premium is set by all insurers, the policyholders choose to renew or to lapse from their current insurer. Then, insurers pay occurring claims during the coverage year. At the end of the period, underwriting results are determined, and the insurer capital is updated: some insurers may be bankrupt. As we deal with a one-period model, for simplicity we do not consider investment results.In the next subsections, we present the four components of the game: (i) a lapse model, (ii) a loss model, (iii) an objective function and (iv) a solvency constraint function. These four components are critical factors for the analysis of the non-life insurance market, see e.g. IASB (2008). In the sequel, a subscript j∈{1,…,I} will always denote an insurer index, whereas a subscript i∈{1,…,n} denotes policyholder index. In the sequel, “insurer” is used when referring to players of the insurance game.In this subsection, we present our lapse model which is designed as a compromise between reflecting the policyholders’ behavior in a reasonable way, yet keeping mathematical tractability. Let njbe the initial portfolio size of Insurer j (such that∑j=1Inj=n). It seems natural that the choice of policyholders for an insurer is highly influenced by the choice of the previous period. We assume that the dispatch (among the I insurers) of the njpolicyholders of Insurer j follows an I-dimensional multinomial distributionMI(nj,pj→(x))with probability vector pj→(x)=(pj→1(x),…,pj→I(x)). The probability pj→k(x) to move from Insurer j to Insurer k naturally depends on the price vector x, (concretely, the difference of premiums). Empirically, the probability to lapse pj→k(x) (with k≠j) is generally much lower than the probability to renew pj→j(x). To our knowledge, only the UK market shows lapse rates above 50%, cf. Dreyer (2000).In the economics literature, pj→kis considered in the framework of discrete choice models. In the random utility maximization setting, McFadden (1981, chap. 5) or Anderson et al. (1989) propose multinomial logit and probit probability choice models. In this paper, we choose a multinomial logit model, because of its simplicity (the probit link function, based on the multivariate normal distribution, would not significantly change the shape of the lapse function). Working with unordered choices, we arbitrarily set the insurer reference category for pj→kto j, the current insurer. We define the probability for a customer to go from insurer j to k given the price vector x by the multinomial logit model(1)pj→k(x)=11+∑l≠jefj(xj,xl)ifj=k,efj(xj,xk)1+∑l≠jefj(xj,xl)ifj≠k,where the sum is taken over the set of insurers {1,…,I} and fjis a price-sensitivity function. We consider two types of price functions(2)f¯j(xj,xl)=μ¯j+α¯jxjxlandf̃j(xj,xl)=μ̃j+α̃j(xj-xl).The first functionf¯jassumes a price-sensitivity according to the ratio of proposed premium xjand competitor premium xl, whereasf̃jworks with the premium difference xj−xl. Parameters μj,αjrepresent a base lapse level and price-sensitivity, respectively. We assume that insurance products display positive price elasiticity of demand αj>0. One can check that∑kpj→k(x)=1.Eq. (1) can be rewritten aspj→k(x)=pj→j(x)(δjk+(1-δjk)efj(xj,xk)),with δijdenoting the Kronecker delta. It is difficult to derive general properties of the distribution of a sum of binomial variables with different probability parameters, except when the size parameters njare reasonably large, in which case the normal approximation is appropriate.The portfolio size Nj(x) of insurer j for the next period is a random variable determined by the sum of renewed policies and (new) policyholders coming from other insurers. Hence, Nj(x) is a sum of I independent binomial variables (Bkj)kwith parameters nk, pk→j(x)(3)Nj(x)=Bjj(x)+∑k=1,k≠jIBkj(x).This assumption is in contrast to the standard models in classical ruin theory, where the portfolio size is assumed constant over time (see e.g. Asmussen and Albrecher (2010) for a recent survey and Malinovskii (2010) for an attempt to have a premium-dependent portfolio size). With this insurer choice model, the expected portfolio size of insurer j reduces toE(Nj(x))=nj×pj→j(x)+∑l≠jnl×pj→k(x).Let Yibe the aggregate loss of policy i during the coverage period. We assume no adverse selection among policyholders of any insurers, i.e. Yiare independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables, for all i=1,…,n. Let us assume a simple frequency – average severity loss modelYi=∑l=1MiZi,l,where the claim number Miis Policyholder i. The claim severities (Zi,l)lare i.i.d. as some generic random variable Z. The aggregate claim amount for Insurer j is thenSj(x)=∑i=1Nj(x)Yi=∑i=1Nj(x)∑l=1MiZi,l,where Nj(x) is the portfolio size defined in Eq. (3). We consider two claim number distributions: (i) Mifollows a Poisson distributionP(λ)and (ii) Mifollows a negative binomial distributionNB(r,p). These instances of the frequency – average severity model are such that the aggregate claim amountSj(x)=∑i=1Nj(x)Yiis still a compound distribution of the same kind, since Yiare assumed i.i.d. random variables. Hence, the aggregate claim amount Sj(x) of Insurer j is a compound distributionSj(x)=∑l=1M∼j(x)Zl,where all claim severitiesZl∼i.i.d.Zand the claim numberM∼j(x)follows either a Poisson distributionP(Nj(x)λ)or a negative-binomial distributionNB(Nj(x)r,p). In the numerical applications, these two loss models are denoted PLN and NBLN, respectively. For the distribution of Z, we choose the lognormal distribution, which is due to its heavy-tailedness and at the same time pleasant statistical properties is a popular modeling assumption in many lines of non-life insurance. This choice is by no means crucial, as any other can be handled in an analogous way.In the two previous subsections, we presented two components of the insurance markets: the lapse model (how policyholders react to premium changes) and the loss model (how policyholders face claims). We now turn our attention to the underwriting strategy of insurers, i.e. on how they set premiums.In Section 2.1, we assumed that price elasticity of demand for the insurance product is positive. Thus, if the whole market underwrites at a loss, any actions of a particular insurer to get back to profitability will result in a reduction of his business volume. This has two consequences for the choice of the objective function: (i) it should involve a decreasing demand function of price xjgiven the competitors price vector x−j=(x1,…,xj−1, xj+1,…,xI) and (ii) it should depend on an assessment of the insurer break-even premium πjper unit of exposure.The parameter πjcorresponds to the estimated mean but depends on the assessment of loss expectation by insurer j. We thus define πjasπj=ωja¯j,0+(1-ωj)m¯0,wherea¯j,0is the actuarial premium based on the past loss experience of insurerj,m¯0is the market premium, available for instance, via rating bureaus or through insurer associations and ωj∈[0,1] is the credibility factor of insurer j.1Rating bureaus or rating agencies are organizations collecting statistical data from insurers in order to publish market information both for insurers and policyholders. The credibility factor is the weight given to individual loss experience in contrast to collective loss data.1ωjreflects the confidence of insurer j in its own loss experience: the closer to 1, the more confident insurer j is. Note that πjtakes into account expenses implicitly via the actuarial and the market premiums.We choose the demand function as(4)Dj(x)=njn1-βjxjmj(x)-1,where βj>0 is the elasticity parameter and mj(x) is a market premium proxy. The demand Dj(x) is not restricted to [0,nj/n], and thus Djtargets both renewal and new business. In this form, Dj(x) approximates the expected market shareENj(x)/npresented in Section 2.1. As the elasticity parameter βjis positive, a premium increase (of insurer j) will result in a decrease of the demand for insurance. The market proxy used in Eq. (4) is the mean price of the other competitorsmj(x)=1I-1∑k≠jxk.The market proxy aims to assess other insurer premiums without specifically targeting one competitor. It can be interpreted as the premium of an ideal medium competitor. Consequently, Insurer j typically does not target the cheapest, the most expensive or the leader insurers.Now we can state our objective function. We suppose that Insurer j maximizes the expected profit of next year policies which we here define in the multiplicative form(5)Oj(x)=njn1-βjxjmj(x)-1(xj-πj),i.e. the product of the demand Djand the expected profit per policy, representing a company-wide expected profit. Thus, maximizing the objective function Ojleads to a trade-off between increasing premium to favor higher projected profit margins and decreasing premium to defend the current market share. Note that Ojhas the nice property to be infinitely differentiable with respect to x.Another key feature of the model is a solvency constraint the goal of which is to require insurers to hold a certain amount of capital in order to protect policyholders against adverse collective claim experience. Therefore, in addition to maximizing a certain objective function, insurers must satisfy a solvency constraint imposed by the regulator. A reasonable criterion to find the minimum capital requirement is linked to deviations of the aggregate losses from its expected value, concretely the difference of a high-level quantile and the mean of the loss distribution. For simplicity, this quantity is supposed to be a linear function of the standard deviation of the loss distribution. In practice, the solvency capital is also required on a prospective basis; we take here the simplifying assumption to use only the in-force policy number. Thus, we define the solvency constraint function as(6)gj1(xj)=Kj+nj(xj-πj)(1-ej)kσ(Y)nj-1,where k is the solvency coefficient chosen to approximate a 99.5% quantile and ejdenotes the expense rate. The numerator corresponds to the sum of the current capital Kjand the expected profit on the in-force portfolio, whereas the denominator approximates the required capital. The constraintgj1(x)⩾0is equivalent toKj+nj(xj-πj)(1-ej)⩾kσ(Y)nj, butgj1is normalized with respect to capital, providing better numerical stability. In Appendix A, we give details about the choice of the constant k.In addition to the solvency constraint, we need to impose bounds on the possible premium. A first choice could be simple linear constraints as xj−x⩾0 andx¯-xj⩾0, wherexandx¯represent the minimum and the maximum premium, respectively. However, the following equivalent reformulation is numerically more stable:gj2(xj)=1-e-(xj-x̲)⩾0andgj3(xj)=1-e-(x¯-xj)⩾0.The boundsxandx¯could for instance be justified by a prudent point of view of a government regulator. In the sequel, we setx̲=E(Y)/(1-emin)<x¯=3E(Y), where eminis the minimum expense rate.Summarizing, the constraint functiongj(xj)=gjl(xj)1⩽l⩽3for Insurer j is(7){xj,gj(xj)⩾0}=xj∈[x̲,x¯],Kj+nj(xj-πj)(1-ej)⩾k995σ(Y)nj.We consider two solution concepts for our game: the Nash equilibrium for which it is assumed that insurer actions are taken simultaneously, and the Stackelberg equilibrium for which actions take place sequentially with a leader, see e.g. Fudenberg and Tirole (1991); Osborne and Rubinstein (2006).DefinitionNash equilibriumFor a game with I insurers, with payoff functions Ojand action set Xj, a Nash equilibrium is a vectorx★=x1★,…,xI★such that for all j=1,…,I,xj★solves the subproblemsupxj∈XjOjxj,x-j★.where xjand x−jdenote the action of insurer j and the other insurers’ actions, respectively. The action set Xjof Insurer j may be parametrized as Xj={xj,gj(xj)⩾0}.A Nash equilibrium can hence be interpreted as a point at which no insurer has an incentive to deviate, given the actions of the other insurers. Now, we turn to the definition of a Stackelberg equilibrium. For simplicity, we assume there is one unique leader (Insurer 1) and insurers j∈{2,…,I} are followers.DefinitionStackelberg equilibriumFor a game with one leader and I−1 followers, with payoff functions Ojand action set Xj, a Stackelberg equilibrium is a vectorx★=x1★,…,xI★such thatx1★solves the problemsupx1∈X1O1x1,x-1★(x1)andx-1★(x1)is a Nash equilibrium for the subgame with the I−1 followers and given action x1 for insurer 1.For our game with objective functions Ojin (5) and constraint functions gjin (7), the game sequence is given as follows.(i)Insurers set their premium according to a Nash or a Stackelberg equilibrium x★.Policyholders randomly choose their new insurer according to probabilities pk→j(x★): we get Nj(x★).For the one-year coverage, claims are random according to the frequency – average severity model relative to the portfolio size Nj(x★).Finally the underwriting result is determined byUWj(x★)=Nj(x★)xj★(1-ej)-Sj(x★)and new capital is Kj+UWj(x★), where ejdenotes the expense rate and Kjthe initial capital value.In this subsection, we investigate properties of the premium equilibrium. We start by showing existence and uniqueness of a Nash equilibrium. Then, we focus on the sensitivity analysis on model parameters of such an equilibrium. Finally, we study the existence of a Stackelberg equilibrium.Proposition 2.1The insurance game with I insurers whose objective functions and solvency constraint functions are defined in Eqs. (5) and (7), respectively, admits a unique Nash premium equilibrium.The strategy set isR=[x̲,x¯]I, which is nonempty, convex and compact. Givenx-j∈[x̲,x¯], the function xj↦Oj(x) is a quadratic function with second-degree term-βjxj2/mj(x)<0up to a constant nj/n. Thus, this function is (strictly) concave. Moreover, for all insurers, the constraint functionsgj1are linear functions, hence also concave. By Theorem 1 of Rosen (1965), the game admits a Nash equilibrium, i.e. existence is guaranteed. By Theorem 2 of Rosen (1965), uniqueness is verified if we have the following inequality for all x,y∈R,(8)∑j=1Irj(xj-yj)∇xjOj(y)+∑j=1Irj(yj-xj)∇xjOj(x)>0,for somer∈RIwith strictly positive components ri>0. As the function xj↦Oj(x) is a strictly concave and differentiable function for all x−j, we have∇xjOj(x)(yj-xj)>Oj(y)-Oj(x)and equivalently∇xjOj(y)(xj-yj)>Oj(x)-Oj(y). Thus,(xj-yj)∇xjOj(y)+(yj-xj)∇xjOj(x)>Oj(y)-Oj(x)+Oj(x)-Oj(y)=0.Taking r= (1,…,1), Eq. (8) is verified.□Let x★be the Nash premium equilibrium of the insurance game with I insurers. For each Insurer j, the insurer equilibriumxj★withxj★∈]x̲,x¯[depends on the parameters in the following way: it increases with break-even premium πj, solvency coefficient k995, loss standard deviation σ(Y), expense rate ejand decreases with sensitivity parameter βjand capital Kj. Whenxj★=x̲orx¯, the premium equilibrium is independent of those parameters.The premium equilibriumxj★of insurer j solves the necessary Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions:(9)∇xjOj(x★)+∑1⩽l⩽3λlj★∇xjgjlxj★=0,0⩽λj★,gjxj★⩾0,gjxj★Tλj★=0,whereλj★∈R3are Lagrange multipliers, see e.g. Facchinei and Kanzow (2009). In the last part of Eq. (9),gjxj★Tλj★=0is the complementarity equation implying that the lth constraintgjlis either activegjlxj★=0or inactivegjlxj★>0, butλlj★=0.We suppose thatxj★∈]x̲,x¯[. Hence,λ2j★=λ3j★=0. There are two cases: either the solvency constraintgj1is active or not. Let us assume the solvency constraint is inactive. Insurer j’s premium equilibrium verifies∇xjOj(x★)=0, i.e.(10)njn1-2βjxj★mj(x★)+βj+βjπjmj(x★)=0.Letxyjbe the premium vector with the jth component equal to y, i.e.xyj=(x1,…,xj-1,y,xj+1,…,xI). Given a parameter z on which we want to investigate the sensitivity, we define the functionFxjasFxj(z,y)=∂Oj∂xjxyj,z,where the objective function (also) depends on z. Eq. (10) can be simply rewritten asFx★jz,xj★=0.By the continuous differentiability of F with respect to z and y and the fact thatFxj(z,y)=0has at least one solution (z0,y0), we can invoke the implicit function theorem, see e.g. Zorich (2000). So there exists a function φ defined in a neighborhood of (z0,y0) such thatFxj(z,φ(z))=0and φ(z0)=y0. Furthermore, if∂Fxj∂y(z0,y0)≠0, the derivative of φ is given byφ′(z)=-∂Fxj∂z(z,y)∂Fxj∂y(z,y)y=φ(z).In our case, we have∂Fxj∂y(z,y)=∂2Oj∂xj2xyj,z=-2αjnjnmj(x)<0.As a consequence, the sign of φ′ is simplysign(φ′(z))=sign∂Fxj∂z(z,φ(z)).Let us consider z=πj. We have∂Fxj∂z(z,y)=njβjnmj(x)>0.Thus, the functionπj↦xj★(πj)is increasing.Let z be the sensitivity coefficient βj. We have∂Fxj∂z(z,y)=njn-2βjymj(x)+1+πjmj(x).UsingFxj(z,φ(z))=0, it leads to∂Fxj∂z(z,φ(z))=njn-1z<0.Thus, the functionβj↦xj★(βj)is decreasing. In such a case of an inactive constraint, the premium equilibrium is independent of the initial portfolio size nj.When the solvency constraint is active, the premium equilibriumxj★verifiesgj1xj★=0, i.e.(11)xj★=πj+k995σ(Y)nj-Kjnj(1-ej).Here, the implicit function theorem is not necessary sincexj★does not depend onx-j★. We deduce thatxj★is an increasing function of πj, k995, σ(Y), ejand a decreasing function Kj.The functionnj↦xj★(nj)is not necessarily monotone. Let z be nj. Differentiating Eq. (11) with respect to z, we getφ′(z)=1z3/2(1-ej)-kσ(Y)2+Kjz,whose sign depends on the value of the other parameters.□Let x★be the premium equilibrium of the insurance game with I insurers. When no constraint functions are active, the premium equilibrium solves a linear system of equations Mβx★=v, whereMβ=2β1-1+β1I-1…-1+β1I-1⋱-1+βII-1…-1+βII-12βIandv=β1π1⋮βIπI.As, no constraint functions are active, if x★ is a Nash equilibrium, x★ must verify for all j∇xjOj(x★)=0⇔2βjx★-(1+βj)1I-1∑k≠jxk★=βjπj.The latter equation can be rewritten as Mβx=β∘π. The matrix Mβis diagonally dominant if and only if for all j|2βj|>∑k≠j-1+βjI-1⇔βj>1.Having positive diagonal terms, Mβis invertible, see e.g. Horn and Johnson (1990). Thus,x★=Mβ-1β∘π. In the special case where βj=β for all j, Mβis a Toeplitz matrix.□The insurance game with I insurers with objective function(5)and solvency constraint function(7)admits a Stackelberg premium equilibrium.By Proposition 2.1, the subgame for followers has a unique Nash equilibriumx-1★(x1)for allx1∈[x̲,x¯]. By the continuity of objective functions Oiand the strict concavity of functions xi↦Oi(x), Berge’s maximum theorem (see e.g. Aubin (1998)) implies that the functionx1↦x-1★(x1)is continuous. Therefore, the leader game consists in maximizing on the interval[x̲,x¯]the continuous functionx1↦O1(x1,x-1★(x1)). Hence, the functionx1↦O1(x1,x-1★(x1))attains its maximum on the interval[x̲,x¯].□All numerical applications are carried out with the R software, R Core Team (2012), cf. Appendix B for computation details. We start by describing the reference parameters in Section 3.1 for which we give the Nash premium equilibrium in Section 3.2. Then, we continue with a sensitivity analysis in Section 3.3 and an analysis of the distribution of the capital at the end of the game in Section 3.4 for the Nash premium equilibrium. Finally, we compare the results with the Stackelberg equilibrium in Section 3.5.We consider a game with three insurers operating a 10,000-customer insurance market, i.e. n=10,000, I=3. Insurer initial portfolio sizes are (n1,n2,n3)=(4500,3200,2300). The portfolio size is chosen such that Insurer 1 is the leader, Insurer 2 the challenger and Insurer 3 the outsider with 45%, 32% and 23% market shares, respectively.We consider the two types of loss models presented in Section 2.2, i.e. (i) PLN loss model such thatE(Y)=1,σ(Y)=4.472and (ii) NBLN loss model such thatE(Y)=1,σ(Y)=10.488. They differ only on the assumption of the frequency distribution (and not on the severity distribution). For these two models, we have a coefficient of variation of the loss distribution of 4.472 and 10.488, respectively (which are reasonable magnitudes for practical purposes).The weight parameters ωjused in the computation of the insurer break-even premium are ω=(1/3,1/3,1/3). We choose the actuarially based premiumsa¯j,0’s and the market premiumm¯0given in Table 1. Table 1 also gives the break-even premium πj. Since the objective functions coincide between the two loss models, we expect premium equilibria to have similar values for both loss models.Before giving the sensitivity parameters βj, we present the two lapse models used. For customer behavior, we have two parameters μj, αjper insurer given a price-sensitivity function, see Eq. (2).In Table 2, we give the lapse parameters. Given x1= (1,1,1) and x1.05=(1.05,1,1), lapse parameters are such that 1−p1→1(x1)=10% and 1−p1→1(x1.05)=15% for Insurer 1 (resp. 14% and 19% for Insurer 2 and 18% and 23% for Insurer 3). Such values of lapse rates are close to actually observed lapse rates e.g. in continental Europe for private motor lines of business. With these lapse parameters, the expected numbers of lost policies when all insurers propose the same premium are 450.1, 448.0 and 414.0. In Fig. 1, total lapse rate functions (i.e. xj↦1−pj→j(x)) are plotted on the interval [1,3] for x−j=(1.5,1.75). The left-hand plot shows the total lapse rate function when using price-sensitivity functionf¯jand the right-hand plot forf̃j.Price sensitivity parameters βjof objective functions are fitted using 1−βj(xj/mj(x)−1)≈pj→j(x). With x1.05, we get βj=(1−pj→j(x))/0.05 and obtain (β1,β2,β3)=(3.0,3.8,4.6). The remaining parameters are capital values and the expense rates. Capital values (K1,K2,K3) are set such that the initial solvency coverage ratio is 133%. Expense rates are (e1,e2,e3)=(15%,15%,15%).Since we consider two loss models (PLN, NBLN) and two price-sensitivity functionsf¯j,f̃j, we define in fact four sets of parameters, which differ on the loss model and the price-sensitivity function. In Table 3, we report the vector of premium equilibria x★ of the four models in the first three columns. In addition to x★, we also give the expected difference Δjin portfolio size (negative means Insurer j expects to lose customers at x★) and the estimated solvency coverage ratio ρj(recalling that the initial solvency coverage ratio is 133%) given byΔj=ENj(x★)-nj,ρj=Kj+ENj(x★)xj★-πj(1-ej)kσ(Y)E(Nj(x★)).The premium equilibrium vector x★ is the same for the four different tested models. We recall that a change in the loss model does not affect the objective function but only the constraint function by changing the standard deviation σ(Y) of the aggregate claim distribution. Furthermore, as the parameters of price-sensitivity functionsf¯j,f̃jare set with the same procedures, the resulting price-sensitivity parameters βjare identical. Therefore, having the same break-even parameters πj, we logically find that the premium equilibrium is the same for the four tested models as long as the constraint functions are not active. However, effects of loss models on portfolio sizes and capital levels are strongly different. Withf̃j, any deviation from competitors’ premium is more heavily penalized than withf¯j. The expected solvency coverage ratio also substantially differs between the two loss models, while the impact of price-sensitivity functions is moderate.In Tables 4 and 5, we perform a sensitivity analysis considering the NBLN-f¯jmodel as the reference model. Table 4 reports the analysis with respect to capital (solvency coverage ratios decrease by 60%) and price sensitvity parameter (all βjincrease by 33%). Table 5 focuses on actuarially based premiums (alla¯j,0increase by 33%), average market premium (m¯0increases by 33%) and credibility factors (all ωjincreases by 33%). The results of this sensitivity analysis are in line with Proposition 2.2. We observe that any slight difference in one component of premium equilibrium x★ can lead to very different situations of solvency for all insurers. For instance, in Table 4 with the capital down scenario, an increase of the premium equilibrium implies a fall in the expected solvency coverage ratio.In Fig. 2, we plot the histograms of the capital of Insurer 3 at the end of the game. We consider two of the four models of Table 3: PLN-f¯jand NBLN-f¯jmodels. In such a setting, the premium equilibrium is given by x★=(1.544,1.511,1.471). In both Fig. 2a and b, the solid vertical line gives the initial capital value K3. We observe the huge difference of capital values. The solvency in the NBLN case is much weaker (with 11.4% of sample capital values below the initial value) than the PLN case (with 0.2%). For the PLN case, the premium equilibrium x★ seems rather unfair compared to the actuarial premium. In practice, two scenarios seem natural: (i) some customers may leave the market (because they cannot afford such a high premium) and may start a mutual fund or stay uninsured, and (ii) no customer notices this gap for the joy of insurers.Table 6reports the Stackelberg premium equilibrium. Compared to the Nash equilibrium of Table 3 (where x★=(1.544,1.511,1.471), the equilibrium value is significantly higher for the Stackelberg equilibrium. We also notice that there is a small difference in terms of the loss model in Table 6, which does not appear in Table 3. In terms of premium ranking, Insurer 1 (the leader) is still higher than competitors, and Insurer 3 asks the cheapest premium at the Stackelberg equilibrium. Regarding the robustness of the premium value, the Stackelberg equilibrium is notably higher than the pure premiumEY=1and also higher than the Nash equilibrium. Finally, the computation complexity is higher for the Stackelberg equilibrium since we carry out a double-level optimization when minimizing the functionx1↦O1x1,x-1★(x1).A sensitivity analysis with respect to the initial portofolio size njhas been performed by considering two scenarios: (n1,n2,n3)=(3500,3200,3300) and (n1,n2,n3)=(5500,2700,1800). Capital levels Kjare determined by using the same coverage ratio ρi. The Stackelberg equilibrium of Table 6 remains unchanged.Our final numerical experiment illustrates the sensitivity of Nash premium and Stackelberg premium with respect to the number I of insurers. For the NBLN loss model and thef¯jsensitivity function, we consider a scenario with 5 insurers by “duplicating” Insurer 2 and Insurer 3. For instance, the initial portfolio sizes are (n1,n2,n3,n4,n5)=(4500,3200,3200,2300,2300). Results are given in Table 7. The increase of insurers in the market reduces the value of the equilibrium, both for Nash and Stackelberg equilibria. However, the ranking remains the same as the leader (Insurer 1) still asks the most expensive premium and Insurer 3 the cheapest. For the Stackelberg equilibrium, the leader premium (Insurer 1) is significantly reduced by the addition of two followers (from 1.740 to 1.600), while the reduction is moderate for followers. Note that results for 5 players still hold when the total number of policyholers is renormalize to 10,000 (as in the 3-player game).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
