@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Undesirable outputs and weighting schemes in composite indicators based on data envelopment analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper explores DEA-based composite indicators with undesirable outputs.A new composite indicator model based on a directional distance function is proposed.The new CI is more suitable to accommodate undesirable outputs than other CI models.An enhanced specification of ARI weight restrictions is proposed.The models are illustrated with the assessment of Brazilian hydropower plans.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Directional distance function,Composite indicator,Undesirable outputs,Weight restrictions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper discusses different models that can be used to construct composite indicators with both desirable and undesirable output indicators. Two approaches are considered. The first is an indirect approach, based on a traditional Data Envelopment Analysis model, requiring a prior transformation in the measurement scale of the undesirable outputs. The second is a direct approach, based on a directional distance function model. The use of a directional distance function allows for the accommodation of undesirable indicators in their original form. The main limitations of these approaches are discussed related to the data transformation in the case of the indirect approach and the possibility to obtain negative margin rates of substitution between the desirable and undesirable outputs in the case of the direct approach. These issues lead to the proposal of a new composite indicator model based on a directional distance function that overcomes the limitations associated with the existing approaches. The incorporation of information on the relative importance of individual indicators using weight restrictions is discussed. Proposed here is an enhanced formulation of weight restrictions, in the form of assurance regions type I, that reflects the relative importance of the indicators in percentage terms. The models are illustrated in the assessment of Brazilian hydropower plants and are suitable for any assessment involving the aggregation of key performance indicators whenever undesirable outputs are present.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) technique uses linear programming to evaluate the relative efficiency of a homogeneous set of Decision Making Units (DMUs) in their use of multiple inputs to produce multiple outputs. In standard DEA models, an inefficient DMU can improve its performance by increasing the levels of outputs (results obtained) or decreasing the levels of inputs (resources used). However, real world applications may involve both desirable and undesirable outputs and inputs. For example, in environmental performance assessment, we may have an output indicator related to quality of the water, for which more output corresponds to better performance and another output indicator related to the levels of CO2 emissions, for which less output corresponds to better performance. In this situation, an inefficient DMU should increase the quality of the water or decrease the levels of CO2 emissions to improve performance.The performance measurement literature has addressed the measurement of productive efficiency in the presence of undesirable outputs since the 1980s. One of the earliest studies addressing the incorporation of undesirable outputs in the assessment of production efficiency was developed by Pittman (1983). This study extended the multilateral productivity indicator proposed by Caves, Christensen, and Diewert (1982) to include measures of both desirable and undesirable outputs. The multilateral productivity indicator developed by Caves et al. (1982) required the specification of price data, but this information is often unavailable for undesirable outputs. Therefore, Pittman (1983) proposed an extension of this indicator that assigned a value to the undesirable outputs based on estimates of shadow prices instead of market prices. Some years later, Fare, Grosskopf, Lovell, and Yaisawarng (1993) proposed an alternative method to estimate shadow prices based on the distance function defined by Shephard (1970). The specification of the shadow prices of undesirable outputs using a linear programming model allowed enhancing the approach proposed by Pittman (1983).Fare, Grosskopf, Lovell, and Pasurka (1989) also proposed a modification in the Farrell’s (1957) approach to efficiency measurement to allow an asymmetric treatment of desirable and undesirable outputs. While the multilateral productivity indicator requires the specification of the price information for the undesirable outputs, the nonparametric approach of Fare et al. (1989) only requires data on quantities of the undesirable outputs. The authors proposed a hyperbolic approach to efficiency measurement to allow considering different assumptions on the disposability of undesirable outputs. The new constraints state that the desirable outputs are strongly disposable (i.e. they can be reduced without cost), while the undesirable outputs are weakly disposable (i.e. they can be reduced only in conjunction with a reduction in the other outputs or an increase in the use of inputs).Some years later, Chung, Fare, and Grosskopf (1997) introduced a different approach to deal with undesirable outputs in the efficiency and productivity measurement literature. The authors proposed the use of a directional distance function to allow expanding the desirable outputs while simultaneously contracting the undesirable ones. The directional distance functions has been widely used in the context of environmental performance assessment, in which the production of waste is often present.The approaches mentioned above are known as direct approaches to treat undesirable outputs. These approaches allow treating the outputs in their original form, that is, without requiring any modification to the measurement scale. On the other hand, there are indirect approaches that transform the values of the undesirable outputs to allow treating them as normal outputs in traditional DEA models.Scheel (2001), Dyson et al. (2001) and Seiford and Zhu (2002) discussed the different approaches for handling undesirable outputs in DEA models using indirect approaches. One option is to move the variables from the output to the input side. Scheel (2001) pointed out that this approach results in the same technology set as incorporating the undesirable outputs as normal outputs, in the form of their additive inverses ( − yund). Regarding this option, Seiford and Zhu (2002) pointed out that to treat undesirable outputs as inputs would not reflect the real production process, as the input–output structure that defines the production process would be lost. The incorporation of the undesirable outputs in the form of their additive inverses was first suggested by Koopmans (1951). Another possibility is to consider the undesirable outputs in the form of their multiplicative inverses (1/yund), as proposed by Golany and Roll (1989). Regarding this option, Dyson et al. (2001) pointed out that this transformation would destroy the ratio or interval scale of the data. The third option is to add to the additive inverses of the undesirable outputs a sufficiently large positive number ( − yund + M), as suggested by Seiford and Zhu (2002). This transformation is the most frequently used in the literature to deal with undesirable outputs using a traditional DEA formulation (Cook & Green, 2005; Oggioni, Riccardi, & Toninelli, 2011).In addition to the above mentioned approaches, in Cherchye, Moesen, Rogge, and Van Puyenbroeck (2011) the transformation in the measurement scale of the undesirable outputs was performed based on a normalization procedure, which was applied both to desirable and undesirable outputs. This procedure results in indicators varying between 0 and 1. As data normalization leads to a loss of information, this approach is rarely used in DEA studies. It does not take advantage of the ability of DEA to deal with data measured on different scales.Although the papers mentioned above approach the presence of undesirable outputs and inputs in DEA models, they do not address the modeling of undesirable factors in the construction of composite indicators (CIs). A CI is given by the aggregation of several individual indicators in a single measure. CIs are intended to reflect multidimensional concepts that cannot be captured by a single indicator and they have benefits such as the capacity to summarize information, the facility to interpret results compared with a battery of separate indicators, and the capacity to reduce the visible size of a set of indicators without dropping the underlying base information (Nardo et al., 2008). Examples of well established composite indicators are the Environmental Performance Index (Emerson et al., 2012), Climate Change Performance Index (Burck, Hermwille, & Krings, 2012), and the Human Development Index (United Nations, 2013). They have been extensively used by decision makers to guide the definition of better policies to improve country performance.The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the European Commission provide a handbook for the construction of composite indicators that discusses the range of methodological approaches available to construct CIs (Nardo et al., 2008). The handbook highlights the growing interest in composite indicators by academic circles, the media, and policymakers. One point discussed and recognized as a source of contention is the definition of the relative importance of the indicators. The handbook indicates that DEA is an interesting weighting and aggregation procedure to reduce the inherent subjectivity associated with the specification of weights. As the indicator weights result from an optimizing process based on linear programming, they are less prone to subjectivity and controversy.The use of DEA for performance assessments focusing only on achievements, rather than the conversion of inputs to outputs, was first proposed by Cook and Kress (1990), with the purpose to construct a preference voting model (for aggregating votes in a preferential ballot). Other relevant studies that support the empirical use of DEA models only with output indicators (or productivity indicators that aggregate output and input information, such as revenue per employee and GDP per capita) can be found in different fields, such as macroeconomic performance assessment (Lovell, Pastor, & Turner, 1995), selective examinations for university entrance (Hashimoto, 1996), university quality assessment (Murias, Miguel, & Rodriguez, 2007), human development (Despotis, 2004; 2005; Mahlberg & Obersteiner, 2001), technology achievement (Cherchye et al., 2008) and evaluation of urban quality of life (Morais & Camanho, 2011). In these studies, all variables were specified as outputs and an identical input level, which for simplicity was assumed to be equal to one, was specified for all DMUs.In this paper, we approach two main issues: the construction of CIs that include both desirable and undesirable output indicators with aggregation procedures based on DEA, and the use of weight restrictions in this context. Two approaches are considered to construct the CI in the presence of undesirable indicators. The first is an indirect approach, based on a traditional DEA model, in which the undesirable output indicators require a prior transformation in the measurement scale to be accommodated in the CI model. The second is a direct approach in which the CI model is specified using a directional distance function. The use of a directional distance function allows for the accommodation of the undesirable output indicators in the CI model in their original form. The strengths and weaknesses of these approaches are discussed, leading to the proposal of a new CI model, also based on a directional distance function, that is able to overcome some limitations associated with the existing approaches. Concerning the use of weight restrictions in the context of estimation of CIs, the paper discusses the implementation of the two most popular types of weight restrictions: the virtual restrictions on weights and the assurance regions type I (ARI) weight restrictions. We propose an enhanced formulation of weight restrictions to incorporate the relative importance of individual indicators expressed in percentage terms, using ARI. The features, weaknesses and advantages of the alternative models and weight restrictions are discussed using a small example, which allows a graphical illustration of the results. Finally, a real world example consisting of the assessment of Brazilian hydropower plants is presented.From a methodological perspective, the major contributions of this paper consist of the construction of DEA-based CIs that can accommodate both desirable and undesirable output indicators as well as the specification of a novel type of weight restriction, using ARI, to incorporate the relative importance of indicators, expressed in percentage terms.The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the DEA formulations that can be used for efficiency assessments in the presence of undesirable outputs and adapts the models to evaluations with composite indicators. It illustrates the specificities of the models and discusses their strengths and weaknesses using a small numerical example. Section 3 presents a new formulation for constructing composite indicators including both desirable and undesirable outputs, that overcomes the limitations of the existing approaches. Section 4 approaches the incorporation of decision maker preferences in the construction of composite indicators, using weight restrictions of different types. Section 5 illustrates the practical use of the models in a real world context consisting of the evaluation of quality of service provided by Brazilian hydropower plants. Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusions.This section discusses in more detail the two main models available to treat undesirable outputs in DEA efficiency assessments: the direct approach based on the Chung et al. (1997) model, and the indirect approach based on Seiford and Zhu (2002). This is followed by the presentation of CI models that can be obtained based on these formulations. The resulting CI models are suitable for any assessment involving the aggregation of key performance indicators in which undesirable outputs are present. The features and implications of the alternative formulations are illustrated in Section 2.3 with a small numerical example.The DEA output oriented model by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978) can be used for assessments involving undesirable outputs with a transformation in the measurement scale of the undesirable outputs as proposed by Seiford and Zhu (2002). The resulting model, with a constant returns to scale formulation, in shown in (1),(1)minhj0=∑i=1mvixij0s.t.∑r=1suryrj0+∑k=1lpk(Mk−bkj0)=1∑r=1suryrj+∑k=1lpk(Mk−bkj)−∑i=1mvixij≤0,j=1,…,nvi≥0,i=1,…,mur≥0,r=1,…,spk≥0,k=1,…,l.In formulation (1), the efficiency score for DMU j0 is given by1/hj0,and it ranges between zero (worst) and one (best). xij, yrjand bkjcorrespond to the value of the input i, desirable output r and undesirable output k, respectively, for DMU j. vi, urand pkare the weights attached to the inputs, desirable outputs and undesirable outputs, respectively, in the performance assessment. Mkis a large positive number. In the transformation proposed by Seiford and Zhu (2002), all of the translated outputs are positive, so the constant Mkmust be a value greater than or equal to the maximum observed for each undesirable output indicator k in all DMUs.In a CI we only have output indicators to be aggregated, so we can assume that all DMUs are similar in terms of inputs. Thus, following Koopmans (1951), Lovell (1995) and Lovell et al. (1995), we can have a unitary input underlying the evaluation of every DMU, interpreted as a “helmsman” attempting to steer the DMUs toward the maximization of outputs. By considering a unitary input level for all DMUs in model (1) we obtain the CI model presented in (2).In formulation (2), the reciprocal of the value of the objective function represents an efficiency measure that ranges between zero and one, where one corresponds to the best level of performance observed in the sample. This is the value of the composite indicator obtained using model (2) that will be used throughout this paper,(2)minhj0=vs.t.∑r=1suryrj0+∑k=1lpk(Mk−bkj0)=1∑r=1suryrj+∑k=1lpk(Mk−bkj)−v≤0,j=1,…,nv≥0ur≥0,r=1,…,spk≥0,k=1,…,l.The use of DEA to construct CIs was popularized by Cherchye, Moesen, Rogge, and Van Puyenbroeck (2007). This approach is known as “benefit of the doubt” construction of composite indicators. The CI proposed by Cherchye et al. (2007) is equivalent to the input oriented model proposed by Charnes et al. (1978), assuming constant returns to scale and a unitary input level for all DMUs. A CI can also be obtained from the output oriented model, and this was the approach followed in this current paper, leading to formulation (2). As both formulations assume constant return to scale, the performance scores obtained with different orientations are the same. The advantage of using the output oriented formulation, as done in this paper, is that it leads to a more direct estimation of targets using the dual model and facilitates the incorporation of weight restrictions.For benchmarking purposes, the identification of the peers and targets for the inefficient DMUs can be done through the envelopment formulation of model (2), shown in (3). The objective function value at the optimal solution of model (3) corresponds to the factor θ by which all outputs of the DMU under assessment can be proportionally increased to reach the target output values. As occurred in the primal formulation shown in (2), the performance score, or composite indicator, of the DMU under assessment is the reciprocal of the objective function value of model (3). Therefore, the DMUs with the best performance are those for which there is no evidence that it is possible to expand their outputs such that the value of θ* is equal to 1,(3)maxθs.t.θyrj0−∑j=1nλjyrj≤0,r=1,…,sθ(Mk−bkj0)−∑j=1nλj(Mk−bkj)≤0,k=1,…,l∑j=1nλj≤1λj≥0,j=1,…,n.The peers for the DMU j0 under assessment are the DMUs with values ofλj*greater than zero at the optimal solution of model (3). The targets for the desirable and undesirable outputs are given by∑j=1nλj*yrjand∑j=1nλj*bkj,respectively.The efficiency evaluation using the directional distance function (DDF), developed by Chambers, Chung, and Fare (1996), allows for simultaneous expansion of outputs and contraction of inputs according to a directional vector. Chung et al. (1997) extended this approach to allow including undesirable outputs in the efficiency evaluation. The Chung et al. (1997) model also assumes weak disposability of undesirable outputs, as proposed in Fare et al. (1989), but preserves the linearity of the DEA model. The constant returns to scale model of Chung et al. (1997) is shown in (4),(4)maxβs.t.∑j=1nxijλj≤xrj0−βgx,i=1,…,m∑j=1nbkjλj=bkj0−βgb,k=1,…,l∑j=1nyrjλj≥yrj0+βgy,r=1,…,sλj≥0,j=1,…,n.In formulation (4), xijare the inputs used by the DMU j to produce yrjdesirable outputs and bkjundesirable outputs. The λjare the intensity variables. The components of vector g = ( − gx, −gb, gy) indicate the direction of change for the inputs and outputs. Positive values for the components are associated with expansion of desirable outputs and negative values are associated with contraction of inputs and undesirable outputs. The factor β indicates the extent of the DMU’s inefficiency. It corresponds to the maximal feasible expansion of desirable outputs and contraction of inputs and undesirable outputs that can be achieved simultaneously.While inputs and desirable outputs are assumed to be strongly disposable, the undesirable outputs are assumed to be weakly disposable as shown by the equality in the constraint associated with the undesirable outputs. When imposing weak disposability of undesirable outputs we are assuming that they are by-products of the desirable outputs and cannot be reduced without cost, which implies that abatement in an undesirable output is possible if accompanied by a reduction in a desirable output or an increase in an input.Using a unitary level of input and setting the directional vector as g = (−gb, gy), a vector that allows to, simultaneously, contract undesirable outputs and expand the desirable outputs while keeping inputs fixed, the input restriction becomes∑j=1nλj≤1. So, in the context of performance evaluations based on CIs, model (4) reduces to the formulation shown in (5),(5)maxβs.t.∑j=1nbkjλj=bkj0−βgb,k=1,…,l∑j=1nyrjλj≥yrj0+βgy,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj≤1λj≥0,j=1,…,n.Chung et al. (1997) explained that when the directional vector is specified as the current value of the outputs for the DMU under assessment, i.e.,g=(−gb,gy)=(−bkj0,yrj0),the directional distance function is comparable to the Shephard’s output distance function and thus the output oriented efficiency measure is given by 1/(1 + β*). This value ranges between zero and one, where one corresponds to the best level of performance observed in the sample. This efficiency score will also be used throughout this paper as the value of the CI obtained using model (5).The dual of model (5) is shown in the multiplier formulation (6). This formulation is preferable for assessments involving the incorporation of weight restrictions,(6)min−∑r=1syrj0ur+∑k=1lbkj0pk+vs.t.∑r=1sgyur+∑k=1lgbpk=1−∑r=1syrjur+∑k=1lbkjpk+v≥0,j=1,…,nv≥0ur≥0,r=1,…,spk∈ℜ,k=1,…,l.The objective function value at the optimal solution of model (6) corresponds to the maximal feasible expansion of desirable factors and contraction of undesirable factors that can be achieved simultaneously.This section provides a small contrived example involving two indicators in order to allow a graphical illustration of the CI models. The graphical illustration intends to enhance the understanding of how the CI models based on direct or indirect approaches work. Two main issues are discussed based on this graphical illustration. First, we discuss the type of frontier that results from each CI model, and second, we discuss the efficiency scores and ranking of DMUs obtained.The illustrative example consists of a set of 10 DMUs, whose data are shown in Table 1. These DMUs are assessed considering two output indicators: y, a desirable output, and b, an undesirable output.Fig. 1illustrates the production possibility set for the illustrative example presented in Table 1, corresponding to an evaluation using model (2) or its dual (3), with a value of M equal to 40. With the transformation in the measurement scale of the undesirable output, the computation of the composite indicator uses as basis a point that no longer coincides with the origin. Instead, it corresponds to a new reference point that depends on the value of the constant M used in model (2). In our illustrative example, the composite indicator is estimated considering that the projection starts at the worst value observed in the original measurement scale of the undesirable output (40, corresponding to DMU I), as shown in Fig. 1.As lower values of the output indicator correspond to better performance, the technically efficient frontier is given by the segments linking DMUs A, C and E. Using DMU F as an example, its CI score is 0.879, which corresponds to the ratio O′F/O′F* in Fig. 1. The target that the DMU F should achieve to improve performance and reach the frontier of the production possibility set is given by point F*, which corresponds to the value 25.02 for the output indicator y and 20.67 for the output indicator b. The peers for DMU F are DMUs C and E, with values of λCand λEequal to 0.622 and 0.378, respectively. The values of λjprovide an indication of the degree of similarity between a DMU and its peers.The transformation consisting of subtracting the values of undesirable outputs from a large positive number (M) has a significant impact on the results of the DEA model. Table 2presents the results that would be obtained by specifying different values for M (40, 45 and 70). Note that as the value of M increases, the discrimination between the DMUs’ scores decreases. In addition, the improvement required for the DMUs to reach the frontier becomes more demanding for the undesirable output and less demanding for the desirable output. This happens because the transformation in the measurement scale inhibits an interpretation of the CI score as a proportional change to the original output levels. This effect can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2, which show the projections obtained using M equal to 40, 45 and 70.By using different values of M, the DMUs’ classification as efficient or inefficient remains unchanged, but the DMUs’ efficiency score changes, and the ranking of the DMUs may also be different. For example, when the constant M is specified as equal to 70, DMU G is projected to the segment linking DMUs A and C instead of the segment linking C and E, where it was projected when M was specified as equal to 40 or 45. This led to a change in the efficiency ranking of DMUs, as shown in Table 2. Thus, using the indirect approach to construct a composite indicator, it is only possible to ensure that the assessment is classification invariant for different values of the constant M, as stated by Seiford and Zhu (2002). Therefore, as the model is sensitive to the choice of values of M, values equal to the maximum value of the undesirable indicator in the sample should be preferred, as these lead to more balanced improvements among desirable and undesirable outputs. Note that we cannot use a value of M equal to the maximum value of the undesirable output when the model includes weight restrictions, as it would result in infeasible solutions for the DMUs whose value of the undesirable output is equal to the maximum of the sample. In these cases, values slightly larger than the maximum (e.g., maximum + 0.1) could be used.This section illustrates the estimation of composite indicators using the CI model (5) or its dual (6). Fig. 3shows the production frontier that would be obtained for our illustrative example (Table 1). The efficient frontier is defined by the segments linking O, C, E and I.By setting the directional vector asg=(−gb,gy)=(−bkj0,yrj0),i.e. the current value of the outputs for the DMU under assessment, it is possible to simultaneously expand the desirable outputs and contract the undesirable outputs through a path that allows proportional interpretation of improvements. In order to facilitate the interpretation of the DMUs’ projection to the frontier, Fig. 3 illustrates the directional vectors and the projection of DMUs D and F on the frontier, corresponding to points D* and F*, respectively.Table 3 shows the results obtained using the CI model (5). The value of β* obtained at the optimal solution to model (5) can be interpreted as the inefficiency (or scope for improvement) of a given DMU. For example, the value of β* for DMU F is 0.125, corresponding to FF*/O′F in Fig. 3. The point F* is the target that the DMU F should achieve to become efficient, i.e., to operate at the frontier, which corresponds to the value 24.74 for the output indicator y and 20.13 for the output indicator b. The peers for DMU F are DMUs C and E, with values of λCand λEequal to 0.658 and 0.342, respectively.As explained in Section 2.2, from the factor β* it is possible to obtain an efficiency measure, given by 1/(1 + β*). Thus, the CI score for the DMU F would be equal to 0.889 (=1/(1 + 0.125)), which corresponds to the ratio O′F/O′F* (see Fig. 3).Concerning the assumption on the disposability of undesirable outputs, Fig. 4 illustrates the efficient frontier that would be obtained if strong disposability of undesirable outputs was imposed. The efficient frontier would be defined by the segment linking DMUs E and I and the horizontal extension of E in the direction to the y axis. Under this condition, the DMU F, for example, would have a score β = 0.364 and it would be projected to the point F* on the frontier, which corresponds to the value 30 for the output indicator y and 14 for the output indicator b. Note that depending on the directional vector used, the projection of some DMUs to the frontier could correspond to negative values of the undesirable outputs. This would be the case of DMU D, whose score under strong disposability of the undesirable output is equal to β = 2. This requires an unreasonable improvement for the undesirable output, since the DMU would be projected to point D*, which corresponds to the value 30 for the output indicator y and −18 for the output indicator b. Therefore, in the context of assessments using a CI, the assumption of weak rather than strong disposability is more appropriate, since it avoids unrealistic projections, i.e., projections involving huge reductions to undesirable outputs, eventually leading to unrealistic targets corresponding to negative values of the undesirable outputs.The main limitation of the directional distance function model with undesirable outputs is that it allows for negative marginal rates of substitution between desirable and undesirable outputs, corresponding to downward-sloping segments of the frontier, such as the segment linking DMUs E and I in Figs. 3 and 4. This implies the existence of efficient DMUs that can simultaneously increase the production of the desirable output and reduce the production of the undesirable output (see Thanassoulis, Portela, and Despi (2008, p. 305–306) for a discussion of this issue). This is the case of DMU I, which despite being classified as efficient, could reduce the production of the undesirable output b and increase the production of the desirable output y to reach the output levels observed in another DMU located on the frontier (DMU E). Furthermore, we can see that although DMU J is classified as inefficient, it has a higher level of the desirable output and a lower level of the undesirable output than DMU I. Thus, the classification of DMU I as efficient is inappropriate in this context. This problem was previously discussed in Picazo-Tadeo and Prior (2005) and Thanassoulis et al. (2008, p. 305–306), but there is no definitive resolution of this issue in the literature. A solution to this problem for assessments aiming to obtain a composite indicator is proposed in the next section.This section proposes an alternative formulation for the composite indicator model in the presence of undesirable outputs. This formulation is based on a directional distance function model and thus it allows a proportional interpretation of the improvements required for all outputs as well as avoids the need to change the original measurement scale of the undesirable output indicators. The most important feature of the formulation proposed in this section is the redesign of the efficient frontier to avoid downward-sloping segments, with negative trade-offs between desirable and undesirable outputs. The new directional CI model is shown in (7),(7)maxβs.t.∑j=1nbkjλj≤bkj0−βgb,k=1,…,l∑j=1nyrjλj≥yrj0+βgy,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj=1λj≥0,j=1,…,n.The resulting model is an adaptation of the directional CI model (5). In order to avoid downward-sloping segments in the frontier, we replaced the equality constraint related to the undesirable outputs in model (5) by an inequality constraint “less than or equal to”, as shown in model (7). This constraint becomes similar to the one imposed to inputs in traditional directional distance function models, where proportional reductions to the levels of these variables are sought. This formulation ensures that a DMU will only be classified as efficient when no further improvements to both desirable and undesirable outputs are possible.In addition, we modified the constraint∑j=1nλj≤1in model (5) to∑j=1nλj=1in model (7). The equality constraint intends to obtain a frontier that is appropriate for assessments involving aggregation of performance indicators expressed as ratios, as is the case of the composite indicators. This constraint allows obtaining a frontier identical to the one used in the indirect approach, presented in Section 2.1 (see model (2) and its dual model (3)). Hollingsworth and Smith (2003) explain that when the variables are expressed as ratios in DEA models, the specification of the Banker, Charnes and Cooper –BCC (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984) formulation is needed. This specification ensures that the comparisons between DMUs is by interpolation only, and extrapolation of behavior to infeasible performance is not allowed. Hollingsworth and Smith (2003) also explain that, in this context, the BCC specification should not be associated with a variable returns to scale model, as the use of ratios leads to a loss of information about the size of the DMU and implicitly assumes constant returns to scale in the operation of the DMUs under analysis.The value of the CI that corresponds to an efficiency measure associated with model (7), can also be obtained as 1/(1 + β*) when the directional vector is specified as the current value of the outputs for the DMU under assessment. The dual of model (7), corresponding to the multiplier formulation, is shown in (8),(8)min−∑r=1syrj0ur+∑k=1lbkj0pk+vs.t.∑r=1sgyur+∑k=1lgbpk=1−∑r=1syrjur+∑k=1lbkjpk+v≥0,j=1,…,nv∈ℜur≥0,r=1,…,spk≥0,k=1,…,l.Similar to the directional CI model presented in Section 2.2, the value of the objective function at the optimal solution to model (8) corresponds to the maximal feasible improvement to the desirable and undesirable outputs that can be achieved simultaneously.This section illustrates the estimation of the composite indicator using the new directional CI model (7) proposed in this paper. Fig. 5shows the production frontier that would be obtained for our illustrative example reported in Table 1. The efficient frontier is defined by the segments linking A, C and E. As in the previous section, the directional vector is defined asg=(−gb,gy)=(−bkj0,yrj0),such that the desirable and undesirable outputs are expanded and contracted, respectively, according to a direction that corresponds to proportional changes to the original levels.The composite indicator, rank and peers obtained using model (7) are shown in Table 4. The values of the CI (efficiency measure) and β have the same interpretation as discussed in the context of model (5).Comparing the results of the directional CI models (5) and (7) shown in Tables 3 and 4, respectively, we can see that both the CI scores and ranking changed. Note that the directional CI model (7) only allows for positive marginal rates of substitution between desirable and undesirable outputs. As a result, DMU I is no longer classified as efficient. Both DMUs I and J are projected on the horizontal ray passing through DMU E in Fig. 5. In addition, under model (7), DMUs A and D improved their performance scores, as the part of the frontier linking the origin with the DMU with the maximum productivity level of the sample (DMU C) was changed with the formulation adopted in model (7). This new part of the frontier envelops the data more tightly than in model (5), similar to the BCC formulation presented by Banker et al. (1984).Regarding the comparison of the results obtained using the new directional CI model (7) and the CI model (2), note that although they are based on assessments with identical frontiers, the CI scores and ranking for the inefficient DMUs are different (see Table 4 and the second and third columns of Table 2). This is explained by the different paths that are used to project the DMUs on the frontier. While model (7) uses a path that corresponds to proportional improvements to output levels, this does not occur in model (2) due to the change in the measurement scale of the undesirable outputs, as discussed in Section 2.1.Although DEA allows the specification of the indicator weights recurring to optimization, in some cases it may be important to incorporate in the model expert opinion about the weight that each individual indicator should have in the assessment. This can be done by imposing restrictions to weights in the DEA model. As noted by Cherchye et al. (2011), the ability to add extra information related to the importance of the individual indicators enables enhancing credibility and acceptance of CIs in practical applications. This section discusses the implementation of restrictions to weights in the context of assessments involving composite indicators.Several types of weight restrictions have been proposed in the DEA literature. Allen, Athanassopoulos, Dyson, and Thanassoulis (1997), Thanassoulis, Portela, and Allen (2004) and Sarrico and Dyson (2004) reviewed the literature on weight restrictions and discussed the advantages and limitations of the different approaches. The most prevalent types of weight restrictions are restrictions to virtual weights and direct restrictions to weights. While the direct restrictions to weights are more often used in DEA assessments that involve an input–output framework, the restrictions to virtual weights are more prevalent in assessments with composite indicators. Cherchye et al. (2007) presented and discussed different ways of implementing the virtual weight restrictions in this context.The virtual weights are the product of the output value of the DMUjwith the corresponding weight. The restrictions to virtual weights were first proposed by Wong and Beasley (1990), and they assume the form presented in (9). They restrict the importance attached to the output indicator yr, expressed in percentage terms, ranging between a lower and an upper bound (ϕrand ψr, respectively),(9)ϕr≤uryrj∑r=1suryrj≤ψr,j=1,…,n.An important advantage of the restrictions to virtual weights is that they are independent of the units of measurement of the inputs and outputs. However, as they are DMU-specific, they may be computationally expensive and lead to infeasible solutions when the bounds are loosely specified. In order to overcome these problems, Wong and Beasley (1990) suggested application of the above restrictions only to the virtual outputs of the DMU under assessment (j0). This procedure has been often used in the literature (e.g. Lins, Oliveira, da Silva, Rosa, & Pereira Jr., 2012; Morais & Camanho, 2011; Rogge, 2012). However, such restrictions also have drawbacks. According to Dyson et al. (2001), if the restrictions are imposed only to the virtual outputs of the DMU under assessment, they compromise the symmetry of the model with respect to all DMUs, as each DMU is assessed based on a different feasible region. Sarrico and Dyson (2004) added that these restrictions imposed only to the DMU under assessment might impose unreasonable restrictions on the virtual weights of the other DMUs.When the DEA model is output oriented and the restrictions to the virtual weights are only imposed to the DMU under assessment (j0), the denominator of expression (9) corresponds to the normalization constraint of the DEA model, which is always equal to 1.The virtual weight restrictions can also be included in the CI models discussed in the previous sections. For the directional CI model (8), which corresponds to the dual of model (7), the output virtual weight restrictions, specified only for the DMU under assessment, are shown in (10),(10){ϕr≤uryrj0≤ψrϕk≤pkbkj0≤ψk.Next we illustrate the use of the above restrictions to virtual outputs in the estimation of the directional CI model (8) for the 10 DMUs presented in Table 1. We only illustrate the restrictions in the context of the directional CI model (8), given its advantages for assessments involving CIs, as previously discussed.Consider that the virtual weight of each output should be at least 40 percent of the total virtual weights. The corresponding weight restrictions to be imposed in model (8) becomeu1y1j0≥0.4for the desirable output y, andp1b1j0≥0.4for the undesirable output b. Note that the limit of 40 percent was chosen to facilitate the graphical illustration of the weight restrictions. Different bounds could have been used (both upper or lower limits), provided they allow reaching a feasible solution with the sum of virtual weights for the DMU under assessment equal to 100 percent. The changes to the efficient frontier for the evaluation of DMU D and DMU B with virtual weight restrictions are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively.Considering the assessment of DMU D, the weight restriction imposed to the desirable output (u1 10 ≥ 0.4) determines the segment labeled I, whereas segment II represents the restriction associated with the undesirable output (p1 18 ≥ 0.4 ). This implies that the slope of the frontier must be between the slopes of segments I and II to ensure that both outputs are given a weight representing at least 40 percent of the total virtual weight of DMU D. The resulting frontier is defined by the segments in bold in Fig. 6(a).Regarding the assessment of DMU B, it can be seen in Fig. 6(b) that the frontier against which this DMU is assessed is different from the frontier underlying the evaluation of DMU D. This happens because the virtual weight restrictions are DMU-specific and thus different restrictions lead to the specification of different frontiers. As the CI is estimated based on comparisons with different frontiers, one for each DMU assessed, some DMUs considered inefficient when evaluated against their specific frontier may appear as peers for others.The most prevalent type of direct weight restrictions used in DEA applications are the assurance regions type I (ARI), proposed by Thompson, Langemeier, Lee, Lee, and Thrall (1990). They usually incorporate information concerning marginal rates of substitution between the outputs (or between the inputs). This type of weight restriction is sensitive to the units of measurement of the inputs and outputs (Allen et al., 1997). As a result, it is often difficult to specify meaningful marginal rates of substitution between the variables in empirical applications.In this paper we propose an enhanced formulation of ARI weight restrictions that enables expressing the relative importance of the output indicators in percentage terms, instead of specifying marginal rates of substitution. This requires the use of an “artificial” DMU representing the average values of the outputs in the sample analyzed. This type of formulation for the weight restrictions was originally proposed by Wong and Beasley (1990) as a complement of DMU-specific virtual weight restrictions.If instead of restricting the virtual outputs of a DMUj, the restrictions are imposed to the average DMU (y¯r), as shown in (11), all DMUs are assessed with identical restrictions. Thus, these weight restrictions in fact work as ARIs, as they are no longer DMU-specific,(11)ϕr≤ury¯r∑r=1sury¯r≤ψr.Besides the advantage of avoiding the problems associated with the DMU-specific weight restrictions previously discussed, the bounds of the restrictions become independent of the units of measurement of the outputs, as the numerator and denominator are the product of the raw weights with the output quantities. Thus, the bounds ϕror ψrof expression (11) may be interpreted as the importance of the output yrin the assessment.The specification of ARI weight restrictions that can accommodate both desirable and undesirable outputs in the CI model (8) is shown in (12). Note that the denominator of the weight restrictions cannot be omitted (as occurred in expression (10)) because it does not coincide with the normalization constraint of model (8), which is specified for the DMU under assessment,(12){ϕr≤ury¯r∑r=1sury¯r+∑k=1lpkb¯k≤ψrϕk≤pkb¯k∑r=1sury¯r+∑k=1lpkb¯k≤ψk.Next we illustrate the use of ARI weight restrictions (12) for the small example involving 10 DMUs presented in Table 1. With the aim to impose that each output is assigned an importance of at least 40 percent in the assessment, the weight restrictions imposed to the CI model (8) are given byu1y¯1u1y¯1+p1b¯1≥0.4for the desirable output y andp1b¯1u1y¯1+p1b¯1≥0.4for the undesirable output b, withy¯1=20.81andb¯1=23.23.In Fig. 7, the restrictions on the desirable and undesirable outputs are represented by the segments I and II, respectively. The slope of the efficient frontier must be between the slopes of these segments to ensure that both outputs are weighted at least 40 percent in the assessment. The efficient frontier used for the assessment of all DMUs is defined by the segments in bold. Fig. 7 also illustrates the projection of the DMUs on the frontier.Unlike what happened with the virtual weight restrictions, which led to assessments against DMU-specific frontiers, using the ARI type of restrictions proposed in this section all DMUs are assessed against a unique frontier, as the weight restrictions are identical for all DMUs. For this reason, we argue they are the best option to construct composite indicators and ranks. As argued by Ramon, Ruiz, and Sirvent (2011) and Hatefi and Torabi (2010), a fair comparison requires the DMUs to be assessed based on similar conditions.Our real world application uses data describing the quality of the service provided by the largest hydropower plants operating in Brazil. These plants have installed capacity above 100 mega watts (MW) electricity and are under the performance monitoring of the Brazilian Independent System Operator (ISO). The sample consist of 81 units and covers 82 percent of the Brazilian total installed capacity from hydros. Considering that around 80–90 percent of the electrical energy that supplies the country comes from hydropower plants, this sample is a good representation of the power supply in Brazil. Recently the Brazilian government gave a referral to the issue of the renewal of the electricity services concessions. The regulation of the hydros operating under the new concessions will take into account the quality of service standard for the calculation of the tariff stipulated by ANNEL (Brazilian electrical regulatory agency). Thus, the allowed revenues will be critically affected by the quality of service provided.Our empirical application intends to benchmark the quality standard provided by the hydropower plants using a composite indicator. This composite indicator is a quantitative measure that could be used for regulatory purposes and thus should include the main quality issues associated with the operation of the hydropower plants.We use three quality indicators for the assessment reported in this paper, all of them provided by the Brazilian ISO. The first is the Availability factor, which refers to the proportion of time that the plant is in operation or available to operate; the second is the Failure rate, which accounts for the number of failures occurring per hour of operation; and, finally, the third indicator is the Average time to repair, which accounts for the number of hours unavailable to operate and under forced maintenance per forced outages. Note that as the evaluation of the hydropower plants uses a composite indicator model, it is based only on these three indicators, one desirable and two undesirable, without requiring the specification of inputs. The baseline for the three quality indicators is the year 2012, and all of them are calculated based on records for a period of 12 months. The values of the indicators are presented in the Appendix.In the context of this assessment, we decided to impose weight restrictions on the minimum importance given to each indicator. Given that the regulator considers the indicator Availability factor the most critical, the restrictions ensure that all plants must allocate at least 10 percent of the total weight to this indicator. In addition, the Failure rate and Average time to repair indicators must weight at least 2.5 percent. These restrictions ensure that all indicators contribute to the overall performance measure and allow incorporating information on the relative importance of the different indicators.Table A.1 in the Appendix, shows the results of the composite indicator models (2), (5) & (7) (or their respective dual formulations (3), (6) & (8)) for all hydropower plants. For each CI model, the results reported in each column of Table A.1 correspond to the unrestricted formulation, the formulation with virtual weight restrictions, and the formulation with ARI restrictions.As the CI models (2) & (7) allow obtaining identical frontiers, the hydropower plants that reached the best performance score, under the unrestricted formulation, are the same in both approaches (8 hydropower plants). On the other hand, using the CI model (5), 16 hydropower plants were classified as efficient (including the 8 plants classified as efficient under models (2) & (7)). The 8 hydropower plants that presented the best score only when evaluated using model (5) are those that are located on the downward-sloping segments of the frontier, as explained in Section 2.3.2. Therefore, there may exist other hydropower plants that, when compared to these 8 plants, present a lower performance score but better levels in all quality indicators. This is the case of the hydropower plant U18, which reached a performance score equal to 1 (the best score) only in model (5). When compared to the hydropower plant U19, for example, with a performance score equal to 0.940, U18 has worse levels in all three indicators (Availability factor, Failure rate and Average time to repair which are equal to 79.25, 4.51, 574.77, respectively, for plant U18 and 92.44, 3.15 and 19.31, respectively, for plant U19). This means that despite being better in all indicators, plant U19 is given a worse CI score than plant U18 under model (5). For this reason, we conclude that models (2) & (7) are more appropriate than model (5) for the estimation of the frontier of the production possibility set.It is worth noting that when imposing weight restriction on CI model (5), the problem of occurring downward-sloping segments in the frontier is avoided. This is because the restrictions impose positive marginal rates of substitution between desirable and undesirable outputs. The results reported in Table A.1 show that, by imposing the weight restrictions ( ≥ 10 percent and ≥ 2.5 percent), the directional CI models (5) & (7) produce the same results (see 9th and 12th columns for the virtual weight restrictions, and 10th and 13th columns for the ARI restrictions). Note that as the original frontiers of the these models are different, the addition of weight restrictions could lead to different efficiency scores, depending on the bounds of the restrictions imposed.Although the unrestricted CI models (2) & (7) allow obtaining identical frontiers, the CI scores are different due to the different procedures used to accommodate the undesirable outputs and the different directions specified for the projection of inefficient DMUs to the frontier. When imposing weight restrictions, the resulting frontiers underlying the evaluations may also be different. This is because the weight restrictions are sensitive to the values of the indicators. While in model (2) the restrictions are defined based on the transformed data of the undesirable indicators, in model (7) the restrictions are defined using the original data of all indicators. As the virtual weight restrictions are DMU-specific, they are more sensitive to changes in the measurement scale of the undesirable indicators than the ARI weight restrictions.For each CI model we found significant correlations (p < 0.0001) between the efficiency scores of the unrestricted formulations and the formulations that include weight restrictions. The correlation coefficients are shown at the end of Table A.1. Note that if the weight restrictions were specified with more restrictive bounds, the correlation between the restricted and unrestricted models would likely have been less strong.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The traditional DEA-based composite indicator models should not be used in the presence of both desirable and undesirable outputs, as they do not seek for reductions to the undesirable indicators. This paper discussed two alternative approaches that can be used for the construction of CI in this context: (1) an indirect approach, based on a traditional DEA model, including a transformation in the measurement scale of undesirable outputs, and (2) a direct approach, based on a directional distance function model, that allows for dealing with the undesirable outputs in their original measurement scale.In order to explain the features of the approaches discussed in this paper, we illustrated graphically their implementation using a small example. It was demonstrated that in the indirect approach, involving a transformation in the measurement scale of the undesirable outputs, the reference point used to compute the CI score is no longer the origin, as in standard DEA models, but a new reference point whose coordinates are equal to the positive numbers used to transform the measurement scale of the undesirable outputs. As a result, this approach does not search for proportional improvements to both desirable and undesirable outputs. Furthermore, it was shown that the results of the indirect approach are sensitive to the value of the constant used for the transformation of the measurement scale. Different values for the constant have implications both in the performance scores and ranking of the DMUs.Conversely, using the direct approach to deal with the undesirable outputs, it is possible to preserve the proportional interpretability of the improvements by setting the components of the directional vector equal to the values of the desirable and undesirable indicators of the DMU under assessment. This is an important advantage of the direct approach. However, it was demonstrated in this paper that this directional CI model has weaknesses related to the possibility of obtaining negative marginal rates of substitution between desirable and undesirable outputs for DMUs located on downward-sloping segments of the frontier. This implies that there can exist efficient DMUs that could simultaneously increase the levels of the desirable outputs and reduce the levels of the undesirable outputs.The issues raised in the discussion of the alternative formulations for CI models lead to the proposal of a new CI model, also based on a directional distance function, which is able to overcome the limitations of the existing approaches. Using the new directional CI model proposed in this paper, the problem of obtaining downward-sloping segments in the frontier is avoided. In addition, the new CI model is set so as to obtain a production frontier identical to the one obtained in assessments using traditional DEA-based composite indicators. Thus, it results in a frontier that is theoretically robust and well accepted in assessments with DEA in the presence of indicators measured as ratios. The new model preserves the advantages of a composite indicator model defined using a directional distance function, namely, the ability do to accommodate the undesirable indicators without any transformations in their measurement scale and the ability to seek for proportional improvements in all indicators, while specifying an enhanced shape for the efficiency frontier.This paper also explored different ways to incorporate information on decision-maker preferences about the relative importance of individual indicators aggregated in the CI. The specification of two different types of weight restrictions that can be used in this context (virtual weight restrictions and ARI weight restrictions) was discussed and illustrated using a small example and a real world application. We proposed an enhanced specification of the ARI weight restrictions that allows incorporating the relative importance of indicators, in percentage terms. This formulation has also the advantage of being independent of the units of measurement of the output indicators.The ARI weight restrictions overcome some limitations of virtual weight restrictions that are commonly used for evaluations based on CI. The problem of having peers for inefficient DMUs that are not efficient when assessed with their own set of virtual weights does not occur with the specification of the enhanced ARI restrictions, as they avoid evaluations against different frontiers. Thus, we conclude that the new restrictions proposed here, in the form of ARI, are the most appropriate approach to reflect the relative importance of outputs in assessments involving the use of CI.Finally, this paper illustrated the applicability of the models discussed in a real world example involving the performance assessment of the 81 largest Brazilian hydropower plants. This example showed that the CI model proposed in this paper is superior to existing approaches to aggregate performance indicators. The new model avoids misspecification of the production possibility set, either due to downward-sloping segments of the frontier that occur in direct approaches or unbalanced relative improvements among desirable and undesirable outputs due to the change in the measurement scale of the undesirable outputs in indirect approaches. In addition, the new model facilitates the interpretation of the results of the assessment, as the model seeks for proportional improvements to all indicators, measured in their original scale.Future research in the field of composite indicators may cover the possibility of aggregating key performance indicators using geometric means, in the line with current approaches proposed by the United Nations Development Program for the construction of the Human Development Index (HDI). This research field has been disclosed by Zhou, Ang, and Zhou (2010) and Tofallis (2013).