@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective probabilistically constrained programs with variable risk: Models for multi-portfolio financial optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Boolean reformulation method for multi-objective joint chance-constrained problems (MOPCP).Multi-portfolio optimization models with centralized and decentralized approach.Computationally efficient MILP inner approximations or equivalent reformulations.Insights about reformulations, risk-revenue tradeoffs, and goal weighing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-portfolio optimization,Probabilistic constraint,Variable reliability,Multi-objective programming,Boolean programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a class of multi-objective probabilistically constrained programs (MOPCP) with a joint probabilistic constraint and a variable risk level. We consider two cases with only a random right-hand side vector or a multi-row random technology matrix, and propose a Boolean modeling framework to derive new mixed-integer linear programs (MILP) that are either equivalent reformulations or inner approximations of MOPCP, respectively. Via testing randomly generated MOPCP instances, we demonstrate modeling insights pertaining to the most suitable MILP, to the trade-offs between conflicting objectives of cost/revenue and reliability, and to the parameter scalarization determining relative importance of each objective. We then focus on several MOPCP variants of a multi-portfolio financial optimization problem to implement a downside risk measure, which can be used in a centralized or decentralized investment context. We study the impact of modeling parameters on the portfolios, show, via a cross-validation study, robustness of MOPCP, and perform a comparative analysis of the optimal investment decisions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper, we focus on a new class of multi-objective stochastic programming problems (see Stancu-Minasian, 1984). The problems consider a constraint that requires a system of r inequalities to hold jointly with probability p. The probability level p, often used to characterize the quality of service level or reliability target, is defined as a continuous decision variable between 0 and 1. We optimize a decision vectorx∈R+m,together with the variable reliability target p, to satisfy a set of deterministic constraints defined byX={(x,p)∈R+m+1:Ax≤b,1≥p≥p̲},whereA∈Rℓ×m,andb∈Rℓ. We investigate two variants of the multi-objective probabilistically constrained program (MOPCP) as follows.1.MOPCP-V where only the right-hand side vector, denoted byζ∈Rr,is random in the joint probabilistic constraint:(1)PCP−VaMOPCP−V:max(x,p)∈Xq⊤x+η(p)(2)subjecttoP(∑j=1mtijxj≤ζi,i=1,…,r)≥p.Heretij∈Ris a deterministic coefficient forxj,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,and ζiis the ith entry of the random vector ζ fori=1,…,r.MOPCP-M where the technology matrix is random in the joint probabilistic constraint:(3)PCP−MaMOPCP−M:max(x,p)∈Xq⊤x+η(p)(4)subjecttoP(∑j=1mξijxj≤di,i=1,…,r)≥p.Hereξij∈Rrepresents the random coefficient of variable xjin the ith row of the inner constraints. Without loss of generality, we assume a deterministic right-hand-side vectord∈Rr. If d is random, we multiply it by a new variablexm+1and move the term to the left-hand side. Then−direpresents the random coefficient of variablexm+1at rowi,i=1,…,r,and we enforcexm+1=1.The objective function isq⊤x+η(p):Rm+1→Rwhere η(p) is a monotone increasing function in reliability variable p. The random vectors ζ in MOPCP-V and ξ in MOPCP-M are discretely distributed and their entries are not necessarily independent random variables. The inequalities (2) and (4) each define a joint probabilistic constraint ensuring that the r inequalities∑j=1mtijxj≤ζiand∑j=1mξijxj≤dihold jointly with reliability at least equal to p. The notationPrefers to a probability measure. In contrast to traditional probabilistically-constrained programs, p is defined as a decision variable representing a reliability level, which is lower-bounded by the lowest acceptable reliability levelp.Optimizing investments over multiple portfolios is complex and increasingly needed in a variety of contexts. Some considered multi-portfolio financial optimization as the “natural next step in portfolio optimization theory” (see Savelsbergh, Stubbs, & Vandenbussche, 2010). The main difficulty is to hedge against the risk of potential losses in multiple and possible interrelated portfolios. Decision makers’ preferences about the tradeoff between cost and potential risk of multiple losses are often unclear under random investment returns. A Pareto analysis is a common way to handle multi-objective programming. However, in the multi-portfolio optimization context, it is difficult to conduct multi-dimensional Pareto analysis and derive the corresponding efficient frontier when there are more than one uncertain outcomes with different risk levels to measure.Other than multi-portfolio optimization, the proposed MOPCP models have a wide range of applications. For instance, we can interpret p in the above two MOPCPs as the reliability of a quality control process (Olson, 1990) or the quality of service provided to customers (Lejeune & Ruszczyński, 2007). As the reliability p increases, the probability of losing customers and the related loss of goodwill become lower, leading to a potential increase of the overall benefits of a company. However, a larger p may trigger additional resources required and raise additional operational and management costs. A decision maker aims to trade off between the above two consequences.Ang and De Leon (1996) advocate the use of a multi-objective stochastic programming model to decide whether an existing infrastructure for earthquake protection should be upgraded. They use a weighted objective function accounting for the degree of structural damage caused by earthquake, the cost of upgrading versus potential losses due to damages, and interpret p as a target reliability level for damage control and life safety. In this paper, we assume that the reliability component η(p) of the objective function is linear in p, and the objective (1) is specified asq⊤x+ap,where a > 0 is the scalarization parameter that defines a proper balance between the profit and reliability objectives (see, e.g., Ehrgott & Gandibleux, 2002; Miettinen, 1999). The determination of the optimal functional form for η(p) is problem-dependent and is a complicated issue beyond the scope of this study.The first MOPCP, in which cost and reliability are two components of a scalarized objective function, is due to Evers (1967). Sengupta and Portillo-Campbell (1973) propose a probabilistically-constrained production scheduling model with reliability levels considered as decision variables. Prékopa (1995) underlines the difficulty of solving multi-objective probabilistically constrained formulations and suggests a parametric approximation approach, which requires recursively solving an MOPCP variant with fixed p and choosing the best solution obtained during the iterative process. Morgan, Eheart, and Valocchi (1993) propose a probabilistically-constrained formulation to trade off between pumping cost and reliability of an aquifer network. Rengarajan and Morton (2009) and Rengarajan, Dimitrov, and Morton (2013) analyze the tradeoffs between the cost of building a network and the probability of an adversarial event causing a network failure, both of which motivate the use of MOPCPs in order to comprehend the risk tradeoff in network applications.Another motivation for studying MOPCPs stems from the prevalence of various hidden costs (e.g., reputation damage) associated with the value of p, which are not necessarily taken into account in probabilistically-constrained programming models with fixed reliability level. Chapman and Harwood (2011) as well as Sullivan and Kida (1995) suggest that the risk faced by a company and the one faced by its managers may need separate consideration as manager’s reputation might suffer from a highly visible mistake. The function η(p) can then be used to capture the manager’s reputation objective related to the reliability level p. The function η(p) can also represent a company’s long-term reputation or brand name modeled as an increasing function of p that represents the quality of service delivered to the customers. Under this context, our objective function combines a short-term profit q⊤x goal with the long-term brand name objective. Alternatively, η(p) gives the flexibility of violating the stochastic inequalities in (2) or (4) with a variable probability level at most equal to(1−p). The impact of the violation depends on the value of p and may significantly affect decision quality, especially in highly uncertain environments (e.g., high-tech industries including oil drilling and renewable energy investment) where optimal decisions are sensitive with respect to p. Shen (2014) studies probabilistically-constrained programs with the reliability guarantees being considered as decision variables. This preliminary study only assumes individual probabilistic constraints withr=1,yielding much simpler modeling mechanisms and solution schemes.In this paper, we develop new formulations, as well as methods for solving the MOPCPs. A key contribution is to show, through a sensitivity analysis, the effect of varying the risk level p. Via an extensive set of computational tests, we analyze the interplay between the objectives and provide insights about the marginal rate of substitution of reliability for revenue. We assess the solution sensitivity with respect to the parameter a defining the relative importance of each objective, which provides guidance to choose the value of a.From the financial optimization viewpoint, we propose a series of new stochastic multi-objective, multi-portfolio optimization models. This study could be a cornerstone for subsequent developments in the multi-portfolio financial optimization. The multi-portfolio financial optimization models balance return with downside risk. They can be used in a centralized fashion (i.e., one generalist manager has a balanced mandate across asset classes) or a decentralized one (i.e., specialized managers each have a mandate for a particular asset class). We also derive reformulations for these models that can be efficiently solved. Finally, we analyze the effect of the different parameters (tolerated loss levels, scalarization parameter, capital allocated to each sub-portfolio) on the composition of the sub-portfolios and compare the decentralized and centralized financial investment approaches.We demonstrate that the proposed reformulations are equivalent to MOPCP-V with random right-hand sides and are inner approximations for MOPCP-M when the technology matrix is random. Further, we identify a series of general conditions for variants of MOPCP-M under which the reformulations are equivalent. A discrete representation of the uncertainty with a set of joint scenarios is frequently employed (see, e.g., Dentcheva, Prékopa, & Ruszczyński, 2000; Ruszczyński, 2002), which permits to take into account dependencies among random variables, and can be derived by sampling from some underlying distributions of the random variables. While algorithmic methods have been proposed for single-objective stochastic problems including a joint probabilistic constraint with random right-hand sides (e.g., Dentcheva et al., 2000; Küçükyavuz, 2012; Lejeune, 2012a), and, most recently, with multi-row random technology matrix (Beraldi & Bruni, 2010; Kogan & Lejeune, 2014), no efficient reformulations or solution methods have been developed, to the best of our knowledge, for the class of multi-objective stochastic programming problems considered in this study.It is important to note that our approach does not require solving multiple probabilistically constrained programs with a set of acceptable fixed values of p to approximate solutions to MOPCP. This is in contrast with studies that perform a Pareto analysis of the “efficient frontier” for chance-constrained programs. Two representative articles Rengarajan et al. (2013); Rengarajan and Morton (2009) are reviewed above, where the authors vary the values of p in the corresponding probabilistic constraints and compute the corresponding objective q⊤x. Mitra, Gudi, Patwardhan, and Sardar (2008) use a similar approach to construct the efficient frontier of a probabilistically-constrained supply chain planning problem in which the objectives are related to cost and demand satisfaction rate. Analyze the impact of changing p in probabilistically-constrained programs with recourse variables by constructing the response space frontier using generalized Lagrangian duality. All these studies require solving a probabilistically-constrained program for a sufficiently large number of reliability choices, whereas we provide a nonparametric approach that simultaneously determines the optimal values of x and p by directly solving reformulations of MOPCP.We further point out two more advantages of using our approach as an alternative to the aforementioned Pareto analysis. First, the normalized parameter a in the objective functionq⊤x+apdefines relatively weights assigned to each objective item. Therefore, decision makers can specify their own trade-off preferences, e.g., ratios between the cost and all risk-related objectives, to obtain the corresponding optimal x and p through our model. Second, in practice there may be more than one uncertain outcomes that need to be probabilistically guaranteed, and thus more than one probabilistic constraints. It results in multiple reliability levels to be traded off with the cost, and a multi-dimensional Pareto analysis becomes complicated, making it difficult to demonstrate the shape of the efficient frontier. Our model can help decision makers who need to obtain optimal operational solutions and risk-level choices more easily. Indeed, the above trade-offs among several random outcomes often arise in multi-portfolio financial optimization, which is the a key motivation for this study.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 revisits some fundamental Boolean concepts first introduced in (Kogan & Lejeune, 2014; Lejeune, 2012a) and the Boolean reformulation method for probabilistically-constrained programs. Section 3 derives new equivalent MILP reformulations for MOPCP-V with random right-hand side vector and variable p, while Section 4 is devoted to MOPCP-M with random technology matrix and variable p. Section 5 compares the computational tractability of the proposed formulations, and presents insights on the trade-offs between different objectives and solution sensitivity. Section 6 contains a comprehensive analysis of stochastic multi-portfolio models that can be used in decentralized and centralized investment contexts. Section 7 concludes the paper.The Boolean method was first introduced to handle joint probabilistic constraints with dependent random right-hand sides (Lejeune, 2012a). It was also used in Lejeune (2012b) to elicit the exhaustive list of p-efficient points (see, e.g., Prékopa, 1995), represented as combinatorial ep-patterns, through solutions of an MILP reformulation. Most recently, the method was employed for probabilistically-constrained programs with multi-row random technology matrix (Kogan & Lejeune, 2014). We shall here expand the method for MOPCPs with random technology matrix and random right-hand side vector with variable risk levels.To be self-contained, we present succinctly the Boolean modeling framework that defines the satisfiability of a joint probabilistic constraint in terms of a partially defined Boolean function (pdBf). Here we describe the Boolean modeling approach for the random matrix ξ in constraint (4) for MOPCP-M. The same procedure applies to the easier case of the random vector ζ in (2) for MOPCP-V, for which we omit the details in this section.The Boolean method involves the construction of the set of recombinations and the binarization of the probability distribution with a set of cut points. Let Ω be the set of all realizations (scenarios)ωk,k=1,2,…,|Ω|that characterize the joint probability distribution functionF:Rr×m→Rof the random variableξ:F(t)=P(ξ≤t).Definition 1Lejeune, 2012bA realization ωkis called p-sufficient if F(ωk) ≥ p and is p-insufficient if F(ωk) < p.A p-sufficient realization defines sufficient conditions for the probabilistic constraint (4) to hold. If ωkis p-sufficient, which implies that F(ωk) ≥ p, Then,∑j=1mωijkxj≤di,i=1,…,r⇒constraint (4) holds. The set Ω is partitioned into the disjoint setsΩ+andΩ−of p-sufficient and p-insufficient realizations, respectively.We generate all points in the same dimension of ξ that are p-sufficient, called recombinations (Kogan & Lejeune, 2014). Let Fijbe the marginal probability function of ξij, andωijkis the scalar value of ωkin dimensions i and j. The inequalitiesFij(ωijk)≥p,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,define necessary conditions forωk∈Ω+. The direct product C11(p) × ⋅⋅⋅ × Cij(p) × ⋅⋅⋅ × Crm(p) of each set(5)Cij(p)={ωijk:Fij(ωijk)≥p,k=1,…,|Ω|},i=1,…,r,j=1,…,mprovides the setΩ¯(p)of recombinations containing all points that can possibly be p-sufficient. The disjoint sets of p-sufficient and p-insufficient recombinations are respectively denoted byΩ¯+(p)={ωk∈Ω¯(p):F(ωk)≥p}andΩ¯−(p)={ωk∈Ω¯(p):F(ωk)<p}.We shall now binarize the probability distribution and the recombinations using the concept of cut points. The binarization process permits to represent constraint (4) as a partially defined Boolean function and to subsequently model its satisfiability with sets of mixed-integer linear inequalities derived by using the concept of minorant of a threshold Boolean function. The number of binary variables in the inequalities is equal to the number of cut points and is typically order of magnitude smaller than the number of joint possible realizations of the random variables. Let nijbe the number of cut points associated with the random variable ξijandn=∑i=1r∑j=1mnijbe the total number of cut points over all (i, j). We denote by cijlthe lth cut point associated with ξij. Note that each cut point cijlbelongs to the set Cij(p), for alll=1,…,nij.Definition 2The binarization process is a mappingRr×m→{0,1}nof ωkinto a binary vectorβk=[β111k,…,β11n11k,…,βij1k,…,βijnijk,…,βrm1k,…,βrmnrmk],such that the value of each Boolean componentβijlkis defined with respect to a cut point cijlas follows:(6)βijlk={1ifωijk≥cijl0otherwise,wherecijl′<cijl,for alli=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l′,l=1,…,nij,l′<l.For any given p, the binarization ofΩ¯(p)creates the setΩ¯B(p)⊆{0,1}nof relevant Boolean vectors, each of which is a binary mapping of a recombination. Since the cut points are arranged in ascending order, the binarization process (6) generates a regularized set of Boolean vectors, i.e., for every component ξij, ifcijl′<cijlfor somel,l′=1,…,nij,l≠l′,then(7)βijlk≤βijl′k,k=1,…,|Ω¯(p)|.The binarization process must be based on a consistent set of cut points to preserve the disjointedness between the respective binary projectionsΩ¯B+(p)andΩ¯B−(p)ofΩ¯+(p)andΩ¯−(p). We employ the sufficient-equivalent consistent set of cut points (Kogan & Lejeune, 2014)(8)Ce(p)=⋃i=1r⋃j=1mCij(p),with each set Cij(p) defined according to (5). The set of relevant Boolean vectors is partitioned into the disjoint sets of p-sufficientΩ¯B+(p)and p-insufficientΩ¯B−(p),which define a pdBf representing the satisfiability of the joint probabilistic constraint (4).Definition 3For any given p and two disjoint subsetsΩ¯B+(p),Ω¯B−(p):Ω¯B+(p)⋃Ω¯B−(p)=Ω¯B(p)⊆{0,1}n,g(Ω¯B+(p),Ω¯B−(p))is a pdBf with sets of true pointsΩ¯B+(p)and false pointsΩ¯B−(p).We introduce in Section 4 a small numerical example that illustrates the above definitions and the Boolean modeling approach.One can carry out the binarization process in a similar way for the random vectorζ=[ζ1,…,ζr]⊤in the joint probabilistic constraint (2) in MOPCP-V. For eachζi,i=1,…,r,we identify the nicut pointscil,l=1,…,ni(withn=∑i=1rni). The relevant Boolean vectorβk=[β11k,…,β1n1k,…,βi1k,…,βinik,…,βr1k,…,βrnrk]⊤for each recombinationωk=[ω1k,…,ωrk]⊤of the random vector ζ. Note that the recombinationsωik,i=1,…,r,k∈Ω¯(p)=Ω¯+(p)⋃Ω¯−(p),the cut pointscil,i=1,…,r,l=1,…,niand the Boolean vectors βkare defined for the right-hand side vectorζ∈Rr,and thus they are all one dimension less than their counterparts in Section 2.The Boolean programming concepts below are used in Section 3.2 to characterize the feasible region of the MOPCP-V with fixed reliability p.Definition 4Crama and Hammer (2011): A function f: {0, 1}n→ {0, 1} is a threshold Boolean function if for all(o1,…,on)∈{0,1}n,there exists a vector of weightsλ∈Rnand a thresholdθ∈R,such thatf(o1,…,on)=1ifandonlyif∑l=1nλlol≥θ. The(n+1)-tuple (λ, θ) is the separating structure for the threshold Boolean function f.Let f be a Boolean function and letT(resp.F) be the sets of points for which f takes value 1 (resp. 0). The function f is said a tight minorant of a pdBfg(Ω¯B+(p),Ω¯B−(p))if (i)Ω¯B−(p)⊆F,and (ii)T⋂Ω¯B+(p)≠∅.Theorem 1 follows from the above definitions. The proof is given in Appendix A.1.Theorem 1Given p ∈ (0, 1], every feasible solution λ*of the system of inequalities(9)∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤r−1,k=1,…,|Ω¯B−(p)|(10)∑l=1niλil=1,i=1,…,r(11)λil∈{0,1},i=1,…,r,l=1,…,nidefines a threshold tight minorant f with integral separating structure(λ,r)∈{0,1}n×Z+. Every point k such that∑i=1r∑l=1niλil*βilk=rbelongs toΩ¯+(p). There is at least onek=1,…,|Ω¯+(p)|satisfying this latter equality.Therefore, any feasible solution λ* for (9)–(11) permits to derive a p-sufficient recombination∑i=1r∑l=1niλil*ciland can thus be used to obtain a feasible solution for MOPCP-V. It was shown in Kogan and Lejeune (2014) that there always exists a threshold tight minorant for anyg(Ω¯B+(p),Ω¯B−(p))(see Definition 3).We first assume that the probability level p in constraint (2) is fixed to a number in [p, 1] and present an equivalent MILP reformulation for the single-objective version of MOPCP-V with fixed p.Theorem 2The feasible set defined by the probabilistic constraint(2)with random right-hand side vector and fixed reliability p is equivalent to the feasible set defined by the following system R1 of mixed-integer linear inequalities:(12)R1:(9)−(11)∑j∈Jtijxj≤∑l=1niλilcil,i=1,…,r.The proof of Theorem 2 is given in Appendix A.2.Using the system of inequalities R1, we propose in Lemma 1 an MILP formulation MIO-V, whose solutions are feasible for MOPCP-V with variable p.Lemma 1Any solution (x, λ) feasible for the mixed-integer optimization problem(13)O−VaMIO−V:maxx≥0:Ax≤bq⊤x+η(p̲)subjectto(10)−(12)∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤r−1,k=1,…,|Ω¯B−(p̲)|is feasible for MOPCP-V.Any solution feasible for MIO-V has a reliability level at least equal topand is therefore feasible for MOPCP-V. The optimal value of MIO-V is a lower bound of the optimal value of MOPCP-V. Next, we continue building on Lemma 1 and Theorem 2 to obtain equivalent reformulations of MOPCP-V. We use MIO-V as the backbone formulation in which additional constraints (see Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3) are introduced.Definition 6Consider the setΩ¯B−(p̲)ofp-insufficient recombinations. For anyωk,ωk′∈Ω¯B−(p̲),a partial order ⪯ defined onΩ¯B−(p̲)ωk′⪯ωk⇔βk≤βk′.is consistent with the formulation MIO-V.The above partial order is implied by the componentwise inequality ≤ in the space of p-insufficient recombinations. If the above relationship holds, the p-insufficient recombinationωk′is said to be dominated by ωk. We defineΩ˜B−(p̲)as the set of nondominated p-insufficient recombinations obtained through the construction of the above partial order:Ω˜B−(p̲)={ωk∈Ω¯B−(p̲):ωk⋠ωk′forallωk′∈Ω¯B−(p̲)∖{ωk}}.Let S be the set of acceptable reliability levelshs:hs≥p̲,s=1,…,|S|. Without loss of generality, we assume that the levels hsare sorted in an ascending order withp̲=h1. LetHs={ωk:P(ξ≤ωk)=hs},s∈Sdenote the set of hs-sufficient recombinations with cumulative probability equal to hs. We setH0=Ω˜B−(p̲). Let αsbe a binary variable associated with each set Hs. Each variable αs, s ∈ S is forced to take value 0 if the solution of MOPCP-V has a reliability level p strictly smaller than hs, and can take value 1 otherwise. Since the lowest acceptable reliability level isp̲=h1,we setα1=1. The above notations and decisions variables permit to rewritep=∑s=1,…,|S|(hs−hs−1)αsin terms of values of hsand binary decision variables αs, withh0=0. As a result,p=hsifαi=1,i=1,…,sandαi=0,i=s+1,…,|S|.Theorem 3The MILP formulation(14)P1−VaEMP1−V:maxx≥0:Ax≤bq⊤x+a∑s∈S(hs−hs−1)αs(15)subjectto(10)−(12)αs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤rk=1,…,|Ht|,t<s∈S(16)α1=1(17)0≤αs≤1s∈S,s≠1is equivalent to MOPCP-V.A proof is given in Appendix A.3. A few comments are in order. First, the sufficient-equivalent set of cut points Ce(p) corresponding to the reliability levelpis a superset of Ce(p) for any p ≥p. Second, each setΩ¯B−(p),p ≥pof p-insufficient recombinations is a superset of the setΩ¯−(p̲). Finally, there exists a finite number of acceptable reliability levels p ≥p. This number can be calculated up-front and is upper bounded by|Ω¯+(p̲)|.In this section, we introduce another MILP formulation in which we introduce precedence constraints and further preprocess the set of covering constraints (15).Theorem 4The MILP problem(18)P2−VaEMP2−V:maxx≥0:Ax≥bq⊤x+a∑s∈S(hs−hs−1)αssubjectto(10)−(12);(16)−(17)αs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤rk=1,…,|Hs−1|,s∈S(19)αs≤αs−1s=2,…,|S|is equivalent to EMP1-V and thus MOPCP-V.The proof is given in Appendix A.4. Note that the elimination of the implied constraints in (15) and their replacement by (18)–(19) significantly reduce the number of constraints in the MILP formulation.We can use the concept of Special Ordered Set Variables of Type One (SOS1) to obtain equivalent reformulations for the problems presented in the previous sub-sections. The SOS1-based reformulations are derived in Appendix B. Similar procedures can be applied to the case of MOPCP-M, resulting in SOS1-based reformulations also given in Appendix B.Probabilistically constrained programs with random technology matrix are notoriously more complex to reformulate and solve than their counterparts with random right-hand sides. In this section, we show that there is a connection between the feasible sets of probabilistically-constrained problems with random right-hand sides on one hand and with random technology matrix on the other. We exploit this link and the results in Section 3 to derive MILP reformulations of the joint probabilistic constraint (4) in MOPCP-M where the technology matrix involves random variablesξij,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m. We follow procedures similar to those presented in Section 3 to derive MILP reformulations whose solutions are always feasible for MOPCP-M and constitute inner approximations of MOPCP-M. We also demonstrate that under a series of general conditions the proposed MILP reformulations are equivalent to MOPCP-M.Recall the Boolean modeling concepts introduced in Section 2. We use an MOPCP-M instance with three decision variables and a two-row random technology matrix to illustrate how the Boolean method reformulates the satisfiability of the probabilistic constraint as a pdBf.(20)maxx1,x2,x3,p3x1+2x2+x3+2psubjecttoP{ξ11x1+ξ12x2+ξ13x3≤13ξ21x1+ξ22x2+ξ23x3≤27}≥p0.8≤p≤1.The random matrixξ=[ξ11ξ12ξ13ξ21ξ22ξ23]is multivariate and we assume that it has six joint possible realizations denoted byωk=[ω11kω12kω13kω21kω22kω23k],k=1,…,6. Table 1describes the probability of each realization ωk, the joint cumulative probability function F of ξ, and the marginal cumulative distribution functions Fijof ξij,i=1,2,j=1,2,3.Forp=0.8,the sufficient equivalent set of cut points is:Ce(0.8)={c111=3;c112=4;c121=3;c122=5;c131=5;c211=2;c212=3;c221=5;c231=4;c232=5}Table 9 in Appendix C.1 displays the p-sufficient and the non-dominated p-insufficient recombinations, their binary images, and their partitioning intoΩ¯B−(0.8)andΩ¯B+(0.8).Noting thatΩ˜B−(p)in (21) is a subset ofΩ¯B−(p)in (9) and only includes the non-dominated p-sufficient recombinations fromΩ¯B−(p),the proof is similar to that for Theorem 1, and is thus omitted here.Theorem 5Given p ∈ (0, 1], every feasible solution λ*of the system of inequalities(21)∑i=1r∑j=1m∑l=1nijλijlβijlk≤rm−1,k=1,…,|Ω˜B−(p)|(22)∑l=1nijλijl=1,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m(23)λijl∈{0,1},i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l=1,…,nijdefines a threshold tight minorant f with integral separating structure(λ,rm)∈{0,1}n×Z+. Every point ωk such that∑i=1r∑j=1m∑l=1nijλijl*βijlk=rmbelongs toΩ¯+(p). There is at least oneωk∈Ω¯+(p)satisfying this latter equality.Any feasible solution λ* that satisfies constraints (21)–(23) permits to derive a p-sufficient recombination and can thus be used to obtain a feasible solution for MOPCP-M. In accordance with Definition 6, we only introduce a constraint of form (21) for the nondominated p-insufficient recombinationsk∈Ω˜B−(p).Theorem 6The feasible set defined by the probabilistic constraint with multi-row random technology matrix(4)and fixed reliability level p includes the feasible set defined by the system S1 of mixed-integer quadratic inequalities:(24)S1:(21)−(23)∑j=1mxj(∑l=1nijλijlcijl)≤di,i=1,…,r.The proof of Theorem 6 is given in Appendix A.5. We provide in Appendix C.2 the system S1 of mixed-integer quadratic inequalities for Example 1.The above system S1 provides an inner approximation for MOPCP-M for the general case. Next, we describe a few special cases when the two formulations are equivalent.Theorem 7The feasible set defined by the system S1 of mixed-integer bilinear inequalities is equivalent to the feasible set defined by(4)when the probabilistic constraint with multi-row random technology matrix takes one of the following forms:(i)Each inequality in(4)has exactly one monomial, i.e.,(25)P(xj′ξij′≤di,i=1,…,r)≥p,where j′ is an arbitrary index value in{1,…,m}.Each inequality in(4)contains exactly one random variable, i.e.,(26)P(ξi∑j=1mxj≤di,i=1,…,r)≥p,withξi=ξij,j=1,…,mfor each i.Each inequality in(4)contains exactly one decision variable:(27)P(xj′∑j=1mξij≤di,i=1,…,r)≥p,withj′∈{1,…,m}.Each inequality in(4)is the product of a sum of random variables by a sum of decision variables, i.e.,(28)P(∑k=1mξik∑j=1mxj≤di,i=1,…,r)≥p.The system of inequalities in(4)includes any mix or combination of stochastic inequalities of the form described in (i)–(iv).We provide in Appendix A.7 a detailed proof. Note that S1 is not linear. We propose several approaches for linearizing the bilinear terms λijlxjin constraints (24). We first use the inequalities proposed by McCormick (1976). Note that each term contains a binary variable λijland a nonnegative continuous variable xj. Defineyijl≡xjλijl,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l=1,…,nij,and enforce the relationship with the inequalities(29)yijl≤ujλijl(30)yijl≤xj(31)yijl≥xj−uj(1−λijl)(32)yijl≥0,where ujis the upper bound of variablexj,j=1,…,m. Constraints (29) and (32) together force yijlto take value 0 ifλijl=0,whereas (30) and (31) imply thatyijl=xj×1=xjifλijl=1.Lemma 2The feasible set defined by the mixed-integer quadratic inequalities in S1 can be equivalently represented by(33)S2:(21)−(23);(29)−(32)∑j=1m∑l=1nijyijlcijl≤di,i=1,…,r.Note that S2 only contains mixed-integer linear inequalities. Furthermore, we can reduce the number of binary integer variables in S2 by noting that∑l=1nijλijl=1. Thus, for everyi=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,only one of the variables yijlis equal to xjwhile all the other yijlare equal to zero. Lemma 3 provides an alternative MILP formulation that is equivalent to S2.Lemma 3Given a fixed reliability level p, the feasible sets defined by systems S1 and S2 are equivalently represented by the following system of mixed-integer inequalities:(34)(21)−(23)S3:∑j=1mzj≤di,i=1,…,r(35)zj≥cijlxj−Mijl(1−λijl),i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l=1,…,nij(36)zj≤cijlxj+Mijl(1−λijl),i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l=1,…,nij,whereMijl=cijl(x¯j−x̲j)withx¯jandxjbeing the (sharpened) upper and lower bounds for xj. For alli=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l=1,…,nij,we have:•ifcijnij>cij1>0,thenx¯j=min{uj,maxi{dicij1:di>0}},andx̲j=max{0,mini{dicijnij:di>0}}.if0>cijnij>cij1,thenx¯j=min{uj,maxi{dicijnij:di<0}},andx̲j=max{0,mini{dicij1:di<0}}.ifcijnij>0>cij1,thenx¯j=min{uj,maxi{dicijnij:di>0}},andx̲j=max{0,mini{dicij1:di<0}}.The proof of Lemma 3 is provided in Appendix A.6.We propose in Lemma 4 (directly implied by Lemma 3) an MILP formulation, whose solutions are feasible for MOPCP-M with variable p ≥p. Note that instead of S3 given in Lemma 3, we could rely upon S1 and S2 for deriving equivalent formulations.Lemma 4Any solution (x, λ, z) feasible for the mixed-integer optimization problemO−MaMIO−M:maxx≥0:Ax≥bq⊤x+η(p̲)subjectto(21)−(23);(34)−(36)is feasible for MOPCP-M. The optimal value of MIO-M is a lower bound of the optimal value of MOPCP-M.Any solution feasible for MIO-M has a reliability level at least equal topand is therefore feasible for MOPCP-M. Next, we build on Lemma 4 to obtain equivalent reformulations for MOPCP-M in which p is a decision variable.Using the results presented in Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3, we derive new MILP formulations for problem MOPCP-M with variable reliability level p. The results are summarized in Theorem 8. The proof follows similar procedures as the ones described for the theorems given in Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.Theorem 8The MILP formulations(37)P1−MaEMP1−M:maxx≥0:Ax≥bq⊤x+a∑s∈S(hs−hs−1)αssubjectto(16)−(17);(21)−(23);(34)−(36);αs+∑i=1r∑j=1m∑l=1nijλijlβijlk≤rm,k=1,…,|Ht|,t<s∈S(38)EMP2−M:maxx≥0:Ax≥bq⊤x+a∑s∈S:s≥1(hs−hs−1)αssubjectto(16)−(17);(19);(21)−(23);(34)−(36)αs+∑i=1r∑j=1m∑l=1nijλijlβijlk≤rm,k=1,…,|Hs−1|,s∈Sare inner approximations of problem MOPCP-M.Their SOS1-based reformulations are provided in Appendix B. Following Theorem 7, if the set of stochastic inequalities in (4) takes one of the forms (i)–(vi) defined in the theorem, then the MILP formulations EMP1-M and EMP2-M become equivalent to MOPCP-M.The MILP reformulations of MOPCP-V and MOPCP-M have two most remarkable features. First, the number of binary variables in EMP1-V or EMP1-M is not an increasing function of the number of scenarios and is typically much smaller than the latter. Second, the number of binary variables is equal to the number of cut points used in the binarization process. This means that the MILP reformulations of the multi-objective stochastic problems MOPCP-V and MOPCP-M have the same number of binary variables as the MILP reformulations of the single-objective (i.e., p fixed) probabilistically-constrained problems studied in Lejeune (2012a) and Kogan and Lejeune (2014).In this section, we focus on the more general and complex model MOPCP-M with random coefficients ξijfor each variable xjin constraint row i, for alli=1,…,randj=1,…,m. We evaluate the computational performance of models EMP1-M, EMP2-M, EMP1-M-SOS1, and EMP2-M-SOS1 by testing a set of randomly generated instances. The goals are (i) to demonstrate and compare the efficacy of the EMP formulations and (ii) to examine the impact of changing the relative weights attributed to the multiple objectives (i.e., revenue and reliability in MOPCP models).Intuitively, EMP2-M formulations improve EMP1-M formulations by eliminating many redundant constraints and variables, which could lead to CPU time reduction. The sizes of all our MILP reformulations depend on the values of r, m, and the number of cut points (e.g.,|Cij(p̲)|,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,min MOPCP-M). The latter does not only affect the number of binary variables λijl, but more importantly, bounds the number of reliability thresholds, i.e.,|S|≤|Ω¯+(p̲)|<|Ω¯(p̲)|that is further bounded by |C11(p)| × ⋅⋅⋅ × |Crm(p)|. Unlike reformulations based on efficient points, reformulations based on p-sufficient points have far fewer variables and constraints (both being bounded by |S|). In practice, decision makers often trade off among relatively high reliability levels (e.g., p ≥ 95 percent). As a result, the number of realizations in Ω that can violate the joint probabilistic constraint is quite small, since|Cij(p̲)|≤⌊(1−p̲)|Ω|⌋,which is a very small number for large p and linear in |Ω|. Therefore, the number |S| of threshold values is bounded by a polynomial function(⌊(1−p̲)|Ω|⌋)r×m.In this section, we demonstrate the performance of the MILP formulations for solving MOPCP-V and MOPCP-M by testing randomly generated instances and varying parameters. All problem instances are solved with CPLEX 12.5.1 via ILOG Concert Technology with C++, and the computations are performed on a HP Workstation Z200 Windows 7 machine with Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU 2.80 gigahertz, and 8 gigabyte memory.We generate a 3 × 5-dimensional random matrix, and consider nonnegative decision variables. The components of the cost vectorq∈R5and the right-hand side vectord∈R3take integer values randomly generated from the intervals [10, 50] and [40, 100], with interval [0.75, 1] for selecting an optimal reliability variable p. To generate the random coefficients ξijfori=1,…,3andj=1,…,5,we first generate fixed numbersℓij,i=1,…,3,j=1,…,5from a Bernoulli distribution with 70 percent “successful” rate. We then generate|Ω|=1500equally likely realizations of a random vectorξ′=[ξ1′,ξ2′,ξ3′,ξ4′,ξ5′]T,with each realization being the nearest integer of a random number sampled from a normal distributionN(2j+⌈10/j⌉,⌈5/j⌉),j=1,…,5. We then computeξij=ℓijξj′for alli=1,2,3andj=1,…,5. Note that the described settings could generate trivial instances, in which the probabilistic constraint (4) cannot be satisfied unless allx=0. We select nine nontrivial instances for our computation.We set the parameter a inη(p)=apas:a=30percent(∑i=15qi). Table 2shows the average, minimum, and maximum CPU seconds needed to attain the optimum with each formulation.EMP1-M, in which the integrality restrictions on variables α are relaxed, solves all instances within ten minutes. We achieve significant average, minimum and maximum CPU time reduction when using EMP2-M in which the redundant constraints of form (67) are removed. This illustrates the computational benefits obtained by preprocessing and eliminating the redundant linear constraints and by reducing the number of binary decision variables. EMP1-M-SOS1 and EMP2-M-SOS1 do not further reduce solution times, and even take slightly more time than their counterparts EMP1-M and EMP2-M. As it is shown to be the most efficient formulation, we will employ formulation EMP2-M in Section 6 for solving the multi-portfolio optimization problems.Keeping the same objective function and constraints, we directly solve a straightforward MILP reformulation of MOPCP-M, denoted by MILP1, after replacing the joint probabilistic constraint (4) in MOPCP-M with the following set of MILP constraints(39)∑j=1mωijkxj≤di+Mσki=1,…,3,k=1,…,|Ω|(40)∑k=1|Ω|pk(1−σk)≥p(41)σk∈{0,1},k=1,…,|Ω|,p̲≤p≤1,where each binary variableσk,k=1,…,|Ω|indicates whether the constraints∑j=1mωijkxj≤di,i=1,…,rare satisfied jointly in scenario ωkwhen ξijis realized asωijk. If yes, thenσk=0; otherwise,σk=1. The big-M constraints (39) allow∑j=1mωijkxj>difor some i in1,…,rby pushing the value of σkto 1. Constraint (40) ensures that the probability of satisfying the joint probabilistic constraint is at least p.We solve EMP2-M and MILP1 for the nine generated instances. We allow 1800 seconds of CPU time for each instance and reformulation. Before comparing the results obtained with the two reformulations, we recall that MILP1 is a reformulation equivalent to MOPCP-M, while our MILP reformulation EMP2-M is an inner approximation. Therefore, the optimal value of EMP2-M is a lower bound (i.e., maximization problem) of the optimal value of MOPCP-M and of MILP1.Table 3reports the CPU time (seconds) for solving the two models and the gaps between the best objective values of MILP1 and EMP2-M, where the percentages in row “Gap” refer totheoptimalobjectiveofEMP2−M−thebestobjectiveofMILP1thebestobjectiveofMILP1×100percent.The numbers in rows “Time (MILP1)” and “Time (EMP2-M)” respectively show the CPU seconds taken by MILP1 and EMP2-M before finding the best feasible solution (and objective value). The following observations appear. First, the EMP2-M reformulation of each instance is solved very fast and takes on average 8.74 seconds. All EMP2-M reformulations are solved to optimality within less than 20 seconds. Second, the time needed to find the best solution with EMP2-M is on average 29.36 times smaller than the time needed to find the best possible with MINLP1. This confirms the high computational efficiency of the reformulation EMP2-M. Finally, besides being obtained much faster, the solution found with EMP2-M is always better than the solution found with MINLP1. On average, the best solution found with EMP2-M is 6.13 percent better than the MINLP1 best solution. This is the most noticeable result as EMP2-M is an inner approximation while MINLP1 is an equivalent reformulation.In this section, we analyze the relative importance of the two objectives, i.e., revenue and reliability, by testing different settings of the parametera=τ∑i=15qiin functionη(p)=ap. We conduct a sensitivity analysis by varying values of τ (and thus values of a) in the interval [0.01, 1].Table 4illustrates the results for instance 5, which EMP2-M solves to optimum. We denote by (x*, p*) the optimal solution to EMP2-M and by q⊤x* the optimal objective value. We report the change in the objective revenue q⊤x* following a 1 percent change of the optimal reliability level p*.Table 4 shows seven value intervals of τ where the optimal reliability level p* remains the same in each interval. As a result, the optimal solution (x*, p*) and the revenue objective component q⊤x* are both unchanged corresponding to each interval. We present two key observations. First, the ratios of revenue changes to the changes of optimal reliability levels (indicated in the last row of Table 4) fluctuate as we increase τ. Similar fluctuating patterns are observed in the other nine instances we tested, for which there are generally between 5 and 7 ranges of values for τ leading to a different optimal value of reliability p*. In all instances, the revenue q⊤x* decreases sharply when the worst-case scenario is considered and a 100 percent reliability level is enforced. The tradeoff between revenue and reliability fluctuates significantly for various values of τ, emphasizing the importance of studying MOPCPs. Second, when p* is relatively low (close to 75 percent), a 1 percent change of p* results in a small reduction in the optimal revenue q⊤x*. The reduction becomes more significant as p* increases (i.e., p* ∈ [0.8, 0.85]), but becomes small again as p* continues increasing and takes its values in [0.85, 0.95]. The revenue reduction rate ultimately becomes very large when the optimal reliability p* is required to be close to 100 percent. These results highlight the sensitivity of the revenue to the level of reliability p*. The revenue is, without surprise, a decreasing function of the reliability level. More interestingly, the amount by which the revenue decreases due to a 1 percent-change in reliability appears to vary tremendously at different reliability levels and to be a highly nonlinear and non-monotone function of the optimal p*. The models proposed in this study permit to identify the “sensitivity zones” of the optimal reliability level on the revenue. The sensitivity study also provides guidance to set the value of the scalarization parameter a and to specify the minimal required reliability levelpin MOPCP-M models.In this section, we consider the multi-portfolio problem faced by an investment company that manages several funds specialized in diverse asset classes (e.g., bonds, small caps), industrial sectors (e.g., financial, consumer staples), or geographical areas (e.g., Japan, Eurozone, North America). We propose two types of stochastic multi-portfolio models based on a downside risk measure and study their use in two types of investment management approaches, i.e., centralized versus decentralized investment.Institutional investors (e.g., pension funds) often split their capital among multiple sub-portfolios handled by managers with distinct expertise. The joint optimization of multiple sub-portfolios is appealing, since it offers diversification across strategies, asset classes, and geographic regions, and fund managers with distinct asset class knowledge. Taking full advantage of diversification and access to multiple investment strategies is nontrivial. Savelsbergh et al. (2010) stress the importance of models and algorithms that allows for the integrated optimization of multiple portfolios, which they viewed as the “natural next step in portfolio optimization theory”. We proceed now to a succinct review of the literature devoted to multi-portfolio optimization in finance. Most existing multi-portfolio optimization models are based on the mean-variance framework. Bertsimas, Darnell, and Soucy (1999) use an MILP model to construct a portfolio involving several sub-portfolios. Each of these must replicate the behavior of a target portfolio sharing the same liquidity and expected return, and takes a limited number of positions in order to lessen the annual trading costs. Jaeger, Rausch, and Foley (2010) propose an aggregate multi-portfolio model with various investment time horizons for each sub-portfolio. Their rationale is that a multi-horizon model is appropriate for investors with long-term spending needs and without strong requirements on the present value of future spending. Wang (1999)) derives a bi-objective model for multi-portfolio optimization using multiple benchmarks. Yoda and Prékopa (2010) extends Kataoka’s portfolio selection model (Kataoka, 1963) to incorporate multiple Value-at-Risk (VaR) constraints. They assume that the random variables in different rows of the random technology matrix are independent. Prékopa (2012) examines the properties of the Multivariate Value-at-Risk (MVaR), which is defined as the quantile set of a multivariate probability distribution. He develops an algorithm to generate the MVaR in the case of discrete distributions, and also introduces a new multivariate risk measure called Multivariate Conditional Value-at-Risk (MCVaR).We specify the following notation. The asset universe includes |J| financial securities. Each security j ∈ J has a stochastic return ξjwith mean return μjand belongs to one or several of the r* asset classes i. We denote by Rithe set of assets in sub-portfolio i:⋃i=1,…,r*Ri=J. The asset classes are not required to be disjoint, as a security can be included in more than one specialized funds (e.g., a security can be both a large cap and a consumer staples). The notation xijis the fraction of capital invested in security j by fund i.With a centralized investment management (Sharpe, 1981) approach, the investment company employs a single generalist manager with a balanced mandate across all asset classes. In the first multi-portfolio model SMPC1, the downside risk measure requires that the loss or negative return of a sub-portfolio i does not exceed a prescribed loss level diwith a certain probability p. A distinct value can be assigned to each didepending on the risk-return profile of the corresponding asset class i. The objective function is a weighted summation of the overall expected return of the portfolio of funds and the probability level p with which each sub-portfolio avoids losing more than the specified loss level. The probability level p represents the risk tolerance and the parameter a can be viewed as the marginal rate of substitution of risk or reliability for expected return. Problem SMPC1 is mean-reliability multi-portfolio investment model, in which expected return is traded off with the probability at which losses exceeding a specified amount can be prevented:(42)SMPC1:max∑j∈J(μj∑i=1r*xij)+ap(43)subjecttoP(−∑j∈Riξjxij≤di,i=1,…,r*−ξjxij≤dj′,j∈J)≥p(44)∑j∈Rixij=qi,i=1,…,r*(45)0≤∑i=1r*xij≤uj,j∈J(46)xij=0,j∉Ri,i=1,…,r*(47)p̲≤p≤1(48)xij≥0,j∈J,i=1,…,r*The parameter qiis the fixed fraction of capital allocated to fund i, and (44) requires a proportion qiof the entire capital to be invested in i. By setting∑i∈1r*qi=1,the constraints (44) guarantee that the entirety of the capital is invested. The downside risk constraint (43) stipulates that the loss incurred by each sub-portfolio i must be at most equal to the loss threshold diwith probability level at least p. The second set of inequalities in (43) impose upper-boundsdj′on the loss associated with each individual asset j. As the same generalist manager handles all funds, the downside risk constraints takes the form of a joint probabilistic constraint. The constraints (46) do not permit sub-portfolios to have a position in a security not belonging to the asset class they handle. The concentration constraints (45) do not allow that the sum of the positions (across all funds) in security j exceeds an upper bound ujand can be enforced as the management of each sub-portfolio is entrusted to the same manager. Constraint (47) defines the lowest acceptablepprobability level while constraints (48) preclude short-selling.In the second model SMPC2, the loss level diof each sub-portfolio is a decision variable instead of a fixed parameter. Instead of the expected return, the objective function now includes a component accounting for the weighted loss level∑i=1r*qidithat must not be exceeded with a probability level p. The formulation reads:(49)SMPC2:max−∑i=1r*qidi+apsubjectto(43)−(48),with decisions variablesxij,i=1,…,r*,j∈Ri,di,i=1,…,r*,and p.With a decentralized investment management approach (Sharpe, 1981), the investment company relies upon multiple managers, each with a specialist mandate within a particular asset class. Collecting information about specific assets or asset classes and capitalizing on such informational advantage require highly specialized skills. This explains why fund companies can replace generalist balanced managers with managers specialized in a single asset class with the expectation that they will outperform the generalists. Decentralized investment management can even be a necessity for investment companies. In fact, some large clients, such as pension funds, international organizations or educational endowments, sometimes require the capital allocated to a particular asset class to be partitioned among several sub-funds or asset managers (Van Binsbergen, Brandt, & Koijen, 2008). As a consequence, investment firms regularly employ multiple specialized managers (even within the same asset class) in an attempt to diversify investment strategies and reduce diseconomies of scale as funds grow larger (Blake, Rossi, Timmermann, Tonks, & Wermers, 2013). Each specialized fund manager acts on a myopic basis and controls their fund independently of the others. Consequently, the joint probabilistic constraint (43) is replaced by r* joint probabilistic constraints of smaller dimensionality, and p is replaced by the reliability levelspi,i=1,…,r*representing each the probability that the loss due to each individually considered sub-portfolio i is at most equal to di. In the decentralized investment setting, the multi-portfolio multi-manager model is:(50)SMPD1:max∑j∈J(μj∑i=1r*xij)+a∑i=1r*pi(51)subjecttoP(−∑j∈Riξjxij≤di−ξjxij≤dj′,j∈Ri)≥pi,i=1,…,r*(52)0≤xij≤uj,j∈J,i=1,…,r*(53)p̲≤pi≤1,i=1,…,r*(44)−(46)and replaces the formulation SMPC1 for the centralized investment approach.We also analyze a second model for the decentralized investment context in which the loss levels are decision variablesdi,i=1,…,r*:(54)SMPD2:max−∑i=1r*qidi+a∑i=1r*pi(44)−(46);(51)−(53).The decentralized model SMPD2 is the counterpart of SMPC2.To illustrate our approach, we consider three sub-portfolios or funds, respectively focused on equities, fixed-income assets, and international securities. The equity sub-portfolio comprises seven securities: a growth large cap domestic equity mutual fund, a value large cap domestic equity mutual fund, a growth small cap domestic equity mutual fund, a value small cap domestic equity mutual fund, an Asian equity fund, a European equity fund, and an emerging market equity fund. The fixed-income sub-portfolio also includes seven securities: a high yield bond fund, a multi-sector bond fund, an emerging markets bond fund, a government bond fund, a world bond fund, an inflation-protected bond fund, and a high yield muni fund. The international securities sub-portfolio includes five funds covering the emerging markets, Europe, and Asia. Table 5lists the securities selected for possible inclusion in each sub-portfolio. The selection of the funds is based on the following criteria. Each fund has a 4- or 5-star Morningstar rating, belongs to Morningstar’s top ten in its fund category, and has a track-record of at least ten years. For each fund, we collect the monthly returns (without missing data) from January 1993 to April 2013. For cross-validation purposes, we split the data into two disjoint subsets. The training set is used to derive the optimal portfolio allocation, while the data in the testing set are not used to derive the optimal investment strategy and are reserved to analyze the robustness of the models and cross-validate the results.We create 72 problem instances. The forty-eight problem instances constructed for the models SMPC1 and SMPD1 differ in the weight a balancing the relative importance of the objectives, the proportion of capitalqi,i=1,…,rallocated to each sub-portfolio, and the maximum loss leveldi,i=1,…,rtolerated for each sub-portfolio. We consider three values for the parameter a. The first value a1 is set to give an equal weight to the two objectives (i.e., expected return and reliability). A standard procedure in the multi-objective literature (Steuer, 1986) is to define a1 as follows:a1=RU−RLPU−PLwhere RU(resp., RL) is an upper (resp., lower) bound on the maximum (resp., minimum) value of the expected return. Similarly, PU(resp., PL) is an upper (resp., lower) bound on the maximal (resp., minimal) value of the reliability p. The second (resp., third) valuea2=1.2a1(resp.,a3=0.8a1) assigned to a gives 20 percent more importance to the reliability (resp., expected return) objective. We consider four combinations of values for the parameters qidetermining the allocation of capital between sub-portfolios. First, we allocate an equal amount of capital to each sub-portfolio:qi=1/3,i=1,2,3. In the other three settings, 40 percent of the capital is allocated to one sub-portfolioi*:qi*=40percent,while the remaining part is split equally between the other two sub-portfolios:qi=30percent,i≠i*. As for the maximal allowable loss difor each sub-portfolio, we consider two sets of values. In the first one, the equity (resp., fixed-income and international securities) sub-portfolio is required to generate a loss lower than 3 percent (resp., 1.5 percent and 2 percent), while the maximal loss associated to the equity (resp., fixed-income and international securities) sub-portfolio is equal to 4 percent (resp., 2.5 percent and 3 percent) in the second parameter setting.The twenty-four problem instances constructed for the models SMPC2 and SMPD2 differ in terms of the weight and the proportion of capitalqi,i=1,…,r*allocated to each sub-portfolio. Indeed, the portfolio loss leveldi,i=1,…,r*that can be obtained with a certain reliability is a decision variable in formulations SMPC2 and SMPD2. The considered values for the parameters a and q are the same as those employed in the SMPC1 and SMPD1 problem instances.We create seventy-two problem instances: 48 for the formulations SMPC1 and SMPD1 and 24 for the SMPC2 and SMPD2. In each, the minimal reliability levelpis set to 95 percent and the upper bound ujinvested in a security j is set to 20 percent. The problem instances differ in terms of the weight a balancing the relative importance of the objectives, the proportion of capitalqi,i=1,…,rallocated to each sub-portfolio, and the maximum loss leveldi,i=1,…,rtolerated for each sub-portfolio. Each problem instance is formulated with the EMP2 model which is the one providing the best solutions times (see Section 5.2). The instances are modeled with AMPL and solved with the Cplex 12.5.1 solver.The numerical experiments conducted in this section have three main objectives. The first one is to assess the applicability and the computational tractability of our reformulation approach to the proposed stochastic multi-portfolio optimization problems. The second one pertains to the derivation of managerial insights related to: (i) the effect of the different parameters on the composition of the sub-portfolios, and (ii) the impact of the decentralized and centralized financial investment approaches on the results obtained with the proposed downside risk multi-portfolio optimization models. The third one is to verify the robustness of the models. To that effect, we carry out a cross-validation analysis to check whether the results obtained on the testing set (data not used to determine the investment strategy) are aligned (in terms of return and reliability) with what is expected from the investment policy built on the basis of the data in the training set.For each of the seventy-two problem instances, optimality can be proven within 175 seconds (see Table 6). The optimal solution of the instances associated with the centralized investment approach (i.e., formulations SMPC1 and SMPC2) takes about 133 seconds on average, while the solution of the instances associated with the decentralized investment approach (i.e., formulations SMPD1 and SMPD2) is faster and takes less than one second (i.e., 0.65 second) on average. This is due to the significantly lower number of constraints included in the deterministic reformulations of SMPD1 and SMPD2. Note also that the formulations SMPC1 and SMPD1 in which eachdi,i=1,…,rtakes a fixed value can be solved faster than their counterparts SMPC2 and SMPD2 in whichdi,i=1,…,r*are decision variables.To evaluate the impact of the parameters a, q, and d (for SMPC1 and SMPD1 only), we consider the trios of problem instances that differ only in terms of one single parameter.The parameter a defines the relative importance of the two objectives (i.e., reliability and return) and has in our experiments a marginal impact on the composition of the optimal portfolios. Among the twenty-four triplets of instances that differ only in terms of the value attributed to a, we observe a difference in the composition of the optimal portfolio in only seven out of the 24 cases. The composition of the portfolios is particularly stable with respect to a for the centralized problem instances. For those, in only two of the sixteen triplets of instances we have a difference in the optimal portfolio when a is modified. Increasing the importance of an objective by up to 20 percent does not appear to be sufficient to have a strong impact on the composition of the portfolio.The parametersqi,i=1,…,r*define the proportion of capital allocated to each sub-portfolio i and have a clear impact on the composition of the portfolio, and on the return and reliability objectives. In almost all cases, the lowest reliability level is obtained when the proportion of capital allocated to the equity sub-portfolio is the largest (i.e., 40 percent). Interestingly, with the SMPC1 decentralized investment model, the expected return that can be achieved is the largest when the proportion of capital allocated to the equity sub-portfolio is the largest.The parametersdi,i=1,…,rdetermine the loss that must not be exceeded with a certain probability level. The optimal expected return for SMPC1 and SMPD1 with fixed parameter diis the lowest when the values assigned to diare the largest (except in three instances) and is a consequence of the trade-off between mean return and downside risk. The optimal objective value of SMPC1 and SMPD1 decreases monotonically with the values taken by di. In Tables 7and 8, we refer to the average, smallest, and largest values with the abbreviations AV, SM, and LA.For both the centralized SMPC1 and decentralized SMPD1 models, the parameter setting leading to the largest objective value is obtained when the weight a is equal to a3 and gives a priority (20 percent more important) to the return objective, when the allowable loss levels are the highest, and when the capital is equally split between the three sub-portfolios.As above-mentioned, the stochastic multi-portfolio optimization models SMPD1 and SMPD2 for the decentralized investment approach are easier to solve than their counterparts SMPC1 and SMPC2 for the centralized investment approach, since they contain less binary variables and a significantly smaller number of constraints.In each problem instance, the decentralized approach models generate a higher objective value. Indeed, the optimal objective value of SMPD1 (resp., SMPD2) is always at least equal to the optimal objective value for SMPC1 (resp., SMPC2). This highlights that the decentralized approach models SMPD1 and SMPD2 are less constraining than the centralized approach models SMPC1 and SMPC2. In SMPC1 and SMPC2, the optimization is carried out with respect to the joint probabilistic constraint (43) which is more constraining than the set of constraints (43) included in SMPD1 and SMPD2 ((43) ⇒ (51)). Also, the concentration constraints (45) in SMPC1 and SMPC2 are more restrictive than the ones (52) in SMPD1 and SMPD2. The decentralization of the investment decisions does not permit to impose the same concentration limitations (i.e., at most 20 percent in each security), since some securities can be included in several sub-portfolios managed by different managers.For forty-five of the forty-eight decentralized problem instances SMPD1 and SMPD2, the optimal portfolio includes at least one position exceeding 20 percent. With SMPD1, the position in the Virtus Emerging Markets Opportunities (resp., Invesco Asia Pacific Growth and Henderson European Focus) fund exceeds the 20 percent threshold 50 percent (resp., 12.5 percent and 45.8 percent) of the time. With SMPD2, the position in the TCW Emerging Markets Income (resp., Henderson European Focus) fund exceeds 20 percent in 2/3 (resp., all) of the instances. This shows that the decentralization approach can lead to concentration and loss of diversification issues as individual managers have hardly any incentive to take into account the correlation of their fund returns with these of other managers (Blake et al., 2013). Elton and Gruber (2004) acknowledge this issue but note that it is possible to overcome, to some extent, the lack of coordination between managers and the ensuing loss of diversification by imposing rules to asset managers and crafting appropriate managerial incentive contracts. Schleifer (1985) adds that the recourse to multiple managers can induce a “yardstick competition” and that the resulting higher effort levels of the managers can further improve their performance.The return obtained with SMPD1 (resp., SMPD2) is equal or above the expected return obtained with SMPC1 (resp., SMPC2) for 58.33 percent (resp., all) the problem instances. Table 7 shows that the average, lowest, and largest return levels for SMPD1 exceeds those obtained with SMPC1. The objective value obtained with SMPD1 (resp., SMPD2) is strictly larger than the one obtained with SMPC1 (resp., SMPC2) for each problem instance. Clearly, the compositions of the decentralized optimal sub-portfolios differ from these of the centralized optimal sub-portfolios. This corroborates what Sharpe (1981) observed for the mean-variance models, namely that the centralized optimal solution to the mean-variance problem is different from the optimal linear combination of mean-variance efficient portfolios for each specialized manager (see also Van Binsbergen et al. (2008)).The entire portfolio’s average (resp., minimum and maximum) loss∑i=13qiditaken over all instances amounts to 1.9 percent (resp., 1.7 percent and 2.1 percent) and 1.8 percent (resp., 1.5 percent and 2 percent) for SMPC2 and SMPD2, respectively (Table 8). The average, minimal, and maximal loss levels are lower for and SMPD2 than they are for and SMPC2 for each sub-portfolio and for the entire portfolio.For each problem instance, we use the asset allocation derived by considering the training data only and observe the average return of the portfolio over the testing period and the reliability to obtain such a return level. The proposed models cross-validate well as shown by the following statistics. The reliability requirement is satisfied for all the seventy-two problem instances over the testing period. The proportion of times that the loss of the portfolio is below the prescribed maximal loss level is below 5 percent. For twenty-one (resp., eighteen) of the twenty-four problem instances SMPD1 (resp., SMPC1), the average return over the testing period exceeds the one over the training period. Similarly, for all (resp., eight of) the twelve problem instances SMPD2 (resp., SMPC2), the average return over the testing period exceeds the one over the training period.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We propose a new approach for a class of multi-objective stochastic programming problems. The problems include a joint probabilistic constraint with multi-row random technology matrix or random right-hand side vector. The probability level in the chance constraint is defined as a decision variable. The weighted linear objective function includes a revenue and a reliability component. The scalarization parameter that determines the relative importance of the objectives can be viewed as the marginal rate of substitution of reliability for revenue.This study will have wide-reaching contributions, as the form MOPCP arises in various problem backgrounds (see, e.g., network reliability (Rengarajan et al., 2013), disaster management (Ang & De Leon, 1996), water management (Morgan et al., 1993), production scheduling (Sengupta & Portillo-Campbell, 1973)), and industrial sectors (see, e.g., siderurgy, finance). On the modeling and algorithmic side, we propose new formulations as well as solution methods for the class of NP-hard multi-objective problems. While a variety of algorithmic methods exist for probabilistically constrained problems, no exact efficient reformulation or solution method is available for the class of problems studied here. We derive new MILP reformulations that are equivalent to problems MOPCP-V with random right-hand side vector and that are inner approximations or equivalent to problems MOPCP-M with multi-row random technology matrix. We identify a series of general conditions for problems of form MOPCP-M under which the proposed MILP formulations are equivalent. A key feature of the approach is that the number of binary variables in the MILP formulations does not depend directly on the number of scenarios, and is equal to the number of cut points used in the binarization. This means that the MILP reformulations of the MOPCP problems have the same problem size and number of binary variables as the reformulations of the standard single-objective probabilistically-constrained problems with random right-hand side vector (Lejeune, 2012a) and with random technology matrix (Kogan & Lejeune, 2014), both having fixed reliability level.A key motivation to study this class of stochastic optimization problems stems from the multi-portfolio financial optimization area. To our best knowledge, this study is the first to propose stochastic multi-objective, multi-portfolio optimization problems and to derive reformulations for such problems that can be efficiently solved. The proposed multi-portfolio financial optimization models balance return with downside risk, and can be used in a centralized fashion (i.e., one generalist manager has a balanced mandate across asset classes) or a decentralized one (i.e., specialized managers each have a mandate for a particular asset class). The tests show: (i) the applicability of the models and the ability to solve them efficiently; (ii) the effect of the different parameters (tolerated loss levels, scalarization parameter, capital allocated to each sub-portfolio) on the composition of the sub-portfolios; (iii) the possible pros and cons of the decentralized and centralized financial investment approaches; (iv) the robustness of the proposed models.Our computational study demonstrates modeling insights about the efficiency of the reformulations and about the solution sensitivity with respect to the relative importance of the objectives. The computational times differ greatly among the proposed MILP reformulations. The study provides guidance to select the most appropriate formulation and to specify the value of the scalarization parameter defining the relative importance of the several pursued goals. The results show first that the revenues are a decreasing function of the reliability level. Second, the rate of substitution of revenue for reliability varies strongly with and is a nonlinear and non-monotone function of the optimal reliability level p*.ProofLetωk′be the “extreme” recombination such thatβjlk′=1,l=1,…,nj,j∈J. Clearly,F(ωk′)=1andωk′∈Ω¯B+(p). For any λ satisfying (9)–(11), we have∑j∈J∑l=1njλjlβjlk′=∑j∈J∑l=1njλjl≥∑j∈J1=|J|.which induces (9) and make it redundant.Consider an arbitrary separating structure (λ, |J|) feasible for (9)–(11). All possible Boolean vectors belong either to the setΩ¯B+(p)of relevant p-sufficient Boolean vectors, or the setΩ¯B−(p)of relevant p-insufficient Boolean vectors, or the set of(ΩB−(p)∖Ω¯B−(p))of nonrelevant p-insufficient realizations. Constraint (9) prevents anyωk∈Ω¯B−(p)from satisfying (55):(55)∑j∈J∑l=1njλjlβjlk≥|J|.Anyωk∈(ΩB−(p)∖Ω¯B−(p))is such thatβj1k=0for at least one j ∈ J. Combining this result with the regularization property (see (7)), we have:βjlk=0,l=1,…,njforatleastonej∈J,∀ωk∈(ΩB−(p)∖Ω¯B−(p)).Therefore,∑l=1njλjlβjlk=0,foratleastonej∈J,∀ωk∈(ΩB−(p)∖Ω¯B−(p)),implying that∑j∈J∑l=1njλjlβjlk≤|J|−1,ωk∈(ΩB−(p)∖Ω¯B−(p)),and thus that (55) does not hold for anyωk∈(ΩB−(p)∖Ω¯B−(p)). Hence, any k for which (55) holds should belong toΩ¯B+(p).□ProofResult (i): Any solution feasible for R1 is feasible for (2). Due to constraints (9)–(11), it follows from Theorem 1 that anyλ^∈{λ:}(9)–(11) defines a separating structure(λ^,r)of a threshold tight minorant f. Hence, we defineG={ωk∈Ω¯B(p):∑i=1r∑l=1niλ^ilβilk=r},and we have thatG⊆Ω¯B+(p). LetL={(i,l):λ^il=1,i=1,…,r,l=1,…,ni}. For any ωk∈ G, the binarization process (6) implies that(56)ωik≥cil,(i,l)∈L.Further, we have from the definition of the sufficient-equivalent set (8) that∃ωk′∈Gsuch that:(57)ωik′=cil,(i,l)∈L.Constraints (10) and (11) ensure that exactly one termλ^ilcilin each summation∑l=1niλilcilof constraint (12) is nonzero and equal to cil, (j, l) ∈ L. Hence, (57) can be rewritten as(58)ωik′=cil=∑l=1niλilcil,(i,l)∈L.Given thatωk′∈G⊆Ω¯+(p),we haveP(ζ≤ωk′)≥p. This implies that(59)∑j=1mtijxj≤ωik′,i=1,…,r⇒P(∑j=1mtijxj≤ζi,i=1,…,r)≥pwhich, together with (58), leads to:∑j=1mtijxj≤∑l=1niλilcil,i=1,…,r⇒(2).Result (ii): Any solution feasible for (2) is feasible for R1. For anyωk′′such thatP(ζ≤ωk′′)≥p,the definition of the sufficient-equivalent set of cut points implies that there existsωk′∈Ω¯B+(p)such thatωk′≤ωk′′andωik′=⋁l=1,…,nicil,i=1,…,r.Letli*=argmaxi{cil:cil=ωik′},i=1,…,r. What is left to prove is that the vector λ′(60)λil′={1ifl=li*0otherwise,i=1,…,ris feasible for R1. Clearly, λ′ is feasible for (10)–(12). From (60), we have λ′ feasible for (9) if(61)∑i=1r∑l=1niλil′βilk=∑i=1rλili*′βili*k=∑i=1rβili*k≤r−1,k=1,…,|Ω¯B−(p)|.The feasibility of the above constraints is ensured ifβili*k=0foratleastonei=1,…,r,k=1,…,|Ω¯B−(p)|.For anyωk′∈Ω¯B+(p),there is noωk∈Ω¯B−(p)such thatβk≥βk′(see (8) for the sufficient-equivalent set of cut points). This implies that(βi1k,…,βinik)<(βi1k′,…,βinik′)foratleastonei,∀ωk∈Ω¯B−(p).Leth∈{1,…,r}be an index such that(βh1k,…,βhnhk)<(βh1k′,…,βhnhk′)for an arbitraryωk∈Ω¯B−(p). Sincelh*=argmaxl=1,…,nhβhlk′=1,we have for anyl>lh*thatβhlk=βhlk′=0. Thus, vectorsβk′and βkdiffer only in the firstlh*components, and we have(βh1k,…,βhlh*k)<(βh1k′,…,βhlh*k′).The regularization property (7) indicates that this relationship can only be true ifβhlh*k=0<βhlh*k′=1. This shows that, for anyωk∈Ω¯B−(p),βili*k=0for at least onei∈{1,…,r},which results in∑i=1rβili*kto be bounded from above by(r−1)for eachωk∈Ω¯B−(p)and implies that λ′ is feasible for (61) and thus (9). This provides the result that we set out to prove.□ProofLemma 1 indicates that the feasible region of MOPCP-V is defined by constraints (10)–(12) and (13). Therefore, we only need to demonstrate that the new constraints (15)–(17) inserted in EMP1-V enforce (13) without cutting any feasible solution for MOPCP-V, and permit to capture the reliability level corresponding to a solution (x, λ, α) feasible for EMP1-V.Result (i):Theorem 1 indicates that for any arbitrary vectorλ˜feasible for (10)–(11) and (13), there exists at least oneωk∈Ω¯B+(p̲),such that:∑i=1r∑l=1niλ˜ilβilk=r. The construction of the set of sufficient-equivalent cut points further implies that for any feasible solution (and the corresponding integral separation structure(λ˜,r)), there existsωk*∈Ω¯B+(p̲)such that we have for eachi=1,…,r:(62)βilk*=1,l=1,…,li*,andβilk*=0,l>li*withli*suchthat:λ˜ili*=1.Given thatP(ζ≤ωk*)=hs,ωk*∈Hs⊆Ω¯B+(p̲),the reliability level that can be achieved withλ˜is hs. It follows from Theorem 1 that(63)∑i=1r∑l=1niλ˜ilβilk≤r−1,k=1,…,|Ω¯B−(hs)|,and therefore that αscan take value 1 in each of the inequalities:(64)αs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλ˜ilβilk≤r,k=1,…,|Ω¯B−(hs)|.Note that the variable αswill always take value 1 when allowed, since EMP1-V is a maximization problem and all coefficients(hs−hs−1)of the variables αsin (14) are nonnegative.Result (ii): In order for the variable αsto be an indicator of whether the reliability level hsis reached (αs=1) or not (αs=0), we must also verify the solutionλ˜defined in (62) forcesαd=0,∀d≥s. Ford=s,one can immediately see thatωk*(see (62)) is such that∑i=1r∑l=1niλ˜ilβilk*=r,which implies that αsmust be equal to 0. For d > s,ωk*∈Ω¯B−(hd),and for any d > s, the inequality(65)αd+∑i=1r∑l=1niλ˜ilβilk*≤r,forces αdto take value 0 for each d > s. This justifies the substitution of (63) and (17) for (13).This result, along with part (i) in which it is shown that each variable α will always take value 1 if allowed, explains why the variables α do not have to be defined as binary ones and can be defined on [0, 1] as in (17). It follows that the second term ofa∑s∈S(hs−hs−1)αsin (14) defines the reliability level corresponding to a feasible solution (x, λ, γ, α).Result (iii): Finally, we identify a number of redundant constraints in (63). The preorderωk⪯ωk′⇔βk≤βk′in Definition 6 implies that(66)∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk′duetoλil∈{0,1}∀i,l.This implies that if the k′th inequality (64) holds, then the kth inequality (64) is also satisfied. Therefore,αs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk′≤r⇒αs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤rforanyfeasibleλ.Thus, each constraint (64) associated with a dominatedωk∈Ω¯B−(hs)is redundant, and we can replace (64) by the more parsimonious one (15). This completes the proof.□ProofTo establish the equivalence between EMP1-V and EMP2-V, we show that constraints (15) are implied by the constraints (18)–(19) in EMP2-V.First, we observe that constraints (15) are implied by their subset(67)αs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤r,k=1,…,|Ht|,t<s∈Swhens=1and thusωk∈H0=Ω˜B−(p̲). For any s ∈ S and t < s, the recombinations in Htare hs-insufficient, and thus belong toΩ¯B−(hs). Therefore, ifαs=1is feasible for (67), we recover∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤r−1,for allωk∈Ω¯B−(hs),and thusλis feasible for (10)–(11), and (67). It follows from Theorem 3 that every solution (x, λ) feasible for (10)–(12) and (67) satisfiesP(∑j=1mtijxj≤ζi,i=1,…,r)≥hs.Next, consider a feasible solution (x, λ, α) for EMP2-V with∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk*=rfor someωk*∈Hs*with binary imageβilk*,i=1,…,r,l=1,…,nidefined by (62). For anyωk∈Hs*−1,we haveβilk<βilk*for at least one component (i, l). Therefore, we have∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk<∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk*=r∀ωk∈Hs*−1,and (18) allowsαs*=1. The precedence constraints (19) enforceαt=1,t=1,…,s*−1.Finally, consider constraints (67) (for all s ∈ S andt<s−1) that are not included in (18). Note that for anyωkt∈Htwithht<hs−1,one can find at least oneωk∈Hs−1such thatβilkt≤βilkandβi′l′kt<βi′l′kfor at least one (i′, l′). Therefore, we have∑i=1r∑l=1niβilkt<∑i=1r∑l=1niβilk⇒∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilkt≤∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilksince the variables λilare nonnegative. By adding αsto both sides, we obtainαs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilkt≤αs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤rkt=1,…,|Ht|,t<s−1,s∈Sshowing that constraints (67) are implied by constraints (18). This demonstrates the equivalence between EMP2-V and EMP1-V and completes the proof.□ProofWe proceed as in Result (i) of Theorem 2. LetG′={ωk∈Ω¯B(p):∑i=1r∑j=1m∑l=1nijλ^ijlβijlk=rm},which implies that:G′⊆Ω¯B+(p). LetL={(i,j,l):λ^ijl=1,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l=1,…,nij}. For any ωk∈ G′, (6) implies that(68)ωijk≥cijl,(i,j,l)∈L,and we know from (8) that∃ωk′∈G′such that:(69)ωijk′=cijl,(i,j,l)∈L,which in turn, based on the reasoning presented in Theorem 2, leads to(70)ωijk′=cijl=∑l=1nijλijlcijl,(i,j,l)∈L.Therefore,P(ξ≤ωk)≥pandP(∑j=1mξijxj≤∑j=1mxjωijk′,i=1,…,r)≥p.Hence,∑j=1mxjωijk′,i=1,…,r⇒P(∑j=1mxjξij≤di,i=1,…,r)≥p,which, together with (70), further implies that∑j=1mxj(∑l=1nijλijlcijl)≤di,i=1,…,r⇒(4).This completes the proof.□ProofLetzj=∑l=1nijyijlcijl,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m. Due to constraints (10) (i.e.,∑l=1nijλijl=1,i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m), exactly one variableλijl,l=1,…,nijcan take value 1 for eachi=1,…,r,j=1,…,m. Thus, for alli=1,…,r,j=1,…,mzj=∑l=1nijyijlcijl=∑l=1nij(xjλijl)cijltakes the value of xjcijlfor somel∈{1,…,nij}if the correspondingλijl=1. As a result,(71)zj≥cijlxj−cijluj(1−λijl),i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l=1,…,nij(72)zj≤cijlxj+cijluj(1−λijl),i=1,…,r,j=1,…,m,l=1,…,nij,enforcezj=xjcijlfor some l whenλijl=1,and are not binding when the solution does not pick the corresponding cut point (i.e., whenλijl=0).We strengthen the valid inequalities (71)–(72) by reducing the value of the big-M coefficients ujand setting each to(x¯j−x̲j),j=1,…,m. Recall that the cut points are sorted out in ascending order (see (6)). To establish the validity of the given upper and lower bounds of xj, j ∈ J, we distinguish three cases: (i)cijnij>cij1>0,(ii)0>cijnij>cij1,and (iii)cijnij>0>cij1. We substitutezj,j=1,…,mfor∑l=1nijyijlcijlin (33), and replace the McCormick inequalities (29)–(32) by (35) and (36). This completes the proof.□ProofCase (i): The stochastic inequalityxj′ξij′≤dican be rewritten as: (i)xj′di≤1ξij′⇔−xj′di≥−1ξij′if diandξij′have the same sign, and (ii)xj′di≥1ξij′if diandξij′have opposite signs. This corresponds to the MOPCP-V formulation with random right-hand side vector. Therefore, using Theorem 2, we can conclude that the feasible area defined by (21)–(23) is equivalent to the feasible set defined by (25). Ifdi=0,thenxj′is forced to be equal to 0 ifξij′is non-negative, and is unbounded otherwise and the constraint is redundant.Case (ii): As in (i), we have a single random variable in each stochastic inequality.Case (iii): Letϑi=∑j=1mξij,i=1,…,r. Constraint (27) becomes(73)P(ϑixi≤di,i=1,…,r)≥p.As ξijis discretely distributed with finite support, so is ϑi. As (73) has the same form as (25), the proof of Case (i) applies here too.Case (iv): The probabilistic constraint (28) can be rewritten as(74)P(ϑi∑j=1mxj≤di,i=1,…,r)≥p,which is similar to (26).Case (v): The proofs of (i)–(iv) essentially show that each stochastic inequality is equivalent to a collection of inequalities of type (i).□ProofRecall that setHs={ωk:P(ζ≤ωk)=hs},s=1,…,|S|andH0=Ω˜B−(p̲). Constraints (76) with binary requirements πs∈ {0, 1}, s ∈ S indicate that we can only select one value among{h1,…,hS}as the reliability level p. Moreover, we can relax the binary constraints and include constraints  (77) by noting that exactly one πs, s ∈ S takes value one at optimum. This is due to the fact that we maximize the objective value in EMP1-V-SOS1 and the coefficients hs, s ∈ S are strictly positive.Suppose thatπs′=1for some s′, then for any t < s′ and any ωk∈ Ht,  (75) is enforced as∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤r−1.Clearly, we have⋃t<s1Ht⊆⋃t<s2Ht,for any s1 < s2 ∈ S. Thus any ωk∈ Ht, t < s ≤ s′ that is included in an inequality for πs, is also included in an inequality forπs′. For the other ωk∈ Htwhere t < s but s > s′, constraints (75) are not binding since we only requireP(∑j=1mtijxj≤ζi,i=1,…,r)≥hs′as (2) in MOPCP-V. The rest of the proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 3.□We use the concept of Special Ordered Set Variables of Type One (SOS1) to provide equivalent reformulations to those presented the main body of the paper. Let πs, s ∈ S denote a binary variable taking value 1 if the attained probability level is hsand 0 otherwise.Theorem 9The MILP problem(75)EMP1−V−SOS1:maxx≥0:Ax≥bq⊤x+a∑s∈Shsπssubjectto(10)−(12)πs+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤rk=1,…,|Ht|,t<s∈S(76)∑s∈Sπs=1(77)0≤πs≤1s∈Sis equivalent to MOPCP-V.The proof is given in Appendix A.8. We shall provide another equivalent MOPCP-V reformulation by replacing the variables αs, s ∈ S in EMP2-V with the SOS1 variables πs, s ∈ S, yielding(78)P2−V−SOS1aEMP2−V−SOS1:maxx≥0:Ax≥bq⊤x+a∑s∈Shsπssubjectto(10)−(12);(76)−(77)∑t≥sπt+∑i=1r∑l=1niλilβilk≤rk=1,…,|Hs−1|,s∈SSimilarly, for MOPCP-M, the following two formulations are equivalent to EMP1-M and EMP2-M given in Theorem 8. We omit the proof here.(79)EMP1−M−SOS1:maxx≥0:Ax≥bq⊤x+a∑s=1|S|hsπssubjectto(76)−(77);(21)−(23);(34)−(36)πs+∑i=1r∑j=1m∑l=1nijλijlβijlk≤rm,k=1,…,|Ht|,t<s∈S(80)EMP2−M−SOS1:maxx≥0:Ax≥bq⊤x+a∑s=1|S|hsπssubjectto(76)−(77);(21)−(23);(34)−(36)∑t≥sπt+∑i=1r∑j=1m∑l=1nijλijlβijlk≤rm,k=1,…,|Hs−1|,s∈STable 9describes the p-sufficient and the non-dominated p-insufficient recombinations, their binary images (relevant Boolean vectors), and their partitioning intoΩ¯B−(0.8)andΩ¯B+(0.8).Table 9 illustrates thatk=6,9,11,12,15belong toΩ¯B−(0.6). The system S1 of inequalities reads:λ111+λ112+λ121+λ122+λ131+λ211+λ221+λ231≤5(21)fork=6λ111+λ121+λ131+λ211+λ212+λ221+λ231+λ232≤5(21)fork=9λ111+λ121+λ122+λ131+λ211+λ221+λ231+λ232≤5(21)fork=11λ111+λ121+λ122+λ131+λ211+λ212+λ221+λ231≤5(21)fork=12λ111+λ112+λ121+λ131+λ211+λ221+λ231+λ232≤5(21)fork=15λ111+λ112=1(22)fori=1,j=1λ121+λ122=1(22)fori=1,j=2λ131=1(22)fori=1,j=3λ211+λ212=1(22)fori=2,j=1λ221=1(22)fori=2,j=2λ231+λ232=1(22)fori=2,j=3λ111,λ112,λ121,λ122,λ131,λ211,λ212,λ221,λ231,λ232∈{0,1}(23)x1(3λ111+4λ112)+x2(3λ121+5λ122)+x3(5λ131)≤13(24)forrowi=1x1(2λ211+3λ212)+x2(5λ221)+x3(4λ231+5λ232)≤27(24)forrowi=2.