@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Frequency optimization in public transportation systems: Formulation and metaheuristic approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new MILP formulation; it computes the global optimum for small cases.Improvements over travel time of around 3% are obtained for a small real case.We propose a metaheuristic to solve large-sized cases.The metaheuristic is applied to a larger real case, comprising more than 130 lines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Bus frequency optimization,Mixed integer linear programming,Tabu Search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study the transit frequency optimization problem, which aims to determine the time interval between subsequent buses for a set of public transportation lines given by their itineraries, i.e., sequences of stops and street sections. The solution should satisfy a given origin–destination demand and a constraint on the available fleet of buses. We propose a new mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulation for an already existing model, originally formulated as a nonlinear bilevel one. The proposed formulation is able to solve to optimality real small-sized instances of the problem using MILP techniques. For solving larger instances we propose a metaheuristic which accuracy is estimated by comparing against exact results (when possible). Both exact and approximated approaches are tested by using existing cases, including a real one related to a small-city which public transportation system comprises 13 lines. The magnitude of the improvement of that system obtained by applying the proposed methodologies, is comparable with the improvements reported in the literature, related to other real systems. Also, we investigate the applicability of the metaheuristic to a larger-sized real case, comprising more than 130 lines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When designing a public transportation system, the planners take decisions that impact in the cost of the system, which is determined by the monetary cost of operation and fares, and the travel time of the users. In systems based on buses, the literature identifies five stages for designing a public transportation system (Ceder & Wilson, 1986): route network design, frequency setting, timetable design, fleet assignment and crew assignment. In real systems, usually these stages are performed sequentially, where decisions taken at a given stage influence decisions taken at subsequent stages. Also, these decisions are taken for different planning horizons, whether the context of the planning is strategic (long term), tactical (medium term) or operational (short term).The frequency setting problem implies to determine the time interval between subsequent buses on the lines, based on their itinerary (sequence of street segments and bus stops) and the demand given by an origin–destination matrix. During the strategic planning of a public transportation system (in particular, when designing the itinerary of the lines, i.e. the route network), a preliminary setting of frequencies is needed. Also, during the tactical planning it is necessary to adjust the frequencies to demand variations along different seasons of the year or time of day, or as response to changes in the route network design (Desaulniers & Hickman, 2007). The frequencies impact both on the users (waiting time, capacity of the lines) and also in the operators (operational cost determined strongly by the size of the required fleet).The frequency setting problem has been approached in the literature as an optimization problem, where usually the objective function states the minimization of the overall travel time of the users (walking, on-board and waiting), under a fleet size constraint as well as other infrastructure and policy constraints (Constantin & Florian, 1995; Han & Wilson, 1982; Schéele, 1981). Since frequency optimization models should include measures relative to the performance of the systems from the viewpoint of the users (typically the waiting time), they should include a sub-model of the behavior of the users with respect to a set of bus lines. Such a model, known as assignment sub-model, usually has a complex formulation and solution method, specially when the influence of the bus capacity is considered in the modeling of the user behavior. That complexity determines an important part of the overall complexity of the frequency optimization model. Moreover, the validity of an assignment model for public transportation, in most cases depends on the real context where it is applied.The existing studies concerning frequency optimization usually involve nonlinear models which are solved approximately (Constantin & Florian, 1995; Schéele, 1981). The nonlinearity arises from the fact that the waiting time is inversely proportional to the frequencies; also, the modeling of the interaction among different lines results in nonlinear expressions. The existing models consider assignment sub-models exhibiting different degrees of realism. The cases used to test the methodologies range from small-sized and fictitious cases to medium-sized cases related to real cities comprising up to 100 lines approximately (Constantin & Florian, 1995; Yu, Yang, & Yao, 2010).Taking into account this state of the art (more widely discussed in Section 2), in this work we contribute in two specific directions:•We propose a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulation for an already existing frequency optimization model (Constantin & Florian, 1995). Given the nature of the proposed formulation, it can be solved exactly by using a commercial MILP solver. Moreover, it includes an assignment sub-model (Spiess & Florian, 1989) that is widely accepted in the literature.With the aim of solving large-sized instances of the problem (systems comprising more than 100 lines), we propose a metaheuristic which accuracy (in the sense of distance to optimum) is estimated by comparing against results produced by the exact model (when possible, i.e. for the smaller instances).Concerning the first contribution, we note that no method existing in the literature is able to find solutions with proven (global) optimality. This is particularly important in the transit frequency optimization problem, since the improvements reported over user’s travel time of current solutions are relatively small (Constantin & Florian, 1995; Yu et al., 2010). Therefore, given the heuristic nature of existing solution methods, it remains unclear whether is possible to improve the results even more.Our metaheuristic is able to find solutions which accuracy is estimated (when possible) by comparing against exact solutions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first published approximated method which results are validated against optimal ones using a real case. The metaheuristic produces results in relatively short time and it includes routines which execute in polynomial time (with respect to the number of lines, size of the underlying graph model and density of the origin–destination matrix), so it is suitable to be applied for solving larger cases.The models and algorithms proposed in this work are applied to real cases and fictitious ones, which illustrate their applications.The structure of the article is as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review while Section 3 contains a description of the mathematical model and the proposed mathematical formulation. Section 4 describes the metaheuristic proposed to solve the problem approximately while Section 5 presents numerical results of both exact and approximated methods over different test cases. Finally, Section 6 comments conclusions and further work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
