@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A frontier measure of U.S. banking competition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Traditional measures of competition are unrelated to each other.We develop a frontier-based measure of banking competition.Competition can be assessed by service line, even if output and price data are missing.Business loans and securities are competitive; consumer loans, payments, and other activities are not.The Herfindahl–Hirschman (HHI) measure does a poor job and should be supplemented with other measures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
(D) Productivity and competitiveness,Competition,Banks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The three main measures of competition (HHI, Lerner index, and H-statistic) are uncorrelated for U.S. banks. We investigate why this occurs, propose a frontier measure of competition, and apply it to five major bank service lines. Fee-based banking services comprise 35 percent of bank revenues so assessing competition by service line is preferred to using a single measure for traditional activities extended to the entire bank. As the Lerner index and the H-statistic together explain only 1 percent of HHI variation and the HHI is similarly unrelated to the frontier method developed here, current merger/acquisition guidelines should be adjusted as banking concentration seems unrelated to likely more accurate competition measures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The three standard indicators of banking competition used in empirical studies (HHI, Lerner index, and H-statistic) measure competition differently. Even so, the expectation would be that when the HHI suggests competition is weak, the Lerner index and the H-statistic could generally be counted upon to draw a similar conclusion. For the banking industry, however, these measures are essentially uncorrelated with each other and inferences regarding competition appear to be measure-specific: results obtained with any one measure need not be confirmed by either of the other two.While regulators rely on the HHI because it has been predictive in concentrated industries, this measure shows only the potential for competitive/collusive behavior and is thus augmented with additional market/behavioral information (e.g., U.S. Department of Justice, 2010). Academics have for solid theoretical reasons favored the Lerner index and/or the H-statistic which seeks to measure realized competition. Using a procedure based on efficient frontier analysis, we derive inferences of competition separately for five bank service lines which the other competition measures, except for loans and deposits, are currently unable to do.The HHI focus on market shares does not account for how they may have been achieved—through lower costs or by uncompetitive behavior, the so-called efficient structure controversy (cf., Berger, 1995). If lower costs have been an important reason for some banks in achieving a relatively high HHI, this will overstate the apparent lack of competition. While the Lerner index examines the spread between average price and estimated marginal cost all divided by average price, the influence of scale economy, productivity, and risk differences among banks cloud the interpretation. Observed input costs will be higher than their true value for banks with greater productivity, making productive banks appear to be more competitive than they are since their measured spread from output price will be lower. Passing on these productivity-reduced costs would lower observed output prices making the bank appear to be even more competitive. Here the influence is productivity-related, rather than due to competition. The H-statistic faces much the same problem as it relates changes in total revenues to changes in observed input prices, holding output level constant. For both measures, observed factor prices need not reflect their true value at more productive banks. Finally, a lack of detailed price and output data limits the application of the three standard measures to traditional loan and deposit bank service lines but neglects fee-based services that generate over a third of bank revenues. Our competition efficiency (CE) approach is not limited in this regard.In what follows, the lack of a correlation among the HHI, Lerner index, and H-statistic are illustrated for U.S. banks in Section 2, a condition that holds for Europe as well. Our revenue-based competition frontier measure is explained in Section 3 as is our econometric framework. Section 4 contains our results where we assess relative competition among five bank service lines. In Section 5 we illustrate how the competition frontier differs from the three standard competition measures. Characteristics of the most and least competitive banks are outlined in Section 6 while conclusions are presented in Section 7.Our analysis is restricted to banks with $100 million or more in assets in 2010. This covers over 98 percent of all commercial bank assets and close to 1.9 million workers.11Banks having less than $100 million in assets are smaller than the average branch office at large banks ($125 million). The average size of the 2300 commercial banks with less than $100 million is only $57 million.Various screens were applied to eliminate shell banks, special purpose banks, banks with no loans, or no deposits, or no full time employees, etc., or that contained variables beyond five standard deviations from the mean and are clearly unrepresentative of the banking industry. The final sample contained 2655 banks and the 382 institutions with more than $1 billion in assets accounted for 90 percent of total sampled assets. These large banks are the focus of our analysis as they have by far the greatest impact on the competitive efficiency of the U.S. banking sector.All bank income, expense, and balance sheet data (deposits excepted) are reported at the level of the bank regardless of where it operates. This means that our competition indicators reflect the weighted average of the local and regional markets they are in. The median bank has branches in only two Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs).22MSA refers to the 956 MSA and non-MSA counties that are covered in the FDIC Summary of Deposits data.Although the subset of billion dollar banks have a broader geographical representation, the median billion dollar bank has branches in only four MSAs and operates in only one state out of 50. Even at the 99th percentile, the average billion dollar bank has offices in only 26 states. While a deposit-based HHI can be computed for each MSA, all the measures in this study—including our frontier indicator—will reflect the weighted average of the separate markets they are in.Following Hirtle (2007), a deposit-based HHI was determined for each of the 2655 commercial banks for 2010. Lerner indices and H-statistics were estimated using a standard translog or Fourier specification applied to quarterly bank level data over 2008–2010. These specifications and the HHI calculation are shown in the appendix. Table 1 shows the overall average of all three competition measures for the 382 banks with total assets (TA) greater than $1 billion (accounting for 90 percent of total assets) as well as the 2273 banks with assets between $100 million and $1 billion (accounting for 10 percent). We also ranked each of the three competition measures separately and report their average values for the most and least competitive quartiles. The least competitive quartile of banks has the highest HHIs and Lerner indices but the lowest H-statistics (where 1.0 is the expected maximum for the most competitive group).The U.S. Justice Department’s 2010 horizontal merger guideline suggests that markets with an HHI below 1500 can be considered to be unconcentrated. The guideline also suggests that a moderately concentrated market exists when the HHI lies between 1500 and 2500 while a highly concentrated market has a HHI above 2500. Based on the average HHI in Table 1 for billion dollar banks, U.S. institutions appear to operate in unconcentrated and hence apparently competitive markets. Indeed some 75 percent of billion dollar banks have a HHI at or below this level. In the sample of smaller banks (N = 2273), 4.0 percent of banks are in highly concentrated markets (with an HHI ≥ 2500), while only 3.1 percent of the billion dollar banks are (N = 382). Using the stronger 1992 guidelines, the percent of banks in highly concentrated markets (HHI > 1800) would be 16.1 percent and 16.0 percent, respectively. For the same banks, the average mark-up of price over marginal cost is 26 percent while the average H-statistic is 0.82.33The median HHI is slightly smaller (at 1271) than the average in Table 1 while the median values of the Lerner index and H-statistic are equal to their averages for billion dollar banks. Marginal cost from the less flexible translog function yields an average Lerner index of 0.31. Replacing marginal cost with average cost—which is observed rather than estimated—gives an average Lerner index of 0.26.As seen in the lower half of Table 1, similar average values were found for banks with $100 million to $1 billion in assets (as well as when the entire sample was used—not shown).The three competition measures in Table 1 are unrelated to one another as their R2s are effectively zero.44Some studies have noted that the Lerner index is not well related to the HHI (Maudos & Guevara, 2004) and others have shown the same for the H-statistic and HHI (Claessens & Laeven, 2004). What seems to be missing is looking at how the Lerner index is or is not related to the H-statistic. As far as we know, there are no studies comparing all three competition measures together (in banking or otherwise).This holds whether using the entire sample (first column) or the most or least competitive quartiles of the sample.55The bivariate correlation results are the same if marginal cost from a translog cost function for billion dollar banks replaces marginal cost from the Fourier function. Also, there is no change if average cost replaces marginal cost. The same holds if the number of bank branches replaces the value of each branch’s deposits used to weight the MSA and non-MSA counties for each bank’s HHI.The correlation coefficients (r) between the H-statistic and either the HHI or Lerner index are not shown but the signs here were at times the opposite (but small) of what they should have been. Similar results have been obtained for Europe. That is, these same three bank competition measures are almost unrelated to each other when compared across European countries over time and can be negatively related within the same country over time (Carbó, Humphrey, Maudos, & Molyneux, 2009).66Using aggregate data on 14 European countries over 1995–2001 covering 1912 banks, the R2 between the Lerner index and the H-statistic was only 0.06. Similarly, the R2 between the HHI and the Lerner index and H-statistic was, respectively, 0.09 and 0.05. Looking at each of the 14 countries separately over time, the relationship between the Lerner index and the H-statistic was positive in only eight out of 14 countries. (This was after the H-statistic was multiplied by − 1.0 so higher values of all three measures indicate less competition.) The relationship between the HHI and these two measures was positive in only eight and five countries, respectively.As shown below, however, there is a weak correspondence between these three measures—and with our frontier competition measure—when the data are sorted into quartiles of most and least competitive banks.They are weak because all three measures assess competition differently. A contributing factor could be that U.S. banking markets are not strong oligopolies. However, banking concentration in Europe is considerably greater than in the U.S. and the same three competition measures are only weakly correlated there. If banking was as concentrated as the steel and auto industry post WWII, the relationship among the three competition measures would likely be stronger. However, since 1994 no bank’s deposit market share can exceed 10 percent of nationwide deposits (and none did at that time). With one exception, this national limit can only be exceeded by de novo entry and/or market growth which is very slow, more costly, and much more competitive than bank expansion through merger or acquisition. An acquiring bank has to offer significantly higher deposit rates and/or lower loan rates to attract market share rather than just buy it outright.77The national deposit cap applies only to commercial banks. Two banks have each subsequently acquired a large savings and loan institution so their deposits both exceed 10 percent, the highest of which is 12 percent nationwide. There is also a 30 percent cap on statewide deposits of any single bank but, as state legislatures could change this cap, 20 have abolished it.This is why 72 percent of the past real growth of the 20 largest U.S. banks by 1980 was achieved through mergers and acquisitions (Rhoades, 1985). If more recent mergers were included, the figure would be considerably higher.While the relatively unconcentrated nature of U.S. banking may help explain why the HHI is unrelated to the other two measures, it is not clear why the Lerner index and H-statistic are also uncorrelated. The Lerner index reflects the spread of output price (Po) to marginal cost (MC) by individual banks averaged over 2008–2010. In banking, output price is typically approximated by the ratio of total revenue to total assets (TR/TA ) where total revenue isTR=PoQoandQo=TArepresents output quantity. As scale economies (SCE) are the ratio of marginal to average cost (AC), the Lerner index can be simplified toPo−AC·SCE.88As the variation of this unit spread across banks will accord well with its percentage value if divided by Poor AC, in this illustration we focus on the spread alone.In contrast, the H-statistic is based onTR=f(Pi,TA)where Pirepresents the price of inputs. The H-statistic itself is the sum of partial derivatives: ∑i∂TR/∂Pi. The H-statistic reflects the change in output price to input prices since output (measured as TA or some of its components) is being held constant. Assuming that average cost reflects the weighted average of input prices and neglecting a measurement issue,99Researchers assumePoQo/TA=Poand ∑i∂TR/∂Pi, holding TA constant, = ∑i∂Po/∂Pieven though Qo≠ TA. The inequality arises because 35 percent of total revenues are generated from non-interest income sources that do not have a corresponding asset value (or output indicator) in the balance sheet nor are these outputs reported elsewhere.these two competition measures—for comparison purposes—can be expressed as:Lerner index:Po−AC·SCEH-statistic:∂Po−∂AC.In effect, the Lerner index looks at the average level of the price-cost spread over a sample period while the H-statistic looks at changes in that spread and thus measure different aspects of competition.What can we make of the many past efforts to tie the HHI to either higher output prices or higher profits in banking? To the degree that these studies have been successful, they use prices and profits not adjusted for differences in underlying costs. Prices at some banks can be higher because of a lack of competition or because their operating costs are higher. Profits can be higher because their prices are higher or because their costs are lower. The consideration of costs along with competition is the basis for the efficient structure controversy. The Lerner index, H-statistic, and the frontier competition measure we develop here all try to separate the cost effect from the competition effect.The fact that U.S. regulators would view an average HHI of 1364 in Table 1 as indicating an unconcentrated (and presumedly competitive) banking market for deposits does not mean that all major banking services are competitive. We attempt to gauge the competitiveness of five different banking markets concerning consumer loans, business loans, payment activities, securities, and investment banking and other fee-based activities.1010Our data source was the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago which has up to 2010 appropriately combined the two bank Call Reports (031 for banks with domestic and foreign offices and 041 for banks with only domestic offices) to generate a consistent set of data (see http://www.chicagofed.org/webpages/banking/financial_institution_reports/commercial_bank_data.cfm).Our approach to measuring competition is similar to that developed independently by Boone (2008a), whose aim was to determine competition based on a firm’s relative profits. Here competition is determined by subtracting a firm’s variable costs from its revenues, giving a return to fixed inputs plus extra revenues associated with the degree of relative competition. Within a general model of Cournot competition, Boone analyzes the impact of increased competition on firms’ output, prices, profit, and market shares. Firms are identical except for their efficiency level. Let π(n) denote the variable profit level of a firm with efficiency level n, where higher n denotes higher efficiency (or lower marginal cost). Consider three firms with different efficiency levels, n2 > n1 > n0, and calculate the “distance” to the least efficient firm, Δ2 = π(n2) − π(n0) > 0 and Δ1 = π(n1) − π(n0) > 0. Competition (through entry, market conduct, or regulation) reallocates output from less efficient to more efficient firms which raises Δ2 relative to Δ1. This output reallocation effect depends on the level of competition, and we may write Δ1(d) and Δ2(d) . Boone defines his measure of Relative Profit Distance (RPD) as RPD(d)=Δ2(d)/Δ1(d) and proves that RPD’(d) > 0. This result holds for a broad set of models (Boone, 2008b). The intuition for Boone’s relative profits measure is that in a more competitive industry firms are punished more harshly for being inefficient since their costs are higher. In a more competitive industry, the most efficient firm gains more relative to less efficient firms, so its relative profits and market share increase relative to those “lagging” firms. Since this output reallocation effect is a general feature of more intense competition, RPD is a robust measure of competition and, from a theoretical point of view, more robust than the price-cost margin of a Lerner index.Profits by bank service line are just revenues minus costs. While revenues are reported for many service lines, outputs and operating costs are not. Our approach to measuring Boone’s RPD involves first forming a ratio of service line revenues minus average funding cost (where applicable) all divided by each bank’s overall operating cost. Second, influences on this ratio that are unrelated to output market competition—such as factor prices, productivity, scale of operation, bank-specific risk, etc., are then “statistically subtracted” leaving an estimate of the unexplained portion of the revenue to cost ratio by service line across banks. Third, the influence of normal error on this residual is removed and we are left with the presumed average effect of competition on the revenue to cost ratio. This value is then used to form a relative index across banks that we maintain reflects Boone’s RPD.In simple terms, profits = f (competition, costs). As profits are simply revenues minus costs, profit differences across banks can be alternatively measured as the “mark-up” ratio revenue/operating costs and, if all explicit costs are included, an estimate of relative competition can be obtained from: revenue/costs − f (costs) = g (competition). Here g (competition) represents the unexplained mark-up of revenue over cost reflecting, we believe, the effect of competition, or the lack of it, across banks. The revenue/cost ratio is the inverse of the popular Cost Income Ratio used in the banking industry. The inverse is the ratio of operating revenue to operating cost and banks with a lower input cost per unit of output revenue raised are (by definition) more profitable.1111The Cost Income Ratio = (labor + capital + other non-interest expense)/(interest revenue − interest expense + fee income). It is typically used to indicate productivity or efficiency but to do this properly the numerator and denominator would have to be adjusted, respectively, for differences in factor input and output service prices yielding a more “physical” input/output relationship (Burger & Moormann, 2008).Our time period covers 2008–2010, as some of the data we need did not exist prior to 2008. This is not a “normal” time period and, importantly, the overall effect of bank competition can vary over the business cycle. In normal times, Schaeck and Cihak (2008) suggest that bank competition can Granger cause an improvement in bank efficiency, reduce costs, expand profits, and contribute to bank soundness by permitting institutions to more easily cover loan losses while adding to capital. However, toward the top of the upswing in the business cycle competition can lead banks to reduce credit standards and expand their portfolio of risky assets to a point where the cost efficiencies and additions to bank capital obtained earlier are dramatically reduced or wiped out in the following downswing (Altunbas, Manganelli, & Marques-Ibanez, 2011). Thus depending on the time period, competition may have positive or negative effects. During our time period, negative effects predominate. This variation is most relevant for a bank’s loan channel but has less force for payment, securities, and other banking services as these services are more stable over the cycle.As a result of the banking crisis, many new regulations have been proposed to reduce risk. This concerns restrictions on banks using insured deposits as funding for more than just market-making for their customers in stock, bond, and commodity investments. Capital requirements have been raised and regulatory pressure applied to reduce bank reliance on overnight and short-term borrowing so as to match better liability and asset maturities. While some of these changes have affected bank profits during our time period, many have come later or are still not in place. The net effect has been to rein in bank risk and reduce bank profits. This will likely increase competition on the margin going forward as many profitable (and risky) activities have been restricted.Our indicator of service line profits across banks is the ratio of revenues minus average funding costs where relevant (REVn) to overall bank operating cost (OC), comprised of labor, physical capital, and materials expense. We do not have an exact measure of the operating cost associated with each of the five separate banking services. However, we specify variables to explain the overall level and variation of operating cost which, in turn, influences the effect of operating cost on the five revenue streams. The three major determinants of the dependent variable REVn/OC in Eq. (1) are the underlying unit operating costs of producing these banking services, the productivity of the factor inputs used in producing these services (along with other cost influences), and the existing level of market competition. We specify the first two while the unexplained portion, averaged over six separate two quarter cross-section/panel regressions, is maintained to approximate the average influence of competition on relative profits over 2008–2010.1212A general issue in measuring competition is whether or not observed input costs are close to their minimum levels. If not, the revenue-cost spread may be lower than otherwise suggesting that competition is greater than it is. Differences in input productivity is one way observed costs may not reflect their actual minimums and is the reason for including two indicators of bank productivity.For consumer and business loans as well as securities, the numerator of the dependent variable REVn/OC is the spread between the average return on loans or securities and the average cost of funds (giving REV). This (net) revenue value is then expressed as a ratio to operating cost (OC). This reflects bank price setting of loan outputs and funding inputs, which are both influenced by the level of market interest rates and factor prices. The same holds for securities except that price setting is largely determined in competitive national markets. For payment services and investment banking and other activities, only observed revenues are used instead of a spread as reliance on deposit funding is minimal and almost all their costs are operating expenses. Scale economies, factor productivity, indicators of output level, and risk also play a role. Specifically, the variation in the ratio REVn/OC is explained in (1) by the following:(1) Technical: standard cost function influences composed of bank output for three major services and factor prices: the value of the level of consumer (CLOAN) and business loans (BLOAN) and securities held (SEC) along with the average price of labor (PL) and an approximation to the cost of physical capital (PK);1313Levels of loan outputs reflect bank size which affects cost economies and the ability to diversify assets which can reduce risk (Demsetz & Strahan, 1997). Logs of the levels data have only a slight trend over our 12 quarters so time-series stationarity is not an issue (as any panel results would be dominated by the 382 or 2273 cross-section observations). In any case, our panel involves only two quarters at a time for six regressions. The price of labor is the ratio of salaries and benefits to the number of full-time-equivalent employees while the capital price is the ratio of premises expense to the value of premises. Capital equipment (e.g., check processing) is typically rented under contract and expensed annually.(2) Productivity and scale: the productivity of capital in producing/supporting deposits measured in the industry by the deposit/branch ratio (DEP/BR), labor productivity as reflected in the labor/branch ratio (L/BR), and a prediction of the effect of scale economies on average operating cost based on a prior estimation of how U.S. banking unit operating cost changes with the value of output produced (PREDAC);1414Predicted bank average unit operating cost uses parameters from a translog cost function estimated with annual data over 1996–2008 but evaluated using bank values for each quarter over 2008–2010. The resulting average operating cost curve was relatively flat when arrayed against the log of total assets with scale economies at the mean of only 0.98 for billion dollar banks.(3) Risk: differences in bank risk are leverage or the ratio of risk-based equity capital to assets (CAPITAL) as well as the ratio of the provision for loan losses to loans (LLR);1515The loan loss ratio was measured as (value of all loans and leases minus provision for losses on loan and leases)/(value of loans and leases). Unknown asset risks accumulated earlier should have been largely realized during 2008–2010 and thus reflected in our specified risk variables (especially LLR).and(4) Market rate/business cycle: the 3-month Treasury bill rate (RATE) is used to control for the base cost of funds which can influence deposit and loan rates charged, securities revenues, as well as fees and points assessed for banking services. The quarterly variation of this variable is collinear with the real GDP output gap which can affect changes in the demand for banking services (so both could not be used).The full model contains n = 5 translog equations in logs:(1)ln(REVn/OC)=α0+∑i=19αilnXi+1/2∑i=19∑j=19αijlnXilnXj+∑i=19∑k=12δiklnXilnPk+∑k=12βklnPk+1/2∑k=12∑m=12βkmlnPklnPm+lne+lnuwhere:n = revenues from consumer loans, business loans, payment activities, investment banking and other fee-based services, and securities;Pk=PL,PK;Xi=CLOAN,BLOAN,SEC,DEP/BR,L/BR,PREDAC,CAPITAL,LLR,RATE;and have been defined above. The composed error term ln e + ln u reflects normal error (ln e) and inefficiency (ln u). The five equations in (1) are estimated using quarterly data over 2008–2010, two separate quarters at a time for six separate cross-section/panel regression (see Table A.1 for estimation results for Q3-Q4 2010). This permits market interest rates (RATE) to vary across the two quarters in each regression. This variable, which also reflects the business cycle, represents the basic cost environment for banks and is especially important in setting the base cost of loans and securities. The own, squared, and interaction parameters were separately estimated for each of the four sets of explanatory variables shown above—not for all eleven variables together.1616Thus own, squared, and interaction terms were estimated for the five Technical or cost function variables separately from the own, squared, and interaction terms for the three Productivity and Scale variables and also separately from the two Risk variables. The Market Rate/Business Cycle variable has only an own and squared term since there is only one variable. As all the RHS variables are the same for each of the five equations in (1), it makes no difference if they are estimated individually or as a system of seemingly unrelated regressions.Our specification includes two banking productivity variables which, along with standard cost function influences (output levels and input prices) have been important in reducing cost inefficiency to low levels in both stochastic and linear programming frontier models (Carbó, Humphrey, & Lopez del Paso, 2007).1717Berger and Mester (1997) and Frei, Harker, and Hunter (2000) have also shown productivity influences to be a primary determinant of previously unexplained bank cost inefficiency. Other influences (e.g., balance sheet variables) turn out to have almost no impact.Our capital and labor productivity measures (DEP/BR and L/BR) indicate inefficiency or overuse when they are “too high” relative to other banks. While other possible influences come to mind (Hicksian ‘quiet life’, agency, governance, contestability, or misreading expected demand and producing an inappropriate output mix), few can be directly specified. We maintain that the first three lead to cost inefficiency which we believe is already captured in the model since the variables we specify are typically used to estimate cost inefficiency in banking. The last two can affect revenues.1818Koetter, Kolari, and Spierdijk (2012) propose an alternative view regarding productivity and inefficiency. Namely, the degree of inefficiency is itself an indication of a lack of competition since, if competition was very strong, profit inefficiency would be de minimis. That is, banks with market power would rather enjoy monopolistic rents from a “quiet life” as opposed to obtain higher profits. If so, the Lerner index and our competition measure developed here understate the lack of competition.If some banking markets are more contestable than others, this potential or actual price competition should already be reflected in our revenue/cost ratio dependent variables while output mix is captured in the Technical or cost function variables. Barriers to new bank entry are quite low in the U.S. and credit unions (because their profits are not taxed) typically pay marginally higher deposit rates and charge less for consumer loans and are considered to be strong competitors to banks in certain geographical markets and for certain types of depositors.Labor productivity (L/BR) can differ across banks due to over staffing. Detailed studies of branch operations identify a daily peak load for teller window transactions and back office processing. Some banks are more adept than others in obtaining part-time (rather than full time) workers to staff the peak load. Another example would be sharing a branch manager when branches are close together (Sherman & Ladino, 1995) or operating in-store or supermarket branches where the staffing level is about half that of a stand-alone office (Radecki, Wenninger, & Orlow, 1996). The capital cost of an in-store branch is also only about one-fifth of a conventional branch and is reflected indirectly in the approximation to the price of capital (PK).1919A better measure would be the number of in-store versus traditional branches a bank has but this information is not available.In addition, in-store branches and stand-alone branches located in higher per capita income areas (suburban versus central city or rural) generate more deposits per office, raising the deposit/branch ratio (DEP/BR) as well as generating a greater demand for other banking services (Edelstein & Morgan, 1996). As deposits are typically the cheapest and most stable source of bank funding, a higher deposit/branch ratio can support a larger loan-deposit rate spread. Importantly, branch locations in high income areas are limited and in-store branch contracts with supermarket chains are exclusive within states or metropolitan areas so these productivity/cost differences can be relatively persistent.2020Today, both productivity measures are on the rise. Over 90,000 branch offices were closed in 2012 in an effort to reduce labor and branch costs to raise profits, help offset increased capital requirements, and adjust to the rise in lower cost internet and mobile banking. Each time a check is deposited using a picture from a mobile phone, a bank is estimated to save $3.88 compared to a deposit at a teller window (Sidel, 2013), a development made possible by Check 21 legislation passed in 2003.In estimating the competition frontier, we use the composed error Distribution Free Approach (DFA) in Berger (1993). Two other frontier approaches exist: linear programming Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) and a composed error Stochastic Frontier Approach (SFA). While any one of these frontier approaches could be used, we feel that the DFA has the fewest limitations.2121Koetter et al. (2012) apply SFA to calculate adjusted Lerner indices of U.S. banks controlling for ‘quiet life’ inefficiencies. Yang and Liu (2012) use DEA to analyze managerial inefficiency of state-owned banks in Taiwan. A similar DFA approach was earlier applied to national level (not bank level) European data but was only able to distinguish between two aggregate service lines: traditional loans versus all fee-based activities (Bolt & Humphrey, 2010). In a recent article, Sun, Kumbhakar, and Tveteras (2015) propose a stochastic cost frontier model in which cost productivity changes are decomposed into inefficiency change, technical change, and scale change components assuming (unknown) smooth functions of firm- and time-effects.With DEA there is no need to specify a functional form which can affect the placement of the frontier. However, random error is assumed to be zero (so hypotheses cannot generally be tested) and the more influences (constraints) considered in the analysis, the lower will be the dispersion from the frontier even when—in a regression framework—the added influences (variables) may be insignificant. The difficulty with SFA is the assumption that inefficiency follows a half-normal distribution with most banks located on or close to the estimated frontier, an assumption not supported when no restriction is placed on the inefficiency distribution (cf., Bauer, 1990; Berger, 1993).2222Using a Gamma distribution for inefficiencies mitigates this problem but also makes it more difficult to distinguish random error from inefficiency in a composed error framework.Unlike SFA or DEA, the DFA model requires panel data and assumes averaging each bank’s residuals across separate cross-section regressions reduces normally distributed error to minimal levels leaving only average inefficiency (or the average effect of competition on revenues). In previous cost efficiency analyses the DFA and SFA approaches have yielded similar levels and rankings of inefficiencies for most—but not all—banks (Bauer, Berger, Ferrier, & Humphrey, 1998).In a composed error framework, Eq. (1) can for illustration be expressed as(2)ln(REVn/OC)=R(lnXi,lnXj,lnPk)+lne+lnu.The total residual (ln e + ln u) reflects the unexplained portion of the revenue-operating cost dependent variable remaining after cost, productivity, and other influences have been accounted for. Here ln e represents the value of random error while our maintained hypothesis is that ln u represents the effect of competition on revenues. The DFA concept assumes that ln e will average to a value close to zero while the average of ln u will reflect the average effect of competition (lnu¯). Using earlier banking data, DeYoung (1997) found that averaging residuals over six separate regressions yielded the lowest standard deviation of the cost inefficiency values he had estimated. Our composed error terms are averaged over six cross-section estimations of two quarters each.2323If (1) was estimated using 12 separate cross-sections of one quarter each, market rates (which also reflect the business cycle) would be a constant in each equation. At the other extreme, if (1) was estimated as a single panel including all 12 quarters together (not shown), the dispersion of the unaveraged residuals naturally rises and markedly increases the size of the computed CE measures. Even so, this does not have much effect on the ranking of which of the five services would be deemed most or least competitive.In all cases, the averaging process reduced the standard deviation of the distribution of our competition indicator (CEi).The bank with the lowest average residual (lnu¯min) is also the bank where the variation in underlying cost and productivity explains the greatest amount of the variation in revenues relative to operating costs, reflecting the strongest effect of market discipline on the revenue/cost ratio through competition. This minimum value defines the competition frontier and the relative competition efficiency (CEi) of all the other i banks in the sample is determined in (3) by their dispersion from this frontier:(3)CEi=exp(lnu¯i−lnu¯min)−1=(u¯i/u¯min)−1In an unlogged version of (2), uiis multiplicative to (REVn/OC)isince it is expressed as(REVn/OC)i=R(X,P)iui. As a result, the ratiou¯i/u¯minis an estimate of the ratio of (REVn/OC)ifor the ith bank to the value of (REVn/OC)min  for the bank facing the greatest competition when both experience the same underlying cost and service productivity.2424The ratiou¯i/u¯minequals ((REVn/OC)i/R(X, P)i)/((REVn/OC)min /R(X, P)min ) and when evaluated at the same level of underlying cost and service productivity, the predicted values of revenue R(X, P)iand R(X, P)min  are equal as both are at the same point on the estimated revenue curve, leaving the ratio (REVn/OC)i/(REVn/OC)min .For example, ifCEi=2.0, thenu¯iis two times larger thanu¯minso the unexplained portion of (REVn/OC)iis two times larger than (REVn/OC)min . This difference reflects the unspecified influence of competition. Thus the larger is CEi, the weaker is the ability of market competition to restrain revenues so CE is equivalent to inefficiency in a cost frontier.An apparent limitation of (3) is that it only indicates the relative level of competition: it cannot determine the absolute level of competition. This is useful, however, since the unexplained residual includes an unknown but valid mark-up over costs (return on equity/investment) and the relative nature of CEireflects differences in this mark-up across banks assumed to reflect the strength of competition. It is also important to examine the fit of the estimating equation since, if the R2 is high, the difference in relative competition measured by CE may not be very economically significant since the residualsu¯nandu¯minwould themselves be absolutely small.The bank or banks that define the competition efficiency frontier are those where the specified cost, productivity, and risk variables in (1) explain the greatest portion—not necessarily all—of the variation in the revenue/cost ratio dependent variable. A frontier bank’s residual (u¯i) is also the minimum (u¯min) so its CEivalue is 0.0 in (3). The average of CEivalues reported below depends on the dispersion of all bank residuals from this minimum and this dispersion (as well as the minimum) is typically smaller—indicating greater relative competition—when the R2 in (1) is high. However, as CE is a percentage measure and all residuals may not fall proportionally as R2 rises, there need not be a one-to-one relationship between CE and R2 . For this reason it is useful to also report the absolute value of the average residual as a ratio to the mean of the dependent variable|u¯i/(REVn/OC)i|(where the denominator is constant). This is an alternative way to illustrate the importance of cost, productivity, and other influences in explaining the variation in the revenue/cost ratio. A low ratio implies strong competition. Frontier efficiency studies typically just look at their efficiency/inefficiency results and do not also consider how the fit of their underlying regressions can affect their interpretation.2525For example, if the R2 in (1) is 0.90 then only 10 percent of the variation in the revenue/cost ratio is unexplained by cost and productivity influences and one would conclude that uncompetitive behavior plays a small role even if the computed value of CE seems quite large.We have asserted that our frontier measure reflects competition because we have included as explanatory variables numerous indicators of input costs and other cost influences associated with productivity and risk leaving, in our view, the influence of the excluded variable of differences across banks in the ratio of revenues to operating cost—namely, competition. In current research focused narrowly on only consumer loans, we compared four competition measures (HHI, Lerner index, H-statistic, and Frontier CE) with the average price of consumer loans across banks (Bolt & Humphrey, 2015). If competition is strong the expected result would be a relatively low price while if it is weak the result should be a relatively high price. Firms with relatively high prices may be able to maintain them because the market they are in is concentrated (as measured by the HHI) or perhaps they incur greater costs which have to be accounted for before a firm is said to have a high price (as measured by the Lerner index or the H-statistic). If so, arraying the average price of consumer loans across price quartiles—going from low price to high price—against quartiles of the various competition measures—going from when a measure that would be consistent with higher expected competition (giving a low price) to lower competition (giving a high price)—should be positive. For example, a high HHI (showing greater market concentration) would be expected to be associated with higher prices and the same expectation would hold for the Lerner index as well—a positive relationship across quartiles.In these comparisons, however, the HHI and H-statistic show a negative relationship (the H-statistic was sign corrected). That is, when these two competition measures should be indicating relatively higher prices, they indicate that observed prices are in fact flat or lower. The Lerner index and the Frontier CE measure, however, show the expected positive relationship. That is, higher observed average prices occur when the measure used suggests that competition is lower and vice versa. In additional tests analyzing quartile correspondence with consumer loan price, the relationship between prices and the Frontier CE measure has twice the individual bank matches of the Lerner index suggesting a stronger relationship. We interpret this as support for using the Frontier CE measure to indicate the likelihood of competition across banks in this paper.2626Our frontier measure may not prove useful in assessing competition in those industries where demand, facing a constrained supply, largely determines output prices. This seems to be the case in the airline industry where a high concentration of airport gates allocated to a single airline at an airport are associated with higher airfares. In other industries where cost is more likely than demand facing a constrained supply to determine output prices, a frontier approach may prove useful.The relative competition of U.S. banks across five major service lines is reported in Table 2. One service line is deemed more competitive than another when its competition efficiency measure (CE) is lower, the R2 is higher (reflecting the extent to which cost, productivity, and other influences successfully explain the variation in the revenue/cost ratio), and the absolute value of the ratio of the average residual to the mean of the dependent variable|u¯i/(REVn/OC)i|is lower. We interpret our CE values as averages of the effect of competition for different banking services over time rather than being constant.In terms of interbank competition, business loans and security activities have the lowest CE values indicating that they are closest to their efficient frontier. Business loans—which include commercial and industrial loans and leases along with real estate, agricultural, construction, and foreign loans—also had the highest average adjusted R2 (0.92–0.97) over the six regressions while securities had the second highest (0.90–0.97) for both banking groups. This suggests that perhaps only 3 percent of the variation in business loan and security revenue/cost ratios for billion dollar banks (8 percent and 10 percent for smaller banks), was not explained by cost and productivity influences. These two service lines had the lowest ratio of their average residual to the mean of the dependent variable showing again that costs are by far the main determinant of the revenue/cost ratio (rather than uncompetitive behavior).Payment activities are less competitive. Their revenue is from deposit service charges, card interchange fees, ATM fees, and sale of checks. Importantly, it does not (but should) include income from minimum balance requirements that are used to help recoup bank payment expenses. This income is not separately reported but is reflected as part of the computed spread for consumer and business loans.2727Bank income statements only show “total interest and fee income on loans” and do not breakout interest from fee income overall or by consumer/business loan type.Given recent regulatory concern with altering interest rates on credit card balances, legislation reducing debit card fees, returned check charges, and bank deposit overdraft fees, it is not surprising that payment activities appear to be the second least competitive banking service. Unless offset by new fees and/or higher monthly deposit account charges, this service line should appear more competitive in the future.Consumer loans cover credit card, revolving, installment, and student loans and appear to be much less competitive than business loans.2828Consumer loans have a high R2 so the CE value may overstate the apparent lack of competition.One reason may be that consumers typically do not shop around for the best rates as large business borrowers do and, since they borrow smaller amounts, they have less bargaining power. Also, many consumer loan charges—from interest rates to points for money to other fees—are not well understood by consumers as noted by Lusardi (2008) and others. Hence the current regulatory emphasis on informing consumers of the overall cost of their borrowing.2929This is an on-going effort. The newly established Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is in the process of simplifying/clarifying further the mortgage loan process so that consumers will be able to compare better “all-in” mortgage costs across banks.It is not surprising that investment banking and other fee-based activities would seem to be the least competitive of the five service lines in Table 2.3030If (1) is estimated as a single panel including all 12 quarters together, the (composed error) residuals and the CE values are much larger as the parameters are constant over 12 quarters. Even so, the ranking of mean CE values is similar: business loans and securities are still the most competitive services while consumer loans and investment banking activities are the least competitive.This line combines many specialized activities—securitization, underwriting, securities brokerage, insurance, venture capital—where service availability and reputation likely play an important role along with cost.3131We do not have a direct indicator of productivity or specific labor cost for this service line. This likely raises CE and lowers the R2.The net effect of restrictions included in the recent Dodd–Frank banking legislation (along with the Volcker rule limiting risky proprietary trading by banks with insured deposits) should make this service line less risky and also less profitable going forward.Our competition measure is the residual from (1) after we statistically “subtract” the influence of cost, productivity, scale, and other non-competition-related variables from service line revenues. While we cannot be sure that all the major non-competition influences have been included in (1), the statistical fit for three of the five banking services is quite high for billion dollar banks in Table 2 (which accounts for 90 percent of our sampled banks). For these services there is not much more that could be explained by digging deeper into the reported banking data. Although a fixed effects approach would likely improve the statistical fit, the bank-specific dummy variables cannot discriminate between excluded cost effects (which we would like to include) and the excluded effect of competition on revenues (which we wish to exclude and keep in the residual).3232Similarly, the Lerner index excludes around 35 percent of banking output when estimating marginal cost using a cost function as the output associated with non-interest income is not reported.Are banks that are competitive in one service line competitive in other lines as well? No, there is almost no relationship. The strongest positive relationship occurs for CE values between business loans and securities with an R2 of only 0.19 while all other positive relationships have an R2 of 0.01 or less. The strongest negative relationship is between securities and payment services at 0.02 with all other values being smaller.3333The same lack of correlation across service lines exists using the ratio of the average residual to the mean of the dependent variable|u¯i/(REVn/OC)i|. Again, the largest positive relationship is between business loans and securities with an R2 of 0.19 (with all other relationships being ≤0.07).As banks appear to differ considerably in their degree of competition across the five service lines, it can be misleading to infer the overall level of competition using measures that typically apply to deposit/loan activities like the HHI (which typically focuses on deposit market concentration) or the Lerner index which usually derives its estimated marginal cost from loan and security outputs and computes its spread from the average return on assets.Frequency distributions of CE values for the five service lines, relative to their separate efficient frontiers (at 0.0), are shown in Fig. 1for billion dollar banks. The low variance for securities activities and business loans shows that they operate in relatively competitive markets. Together, they account for 57 percent of bank revenues. The markets for consumer loans and payment services are much less competitive but account for 19 percent of revenues. The market for investment banking and related activities accounts for 24 percent of revenues and, by our measure, is clearly the least competitive of the five. This would likely still be the case even if we had better data on the labor costs of investment banking and other activities (all we have is the average wage for the whole bank) since these activities are highly specialized and their prices are based more on reputation than costs. Overall, Fig. 1 suggests that almost 60 percent of bank activities could be classed as being competitive. It also suggests that competition efficiency does not have a half-normal distribution like those imposed when implementing a Stochastic Frontier Approach to frontier estimation. These gamma distributions have a more normal shape but differ in their dispersion.Competition efficiency is measured by service line across banks. It is not meant to be a summary indicator of competition for the whole bank. Bank service lines are quite different and aggregating them in some fashion is like aggregating multiple outputs produced by different production functions at a single firm. Even so, some may wish to see how similar or different the CE measure is compared to the same banks’ HHI, Lerner index, or H-statistic. One way to do this is to compute a revenue share weighted average of the five CE values we have estimated for each bank.3434The revenue share weighted average CE value for bank i isREVSHCE=∑jωijCEijfor j = 1, ..., 5 service lines with weightsωij=REVij/∑jREVij.In the top half of Table 3billion dollar banks are ranked by their revenue weighted average CE value and compared with the same bank’s average for the three other competition indicators for the whole bank. The results are divided into quartiles generally separating most competitive from least competitive banks.The weighted average CE measure almost triples between the most and least competitive quartiles of banks but changes in the other three competition measures are more subdued. Higher weighted average CE values suggest less competition which is consistent with the higher HHI for the same banks, a higher Lerner index, and a lower H-statistic as shown. Thus all four measures indicate reduced competition as we move from the most to the least competitive quartile of banks. Even though there is a general correspondence between all four competition measures in the top half of Table 3, this consistency does not always roll over to individual banks. As seen in Table 1, there is almost no correlation between the three standard competition measures at the individual bank level. Although the revenue weighted average CE is significantly related to the corresponding HHI for the same bank (at the 90 percent level), the R2 is less than 0.01 for billion dollar banks. Greater significance and a higher correlation is obtained when CE is regressed on both the Lerner index and the H-statistic (R2 = 0.16) suggesting that CE reflects elements of both of these theoretically-based competition measures.What if the ranking of banks from most to least competitive were performed using the other three competition measures separately? This question is answered in the lower half of Table 3. Ranking banks from most to least competitive using only the HHI would raise it from 789 (unconcentrated) to 2107 (moderately concentrated). Using the Lerner index to rank banks from most to least competitive would raise it from 13 percent to 39 percent while using the H-statistic would result in a fall (showing less competition) from 0.90 to 0.73.One reason for the difference between the top and bottom halves of Table 3 is that the three standard competition measures are more narrow in their competition assessment than is the average CE measure which includes more cost influences and more service lines. The CE covers both traditional banking services (consumer and business loans) along with two fee-based services (payments and investment banking activities) and securities while the HHI, Lerner index, and H-statistic focus on consumer and business loan-deposit concentration, loan-deposit rate spreads, and changes in average asset revenue to cost, respectively.While U.S. competition authorities can use the HHI to focus on local market concentration, this is not possible with the other measures as the necessary data are not available by MSA, although data are available by bank which reflects all the local areas it has branches in. However, as the median commercial bank operates in two MSAs and only one state, viewing competition at the bank level represents an alternative way to assess competition, especially as the HHI represents only a potential for an uncompetitive outcome.Since the four competition measures shown in Table 3 measure different aspects of competition, it can be useful to look to the three theoretically-based measures for a “second opinion” to conclusions authorities may reach when relying on the HHI. These measures can be useful when considering future changes in the HHI merger guidelines. Today’s 2010 HHI guidelines are less strict (identifying 3.1 percent of billion dollar banks as being highly concentrated) compared to those developed in 1992 and used until 2010 (which would have identified 16 percent today as being highly concentrated with our data) so concentration criteria has evolved over time.Billion dollar banks are divided into most and least competitive quartiles based on the rank order of their CE values for a given service line. As the CE values for a given bank can differ across the five service lines shown in Table 4, it may be in the most competitive quartile for one service line but in another quartile for a different service. For consumer loans and payment activities, the set of most competitive banks are on average somewhat smaller in terms of asset size in row 2 ($10 and $7 billion, respectively) than are the corresponding set of least competitive banks (with average assets of $17 and $19 billion). For business loans and securities, asset size is not very different between most ($26–$27 billion) and least ($31 billion) competitive banks while for investment banking and related activities they are the same (at $8 billion, after rounding).Although bank size differs somewhat between most and least competitive banks depending on the service line examined, the least competitive banks are on average always more profitable as measured by ROA or the ratio of net income to assets (row 3). Indeed, for business loans, the least competitive banks are seemingly four times more profitable with all but securities being at least twice as profitable. Recall that CE values used for these rankings reflect bank service line revenues after controlling for cost, productivity, and risk differences. Could some of the profit differences seen in Table 4 be due to unrealized differences in risk?We are only able to control for risk using each bank’s risk-based capital/asset ratio and the ratio of a bank’s provision for loan and lease losses to the value of loans and leases (row 6). Averaged over our three-year time period, this loan loss ratio is quite similar between most and least competitive banks. Could there be other risks that have not been provisioned for or captured in risk-based capital that generate higher profits for one set of banks rather than another? Yes, but given that the recent financial crisis started in 2007, one would expect that unrecognized risk incurred prior to 2007 would have been made obvious and found its way into capital levels and/or loan loss provisions during 2008–2010. As we see little difference in loan loss provisions between most and least competitive banks in Table 4, the likelihood of still unrecognized risk markedly influencing the profitability differences seen row 3 is not strong.An additional difference in Table 4 is that, except for payment activities, the set of most competitive banks have from 8 percent to 20 percent fewer employees per banking office. While this could be due in part of differences in branching strategy and in a few cases having been located in a unit banking state before 1997, it can also suggest more careful attention to branch and back office staffing to achieve lower costs. The deposit/branch ratio is also a productivity indicator but only for payment activities does it suggest greater productivity for the most competitive banks.Regulators rely on the HHI because it has been predictive of relatively high prices in concentrated industries while academics have solid theoretical reasons for favoring the Lerner index or the H-statistic. The three standard competition measures focus on traditional bank loan and deposit activities, while neglecting increasingly important fee-based services, and incompletely adjust for input productivity differences among banks. We suggest a new way to assess relative competition based on efficient frontier analysis which includes the previously excluded cost influences and incorporates fee-based activities. Unlike the standard measures of competition, our approach uses available revenue data to separately cover traditional banking services (consumer and business loans) along with securities and two fee-based services (payments and investment banking activities).The current banking literature effectively ties revenues (or price or profits) to a single measure of competition as in revenues = f(competition measure) and maintains that the remaining portion of revenue is due to cost, productivity, and other “non-competition-related” influences. The competition frontier reverses this approach and instead specifies that revenues = f(costs, productivity, other “non-competition-related” influences) and maintains that the unexplained portion of revenues reflects the influence of competition on returns. Our competition efficiency measure (CE) is thus obtained by statistically “removing” the specified cost, productivity, scale, and risk effects from bank revenues which we assume essentially leaves the effect of competition. The degree of relative competition among banks is then determined by their dispersion from a competition frontier (defined by the most competitive bank or banks).For 382 large banks with assets greater than $1 billion (accounting for 90 percent of sampled bank assets), the ranking of banking activities by their degree of relative competition (most competitive first) is: business loans and security operations (a tie), then payment activities, consumer loans, and finally investment banking and related services. With one exception, the same competition ranking is found for the 2273 other banks in the sample (accounting for the remaining 10 percent of assets). Dividing banks into most and least competitive quartiles, the set of most competitive banks are somewhat smaller in terms of asset size for consumer loans and payment activities, are close to the same size for business loans and security operations, and are the same size for investment banking activities compared to a corresponding set of least competitive banks. However, the least competitive banks are always more profitable, tend to have more employees per banking office, but experience a similar level of loan losses. When one looks at banking services separately, business loans and securities appear to be quite competitive overall. Only about 3 percent of the variation in revenues in these two services remain unexplained by cost and productivity differences across banks. Competition efficiency appears weakest for payment activities and consumer loans. These two areas have been and continue to be areas of recent regulatory concern. Competition in investment banking and related services also appears to be weak but a lack of appropriate data clouds this interpretation.U.S. competition authorities use the HHI to focus on local (MSA) market concentration. The Lerner index, H-statistic, and our frontier CE measure are determined at the bank level where 92 percent of our sampled banks operate in only 1–5 MSAs. We show that these measures are essentially uncorrelated with each other across banks. As well, regressing the HHI on any or all three of the theoretically-based measures explains only 1 percent of the variation. Similar but slightly stronger results apply in Europe. Such a bank-level analysis can serve as a useful “second opinion” regarding competition issues which currently relies on the HHI.While we cannot prove that our frontier measure directly reflects the influence of competition, we do know that it performs better than the other competition measures in identifying banks that charge relatively high or low prices for consumer loans (Bolt & Humphrey, 2015). High prices are thought to be a possible indicator of weak competition while low prices are believed to reflect the opposite, once differences in input expenses and other cost influences are controlled for. This, of course, is the basic theoretical justification for the Lerner index and the H-statistic and, we believe, provides some support for our use of a competition measure derived from frontier analysis.Using all 7821 banks in the FDIC’s Summary of Deposits report for June, 2010, a deposit-based HHI was computed for each of the 956 separate MSA and non-MSA counties in the U.S. Following Hirtle (2007), a deposit share weighted sum of these 956 geographic HHIs was then computed for each bank with over $100 million in assets in the fourth quarter of 2010 that operated and had deposits in these MSA and non-MSA counties. The HHIs were then matched with the 2655 banks in our final sample yielding the set of deposit-based HHIs used here. The very largest banks have foreign offices but the Summary of Deposits only has information on domestic U.S. bank branch deposits and so our calculated HHIs apply only to domestic U.S. market concentration (see Table A.2 for summary statistics).3535Summary of Deposits data are only available once a year in June. We chose to use the HHI for 2010 since, for a few of the very largest banks, their deposit market concentration would be somewhat higher due a recent merger/acquisition. For billion dollar banks, the R2 between HHI values computed for 2010 (the year we used) and 2009 and 2008 are 0.85 and 0.87, respectively. Between 2008 and 2009 it was 0.94. Even so, only two banks out of 382 flip consecutive places for consecutive years when all banks are ranked by their asset value. Using any or all of the years would not have altered our results.The functional form used to estimate marginal cost for the Lerner index, where:TC=total operating and interest expenses;3636Off balance sheet items basically reflect contingent liabilities and incur close to zero cost—just a few highly paid employees out of hundreds or thousands. For this reason they are excluded from the cost function. Including them would add almost nothing to total cost but would bias the estimate of marginal cost since output value at effectively zero cost would be added to the cost function.Qi,ji,j=value of the three output variables CLOAN, BLOAN, and SEC shown in the text;Pk,mk,m=three input prices composed of the average interest rate paid for all domestic and foreign deposits and liability funding (PF), the annual average expense per full-time equivalent worker (PL), and an approximation to the cost of physical capital (PK, defined in the text);T=a quarterly time indicator variable used to reflect time-related technical change; andSk=the cost shares for the funding and labor inputs (the share for the physical capital input is deleted to avoid singularity), is:(A.1)lnTC=α0+∑i=13αilnQi+1/2∑i=13αi,i(lnQi)2+1/2∑i≠j3αi,j(lnQilnQj)+∑i=13∑k=13δi,k(lnQilnPk)+∑k=13βklnPk+1/2∑k=13∑m=13βk,m(lnPklnPm)+θ1lnLLR+1/2θ2ln(LLR)2+θ3lnT+1/2θ4ln(T)2Sk=βk+∑m=13βk,mlnPk+∑i=13δi,klnQiIn the actual estimation, we added sin and cos terms to translog cost function (A1) (i.e., a Fourier form). The Fourier form is a globally flexible approximation, and translog cost function (A1) in Fourier form is estimated jointly with the cost shares (A2).3737See Mitchell and Onvural (1996) and Berger and Mester (1997). The parameters in the share equations are the same as those in the translog portion of the Fourier equation.Parameter symmetry and input price homogeneity of degree 1.0 were imposed in estimation. Marginal cost isMC=(∑i=13∂lnTC/∂lnQi)·ACwhere AC is the ratio of total cost to total assets (TC/TA) and reflects overall average cost under the assumption that the scale economy measure(∑i=13∂lnTC/∂lnQi)applies to the whole bank. The Lerner index=(P−MC)/PwhereP=TR/TA.TheH-statistic was derived from a translog type function, where:3838See Matthews, Murinde, and Zhao (2007), for an analysis of competitive conditions among major U.K. banks during 1980–2004 using the H-statistic.TR=total revenue;Xi= value of the three output variables CLOAN, BLOAN, and SEC plus a loan loss risk measure (LLR defined in the text) and the ratio of total domestic plus foreign deposits to total liabilities—a liability composition measure (DEP/TL);Pk= the same three input prices noted above; andT = the same quarterly time indicator variable noted above;(A.2)lnTR=α0+∑i=15αilnXi+0.5∑i=15∑j=15αijlnXilnXj+∑k=13βklnPk+0.5∑k=13∑m=13βijlnPklnPm+∑i=15∑k=13δiklnXilnPk+υ1T+υ2(T)2+∑i=15υiTlnXi+∑k=13λkTlnPkParameter symmetry is imposed in estimation. Linear homogeneity of input prices is not imposed as a doubling of input prices need not double revenues. The H-statistic equals:HSTAT=∑i=13∂lnTR/∂lnPk.3939The fit of the equation was high at R2 = 0.98.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
