@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Airport utility stochastic optimization models for air traffic flow management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Determinants for delay using logistic and stochastic frontier models were assessed.Utility models show a 2 percentage variation between departures (92 percent) and arrivals (94 percent).Simulations confirm lower delays significantly correlate with higher airport utilities.Airport utilities decrease consistently with increase in air-to-ground cost ratios.A delay threshold of 60 percent and air-to-ground cost ratio of 1.6 were recommended.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Probability,Airport utility,Logistic model,Frontier model,Inefficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The complexity of air traffic flow management has its groundwork at an airport and increases with the number of daily aircraft departures and arrivals. To adequately contribute toward an accelerated air traffic flow management (ATfM), multivariate statistical models were developed based on airport utility. The utility functions were derived from daily probabilities of airport delay and inefficiencies computed using parameterized statistical models. The estimates were based on logistic and stochastic frontier models to derive distribution functions from which daily airport utilities were estimated. Data for testing and model simulations are daily aggregates spanning a five year period, collected from Entebbe International Airport.The utility models show that there was a 2 percent difference between daily aircraft operations at departures (92 percent) and at arrivals (94 percent). These findings confirm the likelihood that events leading to departures are more rigid compared to those observed at aircraft arrivals. Simulation results further confirmed that lowering delays at departure and arrival would result into higher airport utility. Airport utility was found to decrease consistently with an increase in the air-to-ground cost ratios. Airport utility analyses were most stable at a delay threshold of 60 percent and an air-to-ground cost ratio of 1.6 for both departures and arrivals. Therefore, for better outcomes of airport utility studies, this study recommends different treatments between departure and arrival analyses. The models developed are flexible and easily replicable with little adjustments to reflect airport specific characteristics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Management of air traffic flow has its groundwork at an airport and its complexity increases with the increase in the number of daily aircraft departure and arrival operations. The problem of air traffic flow management (ATfM) (Agustin, Alonso-Ayuso, Escudero, & Pizarro, 2012; Lulli & Odoni, 2007) becomes more complex when determinants of air traffic departure and arrival delays are not fully identified and elaborated. To adequately contribute toward an improved air traffic flow management (ATfM), multivariate statistical models and airport utility functions were developed. Many studies have endeavored to identify and assess timeliness of aircraft arrivals and departures (Agustin, Alonso-Ayuso, Escudero, & Pizarro, 2012; Mukherjee, 2004) while others suggest a standard of additional 15 minutes after scheduled time to be able to compute delayed aircraft delay duration. However, there is no rule of thumb because in scheduling of aircrafts, a statistical error bound would already have been assigned in schedule time estimation. Thus, for purposes of modeling in this study, any departure or arrival time beyond the scheduled time was considered a delay.In this study, utility-based stochastic optimization models for airport departure, arrival and aggregation were developed and validated with airport's actual operational data as well as data simulations to ascertain model efficacy. Airport daily delay probabilities and inefficiencies were generated from parameterized statistical models; their distributions were estimated and aggregated to develop airport utility functions (Cook, 2007; Lulli & Odoni, 2007). From the demand side, improved airport utility would generate more income as more passengers often consider airport utility to adjusting their travel programs. Optimum utilities were then contingent upon the daily probabilities of delay with daily airport inefficiency levels. Human intervention can be enhanced in air traffic flow management when based on concrete statistical evidence, an area this study contributes to through developing airport utility models (Clarke, 2003; Kirwan, Rodgers, & Schäfer, 2005; Li & Cai, 2004; Washington, Karlaftis, & Mannering, 2003). In many international airports, especially those in developing countries, automation of air traffic flow management is being implemented as a requirement by the global air navigation plan (GANP) albeit little effort is undertaken to empower human intervention. In its 2013–2028 strategic plans, the GANP provides a comprehensive planning tool to support a harmonized global air navigation system. Different systems blocks especially those in the developed countries have taken advantage to enhance their navigation solutions such as SESAR in Europe, NextGen in the United States, CARATs in Japan, SIRIUS in Brazil and others in Canada, China, India and Russian Federation (Hotham &Tsujino, 2005; Miyamoto, Wickramasinghe, Harada, Miyazawa, & Funabiki, 2013; Redeborn, 2013). However, there is none for Africa, the world's second biggest continent! Realizing that human intervention is a key factor in every industry, statistical models are constantly being developed to provide evidence for enhancing sustainable air traffic management in the era of technological development. It is noted from the literature that most studies that relate to airport utility do so only in relationship to passenger airport choice (Tsai, Hsu, & Chou, 2011; Yang, Lu, & Hsu, 2014). None, however, has attempted to derive airport utility to support traffic flow management while considering the parametric determinants of departure and arrival delay.Airport utility is a proxy for the intrinsic structural and operational preparedness of an airport to optimally allocate airport resources during aircraft departures and arrivals while controlling for all key determinants. Therefore, in developing airport utility models, the following questions were key indicators to determine airport's level of utility and analyses: what is the daily probability of delay for the airport? What is the airport's daily inefficiency level? What is the estimated probability density function? How can the interaction of daily airport's probability and inefficiency be used to derive its utility? What is the recommended threshold level of proportion for a delay day? What is the recommended air-to-ground cost ratio to obtain reliable model output? A question of what basis delay decisions could be made to maximize total utility attributed to the airport formed the crux of this study. Subsequently, the specific objective was to derive models that estimate airport's daily utility during aircraft departures, arrivals and aggregate under the prevailing circumstance (Oster & Strong, 2007). Thus, the question of how much the uncertainties prevalent in aviation and meteorological parameters affect the timeliness of aircraft departures and arrivals and thus airport utilities was concurrently explored (Hadjaz, Marceau, Savaent, & Schoenauer, 2012).To achieve the study objectives, data from Entebbe International Airport, the only international airport in Uganda, a landlocked country found in the Sub-Saharan Africa were used (Wesonga, Nabugoomu, & Jehopio, 2012). Like all developing countries, maximization of the meagre resources to generate a unit output is a key indicator for development (Coltman & Devinney, 2013). Airport utility is considered an important ingredient in the national development endeavors; hence efforts aimed at its optimization greatly relate and support national development. Utility models were derived for airport departures, arrivals as well as an aggregate to provide utility estimates on a scale of 0 to 1 (Verma, Louviere, & Burke, 2006). The fundamental ingredients in determining the airport's utility were parameters for aircraft departures and arrivals. Delayed aircrafts, however, were found to affect not only the operational efficiency of the airport, but also increased levels of customer dissatisfaction that negatively affects revenue for national development. An aircraft delay was measured by computing the difference between the actual and expected time for departure and arrival respectively. The airport efficiency was derived by identifying and examining the stochastic parameters that operationally affect aircraft during departures and arrivals, and subsequently, the resulting stochastic optimization models.The rest of the paper is structured as follows; Section 2 presents the methodology and data, where insights into computations of daily airport probability and daily airport inefficiency are presented. It is in this section, Section 2.3 where stochastic optimization models for departure, arrival and daily airport aggregates are presented, specifically in Eqs. (15), (16) and (17) respectively. Section 3 presents the findings based on operational daily airport data, experimental data for model validations and stochastic optimization model analysis. In Section 4 conclusions and recommendations are presented.Statistical programming using R language on both historical and experimental data was done for model fitting and testing. Historical data represented daily records for the five year period (2004–2008) on parameters of aviation and aeronautical meteorology so as to derive airport efficiencies and probabilities of delay. Table 1 shows the parameters used and their aggregates. Proportions of aircrafts that delayed per day to arrive and depart were customized for use as dependent variables.Data obtained from the airport covering both aviation and meteorological parameters as presented in Table 1 were used to develop the statistical models that resulted into airport utility-level statistics. Fig. 1shows the entry levels of the required data for determining the probabilities of departure and arrival delay and also for computing the inefficiency levels at aircraft departure and arrival. It should be noted that although probability of delay could be correlated with inefficiency level, the two are different and were treated differently in this study. A parameterized approach with post-analysis for the logistic regression was applied to derive the probabilities for departure and arrival delays (Chu & Durango-Cohen, 2008; Wesonga, Nabugoomu, & Jehopio, 2012). Similarly, daily inefficiencies for the airport at departure and arrival were derived using the stochastic frontier approach (Barros, 2008; Fung, Wan, Hui, & Law, 2008). Therefore, outputs from post-analyses of the standard parameterized methodologies of binary logistic regression and stochastic frontier analysis formed inputs for the stochastic optimization model that was responsible for generation of airport utility statistics. An expanded detailed model data flow framework is shown in Fig. 2.Fig. 2 shows a detailed structure of data flows in the system of models for generation of airport utilities at an airport. We appreciate and maintain in high regard the value of data all throughout the modelingexercise that produce airport utility levels on different days because utility for an airport may vary over time. We note five important sub-systems; the departure delay, arrival delay, departure inefficiency, arrival inefficiency and the main SOM (stochastic optimization model) system that obtains inputs from the four sub-systems.The stochastic optimization system inputs are comprised of aviation and meteorological variables as described in Table 1 while outputs are airport utility statistics.Logistic regression was used because an aircraft was said to either delay or be on time for either departure or arrival scenarios. For any aircraft operations, known possibilities for departures or arrivals are either on-time or delay. In this case, an application of binary logistic regression was deemed necessary because the dependent variable had two categories. Thus, the following binary logistic model was assumed;(1)ln(μ1−μ)=β0+β1iX1i+β2iX2i+⋯+βTiXTi,μ=E(Y|X),Y|X∼binomialThe variable Y represents the dependent variable; X1i, X2i, …, XTiare independent variables; β1i, β2i, …, βTiare coefficients; μ is the probability of aircraft delay; E(Y/X) in the model implies the expectation of Y given X; 1, 2, …, i, …, N represent model variables and 1, 2, …, T represent daily records in the period 2004 through 2008. We also note that X follows a binomial distribution, besides the assumptions of independent residuals and linear effects (Wesonga, Nabugoomu, & Jehopio, 2012). Values for probability of aggregated aircraft delay, μ were computed for each day throughout the study period for both departures and arrivals. These probabilities were found more dependable because they were obtained directly from a parameterized approach. Thus, to obtain the probability of delay, after model estimation, the following formula was applied;(2)μ=exp(β0+β1iX1i+⋯+βTiXTi)1+exp(β0+β1iX1i+⋯+βTiXTi)Subsequently, a day would be referred to as a delay day if the probability of delay, μ was greater than that of on-time (1 −μ) operation, alternatively μ > 1/2.Similarly, stochastic frontier modelingapproach was applied to compute the airport daily efficiency by fitting the data on stochastic frontier model (Sarkis, 2000). Having analyzed the dynamics of the distributions of the error terms, exponential distribution was preferred for the error terms in computing airport operational daily efficiencies(Wesonga, Nabugoomu, Jehopio, & Mugisha, 2013). The following framework was assumed. A departing aircraft on day t with operational output was determined by the following model:(3)lnYti=βtilnXti+vuti−mutiThe model's Ytirepresents airport delay on day t; Xtiis a vector of explanatory variables; βtiis a vector of unknown scalar parameters that was estimated; vutithe idiosyncratic error term which was assumed to be independently and identically distributed asN(0,σvu2); the term captured random variation in output due to factors beyond control of the aircraft such as measurement errors in dependent variables and the omitted explanatory variables; mutirepresents the non-negative random variable, accounting for the existence of technical efficiency and it is identically distributed as half-normal (mu ∼ |N(0, σ2)|).When the dependent variable Y is not logged, the airport efficiency, Ɛton day t would be computed as;(4)ɛti=E(YtiUti,Xti)E(YtiUti=0,Xti)Otherwise;(5)ɛti=exp(−Uti);ɛ[0,1]Therefore, airport inefficiency was computed as1 − ɛti. Similarly, a given day would be categorized as inefficient if the aircraft operations’ efficiency level ɛtwas less than the inefficiency level1 − ɛtialternatively whenɛti< 1/2.In Sections 2.2 and 2.3, multivariate techniques were employed to generate airport delay probabilities and efficiencies for departure and arrival operations respectively. These were used as inputs into the stochastic optimization models.The distribution of computed daily probabilities for aircraft departure and arrival over the period under study were estimated using the exponential probability density functions as shown in Eq. (3) (Nadarajah & Haghighi, 2014; Nadarajah, Nassiri, & Mohammadpour, 2014). The equations below demonstrate the process of derivation of stochastic optimization models for air traffic flow management. Airport utility was thus given as follows;(6)U(μ,(1−ɛ))=e−(μ*(1−ɛ))The philosophy of aircraft operations at the airport was that of a single airport with multiple arrivals and departures. On arrival at the airport, the set of flights F = {f1, f2, …, fN} join a queuing system as do departing flights (Gano & Banavar, 2005). The prevailing circumstance at the airport in a given time could determine the timeliness of landing and sometimes it may be safer, though expensive for the aircraft to incur airborne delay. We noted that airborne delay could be recommended for the aircraft many miles away from the destination airport. Flights on the ground may not depart because of the unbearable circumstances either at the departure airport, the arrival airport or en-route (Cheng, Sharma, & Foyle, 2001).In the development of the models, two assumptions were made; a single airport, Entebbe International Airport and that flights were aggregated by scheduled arrivals and departures (Alonso, Escudero, & Teresa Ortuño, 2000). Thus, we opted to minimize the expected departure and arrival delays of aircraft flow at an airport;(7)Minimize{E[departuredelay]andE[arrivaldelay]}Eq. (7) was restated using the concept of utility to measure efficiency of aircraft flight propagation.Airport utility decreases with the increase in the probability that an aircraft delays to depart or to arrive at the airport. Thus, we present the airport utility functions for departures and arrivals in Eqs. (8) and (9) respectively. Note that the parameter λ in Eq. (9) represents an extra value which is the risk that aircrafts have with a unit increase in airborne delay, expressed as air-to-ground unit cost.(8)UDt={e−(μDt)×(ɛDt)}whereUDtis theairport utility during aircraft departures on day t;μDtis theprobability of aircraft delay at departure on day t;ɛDtis theinefficiency of an airport during departure on day t.(9)UAt={e−λ×(μAt)×(ɛAt)}whereUAtis theairport utility during aircraft arrivals on day t;μAtis theprobability of aircraft delay at arrival on day t;ɛAtis theinefficiency of an airport during arrival on day t; λ is theair-to-ground delay cost ratio.The outputs of these utility functions are numeric; they represent utility levels of the airport in regards to aircraft departure and arrival respectively. The airport utilities are aggregate of airport's daily traffic flow performance. Therefore the utility value during departure and arrival is expected to be at maximum when the proportion of aircrafts which experience delay at departure or arrival is zero. During such a time, all aircrafts are assumed to depart as per their scheduled times and therefore the airport would operate at utility level of 1 or 100 percent. However, airport's utility may reduce as the proportions of aircraft delay increase thus, the more the delay and inefficiency, the less would the utility of the airport be (Burgain, Pinon, Feron, Clarke, & Mavris, 2009).Average utility over period T for aircraft departures and arrivals was computed using Eqs. (10) and (11) respectively.(10)DU¯=∑t=1TUDtT=∑t=1T{e−(μDt)×(ɛDt)}T(11)AU¯=∑t=1TUAtT=∑t=1T{e−λ×(μAt)×(ɛAt)}TSubsequently, the average overall airport utility in a given time period is equivalent to the average of departure and arrival utilities in period T as shown in Eqs. (12), (13) and (14).(12)OU¯=∑t=1TUDt+∑t=1TUDtT(13)OU¯=∑t=1T{e−(μDt)×(ɛDt)}+∑t=1T{e−τ×(μAt)×(ɛAt)}T(14)OU¯=∑t=1T[[{e−(μDt)×(ɛDt)}+{e−λ×(μAt)×(ɛAt)}]]TThus, the stochastic optimization models for maximization of utilities at aircraft departure, arrival and overall utility at the airport over period T is given in Eqs. (15), (16) and (17) respectively.(15)max0≤μDt;ɛDt≤1{e−(μDt)×(ɛDt)};1≤t≤T(16)max0≤μAt;ɛAt≤1{e−λ×(μAt)×(ɛAt)};1≤t≤T;1≤λ≤2(17)max0≤μDt;ɛDt;μAt;ɛAt≤1∥mean[[{e−(μDt)×(ɛDt)},{e−λ×(μAt)×(ɛAt)}]]∥;1≤t≤T;1≤λ≤2Airport utility maximization in the context of this study implies appropriate use of the time resource during aircraft departure and arrival operations. In our case, we maximize the average rate of departure and arrival operations within a given time period, say, a day, for air-to-ground delay cost ratio (1 ≤ λ ≤ 2).The following assumptions were made in derivation of stochastic optimization models:i)A clean relational database of aviation and meteorological parameters that determine departure and arrival delay at an airport is assumed to exist.Ability to manipulate multivariate level statistics using appropriate software is assumed.The probabilities of departure and arrival delay were computations from the post-logistic regression model analysis using the necessary explanatory variables. Although the model has been tested and found reliable in predicting the probabilities, the choice and completeness of the explanatory variables had to be arrived at statistically for the probability range (0 ≤ probability ≤ 1).The technical inefficiency levels at both aircraft departure and arrival were computed using the stochastic frontier model. These models are tested, current and also found to perform best when the necessary explanatory variables are all included. Determination of the levels of inefficiencies was based on the error terms and their distributions. Thus, the inefficiency level of an airport at departure and arrival were estimated to be in the range (0 ≤ inefficiency ≤ 1).The fact that the stochastic optimization models depended on a set of explanatory variables implies that their application highly depends on the availability of data to generate inputs for the stochastic optimization models. The interaction terms in the utility function as given in the exponential functions are computations based on parameters at time, t. Therefore, the derived utility value was also established to be in the range (0 ≤ utility ≤ 1), but could also be expressed as a percentage for ease of interpretation. Higher values indicated better airport utility, showing better structural and operational performance.The findings presented here are based on the derived models in Section 2, five-year daily data for Entebbe International Airport and simulations aimed at testing the efficacy of the models.Table 2presents airport utility outputs based on the models at departure and arrival. At Entebbe International Airport, it was evident that aircraft utilities were lower at departure than during aircraft arrival. On average, the models estimated utility for the airport during departures and arrivals to be 0.8838 and 0.9065 respectively. The results show that the structural and operational performance of the airport to handle aircraft departures is still under development and even though the arrival utility is higher, its performance would be because of the exogenous factors determined outside of the airport.To compute the utility values for each year, only parameter values for the given year were applied. The airport's daily departures and arrivals were improvement as indicated by the utilities over the period. Furthermore, it was established over the study period that airport utilities were higher at arrival than at departure (Table 3).Fig. 3shows the variations of parameter based probabilities for departure and arrival delays and airport inefficiencies during departure and arrival with and without logarithms plotted over the study period. The purpose of taking natural logarithms was to reduce the unnecessary noise as observed in the plots before logarithms were taken. It was evident from the figure that there was an overall improvement resulting into reduced probabilities of delay and general reduction in the airport's level of inefficiency over the period.To evaluate the performance of the model, three simulations were designed to test the efficacies (Nguyen, Rabczuk, Bordas, & Duflot, 2008) of the stochastic optimization models. Specific experiments were designed to test their performance using case study data and data simulations.Data for the airport during departure and arrival delays were applied to the stochastic optimization models, their sensitivities were tested to establish how the model outputs would vary. Changes in the model parameters simulating lower and higher probabilities of delay were instituted to establish how they would affect airport utility output. Table 4shows final utility values for the different scenarios that indicated that an airport's utility performance would be higher with lower probabilities of delay.Table 4 further shows that lower probabilities of delay at departure and arrival of aircrafts are inversely related to airport utilities. Conversely, the airport's utility would be higher when aircrafts’ delay probabilities at departure and arrival during a specific time interval are low.Using airport data with lower and higher simulation values for departure and arrival efficiencies, the stochastic optimization models were tested for their sensitivities regarding generation of airport utility. Table 5shows the airport utility for the different scenarios during the study period.It was noted that when the airport operated less efficiently, the model generated low utilities and higher utilities were generated for more efficient airport operations. Similarly, the fact that the utility level could be determined also by factors beyond management of the air traffic controllers was considered in the stochastic frontier model by considering the behavior of the two error terms.Little work has been done with a focus on the level to which arrival-to-departure cost ratios affect airport utilities; however, we explored this relationship, using simulations with a view of establishing a daily aggregate cost ratio for the airport under study.In this scenario, the airport's probabilities and efficiencies were generated from the actual operational data for both departures and arrivals, only varied the cost ratios. The stochastic optimization models’ efficacies were tested and Table 6shows results from the experiment with cost ratio variations over the period. The study applied air-to-ground cost ratios only to explore the differences in effects caused between departure and arrival delays.The airport's utilities over different cost ratios for the airport and those simulated high efficiencies showed high positive correlation (0.99). This could imply that generally Entebbe International Airport has high level of efficiency and the optimal air-to-ground cost ratio is 1.6. However, this seemingly high efficiency of the airport could be explained partly by the fact that it still operates at a mild average performance in terms of departures and arrivals against the expected airport capacity.Here, a presentation of findings based on model analysis and data for the case study used to test the validity, reliability and efficacies of the stochastic optimization models is made. Logarithms for the utilities computed over the study period using models in Eqs. (8) and (9) indicate a positive correlation with time for both departures and arrivals as shown in Fig. 4.Using optimization equation for airport utility at aircraft departure, we noticed the dependence on two main stochastic parameters, that is, daily probability of departure delay and estimated level of inefficiency. The analysis from the parameterized approaches show that the maximum utility at departure occurred on a day when the combination of probability of departure delay and inefficiency level was minimum. Using the model, the maximum departure utility (0.99938) was established to have occurred on the 14thJanuary, 2004 when the probability of delay and airport inefficiency was 0.01006 and 0.06152 respectively.Similarly, using optimization equation for airport utility at aircraft arrival, we noticed the dependence on three main stochastic parameters, that is, probability of arrival delay and estimated level of arrival inefficiency and the air-to-ground cost ratio, all of which are daily estimates. From the data that was generated from the parameterized approaches, the maximum utility at arrival occurred on a day when the combination of probability of departure delay and inefficiency level was at minimum. Thus, the maximum arrival utility for the airport was estimated to be 0.99432 and this occurred on the 23rd April, 2007 when the probability of delay and airport inefficiency airport was 0.01329 and 0.26784 respectively.The overall airport utility was a function of departure and arrival utility estimates and findings from the stochastic optimization model indicate that for any airport to achieve maximum utility, probabilities of aircraft departure and arrival delays as well as inefficiency levels must be kept at minimum. The combination of the estimates that generated such a combination for the case study occurred on the 14thApril, 2008 when probabilities of departure and arrival delays; and airport inefficiency level at departure and arrival were 0.02359, 0.12824 and 0.07518, 0.07905 respectively. At that operational level, the stochastic optimization model generated airport utility of 0.993758. On the other hand, the date when the minimum airport utility (0.517992) occurred was found to have occurred on the 30th November, 2005 and was estimated based on probability of departure and arrival delay, airport inefficiency level at departure and arrival of 0.61182, 0.29652 and 1.00000, 1.00000 respectively.The stochastic optimization models for air traffic flow management presented in this paper were tested and validated for reliability, effectiveness and efficiency. The models will effectively respond to inputs with an appropriate airport utility. They not only can give a cross-sectional airport utility analysis, but also a time series evaluation of airport performance. In terms of their computational efficiency, on a typical computer, Intel core i5 processor, outputs are generated within 5 seconds depending on the magnitude of model inputs.The choice of probability of delay and inefficiency to determine airport utility was made based on statistical multivariate approach so as to provide reliable estimates for airport utilities (Rosello, 2009). The derivation of both of these model inputs was done by using standard and tested parameterized multivariate statistical methods. To obtain the probabilities of delay, post estimation techniques for the logistic regression were applied while airport efficiencies were estimated using the stochastic frontier approach. Airport utilities were found to vary both at aircraft departure and arrival. The study recommends that in order to obtain reliable airport utility, considerations should be made to integrate departure and arrival parameters.As demonstrated (Ukkusuri & Patil, 2009), under airport resource demand uncertainty, there are potential benefits of introducing flexibility. Data simulations showed that the models presented in this study are resilient, effective and efficient in their use of parameterized approaches to derive model airport utility outputs. Cost ratios were evaluated using the known hypothesis that arrival delays are more expensive than ground delays (Agustin, Alonso-Ayuso, Escudero, & Pizarro, 2012; Mukherjee & Hansen, 2009). In all cases, the airport utility at departure and arrival decreased with increases in the cost ratios, suggesting that on any given day, different possible scenarios exist at any airport and may differ between days or generally over time. These perturbations through data simulations led to the recommendations that a threshold level of 60 percent proportions of delay and air-to-ground cost ratio of 1.6 be adopted when studying delay at this airport. These values provide the most optimal and reliable utility levels of the airport and were found to be the same for both departure and arrival analyses. They are thus, recommended as a baseline while studying airport utilities at any other airports with similar parameters before actual values for such an airport can be obtained. Consequently, the models for departure, arrival and airport were aggregated to reflect values for a day as a unit of analysis.Subsequently, an extension of airport utility modeling to simultaneously cover a network of airports and to estimate and maximize daily airport utility using statistical multivariate analysis of airport delay is recommended for future research work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
