@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Electric Fleet Size and Mix Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Recharging Stations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new rich heterogeneous electric fleet routing problem is modeled and solved.A new benchmark set with bounds computed using a branch-and-price solver is provided.A hybrid Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search is proposed for larger instances.A sophisticated, constant time move evaluation process is described.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heterogenous fleet,Electric vehicle routing,Efficient constraint handling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to new regulations and further technological progress in the field of electric vehicles, the research community faces the new challenge of incorporating the electric energy based restrictions into vehicle routing problems. One of these restrictions is the limited battery capacity which makes detours to recharging stations necessary, thus requiring efficient tour planning mechanisms in order to sustain the competitiveness of electric vehicles compared to conventional vehicles. We introduce the Electric Fleet Size and Mix Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Recharging Stations (E-FSMFTW) to model decisions to be made with regards to fleet composition and the actual vehicle routes including the choice of recharging times and locations. The available vehicle types differ in their transport capacity, battery size and acquisition cost. Furthermore, we consider time windows at customer locations, which is a common and important constraint in real-world routing and planning problems. We solve this problem by means of branch-and-price as well as proposing a hybrid heuristic, which combines an Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search with an embedded local search and labeling procedure for intensification. By solving a newly created set of benchmark instances for the E-FSMFTW and the existing single vehicle type benchmark using an exact method as well, we show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Current research in sustainable and energy efficient mobility is strongly motivated by increasing concerns about climate change and rising green house gas emissions. The introduction of electrically powered vehicles is one of the major directions taken in order to address these concerns. Pure battery electric vehicles, as studied in this work, are only powered by an electric engine, using the energy stored in a rechargeable battery. One of the main operational challenges in transport applications is their limited range and long recharging times. Besides acquisition cost, the acceptance of electric vehicles in the transportation business will strongly depend on methods alleviating the range and recharging limitations. Selecting the right vehicles for specific transport requirements while minimizing overall cost is therefore of crucial importance.Companies have a variety of available electric vehicles with certain variability concerning range, payload, and price to consider (see e.g., Austriatech, 2014). Especially with electric vehicles, acquisition cost play an important role in economic considerations of fleet managers. This means that larger vehicles might be able to serve the transportation needs without recharging operations. But the difference in price, using smaller vehicles in the fleet mix could reduce the overall cost. However, smaller vehicles have a smaller capacity and battery size, thus need to be recharged in order to serve longer tours, which in turn takes time. It is to be expected that smaller and cheaper vehicles will be used alongside larger vehicles depending on the typical customer distribution over the urban area. In this work we will show that a fleet composed of different vehicle types can indeed be beneficial.We propose to address this task by introducing a new optimization problem, the so-called Electric Fleet Size and Mix Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Recharging Stations (E-FSMFTW). It combines and subsumes the well known Fleet Size Mix Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (FSMFTW) and the recently defined Electric Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Recharging Stations (E-VRPTW).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
