@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Strategizing niceness in co-opetition: The case of knowledge exchange in supply chain innovation projects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explore determinants of supply chain innovation strategies.Strategies can generally be mean, if defecting without provocation or nice otherwise.Partner’s preference ordering is irrelevant in long-term innovation interactions.Gain from inducing partner's cooperation determines reciprocation of strategy type.There are four zones of innovation interaction: cooperation, abuse, tolerance and rivalry.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision analysis,Simulation,Innovation,Game theory,Knowledge sharing dilemma,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Inter-firm knowledge sharing11Knowledge sharing and knowledge exchange are used interchangeably.is now an integral part of organizational strategy. Firms pursue opportunities to increase their stock of corporate knowledge (Samaddar & Kadiyala, 2006) while sharing the costs and risks of knowledge creation (Tether, 2002). Nevertheless, the threat that unintended knowledge spillovers will diminish competitive advantage still persists (Ding & Huang, 2010). In particular, when “fine-grained tacit knowledge” is to be shared, the increasing preference for informal, as opposed to legal, safeguards elevates this risk (Lee & Johnson, 2010; Nair, Narasimhan, & Bendoly, 2011). We take the case of supply chain knowledge sharing between the participative members as a particular case to further discuss this dilemma.As supply chain knowledge exchanges have become increasingly indispensible (Eng, Chew, & Lee, 2014), a firm's decision to share part of its internal knowledge with other members of the chain may be encouraged, but nonetheless partners must be trusted not to leak the shared knowledge to the competition. Thus, the risk of horizontal leakage of knowledge (to competition) is inherent in vertical sharing (with supply chain partners). In this context, the unintended knowledge spillover problem becomes each firm's deliberate choice whether or not to leak its partner's knowledge to that partner's competition (e.g., a shared supplier may pass a manufacturer's development plans to competing manufacturers). Because the outcome depends on the decisions of all parties, this multi-decision-maker problem can be effectively modeled as a game (Nagarajan & Sošić, 2008). We, therefore, adopt a game-theoretic perspective in an exploratory study of supply chain knowledge exchanges, to address whether a firm should:(1)readily share its knowledge with a partner; and/oruse partner's knowledge in other linkages.For the most part, the literature on knowledge sharing has dichotomized this challenge as the choice to be a “good partner” or not (Hamel, 1991), or, more pointedly, as the choice to cooperate or defect (Nair, Narasimhan, & Choi, 2009). This knowledge-sharing dilemma is also known as the “boundary paradox” (Quintas, Lefrere, & Jones, 1997).We focus on a knowledge-sharing problem involving two firms (or players) in a supply chain. In our model, the firms have shared knowledge (e.g., innovation projects such as new product development), and each has the option of sharing it without the partner's consent or keeping it within the partnership. Because each player must choose one of two alternatives, the relationship between the two players can be modeled as a 2 × 2 game, in which each player chooses (simultaneously) whether to cooperate or defect. The best known of these games is Prisoners’ Dilemma, but there are many others in which the players’ values are different (Kilgour & Fraser, 1988; Rapoport & Guyer, 1978; Robinson & Goforth, 2005). In our view, the assumption of symmetric player motivations inherent in the Prisoners’ Dilemma payoff structure limits the applicability of the model, and does not facilitate an understanding of the relationship of partners’ preferences and actions.Our aim in this paper is to highlight a broader class of symmetric and asymmetric 2 × 2 games that can model the knowledge-sharing dilemma among supply chain partners, in the context of joint innovation projects. Firms strive to involve supply chain partners in innovation activities in multiple ways including strategic commitment to price (Gilbert & Cvsa, 2003), subsidies provision (Kim, 2000), or direct exchanges of knowledge. We here focus on the latter to study decisions regarding incoming and outgoing knowledge flows, shedding light on how the different types of players (firms) interact by relaxing several of the assumptions of Prisoners’ Dilemma. For this purpose, we consider the six player types suggested by Perlo-Freeman (2006, p. 5). Cooperate-Defect (CD) Games are 2 × 2 games in which“… for each player X, there exists a strategy of the other player, which we call ‘Co-operate’, such that for each strategy for player X, he prefers the other player to choose Co-operate. We call the other strategy for each player ‘Defect’.”In other words, whatever X chooses, he/she prefers that partner Cooperate. Restricting attention to CD games enables us to classify firms along two dimensions:(1)Collaboration motive: What is the firm's most preferred outcome?Relative power: Which outcome does the firm strive to avoid the most?The answers to these questions determine the player type. For example, a prisoner is a firm that prefers to defect (while partner cooperates, of course) and least prefers to cooperate (while partner defects). Thus we think of a prisoner as an aggressively exploitative firm that most prefers to defect and least prefers to be suckered. The interaction of two prisoners is a Prisoners’ Dilemma. The other five types are fully opportunistic, fearfully exploitative, fair, good and moral.We see CD games as particularly relevant to the supply chain knowledge-sharing dilemma in the short term, as each firm always prefers that its partner cooperate (maintain secrecy) rather than defect (expose secrets). We build on Perlo-Freeman's definitions to characterize firms of different types and study their behaviors in one-time joint innovation projects.To address long-term relationships, we investigate the effect of repetition of the game on firms’ choices and outcomes using MATLAB simulation. We adopt Axelrod's (1984) classification of long-term strategies as ‘nice’ or ‘mean’ according to their approach to supply chain relations, trustful or distrustful. A ‘nice’ firm never defects, except when provoked (defected against), whereas a ‘mean’ firm may defect without provocation. In particular, we are interested in conditions when sequences of cooperation might occur, and when they are vulnerable to unprovoked defection.The issue of provoked versus unprovoked defection carries a particular relevance to the supply chain, where communicating a policy of defection only when provoked would seem to signal fairness and trustworthiness, while the threat of unprovoked defection signals untrustworthiness. Managers tend to consider inter-firm relationships as polar opposites, either entirely cooperative or entirely competitive (Klein, Rai, & Straub, 2007). In this study, we explore the conditions under which being trustful (nice) versus distrustful (mean) is advisable (see Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer (1998) for a review of inter-firm trust).This paper provides a relevant and timely expansion of the horizon of supply chain innovation games beyond Prisoners’ Dilemma. We introduce a pool of possible knowledge interactions by firms showing how they could be strategized in a supply chain. We also build on Axelrod's (1984) findings on direct reciprocation (the famous TIT FOR TAT strategy) by introducing reciprocation of strategy type. One interesting finding is that the superiority of TIT FOR TAT is not universal, but depends on the relative gain from changing the opponent's action versus the cost of changing one's own. We identify seven payoff categories that help us explore the effect of different motivations – gaining the greatest reward versus avoiding the worst punishment in exchange of knowledge between two firms in a supply chain.The joint innovation process (e.g., in supply chain) is a collaborative relationship in which organizations collectively implement a knowledge creation endeavor, sharing the expenses and the benefits of the newly created knowledge according to a mutually agreed rule (Samaddar & Kadiyala, 2006). In this process, participating firms contribute useful knowledge to this pool, building up a “knowledge repository” retrievable by all members (Cress & Martin, 2006). For the endeavor to succeed, participating firms must allocate and share adequate resources (Samaddar & Kadiyala, 2006).The conventional wisdom regarding collaborative knowledge creation generally directs firms to be “good partners” by being open and contributing knowledge to the shared pool. Hamel (1991) was the first to question this advice, suggesting that inter-firm collaboration can develop into a “race to learn”, in which a firm intends to “acquire” its partner's skills as opposed to merely accessing them. The idea was that “good partners” with high transparency and collaborative intent tend to be exploited by opportunistic partners with lower transparency and competitive intent (Hamel, 1991). Larsson, Bengtsson, Henriksson, and Sparks (1998) build on this analysis using a game-theoretic perspective, by developing a collective learning framework that explains both negative and positive learning processes. The authors highlight the distributive dimension and its effect on the appropriation of joint learning by individual organizations.Consequently, there is a trade-off between the integrative and distributive dimensions of collaborative knowledge creation (Larsson et al., 1998). Quintas et al. (1997) referred to this problem as “the boundary paradox”; where borders must be open for knowledge to flow, but core strategic knowledge, upon which survival depends, must be preserved. On similar grounds, Das and Teng (1998) define relational risk in terms of the probability that a partner does not cooperate, instead acting opportunistically and misusing the acquired knowledge.Given the existence of both collaborative and competitive dimensions, joint innovation projects have often evolved into “mixed-motive” relations (Parkhe, 1993). In some cases, abundance of access to a firm's knowledge has created new competitors (Arruñada & Vázquez, 2006). In others, leakage effects allowed the imitators to profit more from innovations than the original commercializers (Teece, 1986). Once a firm shares valuable and strategic knowledge externally, its ability to control access to this knowledge is severely compromised (Anand & Goyal, 2009). There is an obvious imperative to manage organizational knowledge strategically in order to optimize its flow.The literature suggests few ways to deal with the tension between sharing and protecting knowledge. Trust is one of the most significant ways of reducing partners’ opportunistic behavior (Das & Teng, 1998; Norman, 2004; Zaheer, McEvily, & Perrone, 1998). Empirically, it has been shown that when firms build relational capital in conjunction with an integrative approach to managing conflict, they are able to simultaneously learn and protect (Kale & Singh, 2000). Other protection mechanisms include: (1) making company personnel aware of the need to protect certain knowledge and identifying the knowledge that needs protecting; (2) walling off critical knowledge from the joint project; and (3) using contractual mechanisms that specifically identify proprietary data, as opposed to information that can be shared (Norman, 2001).The simultaneous motivation to cooperate and compete with the same business partner has been labeled as “co-opetition” (Brandenburger & Nalebuff, 1995, 1996). Even though the literature has mostly, if not exclusively, referred to horizontal co-opetition (with direct competitors), we here acknowledge the presence of competitive forces with supply chain partners, who typically work also with competitors, and may leak strategic knowledge. Heide and Miner (1992) see buyer–supplier interactions as competitive and best represented by Prisoners’ Dilemma, but they take an operational perspective (they define competition in terms of pricing decisions, inventory costs, and delivery terms) as opposed to the knowledge-based perspective we adopt here. The opportunity to create rents through simultaneous competition and cooperation has been conceptually examined using a game-theoretic lens (Brandenburger & Nalebuff, 1995; Heide & Miner, 1992; Lado, Boyd, & Hanlon, 1997; Parkhe, 1993).More specifically, co-opetitive knowledge sharing interactions have been seen as instances of social dilemmas (Cabrera & Cabrera, 2002; Quigley, Tesluk, Locke, & Bartol, 2007). “Social dilemmas are situations in which each member of a group has a clear and unambiguous incentive to make a choice that – when made by all members – provides poorer outcomes for all than they would have received if none had made the choice” (Dawes & Messick, 2000). In such collaborative interactions, a better-for-all outcome may not be fully attainable because of individual temptations to pursue “selfish” goals while free riding on others’ contributions (Wu, Loch, & Ahmad, 2011). The dilemma, therefore, represents a tension between individual and collective rationality, where individual rationality leads to collective irrationality (Kollock, 1998; Wang, Gwebu, Shanker, & Troutt, 2009). Unfortunately, the solution to games involving social dilemmas includes at least one deficient equilibrium, i.e., there is always another outcome that is better for everyone (Kollock, 1998).Game Theory has been a very useful tool for representing social dilemmas. Game Theory was pioneered by Princeton mathematician John von Neumann as a science of strategy; that is, information and decision-making. This science determines the optimum actions for a player or a set of interdependent, rational players (Dixit & Nalebuff, 2008). Optimum actions are defined by Nash Equilibrium for static games with complete information, or one of its refined versions: Bayesian Nash for static games with incomplete information, sub-game perfectness for dynamic games with complete information, and some refinement of the sequential Nash Equilibrium for dynamic games with incomplete information (Goeree & Holt, 2001). There is a variety of ways to classify games, notably as cooperative/non-cooperative, static/dynamic, zero-sum/positive sum/negative sum, and as games of incomplete/complete information. With these “neat” classifications, researchers perceive that the field has gained a comfortable level of maturity (Goeree & Holt, 2001).Prisoners’ Dilemma is the two-person social dilemma that has received the most attention in the context of knowledge sharing (Kollock, 1998). “The essence of the dilemma is that each individual actor has an incentive to act according to competitive, narrow self-interest even though all actors are collectively better off (i.e., receive higher rewards) if they cooperate” (Cable & Shane, 1997). Prisoners’ Dilemma neatly illustrates the rationale of innovation-related co-opetition from a game-theoretic perspective (Ritala & Hurmelinna-Laukkanen, 2009). In most, if not all, co-opetitive situations, it is advantageous for each partner to “defect” and pursue individual interests at the expense of others (Hennart, 1991; Kogut, 1989). Firms may defect by withholding knowledge, not fulfilling promises, stealing a partner's proprietary technology, or hiring the partner's key personnel (Parkhe, 1993). The complexity of the problem is exacerbated by the further difficulty to observe defections, i.e., partner deciding to withhold rather than share knowledge (Gächter, von Krogh, & Haefliger, 2010).Iterated Prisoners’ Dilemma represents multiple firm interactions on joint innovation projects. The main significance of the iterated Prisoners’ Dilemma is the fact that repeated interaction exposes one's strategy, which may overcome the dominance of defection, producing mutual cooperation. Players are mindful of the fact that observed actions will be reciprocated and are therefore motivated to signal cooperative behavior (Wu, Choi, & Rungtusanatham, 2010). In an iterated Prisoners’ Dilemma, decisions in one round affect decisions (and outcomes) of subsequent rounds, altering the utility of each cooperation/defection decision (Rokkan, Heide, & Wathne, 2003). The most influential work on the iterated Prisoners’ Dilemma is Axelrod's The Evolution of Cooperation (1984). In this work, Axelrod reports on two tournaments, in which subject matter experts were invited to submit strategies for an iterated Prisoners’ Dilemma tournament. The winning strategy, TIT-FOR-TAT, carries the main message of his work: It is beneficial to reciprocate partner's actions, be they cooperation or defection.Furthermore, Axelrod delivers three more suggestions on how to do well in an iterated Prisoners’ Dilemma, namely: (1) Realize that the aim is not to destroy the opponent, and therefore refrain from comparing payoffs or being envious, (2) Be mindful of opponent's adaptation by refraining from overly complex strategies that cannot be distinguished from randomness, and finally (3) Be “nice.” Axelrod made the striking claim that the single best predictor of the performance of a strategy is its “niceness”, i.e., whether it could ever defect first. This result will be challenged and further investigated in this paper.Although Axelrod's work was “far and away the most influential study of strategic solutions to social dilemmas” (Kollock, 1998), it did receive a number of criticisms. The reciprocal altruism represented by TIT-FOR-TAT was found to perform very badly in noisy environments and to be extremely vulnerable to disturbances (Molander, 1985). Even though Axelrod never claimed TIT-FOR-TAT to be a universally superior strategy regardless of opponent or conditions, critics still argued that other strategies, including those that allow for mutations, forgiveness, and different kinds of reciprocity, frequently work better (Brams & Kilgour, 2012; Molander, 1985; Nowak, 2006; Sigmund, 2010). Below we confirm that TIT-FOR-TAT performs well, but not necessarily best, in an iterated context. As will be shown later, our simulation results confirm that other strategies score higher on average.Very few studies have gone beyond Prisoners’ Dilemma to acknowledge the representativeness of other 2 × 2 games (e.g., Chicken and Stag Hunt games) to the knowledge-sharing dilemma. Scholars have sometimes recognized the potential of these other games but there has been little further analysis (Parkhe, 1993; Ritala & Hurmelinna-Laukkanen, 2009). Kollock (1998), for instance, states that the three games of: Prisoner's Dilemma, Chicken and Assurance (Stag Hunt) are the key two-person social dilemma games, and even argues that the latter is a more accurate model of some social dilemmas. The dynamics of these games have been less explored; here we take a step toward filling this void by applying them in the context of joint innovation practices in supply chains.The most notable work on a wider pool of relevant games that apply to the context of collective action (including knowledge-sharing relations) is a working paper by Perlo-Freeman (2006) on what he calls the ‘Co-operate-Defect’ games. A game is a ‘Co-operate-Defect’ if“... for each player X, there exists a strategy of the other player … ‘Co-operate’, such that for each strategy for player X, he prefers the other player to choose Co-operate”; the other strategy for each player is called ‘Defect’".In other words, a player always prefers that the opponent Cooperate rather than Defect.The attractiveness of the aforementioned games lies in their relevance to several contexts including supply chain joint innovations, in which firms always prefer their partner to ‘cooperate’. Perlo-Freeman finds that players in ‘cooperate-defect’ games can be classified into six types based on their preference orderings: prisoner, chicken, deterrer, appeaser, warrior and pacifist. The author further argues that there is no particular reason to assume that players in a game face identical priorities and constraints (i.e., players are not necessarily the same type), so asymmetric games are equally worthy of attention. In our study, we follow Perlo-Freeman's recommendations and consider the whole pool of ‘cooperate-defect’ games (symmetric and asymmetric) when two firms in a supply chain opt to practice joint innovation.Our notation for a cooperate-defect game is shown in Table 1below. The focal player (focal firm for which optimum decisions are studied) is the row chooser. The focal player decides whether to cooperate or defect. In the context of joint supply chain innovation, cooperation may be viewed as sharing knowledge readily with the project partner and protecting partner's knowledge from reaching its competitors, while defecting is the opposite. The focal player's utilities (payoffs) are as follows:R: reward (payoff from mutual cooperation)S: sucker's payoff (from unilateral cooperation)T: temptation (payoff from unilateral defection)P: punishment (from mutual defection)The focal player's opponent is the column chooser. Each player must choose either to cooperate (C) or defect (D). Payoffs must satisfy two conditions (1) S < R, and (2) P < T; i.e., focal player prefers opponent cooperation regardless of focal player's choice. This gives rise to six preference orderings, introduced by Perlo-Freeman (2006):1.Prisoner: T > R > P > SChicken: T > R > S > PAppeaser: R > T > P > SDeterrer: R > T > S > PWarrior: T > P > R > SPacifist: R > S > T > PWe think of Perlo-Freeman's six preference orderings as defining six player types with the descriptive names given above. In the context of joint supply chain, they can be classified along the two dimensions of collaboration motive and power. The first dimension, collaboration motive, refers to the preferred outcome from the interaction with a supply chain partner. Three motives are identified:(1)Race to learn: (T > R > S and P) (orderings 1 and 2), where the focal player's main goal is to induce the opponent to cooperate, yielding either the temptation payoff, which it prefers, or the mutual reward. Such firms are exploitative in the short term. That is, if they do not perceive/plan for future projects with the partner, they tend to defect in a current knowledge exchange.Mutual cooperation: (R > T > S and P) (orderings 3 and 4), where the focal player's main goal is truly looking for a two-way cooperation, and if not that then the temptation payoff. Such firms are cooperative in the short term. That is, if they do not perceive/plan for future projects with the partner, they tend to cooperate in a current knowledge exchange.Extreme motives: (either P > R or S > T) (orderings 5 and 6), where one of the less preferred outcomes, with payoff S or P, is second in the preference ordering. Such a firm's behavior is determined, even in the long term, regardless of the opponent's choices. That is, the motivation (to cooperate in case of S > T, or to defect in case S > T) is strong enough to dictate the same decision in both short-term and long-term knowledge exchanges.The second dimension relates to a firm's relative power between the two supply chain partners. Power is a key concept that introduces new motivations to a game (Wolf & Shubik, 1974). It can be defined in terms of several aspects including, the ability to reward or punish an opponent, the cost of exercising rewards or punishments (Wolf & Shubik, 1974), or in terms of opponent replaceability (Kumar, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 1995, 1998). We adopt the latter definition, which is most appropriate to supply chains, where power can be seen as inversely proportional to switching cost (ease and cost of replacing a partner) (Kumar et al., 1998). This is indicated by what a firm would mostly avoid from an interaction, which by assumption must be S or P. If a firm's least possible utility is P, it cannot afford to lose a deal and would rather be suckered, it signals low power, or a high need for its partner. On the other hand, if a firm's least possible utility is S, it would rather lose the deal than be suckered, signaling higher power and less need for its partner. A framework for firm types is shown in Fig. 1.It is worth emphasizing that the firm types explained above are commonly encountered in supply chain innovation projects. A prisoner, or an aggressively exploitative partner, can be viewed as a jointly innovating firm in a race-to-patent. Such a firm benefits from developing a new product with a partner, but gets even greater return for exclusive patent privileges, and drives away its partner's rights (T > R). A two-prisoner interaction (i.e., Prisoners’ Dilemma) represents a two-way race for patent on a jointly developed technology or product, where the greatest payoff is for exclusive rights, followed by shared rights, with total loss of patent rights to partner coming as the worst outcome. An example is Sears Inc., which was benefiting well (by getting reward R) from the exclusive right to sell its supplier's shared product innovation, the “Bionic Wrench” of “LoggerHead Tools”. The company, yet, sought higher temptation payoff (T) from defecting by giving the idea to its offshore tool manufacturer, Craftsman (Collins, 2012).A chicken, or fearfully exploitative partner, has the same motivations, except that it has much higher dependence on its opponent, making loss of the deal more destructive than giving up patent privilege altogether. In the above example, LoggerHead Tools illustrate a chicken being unable to replace Sears’ large orders and missing resources to drag out the lawsuit, leading it to tolerate a defecting partner rather than lose the deal and suffer bankruptcy (Collins, 2012).Both appeaser and deterrer, equally good and fair partners, enter into a joint project looking for the expanded pool of knowledge and expanded rewards. The difference is that the former's low power means that it nonetheless benefits by contributing more knowledge to the partnership, even if the opponent misuses it (S > P). The latter, however, places higher proprietorship value on its knowledge, that it would rather lose the partnership than find that its knowledge has been leaked away (P > S).On the other hand, a warrior, or a fully opportunistic partner, is a very powerful firm that can never be defeated. It wants only deals in which it can suck away partner's knowledge. An example is the largest turbine manufacturer in China, Sinovel Wind Group Co. Ltd., which stopped doing business with one of its suppliers, American Superconductor Corp. (AMSC) after “stealing” intellectually protected technology related to wind turbines (Ailworth, 2011). This signals the extreme preference for temptation, followed by ending the deal (T and P are the greatest payoffs) as opposed to any cooperative outcome. Finally, a Pacifist, or moral partner, always benefits from cooperating. This could be a company that prefers losing patent privilege to facing infringement penalties (S > T). Such a scenario is common when opponents are well protected legally by intellectual property rights such as the series of lawsuits between Samsung and Apple Inc. (Carare, 2013; Duhigg & Lohr, 2012).How do the player types above behave in a one-shot interaction (equivalently one-time innovation project or at least one in which there is no intent of a future interaction)? Nash equilibrium analysis produces Fig. 2. Only five games end up with mutual cooperation (indicated by the green squares). As expected, a Warrior always defects, and a Pacifist always cooperates, because of their unconditional preference for defection and cooperation, respectively. Similarly, a Prisoner will always defect and an Appeaser will always cooperate in a one-time interaction, as their dominant strategies dictate. As we will show, however, there is a great difference between dominant and unconditionally preferred strategies in the repeated game context. In 16 games there is defection at least from one side, or as part of a mixed strategy. This motivates our subsequent study on the effect of repeated interaction on the one-shot equilibria.In a repeated game, a player can be induced to avoid an otherwise dominant strategy. For example, Axelrod (1981, 1984) suggested that in repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma players (whom we call prisoners) can be induced to cooperate, despite their one-shot dominant strategy of defection.Similar to the logic behind a prisoner's behavior, a chicken would prefer to signal cooperative intent in a repeated interaction to induce its partner to cooperate, to avoid the worst outcome. A deterrer can be easily induced by partner's actions, as it prefers to mimic them. Therefore, it is expected that a deterrer will tend to match its partner's actions. Although an appeaser has a dominant strategy of cooperation, still finds T > S, so it may try to take advantage. Finally, as suggested by Perlo-Freeman (2006), the unconditionally preferred behaviors of warrior and pacifist cannot be overcome, even in a repeated game. This makes the behavior of the first four types more compelling to test, with the latter pair representing a null hypothesis.In the pool of 10 games among the four inducible players, prisoner, chicken, deterrer, and appeaser, we are particularly interested in whether repetition of the games would stimulate cooperative behavior, especially as, in eight of these games, equilibrium involves defection (Fig. 2). As a first step, we would like to characterize long-term “cooperative behavior” in testable terms, namely as “niceness”. Nice strategies are defined by Axelrod (1984) as strategies that never defect first. In a repeated (long-term) interaction, a firm that is pursuing a “nice” strategy defects only in response to opponent's defection. Alternatively, a firm that employs unprovoked defection, even if it is only occasional, is pursuing a “mean” strategy.Under what conditions is niceness advisable in repeated innovation interactions? The answer may involve several factors, including player type, opponent type, opponent strategy, payoff structure and length of relationship (number of game iterations). In the next section, we will test these factors to assess when nice strategies are superior to their mean counterparts. Simulating the different player types, strategies, and payoff structures will enable us to reach several managerial recommendations regarding cooperative behavior in repeated innovation projects.Simulation is widely recognized as an “effective pragmatic” research methodology for studying supply chain management issues, especially for problems that are more complex, require detailed analysis, or involve random elements (Nair et al., 2009; Swaminathan, Smith, & Sadeh, 1998). Given the infinitely many possibilities for long-term interaction strategies, as well as the fact that randomness is involved in some of those strategies, simulation is a reasonable and feasible platform for this study. Our aim is to determine what behaviors of prisoner, chicken, appeaser, and deterrer maximize their returns in a repeated-game environment, in games that may or may not be symmetric (i.e., players of the same type). These four player types seem to be most realistic, interesting, and relevant to the supply chain context. Extreme motive relations where firms are completely inadaptable to partner's actions are far from being common, especially in long-term relations. In addition, their lack of adaptability makes them less appealing for long-term analysis.Similar techniques, such as meta-heuristics, are used extensively in operations management research problem (Griffis, Bell, & Closs, 2012; Venkatadri, Bose, & Azaron, 2012). Meta-heuristics are not appropriate to use in our case because the objective is not to find the best (or close to best) strategy, but to find factors affecting such along with a comparison between strategy types: nice and mean (Jones, 2002). Meta-heuristics fetch good solutions to problems (not necessarily optimal), which is not the objective in our case. Moreover, meta-heuristics present “a poor black box” technique because of its sensitivity to model parameters, making it further unadvisable in a strategic game theory model (Jones, 2002).In particular, we are interested in whether player prospects are affected by repetition of interaction. We use MATLAB in our simulation.22MATLAB file exchange and description is found at http://www.mathworks.com/ matlabcentral/fileexchange/48265-supply-chain-niceness-in-innovation-projects.MATLAB is a high-level, high-performance language for numerical and technical computation (The Mathworks, 2000). It provides an interactive environment for computing, visualizing, and analyzing models. MATLAB stands for Matrix Laboratory and is customary used for simulation.The program was used to code the playing of the games, and 20 strategies chosen to be as representative as possible. The selection of strategies was informed by a general search on the terms ‘Iterated Prisoners' Dilemma’ and ‘Repeated Prisoners' Dilemma’. The criteria for selection included that the strategy has been clearly explained in the literature, that it can be classified as ‘nice’ or ‘mean’, that it can be matched with an essentially identical strategy of the other classification, and that is not too complex to code. Although whether a behavior is successful in a game depends on the payoffs, it is yet zero-independent and scale-independent (adding a constant to every payoff or multiplying all payoffs by the same positive number should not change the results). However, it may well depend on the relative gaps between the payoffs, which we call the payoff structure.We simulated several payoff structures according to the magnitude of differences among the focal player's payoffs: S, P, R and T. The structure is described in terms of the differences between consecutive payoffs, starting with the lowest. Gaps can be either ‘small’, S, or ‘big’, B, giving rise to seven broad categories of payoff patterns, SSS or BBB, where differences are equal (we call this one EQUI), SBB, BSB, BBS, BSS, SBS, and SSB. We carried out several simulations in which the ratio of B to S ranged from 2 to 400. Although in some cases, our results depended on the payoff pattern, the specific value of the ratio of B to S did not seem to affect our results significantly.The main game adapts each set of payoffs to each of the four player types: prisoner, chicken, deterrer and appeaser, according to the player's preference ordering. Each player then plays a sequence of games with every player type, using each of the 20 strategies defined in Table A1 in the Appendix. The result is shown in terms of the ranking of the 20 strategies for each player, from best to worst. For each player, three rankings are shown: (1) rankings of all strategies against the 10 nice opponents only; (2) rankings of strategies against the 10 mean strategies only; and, (3) ranking of strategies against all 20 opponent strategies. Modules are subsequently programmed to assess the following:(1)Which factors, firm type, opponent type, and/or payoff structure, determine the optimum innovation strategy for firms in long-term interactions?In what way can determinants from (1) dictate niceness in innovation strategies?Results of the above questions are discussed in Section 5.To assess whether opponent type affects advisability of strategies, we simulated the 10 games allowing each player type to play 600 iterations with each opponent type. This simulation was carried out for each of the seven payoff structures. Note that exact values for each payoff structure were chosen arbitrarily, as is typical in studies on iterated Prisoner Dilemma – see Axelrod (1984).33A similar argument applies to the choice of number of iterations. This is commonly arbitrary in the literature. In the context of long term innovation endeavors, 600 interactions readily cover what companies consider to be ‘long-term’.Further analysis also proved that within a payoff structure, differences are insignificant (seeSection 4.2). Kendall's τ (Kendall rank correlation coefficient) was then calculated to make 24 comparisons. Kendall's τ was used as it is a non-parametric, easily calculable, and a fair measure of rank correlation (Kendall, 1938). For example, a prisoner is ranked when playing against the following: another prisoner (PP ranking), chicken (PC ranking), deterrer (PD ranking) and appeaser (PA ranking). Six comparisons are performed to compare each pair of the four prisoner rankings. The same test was performed for the other three players, resulting in 24 comparisons. For all 24 comparisons, rankings are highly correlated with no statistically significant differences. We, therefore, conclude that, all other things being equal, opponent type does not matter in strategy rankings across all player types and all payoff structures.The same procedure was repeated across payoff structures to compare how player types perform using different strategies against the same opponent type. For example, the four player types were ranked when playing against a prisoner providing: PP ranking, CP ranking, DP ranking, and AP ranking. Six comparisons are performed to compare each two of the four prisoner rankings. The same procedure was applied to the other three players, resulting in 24 comparisons.This module of the simulation investigates whether nice strategies are superior to their mean counterparts, and what the conditions for their superiority are. The module plays three games to capture rankings for each player across the seven categories of payoff structures (Note that from Section 4.1 opponent type does not cause any significant difference in rankings so only three games as opposed to 10 were simulated). Two payoff structures were simulated within each of the categories to determine whether exact payoff values matter within a category. Rankings are then recorded for each player, throughout several iterations, 300, 400, 500 and 600, to ensure robustness of findings. Firstly, a test was carried out to compare rankings of each pair of payoff values within a category of payoffs. Kendall's τ was used to make the comparison. No difference was significant (see Table A4 in the Appendix).The lack of significant difference between payoff values within a category of payoffs justifies restricting our analysis to one set of payoffs in each category. Therefore, the nice versus mean comparison was carried out for one set of payoffs within each payoff category (and across player types) to test for the superiority of nice strategies over their mean counterparts, when playing against (1) only nice strategies, (2) only mean strategies, and (3) a mix of nice and mean strategies. To do so, we performed a Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test (a non-parametric two-sided rank sum test) to compare whether nice strategies tend to achieve greater payoffs than their mean counterparts.There is no evidence that the rankings of a player's strategies depend on the type of the opponent. In other words, all else being equal, a prisoner (i.e., an aggressively exploitative partner), for instance, has essentially the same strategy rankings whether it plays against another prisoner, a chicken, a deterrer or an appeaser, as long as comparison is made over the same set of strategies (see Table A5 in the Appendix). This implies that, although in a one-shot interaction actions and outcome are sensitive to opponent type (Fig. 2), in a repeated interaction, advisable actions for a player do not depend on opponent type.Secondly, by taking a close look at the comparison results among player types (see Table A6 in the Appendix), it is evident that different player types perform essentially the same in all payoffs except three: SSB, BSS, or BSB. These three payoff structures share the property of having a (relative) middle S, which means that there is a relatively small difference between T and R on one side (outcomes from opponent cooperating), and, S and P on the other (outcomes from opponent defecting). This means that within these payoff structures a player gains relatively little by ‘training’ the opponent to be cooperative. In this case, correlations among rankings of different players (when playing with same opponent) are negative and/or not significant. This implies that, when there is relatively little value in inducing the opponent to cooperate, each player type will be advised differently. Otherwise, the high value from inducing cooperation unifies advisable strategies across different player preferences. These results suggest that both player type and payoff structure are determinants for optimum innovation strategy.Moreover, we notice from test results on player type that negative correlations and/or lack of significance are consistent along all three middle S payoff structures when comparison is made between prisoner and appeaser, or between chicken and deterrer. This result is quite intuitive, given that these are the two maximally different pairs, in terms of payoff preference (see Fig. 1). On one hand, a prisoner has high power and a Race to Learn motivation, whereas an appeaser has low power and a Mutual Cooperation motivation. On another hand, a chicken has low power and a Race to Learn motivation, while a deterrer has high power and a Mutual Cooperation motivation. It is not surprising that rankings are maximally different across each of these two pairs. Below we discuss the results of the module, which investigates whether nice strategies are superior to mean ones.Testing the hypothesis that nice strategies are superior to their mean counterparts (at the 0.05 level), we made the following general observations:1.Nice strategies yield a significantly greater expected payoff compared to their mean counterparts against a nice opponent, regardless of opponent type.Nice strategies do not yield significantly greater expected payoff compared to their mean counterparts against mean opponents, regardless of opponent type.Nice strategies yield a significantly greater expected payoff compared to their mean counterparts against a (balanced) combination of nice and mean strategies, regardless of opponent type.According to these results, inasmuch as it can be perceived, a player should reciprocate his/ her opponent's strategy type as opposed to actions [see Axelrod (1984) on TIT FOR TAT]. Even though this reciprocation result contrasts with the underlying assumption of several economic models, conventional game-theoretic models in particular, stating that agents are self-interested, it extends results of action fairness or fair play. Experiments suggest that cooperative behavior in Sequential Prisoners’ Dilemma reflects what is known as “positive reciprocation” (Clark & Sefton, 2001). Moreover, in models of “reciprocal altruism”, where cooperation is a best response to cooperation, and defection a best response to defection, the one-shot equilibrium involves matching (Andreoni & Miller, 1993). Our findings extend results from the literature about reciprocation of partner's action in both repeated and sequential Prisoners’ Dilemma (Axelrod, 1984; Clark & Sefton, 2001; Cooper, DeJong, Forsythe, & Ross, 1996; Eckel & Grossman, 1996; Fehr & Gächter, 1998) by suggesting reciprocation of strategy type (niceness) as a generalized result not applying solely for prisoners but extended to the four player types studied herein. In other words, a firm observing a nice strategy from its innovation partner should also adopt a nice strategy to maximize return. Table A2 in the Appendix shows samples of typical results for the general reciprocation rule.The reciprocation results, discussed above, have two main exceptions, depending on the payoff structure. In these two exceptions, a player may abuse nice opponents by pursuing a mean strategy, or may pursue a nice strategy against mean opponents. Table A3 in the Appendix shows these exceptions, in which previously significant results (at the 0.05 level) are replaced by weakly significant or insignificant p-values; previously non-significant results are replaced by either strongly or weakly significant values of p (p < 0.1).These exceptions can be attributed to the relative gain from inducing opponent's cooperation, that is, the benefit of changing one's opponent's actions relative to changing one's own. In the three payoff structures of SSB, BSB, and BSS, it makes relatively little difference whether the opponent cooperates or defects. In this case, the player cares less to induce the opponent to cooperate and may, therefore, pursue a mean strategy even with nice opponents. However, in other payoff structures where it makes a relatively large difference whether the opponent cooperates or defects (namely BBS, SBB and SBS), a player may accommodate its (mean) opponent by pursuing nice strategies.For the former exception, results that originally showed nice strategies to be significantly better than their mean counterparts now show either weak significance (0.05 < p < 0.1) or insignificance. And for the latter exception, results that originally showed that nice strategies are not significantly superior to their mean counterparts now show either strong or weak significance (p < 0.1). Table A3 in the Appendix shows the details of exceptions.If we take a closer look at Table A3 (see the Appendix), we observe a pattern in the (first) “Nice Abuse Exception” regarding player types. A prisoner will always be advised to abuse its mean opponent when the relative gain rule applies, while an appeaser is never advised to follow such a strategy. This result seems quite intuitive, given the fact that a prisoner is both exploitative and powerful, and may therefore be abusive, while an appeaser is cooperative and powerless, and is not expected to be abusive (see Framework in Fig. 1). As for the other two players, deterrer and chicken, each is either exploitative or powerful, and may be well advised to abuse nice opponents in a single payoff structure. In the SSB payoff, a chicken's biggest (relative) gain is from obtaining T by defecting against a cooperative strategy. While in the BSS payoff, a deterrer gains relatively little by moving from unilateral defection (T) to mutual cooperation (R), and would, therefore, not be advised to make the move.In the second exception, the gain from inducing a change in opponent's behavior is substantial (SBB, SBS, and BBS). The substantial middle jump of payoffs from S and P on one side to R and T on the other side motivates niceness, even against mean strategies, hoping to prompt cooperation. A player would try hard to induce cooperation by defecting opponents, ending up with either R or T. In this case, we say that a player's payoff may depend more on the opponent's action than the player's own action. In the BBS payoff, however, players can still achieve relatively high gains with mean (defective) opponents through changing their own actions and moving between S and P.According to the above conclusions, the base case in which payoffs are equidistant (SSS) should support the general result on strategy reciprocation (Section 5.1). However, we still observe some (weak) evidence that nice strategies are superior to mean, and only for prisoner types. Although this observation is not in line with the relative gains rule, it does confirm the findings of Axelrod (1984), who used equidistant payoffs and concluded that nice strategies perform better than mean ones. We here contend, however, that this is a specific conclusion applicable to prisoners, and does not necessarily apply to other firm types.The results presented in this paper provide several insights regarding strategies of managing joint innovations in supply chains, under several conditions including: (1) intent of each firm from the joint innovation relation, (2) relative power of each firm, in terms of partner replaceability, and, (3) relative motivations of gaining most reward versus avoiding worst punishment (payoff structure). Together, (1) and (2) define what we call firm “type”, which may play a key role in determining the best strategies to pursue in supply chain innovation relations. In these risky venues, where firms’ strategic knowledge is at stake, firms may be aggressively exploitative, fearfully exploitative, good, fair, moral or fully opportunistic.Exploring advisable long-term strategies for a focal firm, one surprising result was the fact that partner's intent and power (i.e., partner type) does not affect the focal firm's advisable strategies. In contrast to one-shot interactions, in long-term interactions, opponent innovation strategy is what matters, regardless of its type or preferences from collaboration (Table 2 summarizes results). On the other hand, the importance of intent and power of the focal firm itself in driving its decisions of what strategy to adopt, is contingent on its motivation to signal cooperative behavior and induce it in its partner. When there is relatively high gain from signaling cooperative behavior, firm type is less important and the different firm types are similarly advised as to what strategies to adopt. However, when the gain from signaling cooperativeness is relatively low, firm types are advised differently and may pursue diverse strategies. This latter conclusion of diversity in advisable strategies is most pronounced among maximally different types of firms, i.e., ones that are different in both power (high versus low) and collaboration intent (mutual cooperation versus race to learn).Firms that engage in repetition of innovation interactions can induce cooperative behavior, or niceness, in four “inducible” partner types: the fearfully exploitative, the aggressively exploitative, the fair, and the good partners. Our results support the conventional wisdom regarding action reciprocation (by, for example, TIT FOR TAT) and reciprocal altruism by introducing reciprocation of strategies. Companies are advised to pursue cooperative strategies that never defect first, i.e., nice strategies, only when opponents pursue similarly cooperative strategies. Otherwise, companies may be well advised to consider defecting.The above recommendation, however, is subject to conditions related to relative gains from attempting to change partner's actions (Fig. 3). A firm may abuse a “good partner” when the relative gain from inducement is insignificant, and it may be nice to be a “bad partner” when the relative gain from inducement is significant. The generalizability of abuse, however, is still subject to the firm's power and the nature of its collaboration motive. Finally, it is worth noting that relative gains from different combinations of actions can be placed into seven broad categories, where differences in behavior within each category are not significant, but differences in behavior across categories are significant.This paper presents an exploratory study that highlights a pool of symmetric and asymmetric 2 × 2 games that can effectively model the knowledge-sharing dilemma among supply chain partners that jointly innovate. We study how the different types of players (firms) interact by classifying them along two dimensions: collaboration motive and relative power. We then proceed using a simulation to study repeated innovation interactions (equivalently long-term relations), exploring the effects of firm type, opponent type, and strategy type (nice versus mean). Our results show the complete irrelevance of opponent type, and the contingent relevance of focal firm type on advisable strategies in long-term innovation interactions. We also extend the literature on action reciprocation (e.g., TIT-FOR-TAT) by promoting reciprocation of strategy type (nice versus mean), naming and explaining three conditions as exceptions to this reciprocation.While this research provides some interesting results, our work provides opportunities for further future extension. Firstly, information about opponent's real motive from collaboration may be unavailable or at least not accurate. In other words, companies may not know about their partner's preferences, their real gains or losses from losing deals, losing knowledge, or abusing knowledge, or from mutual cooperation. Secondly, dichotomizing cooperation decisions may be unrealistic in cases where it is difficult to define cooperation as a yes or no question (Larsson et al., 1998). Moreover, we recognize that we considered only 20 strategies in an infinite universe – considering more may lead to more robust conclusions. Finally, real supply chains involve multiple actors, as opposed to dyads, and other motivations such as reputation building and altruism may figure into decisions.Our study can, therefore, be extended along several dimensions. One extension is to consider the “shadow of the future” or the probability of the game ending at any iteration. In a supply chain, this can represent the value of dealing with the same partner again, or the likelihood of repeated projects. Moreover, we characterized cooperative behavior using only niceness, but other features, such as forgiveness, can be studied as another dimension of cooperation. Furthermore, the fact that some interactions may involve elements of negotiation and can be represented as cooperative games also applies to supply chains, in which payoff division from joint projects are agreed upon and use of partner's knowledge can be negotiated (for example, in an intellectual property agreement).Another extension may expand the level of analysis to the network, acknowledging both the presence of several partners in a supply chain and the possible evolution of strategies in the determination of which one survives as the fittest. Finally, supply chain decisions involve several relational elements, such as care for the other, or ‘warm glow altruism’ (Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts, & Wilson, 1982). Altruism is particularly relevant to the supply chain context as payoffs are likely interdependent. Further experiments can study the effect of social capital and length of previous relationships with partners on supply chain cooperation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
