@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiple criteria decision aiding for finance: An updated bibliographic survey

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analysis of the role of MCDA for financial decisions.Bibliographic coverage of the applications of MCDA in finance.Identification of trends and challenges for MCDA research in finance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple criteria analysis,Finance,Bibliographic survey,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Finance is a popular field for applied and methodological research involving multiple criteria decision aiding (MCDA) techniques. In this study we present an up-to-date bibliographic survey of the contributions of MCDA in financial decision making, focusing on the developments during the past decade. The survey covers all main areas of financial modeling as well as the different methodological approaches in MCDA and its connections with other analytical fields. On the basis of the survey results, we discuss the contributions of MCDA in different areas of financial decision making and identify established and emerging research topics, as well as future opportunities and challenges.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increasing complexity and volatility of the global financial system has led to increasing use of sophisticated analytic techniques for analyzing financial data and supporting financial decisions. These techniques have their roots in the work of Markowitz on portfolio selection and of Black, Scholes, and Merton on models of pricing contingent claims.The theory of finance is mostly concerned with developing normative and descriptive models of the financial world involving the actions/decisions of firms, individuals, and policy makers (regulators), as well as the effects of such actions and decisions at the macro and micro levels. Such models are essential for understanding the financial environment and the context in which financial decisions are made. But making financial decisions in actual situations requires the combination of financial theory with prescriptive and constructive tools that provide guidance and support customized to the requirements of the particular problem at hand.A wide range of techniques and approaches can be useful in this context, ranging from statistical and econometric methods to soft operations research, optimization models, data mining, and soft computing, among others. Among such disciplines, multiple criteria decision aiding (MCDA) has appealing distinctive features that are well suited for financial decision making.11In this paper we shall use the term MCDA as interchangeable with MCDM (multiple criteria decision making), although the two terms imply different philosophies regarding the way multiple criteria decision problems are tackled (Roy & Vanderpooten, 1996).A variety of MCDA techniques allow the handling of uncertainty and the dynamic nature of financial decisions, as well as the investigation and enhancement of the traditional bi-criterion risk-return trade-off, on which many financial decisions are based, through a richer multidimensional scheme.According to the survey of Steuer and Na (2003), the first contributions of MCDA in the field of finance started to appear during the 1950s and 1960s and were focused on goal programming models for capital budgeting decisions (see, for instance, Charnes, Cooper, & Ijiri, 1963; Charnes, Cooper, & Ferguson, 1955). Steuer and Na (2003) presented a first survey of the relevant literature up to 2001. Since then MCDA has progressed significantly, and the field of finance has also experienced major changes, driven by the intensifying globalization and increasing volatility of the markets as well as the introduction of new regulatory requirements and new financial products and services.In this context, we extend the previous survey of Steuer and Na (2003), providing up-to-date bibliographic coverage of the applications of MCDA in financial decision making, focusing on the developments from 2002 up to 2014. The new survey of the literature highlights methodological trends and new application areas that have emerged over the past decade and enables the identification of opportunities and challenges for researchers working at the intersection of MCDA and finance.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the role of MCDA in financial decision making, whereas Section 3 is devoted to the survey of the literature and the analysis of the main findings. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper and presents future research directions on the basis of the conducted survey.Before proceeding to the survey of the relevant literature, it is important to analyze the actual relevance of MCDA to the financial operation of firms and organizations, their goals, and the way financial decisions are made in practice. This can be done from multiple perspectives. For instance, Zopounidis and Doumpos (2013) describe the multidimensional nature of risk and return and the contributions of the prescriptive and constructive paradigms of MCDA (Bouyssou, Marchant, Pirlot, Tsoukiàs, & Vincke, 2006) as opposed to normative and descriptive financial theories and models (for a more detailed analysis see Doumpos & Zopounidis, 2014). In this section, we base the discussion on the main theories about the objectives of firms (in line with Spronk, Steuer, Zopounidis, & Ehrgott, 2005) and emphasize that MCDA is relevant for financial decisions irrespective of whether one agrees or not that firms (should) have a single objective or multiple objectives. To this end, we employ the relevant literature, primarily from the finance point of view.It is well known that finance theory has adopted the principle of shareholder value maximization as the only meaningful objective that corporations should pursue. Jensen (2001) justifies this unidimensional approach, arguing that it is impossible to maximize in more dimensions and that doing so would actually leave managers with no objective. According to Jensen, shareholder value maximization overcomes such difficulties while being consistent with society’s goal to maximize social welfare, assuming that there are no monopolies and externalities.Stakeholder theory provides an alternative view, which relies mostly on a strategic management perspective. In particular, stakeholder theory advocates that corporate objectives should represent the interests of all stakeholders (e.g., employees, customers, suppliers, shareholders, the community, etc.), rather than focusing solely on the shareholders of a firm (Freeman, Harrison, Wicks, Parmar, & de Coll, 2010). In this setting, financial performance measures are still regarded as being important, but they are considered incomplete as they cannot describe, in full, the corporate value creation process. Consequently, heavy reliance on such measures may fail to identify the problems that organizations face (Harrison & Wicks, 2013; Richard, Devinney, Yip, & Johnson, 2009). Issues and concepts like business ethics, corporate governance, sustainability, accountability, and corporate social responsibility, among others, are highly relevant in this framework, thus leading an enhanced and extended view compared to shareholder theory (Pfarrer, 2010). Steuer and Na (2003) and Hallerbach and Spronk (2002) further note the different risk attitudes and time preferences that stakeholders usually have, their different perceptions of value, as well as information asymmetries and transaction costs. Clearly, the consideration of all these factors in the financial decision making process suits very well the MCDA paradigm.However, MCDA is also relevant from the perspective of the traditional shareholder value theory. Indeed, the creation of long-term market value is impossible without making sure that all critical functions of the organizational strategy and operation of a firm are realized in an effective manner (e.g., managing human resources, developing new products, selecting investments, etc.). Jensen (2001) uses the term enlightened value maximization to describe this integration of the multiple dimensions of a firm under the global goal of shareholder value maximization. MCDA fits well with such an integrated shareholder–stakeholder point of view, as it provides a much-needed framework for modeling and exploring the trade-offs involved in financial decisions that firms face at different levels (e.g., risk-return trade-offs, strengths, weaknesses, challenges, opportunities, etc.). Such a framework is also useful for supporting the construction of acceptable solutions through an iterative analytical learning process.Bhaskar and McNamee (1983) further argue that even if a firm does focus on shareholder value maximization, this is often too broadly defined, thus requiring the introduction of multiple proxy goals that can be translated to everyday terms. As an example consider an organization such as a bank, whose operation depends on a wide range of very different and complex processes, including credit portfolio management (global risk management policies, credit scoring, loan pricing, etc.), asset-liability management, branch network organization, internal audit and control, and customer relationship management, just to name a few. Inevitably, operational decisions for all such functions are based on multiple decision criteria (and constraints), even if the organization’s overall objective is to maximize the wealth of its shareholders. For instance, from a credit risk management perspective credit granting decisions should minimize the expected losses, but this requires the consideration of financial and non financial attributes that describe the likelihood of default and the losses for each obligor.The literature provides similar evidence for corporate finance, too. For instance, Graham and Harvey (2001) surveyed 392 chief financial officers of North American firms (USA and Canada) and found that executives rely on practical, informal rules when choosing capital structure, focusing primarily on issues such as financial flexibility, credit ratings, earnings per share, and recent stock price appreciation. Similar results have also been reported for European firms (Brounen, de Jong, & Koedijk, 2006), whereas in an earlier survey, Moore and Reichert (1983) found that in addition to traditional financial management techniques, large US firms often use a variety of analytical methods, usually from different areas, including goal programming among others.In an investment setting, the overview of Fabozzi, Focardi, and Jonas (2007) on the current practices and trends in portfolio selection shows that portfolio managers use a variety of risk measures and approaches beyond the traditional mean-variance framework of Markowitz. The different views on the concept and measurement of risk have been an active area of research and debate over the past couple of decades, particularly after the establishment of value-at-risk systems, their adoption by regulators, and the failures observed in multiple instances (including the recent worldwide financial crisis). Several scholars have advocated for the need to establish and use coherent risk measures that meet well-grounded properties (Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, & Heath, 1999; Szegö, 2005). However, as Ortobelli, Rachev, Stoyanov, Fabozzi, and Biglova (2005) note, “even if we can identify some desirable features of an investment risk measure, probably no unique risk measure exists that can be used to solve every investor’s problem.” Indeed, risk is a subjective concept and different investors have different perceptions of risk; and this holds true even if all investors follow the expected utility maximization principle that is the basis of traditional investment decision theory (similar to shareholder value maximization in corporate finance). Guégan and Tarrant (2012) provide theoretical results supporting the use of multiple risk measures in a broader supervisory context for financial institutions as the only way to avoid the ambiguity in describing the risks they take and the associated actual loss distribution.The above examples and discussion indicate that financial decisions at the operational and even strategic level have multidimensional aspects, which are realized in various forms. Irrespective of how this translates to the overall objective(s) of a firm, dealing with financial decisions in a multidimensional/multicriteria setting can result in more informed outcomes, which are robust against unrealistic modeling and data assumptions (i.e., model risk, Christodoulakis & Satchell, 2008).The first bibliographic survey related to the applications of MCDA in finance was conducted by Steuer and Na (2003), who reviewed a set of 265 publications from 1955 up to 2001. Other smaller-scale surveys and reviews of specific areas or methods can be found in studies such as those of Aouni, Colapinto, and La Torre (2014), Xidonas and Psarras (2009), Xidonas, Mavrotas, and Psarras (2010b), and Zavadskas and Turskis (2011). For the purposes of this study, we cover the period 2002–2014, thus focusing on recent trends both in terms of methodological developments and the main areas of application. The following subsections explain the sampling methodology and discuss the obtained findings.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
