@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A 4D-sequencing approach for air traffic management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a 4D-sequencing of aircraft on structured lattices and orthodromic routes.We provide a structural characterization of systems admitting a high density solution.The efficiency of our approach is assessed through numerical experiments.We work on real data sets depicting a full day of traffic over the whole European sky.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Air traffic management,Conflict resolution,Graph theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The current air traffic system is forecasted to face strong challenges due to the continuous increase in air traffic demand. Hence, there is a need for new types of organization permitting a more efficient air traffic management, with both a high capacity and a high level of safety, and possibly with a reduced environmental impact. In this article, we study a holistic approach, consisting in designing across Europe a very organized air traffic system, as opposed to free flight, to reduce costs while maintaining safety.Our work is based on the moving point paradigm, initially presented in Prot et al. (2010). We give theoretical background to design conflict-free routes with high capacity and propose, based on these results, the allocation of aircraft to a new system of air routes, that include both lattices and orthodromic routes. The efficiency of the approach is assessed through simulations based on real data sets representing a full day of traffic over the whole European sky. The numerical results demonstrates a drastic reduction of the conflicts rate compared to the actual commercial routes, with a very limited fuel overconsumption.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The current Air Traffic Management (ATM) system is composed of three complementary layers, namely AirSpace Management (ASM), Air Traffic Flow and Capacity Management (ATFCM) and Air Traffic Control (ATC). ASM consists in dealing with the airspace structure to build an efficient system, and it takes place months before the operations. The ATFCM occurs from weeks to a few hours before the flight, and is aiming at adjusting the demand to the capacity of the network; the classical way to do it is to reroute or delay some flights. Finally, ATC is a real-time service aiming at ensuring the safety of the traffic, by avoiding and/or solving any potential conflict. A conflict situation occurs when two or more aircraft are too close to each other, violating the horizontal and vertical separation distances of 5 Nautical Miles and 1000 feet in the current ATM standards.In the current Air Traffic Management (ATM) system, airspace is divided into control sectors monitored by air traffic controllers. Each sector is characterized by a capacity expressed as the maximum number of aircraft allowed to enter in it during a time period. Remaining within this limit is necessary to protect the air traffic controllers against excessive workload and ensure safe traffic conditions. The main task of air traffic controllers is to prevent conflict situations in order to guarantee a high level of safety. With the quasi-continuous growth of air traffic movements encountered by the system for several decades, sectors in the core area of Europe are more and more frequently threatened by saturation. One of the preferential methods to increase the overall capacity of the air traffic system is generally the dividing of overcrowded control sectors into smaller ones. However, this strategy is not sustainable, since air traffic growth is foreseen to continue (see Performance Review Commission (2013)) and because small sectors are more difficult to monitor than large ones. Moreover, air traffic growth also increases the conflict risks between aircraft and leads to an ever growing controllers’ workload. The workload of air traffic controllers is correlated, among other factors, to the number of conflict situations they have to monitor. In this article we study a new paradigm whose structure aims to have a limited number of potential conflicts. It hence will require less monitoring actions and conflict resolutions for air traffic controllers and their workload will be reduced. If we consider a constant workload, such a paradigm can lead to reduce the costs involved by the ATC layer, by redefining the existing sectors and/or by doing dynamic airspace configuration (see Sherali & Hill (2013)).Extensive research has been conducted in different directions to improve air traffic operations. Since 2004, most efforts have been guided by the SESAR (Single European Sky ATM Research) essential motives. SESAR is a European Union and Eurocontrol project aiming at modernizing the air traffic infrastructure, notably by reducing air traffic environmental impacts and trebling the system capacity, while maintaining the current safety level. Some of these research directions focus on solutions taking place in the current air traffic framework; others propose alternative paradigms for air traffic management, which is the case of this paper. In the first stream of research, most of the recent articles dedicated to the optimization of the current air traffic system deal with the ATFCM and the ATC functions. For example, for the ATFCM, one can cite Bertsimas, Lulli, and Odoni (2011) and Agustín, Alonso-Ayuso, Escudero, and Pizarro (2012a, 2012b). For the ATC, the main research stream considers the development of conflict detection and resolution (CD&R) algorithms. Two surveys on conflict detection and resolution models are proposed by Kuchar and Yang (2000) and Martín-Campo (2010). More recent works can be found in Alonso-Ayuso, Escudero, Olaso, and Pizarro (2013) and Cafieri and Durand (2013).This paper focuses on another type of answer, aiming to propose new ATM paradigms with a decreased controllers workload, and hence a reduced cost. Free Flight is such a paradigm, where aircraft operate in an autonomous way, following their preferred trajectories and ensuring their own safety as well as their safety with respect to the rest of aircraft. Free Flight has been proposed and studied by the ATM community (see Barnett (2000) and Willemain (2003)) and seems promising for non-dense areas (see Mediterranean Free Flight Programme (2005)). This kind of organization however presents strong difficulties for crowded areas. An alternative approach thus consists on the contrary in keeping an airspace structure, and making it even stronger than the current one. In Hering (2005), the author proposes to create two freeways (from Ireland to Turkey, and from Baltic Sea to Spain) at high altitude, and at different flight levels. For each direction, these freeways consist in two or more parallel lines, horizontally separated, and specific rules are defined, mainly to join and leave them. These freeways aim at absorbing intercontinental traffic and a part of long European traffic. In Irvine and Hering (2007), the authors build a regular lattice covering the European core area, the tracks of which the aircraft have to follow. This structure takes up nine consecutive flight levels. On each one, a couple of directions is used, with a45°rotation between two consecutive flight levels, and aircraft are compelled to follow these tracks. When climbing from a flight level to the next, the direction of the tracks increases by45°clockwise, and aircraft have to change their flight level if they want to change their course.Contributions of this paper. The purpose of this paper is to study a new ATM paradigm, strongly organized, which aims to reduce the overall cost of the ATM system while maintaining safety. It is important to note that, while we consider a global approach, the scope of this paper is clearly not to provide a complete and fully detailed ATM system, which would be unrealistic. In particular we do not address the ATC layer. This is why we do not deal with conflict detection and resolution in real-time. As a consequence the workload of the air traffic controllers is estimated through the number of potential conflicts.Our paradigm uses a time discretization of 4D-trajectories, based on the concept of moving point (MP) initially introduced in Prot, Rapine, Constans, and Fondacci (2010).In this article, we propose both theoretical and experimental results for the moving point (MP) paradigm. Specifically, we obtain an efficient characterization of the sets of routes admitting a high density solution. This result enables us to propose an allocation of flights to multi-directional lattices for one or more flight levels, where air traffic is completely organized by a 4D-sequencing of the aircraft, and with the objectives that traffic encounters a very low conflict rate and that fuel overconsumption compared to direct routes is limited. Hence our approach is in a sense similar to the one of Irvine and Hering (2007), except that the MP paradigm allows us to take advantage of the temporal dimension on the lattices, increasing the capacity of the structure and making it simpler to manage. In addition, since all the flights cannot be assigned on the lattices, we also propose a complementary approach, also based on the MP paradigm, that uses orthodromic routes. The efficiency of these different approaches is assessed with numerical experiments on real data sets at the European sky scale.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we recall the principles of the proposed air traffic system based on the moving point paradigm. In Section 3 we provide a structural characterization, which can be checked in polynomial time, of systems admitting a high density solution. Then Section 4 exploits those theoretical results to propose organized structures at the European sky scale. Finally, numerical experiments on real data sets are presented to validate the advantage of the moving point paradigm. Section 6 concludes the paper.The moving point (MP) paradigm was first introduced in Prot et al. (2010), where a detailed discussion on its applicability and some theoretical results can be found. This paradigm is based on a time discretization of 4D-trajectories, which allows to design in theory conflict-free air traffic systems. That is, systems that are guaranteed to be without conflict between aircraft, at least during their cruise phases. To be self-content, we recall below the main principles of the MP paradigm. This paradigm gets rise to new combinatorial optimization problems, notably the max-density assignment problem, presented in Section 2.2.In the following of this paper the term route refers to a potential trajectory of an aircraft, described by an origin, a destination and a 3D-profile, but without departure or arrival time. Let us consider that we are given a set of routes to manage. On each route, the MP paradigm generates fictive and immaterial moving points at regular pace, all of them following the 3D-profile of the route. The time period T between any two consecutive moving points is the same on all the routes and is chosen large enough for no trailing conflict to occur between moving points of the same route. However, conflicts between moving points can clearly occur in the neighborhood of the intersections of the routes. The paradigm associates a status to each moving point, either allowed or forbidden, such that two allowed moving points are never in conflict. The aircraft are then compelled to follow an allowed point during all their trajectories. The 4D profile of a moving point thus has to be compatible with the performances of the aircraft type assigned to it. From a design point of view, we have to choose the underlying routes, the time period of the moving points and eventually the phase shift between the routes. Finally, we have to assign a status to each moving point to obtain a conflict-free system, which is clearly a discrete combinatorial problem. Since aircraft must wait for an available allowed moving point, one natural objective is to ensure that the time interval between two consecutive allowed moving points on a route is as small as possible. This objective is formalized by the density criterion in Section 2.2.We recall now some definitions and assumptions needed in the following of the paper. We index consecutively the moving points on each route i, such thatp(i,x)denotes its xth moving point. Since we assume the same time period on all the routes, the conflicts are also periodic in the sense that if moving pointsp(i,x)andp(j,y)are in conflict, so arep(i,x+z)andp(j,y+z)for allz∈Z. We also need the assumption, called unicity, that a moving point of route i can be in conflict with at most one moving point of another route j. As a consequence of the unicity assumption, for each couple(i,j)of routes with a conflict occuring at their intersection, there exists a valueΔijsuch that moving pointsp(i,x)andp(j,y)are in conflict if and only ify-x=Δij. This property will simplify our analysis in the forthcoming sections.We need a criterion enabling a fair repartition of allowed status to moving points among the routes. Recall that an assignmentλassociates to each moving pointp(i,x)a status either authorized or forbidden. An assignment is called feasible if no conflict occurs between any two allowed moving points. In order to assess that an aircraft will not wait too long on ground for an allowed moving point on its route, we choose the density as the criterion to measure the quality of an assignment:Definition 1An assignmentλhas a density1/k, or is said to be1k-dense, if there are at most(k-1)consecutive forbidden moving points on any route.An assignment is said to be exactly1k-dense if there are exactly(k-1)forbidden moving points between any two consecutive allowed moving points, i.e. allowed moving points are periodic on any route, with a period of k. From an operational point of view a1k-dense assignment guarantees that an aircraft waits on ground during at most k time periods between two allowed moving points on its route. The problem of finding a feasible assignment of maximum density has been addressed in Prot et al. (2010). In this paper we are interested in investigating special route structures admitting a12-dense assignment, which corresponds to the best possible density. Section 3 will provide an efficient characterization of so called12-dense systems.We introduce in this section an oriented graphGR=(VR,AR), called the routes graph, modeling intersection configurations of the routes and the potential conflicts between pairs of moving points. Consider a set of routes, such as that in Fig. 1, with moving points defined on them but with unknown status. Each vertex ofGRcorresponds to the intersection of two routes where a conflict between moving points occurs. LetIi,jdenote the intersection of route i and j. An arca=(Ii,j,Ii,k)belongs toARif intersectionsIi,jandIi,kare nodes ofVRand are consecutive on route i. In this case we say that arc a is associated with route i. In addition we define a weight function w on the arcs as follows. For each intersectionIi,j∈VR, we arbitrarily choose a couple of moving points in conflict at this intersection. These moving points are called reference moving points of route i (resp. j) for intersectionIi,j. Denoting byri,jthe index of the reference moving point of route i for intersectionIi,j, the weight of arca=(Ii,j,Ii,k)is defined asw(a)=ri,k-ri,j. The weight of arc a thus corresponds to the algebraic number of moving point periods on route i from reference moving point of route i atIi,jto reference moving point of route i atIi,k. Fig. 2gives the routes graph corresponding to Fig. 1.We assume in the following that each vertex of the routes graph is of degree at most 4, i.e. that only two routes intersect at this vertex. If three routes or more intersect at the same spatial point, we create an auxiliary vertex in the routes graph per couple of routes, and we use an arbitrary order (for instance route indices) to define the sequence of the intersection on each route. Notice that the structure of routes graphGRdepends on the geometry of the system and the moving points period and shift phases. On the contrary the weights are based on an arbitrary choice of the reference moving points. In Prot et al. (2010) the authors show that main properties of the routes graph are independent from this choice. They also give a characterization of route systems admitting a12-dense assignment, based on an infinite graph called the conflict graph. In the next section we demonstrate that route systems admitting a12-dense assignment have a polynomial-time structural characterization, based only on the routes graph.In this section, we propose a characterization of the instances admitting a12-dense assignment, using the routes graph and its fundamental cycles. Notice that we can view a12-dense assignmentλas a 2-coloring of the moving points, with the convention the color 1 corresponds to the authorized status and 0 to the forbidden status. We can observe that a12-dense assignment is in fact exactly12-dense, i.e. that authorized and forbidden status alternate along the moving points of a route. To see that, consider any two consecutive moving points. From the definition of density, at least one of them gets an authorized status. If both are authorized, then on any other conflicting route we would have two consecutive forbidden status, this contradicts that the assignment is12-dense. Recall thatri,jstands for the index of the reference moving point on route i for intersectionIi,j. We have the following property:Lemma 1A12-dense assignmentλis feasible if and only if, for any intersectionIi,jwhere a conflict occurs, the corresponding reference moving points have different status, i.e.,λ(p(i,ri,j))≠λ(p(j,rj,i)).The proof is quite immediate. Ifλis a feasible assignment, clearly any such reference moving points must have a different status since by construction they are in conflict. Conversely consider a12-dense assignmentλverifying that no conflict occurs for any couple of reference moving points. For the sake of contradiction assume that there exist two moving pointsp(i,x)andp(j,y)in conflict with the same status. Sinceλhas to be exactly12-dense due to our remark, we haveλ(p(i,ri,j))=λ(p(i,x))+(ri,j-x)mod.2andλ(p(j,rj,i))=λ(p(j,y))+(rj,i-y)mod.2. However, due to the unicity assumption, there must exist an integer z such thatri,j=x+zandrj,i=y+z. It implies thatλ(p(i,ri,j))=λ(p(j,rj,i)), which is a contradiction. □Lemma 1 leads to an algorithmic characterization of routes graphs admitting a12-dense assignment. Indeed as a feasible assignment is necessarily exactly12-dense, it is entirely defined by the status of a single moving point, sayp(1,0). We can make a guess on its status and then set the status of a reference moving point on route 1 asλ(p(1,x))=λ(p(1,0))+xmod.2. Then any reference moving point on route 1 fixes the status of the reference moving point of its conflicting routes. Clearly we can end our coloring of reference moving points while satisfying the condition of the lemma if and only if a12-dense assignment exists. This check procedure is polynomial as the number of reference moving points to consider is at most quadratic in the number of routes. In fact, it is equivalent to solve a 2-satisfiability problem on the reference moving point status.In the following, we are interested in giving a more structural characterization of12-dense route graphs. We first introduce some necessary definitions. Given an undirected path p of the routes graph together with an orientation, we denote byℓ(p)the length of the path, defined as usual as its number of arcs, and byw(p)its weight, defined as the sum of the weights of its arcs following the orientation, minus the sum of the weights of its arcs opposite to the orientation. Clearly the sign ofw(p)depends on the chosen orientation, but its value mod. 2 does not, sincex=-xmod.2for any integer x. In addition, we define the route-length of a path p, denoted byℓR(p), as the length of path p minus the number of consecutive arcs of p belonging to the same route. More formally, for any two arcs a anda′ofAR, we lets(a,a′)=1if and only if both arcs are adjacent and associated to the same route. If path p corresponds to the sequence of arcs(a1,…,al), withl=ℓ(p), thenℓR(p)is defined asl-∑i=1l-1s(ai,ai+1). Notice that if p is constituted of a single arc, thenℓR(p)=ℓ(p)=1.For a more convenient reading, we say that a path in the routes graph is12-dense if the set of the routes that compose it admits an exactly12-dense assignment. As already observed, in a12-dense assignmentλ, status do alternate along any route, and do differ between any two reference moving points associated with an intersection. For a pathp=(a1,…,al)going from intersection I to intersection J, we say by convention that p starts from the reference moving u of intersection I on the route not associated with arca1, and ends at the reference moving point v of intersection J on the route associated with arcal. We then defineλ(p)as the differenceλ(v)-λ(u)mod. 2, see Fig. 3. From what preceeds we can state the following lemma:Lemma 2Ifλis a12-dense assignment, then for any path p of the routes graphs we haveλ(p)=w(p)+ℓR(p).The proof is illustrated in Fig. 3. Consider an exactly12-dense assignmentλfor p. We proceed by induction on the lengthℓ(p)of path p, basically following the coloring defined byλ. First consider that path p reduces to a single arca1. Letu′be the reference moving point at intersection I on the route associated with arca1. Clearly asλis feasible, we haveλ(u)=λ(u′)+1mod.2. In addition sinceλalternates on any route, it must be thatλ(v)=λ(u′)+w(a1). Thus, we haveλ(p)=λ(v)-λ(u)=w(a1)+1mod.2, and the result holds.Now consider any pathp′=(a1,…,al+1)ending at a reference moving point t. By induction, for pathp=(a1,…,al), ending at a reference moving point v, we haveλ(p)=λ(v)-λ(u)=w(p)+ℓR(p). Also, by definition, we havew(p′)=w(p)+w(al+1)andℓR(p′)=ℓR(p)+1-s(al,al+1). It results thatℓR(p′)+w(p′)=λ(p)+w(al+1)+1-s(al,al+1). To conclude, we distinguish 2 cases, depending on whether arcsalandal+1are associated to the same route or not:•Ifs(al,al+1)=1, thenℓR(p′)=ℓR(p). Since moving points v and t are on the same route, we must haveλ(w)=λ(v)+w(al+1)mod.2, which implies thatλ(p′)=λ(p)+w(al+1)mod.2. Hence, we getℓR(p′)+w(p′)=λ(p′)mod.2, which is the desired result.Ifs(al,al+1)=0, thenℓR(p′)=ℓR(p)+1. However, since v and t are not on the same route, we must haveλ(w)=λ(v)+w(al+1)+1mod.2. We can then conclude in a similar way to the previous case. □We now focus our attention on the cycles of the routes graph. A necessary condition for a routes graph to admit a12-dense assignment is clearly that each of its cycles is12-dense. Considering elementary cycles individually, we have the following corollary of Lemma 2:Corollary 1If an elementary cycle C is12-dense, thenℓR(C)andw(C)have the same parity.LetC=(a1,…,al)be a cycle admitting a feasible assignmentλ. We can choose to start C at a moving point u and end it at a moving point v, such thata1andalare not associated with the same route. Notice that u and v refer actually to the same reference moving point in case of a cycle, and thus, should obviously have the same status. Thus,λ(C)=0for any12-dense assignmentλ. Using Lemma 2, we can write thatλ(C)=w(C)+ℓR(C)mod.2to conclude. □At first sight, we may wonder why Corollary 1 is not an equivalence. Even if it may be not intuitive, there exist elementary cycles having same parity of route-length and weight, for which no12-dense assignment exists. We draw an example in Fig. 4, where cycleC1has a (route-)length of 12 and a weight of 10. The problem is due to the fact that other elementary cycle having a different parity of length and weight may appear in the cycle we study. In this example, cyclesC2andC3are problematic since they both have a weight of 1 and a (route-)length of 4.Even if locally a cycle of weight w and route-length L, withw+Leven, does not necessarily admit a12-dense assignment, we show that globally, if every elementary cycle has its weight and route-length of same parity, then there exists an12-dense assignment. The following theorem states the equivalence:Theorem 1There exists a12-dense assignment for a routes graph if and only if each elementary cycle has its weight and its route-length of same parity.If there exists an elementary cycle having its route-length and its weight of different parity, we can use the previous corollary to conclude that there exists no feasible12-dense assignment. Conversely, let us suppose that each elementary cycle has its route-length and its weight of same parity. We then show that the coloring procedure of Lemma 1 constructs a feasible12-dense assignment. We first choose a route, numbered 1, on which we construct a12-dense assignment by alternating the status. We then choose a second route intersecting route 1 and label it 2. As no conflict must occur at their intersection, we have to affect a different status to the two reference moving points, and we extend the construction to the rest of route 2. We repeat this procedure by choosing at each step a route intersecting at least one of the route already colored, and by fixing its moving point status in regard with its first intersection with a colored route.Now suppose that, when coloring route i, a conflict occurs at one intersection, that is, there is a routeb<isuch that reference moving pointsp(i,ri,b)andp(b,rb,i)have been given the same status. Fig. 5illustrates this situation. By construction we have set the status of moving points of route i with regard to its first intersection with one of the(i-1)first routes, sayi0. Therefore, we havei0<b, and thus we can consider a, the route crossing route i just before route b. Let p be an elementary path between intersectionIi,aandIi,bin the routes graph restricted to the arcs of the(i-1)first routes. This path certainly exists since the(i-1)first routes are connected by construction. Due to Lemma 1 this subgraph admits a12-dense assignmentλ. Applying Lemma 2, we haveλ(p)=w(p)+ℓR(p). Now consider the cycle C obtained by adding the arc e on route i between intersectionIi,aandIi,b. Clearly we havew(C)=w(p)+weandℓR(C)=ℓR(p)+1. Writing that a conflict occurs at intersectionIi,b, we getwe=λ(p)mod.2. Thus we havew(C)+ℓR(C)=λ(p)+we+1=1mod.2, which contradicts the hypothesis. □Although Theorem 1 is a structural characterization of routes graphs admitting a12-dense assignment, it is not of practicable use since we may have to check an exponential number of elementary cycles. We introduce in the next section the notion of fundamental cycles to derive a polynomial time characterization.We recall in this section the definition of a cycle basis for a graphG=(V,E). For further details the reader is referred to Diestel and Theory (2005). If we take the symmetric difference as addition, the power set of E is aZ/2Z-vector space, called the binary edge space, and its dimension is|E|. The binary cycle space of a graph G is the subspace of the binary edge space generated by all the simple cycles of the graph G. To generate the binary cycle space, we just need a cycle basis. For that, we introduce the following definition of a fundamental cycle:Definition 2LetG=(V,E)be a graph, T a spanning tree on G, ande∈E⧹Tan edge. The unique cycleC(e)inG′=(V,T+e)is called a fundamental cycle.By construction, a fundamental cycle is elementary. Given a graph G and a spanning tree T, we can construct(m-n+1)fundamental cycles, wherem=|E|andn=|V|. Doing so, we obtain precisely a cycle basis:Property 1LetG=(V,E)be a graph and T a spanning tree on G. The(m-n+1)fundamental cycles associated with T form a basis of the binary cycle space of G.In Fig. 6, we draw a graph and a spanning tree. The three fundamental cycles are presented in Figs. 7–9. To construct the cycle of Fig. 10, we have to sum the 3 fundamental cycles.To obtain a basisBof the binary cycle space of G, we first have to find a spanning tree, which can be done in time complexityO(m)by using for instance Depth First or Breath First Search algorithms. We then need a time complexity ofO(n)to determine each of the(m-n+1)fundamental cycles. It hence results in an overall time complexity ofO(mn)to obtainB. Fundamental cycles are useful as they allow us to describe all the cycles of a graph with a polynomial number of cycles. We can derive the following polynomial characterization of routes graphs admitting a12-dense assignment, rephrasing Theorem 1 with fundamental cycles instead of elementary cycles:Theorem 2There exists a12-dense assignment for a routes graph if and only if each fundamental cycle has its weight and its route-length of same parity.See Appendix A. □At first sight, it seems that any routes graph is planar, since vertices are intersection points between routes. However an intersection point does not always correspond to a vertex in the routes graph, since only those where there exists a conflict situation between two moving points are vertices of the routes graph. As a consequence, a routes graph is not necessarily planar. Moreover, when three or more routes cross at the same spatial point, we create one vertex in the routes graph per couple of routes, which may lead to a non-planar graph. However, it is interesting to study this particular case, specially if we are able to find a set of routes that leads to a planar routes graph. If the graph is planar, using Euler’s formula, we know thatn-m+f=2where f is the number of faces. We thus need(f-1)cycles to form a cycle basis. This basis can be formed with(f-1)of the f faces, the easiest way being to avoid the external face. Using this basis, we hence know from Theorem 2 that there exists a12-dense solution if and only if each internal face has its weight and its length of same parity in the routes graph.This shows that it is easy to know whether our problem admits a12-dense assignment, since we only need to look at fundamental cycles route-lengths and weights in the routes graph. However, supposing that weights and lengths are randomly uniformly distributed, since the basisBhas a dimension of(m-n+1), the probability of having a12-dense solution is12m-n+1. It suggests us to choose appropriately the routes, which is precisely the purpose of next section.Similarly to Irvine and Hering (2007), we propose to create a regular structure, called lattice, over a European dense area. Recall that in Irvine and Hering (2007), only two (opposite) directions are used on each flight level to assert that no conflict appears on the lattices. Our idea is to increase the number of directions on a given flight level, taking advantage of the temporality and the theoretical results obtained in the previous section to propose a conflict-free structure. We first look at lattices in the plane using three directions couples in Section 4.1.1 to propose12-dense structures, and then extend our results to lattices on the sphere in Section 4.1.2. However we do not claim to manage the whole air traffic over Europe via the lattices. For this reason, we precise in Section 4.1.3 which aircraft can be assigned to the lattices, depending on its flight plan and its performances. Since all the flights cannot be assigned on the lattices due to the operational conditions stated in Section 4.1.3, a complementary method using the MP paradigm on orthodromic routes is proposed in Section 4.2 to sequence a part of the remaining traffic. Finally, in Section 4.3 we present answers to some operational implementation issues.We propose in this section a lattice admitting a12-dense solution. We suppose that the ground speed is constant on a layer of a lattice. This hypothesis may seem quite strong but it is important to remember that lattices are dedicated to deal with flights’ cruise phases. We discuss this point in more details in Section 5.2.The lattice consists of a tiling of the plane with regular hexagons and triangles, represented in Fig. 11. Routes graph being once again planar, we are interested in faces route-length and weight, which are written inside each of them in Fig. 11. Triangles, having a (route-)length of 3, have a weight of 1 or 3. Hexagons, 6-long, have a weight of 2 or 6. Hence, all the faces respect the conditions of Theorem 2; we can conclude that this lattice admits a12-dense solution, represented in Fig. 12.Similarly to Irvine and Hering (2007), we propose to put one lattice on each flight level between FL180 and FL450. We define two different orientations for the lattices, with a30°angle between these two orientations, and alternate these orientations on each flight level. To obtain an operational system, we have to adapt the lattices to the sphere, which implies a deformation of the previous construction. We discuss the problem in Section 4.1.2.In this section, we show how to transpose the construction of the lattice proposed in Fig. 12 to the sphere, where distortions occur. This point is requested to design an operational solution, since a flight level is by definition spherical. For that, we first design three distinct fictive pairs of poles(PiN,PiS),i=1,3, see Fig. 13, and then draw orthodromic routes from these three pairs of poles, as shown in Fig. 14.Far from the poles, we obtain the expected tiling. On the contrary, as soon as we are close to one pole, the tiling misbehaves, and is no more regular. However, since we have to deal with European air traffic, we are only interested in having an almost regular tiling far from poles. We actually can compute the maximum size of the lattice such that a12-dense solution still exists. This computation is a little bit intricated and is hence described in B. Due to the deformation of triangles, it requested to increase the distance between two consecutive moving points to 20Nautical Miles to ensure that there is no conflict situation between two allowed moving points. The biggest lattice is composed of 40 orthodromic routes between each pair of poles and is represented in Fig. 15. Theorem 2 ensures that this lattice on the sphere still admits a12-dense solution.We address here the question of which flights should be assigned to the lattices and how to operate them. We consider that we are given a set of flight plans (FPL), say for a day of traffic. Each flight plan is composed of many information, including departure and arrival airports, aircraft type, departure time, requested flight level (RFL), and air routes that the operator would like to follow. The lattice defined in Fig. 11 has two main parameters, in addition to its orientation: the flight level FL on which it is placed and the moving points ground speed s. An aircraft is not able to fly at any given ground speed, that is why we impose a minimum ground speed. In the same way for each aircraft there exists a maximum flight level it can fly. In addition each type of aircraft has an optimal cruise flight level and speed which minimizes its fuel consumption, and differing from these values may significantly increase the fuel consumption. Finally the resulting trajectory of the flight should not be too long compared to its orthodromic route to avoid over-consumption and possible delays. In order to satisfy these operational conditions and to avoid a too important overconsumption, we hence impose conditions on the flight plans we can assign to the lattice at a given flight level. Basically, we have to guarantee that the lattice ground speed s, the flight level FL and the resulting trajectory are not too different from the deposed flight plan. Recall that the lattices manage only aircraft in their cruise phase:•The requested flight level RFL has to belong to the interval[FL,FL+20[. This condition guarantees that an aircraft on the lattice flies at a lower flight level than the one it requested, to avoid that it is affected to a flight level higher than its ceiling. We impose FL to be close to the requested flight level for an aircraft since its fuel consumption increases if it flies on a flight level far from its optimal one.The theoretical operating ground speed of the aircraft at the lattice flight level has to belong to the interval[s,1.15s], where s stands for the lattice ground speed. This operating speed is determined using the BADA model (see Eurocontrol (2004)). This condition guarantees that an aircraft on the lattice does not fly at a greater speed than its operating speed. It also prevents a too important overconsumption.For each flight, we have to determine an entry (resp. exit) point of the lattice. To simplify the management of these points, we restrict ourself to the intersection points of different routes. The entry/exit points management is illustrated in Fig. 16. The entry (resp. exit) point has to belong to an annulus, centered on the origin (resp. destination) airport. The internal radius is equal to the climbing (resp. descent) distance. The external radius is fixed in order to maximize the total distance flown on the lattice and to keep some potential entry (resp. exit) points. After simulations, we propose the external radius to be proportional to the internal one, the quotient being fixed to1.2. We then impose a limit on the total distance flown (origin–entry point–exit point–destination): the ratio between this distance and the direct route (origin–destination) has to be lower than a fixed value,1.1. It means that the length of the trajectory of a flight allocated to the lattices could not exceed by more than10%its orthodromic distance.With those restrictions, some flights cannot be placed on the lattice and are considered to fly according to their deposed flight plan. The choice of the different allocation parameters to the lattice (flight level, ground speed, total distance) is clearly a compromise between efficiency and air traffic management capacity. Relaxing these parameters allows to allocate a larger part of the traffic to the lattices, which decreases the workload of air traffic controllers as the lattice is conflict-free. However it would probably result in an important over-consumption if flights are operated in conditions too different from their optimal ones. Simulations of air traffic are reported in Section 5 to assess our approach.With the restrictions imposed in Section 4.1.3, some flights cannot be placed on the lattices. This is why we propose to combine the lattices with another efficient method to sequence aircraft using the moving point paradigm, in order to ensure a conflict-free system. For that, we first allow each flight to follow its orthodromic trajectory: we obtain this way a set of routes with moving points defined on them. For a given integer value k, we then try to find a (maximal) subset of these routes admitting a1k-dense assignment. We call this problem the Maximum1k-dense route set problem. The flights whose orthodromic route is not selected are operated as previously using their FPL. To simplify the problem, we restrict ourselves to exactly1k-dense assignments, even if they are not theoretically dominant. Consider the following infinite graph GC, called the conflicts graph and introduced in Prot et al. (2010), where each vertex represents a moving point and each edge links two moving points that are in conflict at some point in time. Notice that any feasible assignment corresponds to a stable set (of authorized moving points) in the conflicts graph. Restricting to exactly1k-dense assignments enable us to work with a finite and compact version of the conflicts graph, that we call thek-quotiented conflicts graph:Definition 3Thek-quotiented conflicts graphGCkis composed of nk nodes. For each route i, there are k vertices, each vertexp(i,x)ofGCkbeing the merging of verticesp(i,x+λk)ofGC, forλ∈Z. There exists an edge betweenp(i,x)andp(j,y)inGCkif there exists an integerμ∈kZfor which we can find an edge betweenp(i,x)andp(j,y+μ)inGC. Moreover, all the k vertices of any route i form a clique.An example of3-quotiented conflicts graph is presented in Fig. 18. From the definition of thek-quotiented conflicts graph, we can directly notice that the Maximum1k-dense route set problem is nothing but a maximum independent set problem on thek-quotiented conflicts graph. Since we are dealing with very large graphs (with about 100,000 nodes), it is hardly possible to use an exact approach. That is why we have made a quite extensive search in graph literature for efficient and fast heuristics for the independent set problem. We only present here the best algorithm we have implemented, with respect to our test instances. We propose a greedy algorithm improved with local search. More specifically, we first greedily compute a stable set by the minimum degree rule. Given this independent set, we use a local search algorithm to improve it, as described in Algorithm 1 given in C. In this algorithm, methodOptMIS(G′)computes an optimal solution to the maximum independent set problem on the graphG′, which is a small subgraph ofGCk. This problem is NP-hard and the known exact algorithms have an exponential running time. We use the exact algorithm proposed in Fomin, Grandoni, and Kratsch (2006), whose time complexity isO(1.22n). It has been preferred for its simplicity to more effective algorithms, as the ones developed in Beigel (1999) or Robson (2001).In this section, we try to point out the difficulties that may arise when we are looking at the operational implementation of the paradigm studied in this paper.When providing a new ATM system, one of the main operational difficulties is the change management. Indeed, it may be very hard to change the whole system directly. One of the advantages of the paradigm we study is that there are three different ways to assign aircraft on routes (on a lattice, on an orthodromic route, or on their current FPL). That is why we can ensure to smoothly change the current system, by progressively removing aircraft from their current FPL and assign them to either a lattice or an orthodromic route. In that way, the whole system will not be completely changed from one day to another, and all the ATM staff (especially air traffic controllers) can adapt progressively to the new system.A second important point to take into account is the uncertainty on the flight positions and on the respect of ground speeds. Small uncertainties due to measure imprecisions can be overcome by requiring a larger separation distanceDs′in the moving point paradigm. For instance, fixingDs′=7Nautical Miles allows an imprecision of±2Nautical Miles on the position of the aircraft, while increasing only up to 28Nautical Miles the distance between consecutive moving points on the lattices. One of the most challenging aspect of uncertainty is due to the wind, which can have a strong impact on the performances and consumptions. Dominant winds can be forecasted with a convenient accuracy one day ahead, and thus,4Dprofiles can be modified consequently. Notice that uncertainties due to airport delays and saturations have little impact on the moving point paradigm, since all the authorized moving point on the lattices on an orthodromic route are somehow equivalent from a conflict point of view. Thus a ground delay only translate to the arrival time delay, but do not generate by itself more en-route delays.With the lattice structure, we assume that the same ground speed is imposed on each direction of the lattices and hence we cannot modify the ground speed of the lattice; however, we can reasonably assume that aircraft are conceived with an autopilot dedicated to follow a specific route and a given ground speed, in a reasonable speed range. If the wind speed is too important, there will be some directions for which aircraft cannot respect the lattice ground speed, and it will hence reduce the capacity of the lattice. Some flights may have to be reassigned to orthodromic routes or to classical FPL. We hence have to study how tolerant the system is with respect to significant winds before implementing the system operationally.In this section, we propose three different simulations of a whole European traffic day; the first one is dedicated to the lattices with three pairs of directions, the second one to orthodromic routes using the method described in Section 4.2 and the third one to a combination of both methods. All the results are presented in Table 1. We use Visual Borland C++on a standard personal computer; the computation times are within one hour. Since we work on a global approach, we do not have to have real-time results, and hence such computation times are not prohibitive.The LICIT laboratory has developed an air traffic simulator, whose aim is to simulate air traffic days according to various regulation and optimization methods, and to assess these methods with different indicators. This simulator is able to deal with airports’ waiting times (there is a minimum time between two consecutive takeoffs) and the saturation of moving points’ routes, but it cannot manage conflicts nor meteorological events. We are working on real data, provided by Eurocontrol, and our tests are mostly based on the traffic day of 2007, September, 27th, which contains 33,213 flight plans. Recall that a flight plan gives information on the departure and arrival airports, aircraft type, departure time, requested flight level, and air routes that the operator would like to follow. To simulate these flights, we use the BADA model (see Eurocontrol (2004)), developed by Eurocontrol, to derive the standard vertical and horizontal operating speed, given an aircraft type and a flight level. We also compute the fuel consumption with the same model.It is necessary to compare the results we obtain to a reference simulation. It consists in assigning the 33,213 aircraft to their requested flight level, on the air route they asked for, at the ground speed determined by the BADA model. To assess the quality of a solution, we use various indicators. The first one is the total number of conflicts between pairs of aircraft. However, it is not the most relevant measure since it does not take into account the seriousness of a conflict. We hence defined the conflicts quantity, which is equal to the sum of all conflict durations. This indicator does not fully accurately reflect the severity of a conflict but is simple and can be computed quickly. At first sight, it may be surprising that we consider indicators based on conflicts, since we want conflict-free systems. However, since we work at a global level, the aim is to provide systems with low conflict rate, and we assume that the conflict situations will be resolved with dedicated short-term approaches or eventually by air traffic controllers. We also propose three economical and environmental measures: the total traveled distance, the total consumption and the total travel time. The fuel consumption is the most natural indicator, but we can compare it with the total traveled distance, especially if we modify aircraft speeds. The total travel time is interesting for the airline company from an economical point of view. The last indicator we provide is the arrival delay; it is computed as the difference between arrival times in the reference simulation and arrival times in the experiment. In our paradigm framework, we can split this delay into two parts: the predictable delay and the unpredictable delay. The predictable delay is the shift between the requested departure time and the next allowed moving point on the route followed by the aircraft. This waiting time on ground can be removed from the system if companies adapt their timetable to the paradigm. For example, if a flight is scheduled at 8:08am while moving points are available each 5minutes, starting at 8am, there is a 2minutes predictable delay, that company may suppress by timetabling the flight at 8:10am. The unpredictable delay, computed as the difference between the total delay and the predictable delay, is mainly due to airports saturations, and sometimes to routes saturations, as they occur in the simulator. We express it globally in hours for the simulation as well as in seconds per flight.Choosing the ground speed associated to a lattice at a given flight level is difficult since we have to deal with different operating ground speeds according to aircraft types. In Fig. 19, we draw the different operating ground speeds according to flight levels on September 27th 2007. For a flight level – ground speed (FL-s) couple, the disk area is proportional to the number of aircraft having the operating ground speed s at the flight level FL. Recall that we impose, given a lattice ground speed s, that only aircraft with an operating ground speed belonging to the interval[s,1.15s]are allowed to fly on the lattice. To choose the lattice ground speed s, we hence determine the speed interval[s,1.15s]where the aircraft number is maximal. The obtained results are very heterogeneous according to flight levels: for FL370, ground speed is 450KTS, whereas for FL200 it is fixed to 276KTS. We can determine this way the lattice ground speed on a day to day basis, or fix it using a statistical analysis on a larger data set.In the proposed system we put a lattice on each flight level between FL180 and FL450, alternating two different orientations, with a30°angle between them, for the lattice at each flight level. We then assign to each lattice all the flight plans respecting the conditions given in Section 4.1.3. It means that one flight plan may potentially be assigned to two consecutive lattices, offering the possibility for each aircraft to pick out between 12 different track directions.Due to the restrictive conditions we defined in Section 4.1.3, only27%of the flights are assigned to the lattices, the others flying according to their deposed flight plans. Still, we observe very good results on the total conflict time: the use of the lattices allows to reduce it by about33%compared to the reference simulation. The unpredictable delay is almost the same between the two simulations, as well as the total traveled distance. The consumption, however, slightly increases of0.4%. This is mainly due to the long-haul flights that may stay during a long time on the lattice without respecting their optimal flight level and operating speed. Globally, the simulation with the lattices gives very positive results, especially in terms of conflicts quantity reduction. It could be interesting to study more precisely the influence of the speed and/or flight level on the overconsumption. A criterion based on the overconsumption could for instance be added as a necessary condition for an aircraft to be assigned to a lattice.Since lattices only host27%of the traffic, it is natural to consider an alternative method to manage the traffic. Considering the method defined in Section 4.2, we have intensively tested different parameters, mainly the value k for the exactly1k-dense assignment we look for, the phase shift and the number of independent sets. Extensive results can be found in Prot (2009); we present here only the best compromise solution, for whichk=6. Operationally, there is an allowed moving point available every 15minutes for each origin–destination, which is a much higher frequency than on any today real origin–destination. It means that we have a sufficiently large capacity, but the waiting time on ground may be potentially as long as a quarter of hour for a flight. This is reflected in the predictable delay indicator.Using our independent set local search heuristic, we can affect75%of the traffic on orthodromic routes, reducing the number of conflicts in the simulation by28%, and dividing the total conflict time by more than a factor 2. Since we are dealing with orthodromic routes, the consumption is obviously almost optimal for75%of the traffic, leading to a2.7%decrease of the total consumption. All these results are clearly very good. However, two points can be improved. First,25%of the flights remain affected to their FPL. Second, delays are quite important, with an unpredictable delay of more than 3minutes per flight, which tends to prove that we have reached the limits of this method. To improve this two points, we have combined the lattices and the orthodromic routes, as presented in the next simulation.In this last simulation, we first allocate the largest possible portion of the traffic to the lattices. Then, we try to allocate the largest possible portion of the remaining traffic to orthodromic routes. Finally the part of the traffic neither allocated to the lattices nor to orthodromic routes simply follows the FPL. The number of flights affected to the lattices is obviously the same as in the first simulation (27%), while, almost mechanically, less flights are alloted to orthodromic routes compared to the second simulation. However, the important point is that now only11%of the flights follow their FPL. It means that almost90%of the traffic is managed by the MP paradigm, either on the lattices or on orthodromic routes.Globally, all the indicators have a better behavior for the mixed allocation than for each method alone, except the consumption which is logically better for the orthodromic routes simulation. In particular the total conflict time is reduced by2/3compared to the reference simulation. The most important improvement is for the unpredictable delay, since we can reduce it by about 2minutes per flight. The mixed allocation is the only method which improves all the indicators with respect to the reference simulation. One could possibly have expected even stronger results as90%of the traffic is managed by two independently conflict-free systems. However the lattices and orthodromic routes are guaranteed conflict-free only inside themselves: conflicts can actually occur between flights on the lattices and flights on orthodromic routes, and of course also with flights on their FPL. A possible refinement of our method may consist in building simultaneously the two conflict-free systems, in order to reduce the conflicts involving aircraft of the two different systems, even if it may reduce the capacity of the system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
