@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assignment formulation for the Elevator Dispatching Problem with destination control and its performance analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A mixed integer linear program for the Elevator Dispatching Problem is introduced.The assignment formulation is compared with the routing formulation.Some well-known traffic patterns are analyzed.A numerical experiment is carried out on random instances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Linear programming,Elevator dispatching problem,Assignment formulation,Destination control,Collective control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies the Elevator Dispatching Problem arising in destination controls. In many of the presented methods to the problem a routing aspect is not considered; decision variables specify only request-to-elevator assignments and the service order of the requests is determined by applying a heuristic rule called the collective control principle. However, quality of this approach is rarely investigated. In this paper the approach is compared with a formulation defining explicitly the elevator routes. The average waiting time as well as average journey time are used as objective functions in the comparisons. Computational experiments with the former objective function on random instances arising during light and normal traffic conditions indicate that both approaches very often produce the same solution while with the latter one the situation is the opposite. Some well-known traffic patterns are also analyzed to identify cases in which the optimal solutions of these approaches are equal.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Elevators in a building form a vertical transportation system designed to transport passengers from their origin floors to destinations safely, comfortably, and efficiently. A set of elevators is called an elevator group if they have a common set of request registration devices located in their vicinity on floors and their movements are planned in a coordinated manner. The task of designing elevator routes serving all transportation requests given by passengers is called the Elevator Dispatching Problem (EDP). The EDP is by nature an online problem as requests are gradually revealed in the course of time and dispatching decisions has to be made on the basis of incomplete data. A rolling horizon scheme is used: an offline subproblem, derived from the online version, is solved repeatedly. The task of the offline subproblem is to redesign the elevator routes using all currently known requests subject to all operational constraints.This paper is concerned with the static offline subproblem arising in the so-called destination control (DC). Static means that all inputs of the problem are constants. In a DC registration devices are equipped with destination keypads. It is assumed that each passenger issues a destination request by inputting the intended destination floor (and possibly the number of passengers traveling along with him/her to the same destination floor) on a keypad in the elevator lobby. A destination request therefore consists of, in addition to the origin floor and the arrival time, the number of passengers and the destination floor.A typical policy in a DC is immediate assignment. When a passenger registers a request, the offline subproblem is solved, the resulting elevator assignment is immediately announced to him/her on the display, and that request-to-elevator assignment remains fixed in the subsequent offline subproblems (see e.,g., Schröder, 1990 and Sorsa, Hakonen, and Siikonen, 2006). The immediate assignment policy means that the offline subproblem is solved every time a new request is registered. The subproblem can also be solved for each elevator separately in other times to just update the service order of its requests. The immediate assignment policy has also been applied in elevator systems with traditional up and down buttons (e.g., Hirasawa, Kuzunuki, Iwasaki, & Kaneko, 1978).Another assignment policy used in elevator group controls is delayed assignment. In the delayed assignment subproblems are solved constantly, for instance twice a second, and a request-to-elevator assignment is allowed to be changed. The last moment after which the assignment cannot be changed anymore is in practice when the serving elevator has to start to decelerate for the request floor. At this moment the passengers are informed about the arriving elevator by a lantern and/or gong. The delayed assignment is mainly applied in elevator systems with up and down buttons (e.g., Tyni and Ylinen, 2001 and Fernandez, Cortes, Munuzuri, and Guadix, 2014). It can also be applied in a DC with a destination-oriented passenger guidance system. When an elevator arrives at a floor to server passengers, the guidance system indicates the destination floors of the passengers who should board the car (e.g.,Tanaka, Uraguchi, and Araki, 2005 and Hiller, Klug, and Tuchscherer, 2014).In many of the presented approaches to the EDP, elevators are assumed to obey a heuristic rule called the collective control (CC) (Tyni and Ylinen, 2001 and Smith and Peters, 2002). This rule is explained in the next section in detail. An interesting and significant feature of the EDP with CC (EDPCC) is that its offline subproblems can be modeled as an optimization problem with decision variables specifying only the request-to-elevator assignments. An optimal solution of it, however, may not necessarily be optimal for the EDP. The aim of this paper is to study the quality of the EDPCC.Quality considerations of the EDPCC have been done in three studies with different setups. Closs (1970) considered a single-elevator DC. However, the available computing power at that time did not allow the investigation of more than toy examples. Inamoto, Tamaki, Murao, and Kitamura (2002) studied a multi-elevator DC but with very simplified settings. They also assumed that an elevator can pick up any subset of the waiting passengers. In practice this means that each passenger should be guided individually when to board the car. Tanaka et al. (2005) investigated a single-elevator DC with the destination-oriented passenger guidance system.This paper compares the EDPCC with EDP in the case of a multi-elevator DC with a typical passenger guidance and with immediate assignment. That is, a request is immediately assigned to an elevator, that assignment is announced to the passenger on the display in the request giving device, and when the serving elevator arrives, all passengers assigned to it are assumed to enter it. In particular, an aim is to identify cases when the optimal solutions of the offline EDP and EDPCC are equal. To achieve these goals, the offline subproblem of the EDPCC is formulated as a mixed integer linear program with decision variables specifying requests-to-elevators assignments. We refer to this formulation as the assignment formulation (AF). The formulation is based on destination requests and therefore may not be applied as such in elevator systems with up and down buttons.For modeling reasons, in the AF each elevator route is restricted to a certain length, a single round trip. The formulation of the EDPCC where all appropriate constraints have been given in an explicit mathematical form is now, according to our knowledge, introduced for the first time. Mathematical formulation of the offline EDP, which is used in the comparisons, is presented in Ruokokoski, Ehtamo, and Pardalos (2015). That formulation is based on arc-flow formulations, and is referred as the routing formulation (RF). In the RF the length of an elevator route is not restricted in any way.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, a detailed description of the offline EDPCC is given. Mathematical formulation follows in Section 3. Section 4 analyzes some well-known traffic patterns to identify cases in which the optimal solutions of both formulations are equal. Branch-and-Bound algorithm used to solve the problem instances is described in Section 5. Computational experiments are reported in Section 6 and conclusions follow in Section 7.We begin with some definitions.Let N be the set of destination requests in the offline subproblem at hand, and|N|=n. Requests can be divided into three disjoint subsets according to their states: unassigned requests N1, i.e., requests that must be assigned to elevators; assigned requests N2, i.e., requests that have assignments to elevators but their services have not started yet; and on-board requests N3, i.e., requests whose passengers are already inside elevators. A request that belongs either to N2 or N3 is called a fixed request as its assignment cannot be changed.In the CC (e.g., Barney, 2003), an elevator stops to serve requests assigned to it in its current travel direction in a floor sequence. Destination locations of the on-board requests cannot be bypassed in any case whereas assigned and unassigned requests can be bypassed only when the elevator is full. When no more requests are ahead in its current direction, the elevator moves to the furthest assigned request in the opposite direction, if any, reverses its travel direction and serves the requests in the new direction.In the reversal control, which is obeyed by the most of the group control methods including the CC, movements in which at least one passenger travels in the opposite direction with respect to his destination floor after boarding the elevator are not allowed. Such movements are forbidden since they are in general considered psychologically undesirable for passengers (Levy, Yadin, & Alexandrovits, 1977). In practice reversal control means that an elevator is allowed to change its travel direction only when it is empty.A round trip of an elevator e is a cyclic route in a building. It starts from the initial position of e and contains first some (or possible none) requests that can be served in the current travel direction of e. It then contains some (or possible none) requests that can be served after reversing the travel direction once, that is, requests in the opposite direction, and finally some (or possible none) requests that require two reversions for e before they can be served.Waiting time of a passenger is the time from the instant that the passenger registers the request, until the instant the passenger can start boarding the elevator. Journey time of a passenger is the time from the instant the passenger registers the request, until the passenger can start exiting the elevator at the destination floor.The formal description of the offline EDP considered is as follows. Given an elevator group and a set of requests, the objective is to design a minimum-cost set of elevator routes subject to side constraints. The reversal control principle must be fulfilled. For each elevator, the load of it must not exceed the capacity at any point and the route must start at its initial location. All requests must be served. Requests, except fixed ones, can be served by any elevator. A fixed request must be served by the elevator for which it has been assigned to. For each request, the origin location must precede the destination and both locations must be visited by the same elevator within time windows. The following four assumptions, which more or less reflect practical situations in elevator installations, must be satisfied.Assumption 1Waiting passengers at a landing cannot board the serving elevator before all on-board passengers who exit the elevator at that floor.If there is more than one passenger boarding the elevator at a landing, they board the elevator on a first-in first-out basis, i.e., in the ascending order of their arrival times.If an elevator starts to load passengers assigned to it at a floor, all of them should board, or as many as its capacity allows.If more than one passenger leaves the car at a landing, they exit the elevator on a last-in first-out basis, i.e., in the reverse order of their boarding order.As said earlier, the offline EDPCC can be formulated as a problem of designing the assignment of requests to elevators. This comes from the fact that the CC principle together with Assumptions 1–4 define a unique elevator route for any set of requests. Natural choice for the decision variables in the EDPCC is therefore the variables specifying the assignment of requests to elevators.In this paper our aim is to model the EDPCC as a mixed integer linear program with the mentioned decision variables. Nevertheless, we have not found so far a way to write a relation between the assignment variables and time variables saying when a certain location is visited as linear inequalities in the case an elevator has to bypass some requests due to the finite capacity of the elevator. To overcome this issue, we require that the length of each elevator route is at most one round trip, that is, there is no bypassing. The disadvantage of this restriction is that it may rule out the optimal solution of the offline EDP even during a light traffic and make the problem infeasible during heavy traffic since multiple round trips need to be considered for each elevator.It should be mentioned that when planning an elevator group, sufficient transportation capacity and reasonably short waiting and journey times should be guaranteed. For example, it is recommended that for an excellent service level in office buildings 98 percent of all waiting times should be less than 60 seconds and 75 percent less than 30 seconds (Barney, 2003). Therefore in practice long elevator routes should not often occur.The input parameters to the EDP considered in this paper are the set of homogeneous elevators, E, and the set of requests, N. Each request i ∈ N has several parameters: arrival time, origin floor, destination floor, number of passengers, state, and walking time. Walking time is needed in an elevator installation where the request devices are not in the vicinity of the elevator group. Common parameters for the requests are: maximum waiting time, maximum journey time, and transfer time. Transfer time means the time it takes from a passenger to enter or exit an elevator. Each elevator e ∈ E has several parameters: state, assigned requests, and on-board requests. The state of e tells whether it is vacant, serving requests at some floor, closing doors, opening doors, accelerating, moving at full speed, or decelerating. Common parameters for the elevators are related to door operations and kinematics of the elevators: acceleration, nominal speed, jerk, capacity Q, door opening time, and door closing time.We define the AF on a directed acyclic multi-graphG=(V,A,E),where V is the vertex set and A ⊂ V × V × E is the arc set. We next describe how the vertices and arcs are defined.Each requesti=1,…,nis associated with a pickup vertex i and a delivery vertexn+ithat correspond to the origin and destination floors of request i, respectively. Here we assume, without loss of generality, that requests are indexed in the ascending order of their arrival times. Let the sets of pickup and delivery vertices be denoted by P and D, respectively. According to the states of the requests, both of these two sets can be divided into unassigned, assigned, and on-board subsets, denoted by P1, D1, P2, D2, and P3, D3, respectively. Notice that the vertices of P3 can be omitted as for on-board requests the origin locations have already been visited. Let e(i) denote the elevator for which vertex i ∈ P2 ∪ D2 ∪ D3 has been fixed to.With each elevator e ∈ E is associated a depot vertex2n+erepresenting its initial location at the moment the offline instance is solved. Let the set of depot vertices be denoted by T. Vertex set V is union of these disjoint sets P, D, and T.Arcs represent the possible movements of the elevators. Let Aedenote the set of arcs for elevator e ∈ E. The set of all arcs is thereforeA=∪e∈EAe. Some of the arcs can be eliminated as they are not used in any feasible route due to the constraints of the problem. Instead of describing which arcs are eliminated, we describe the arc forming procedure. It consists of three phases.In the first phase, for each elevator e a set Beis constructed consisting of vertices it can visit and the depot vertex of it. Thus,Be={2n+e}∪P1∪D1∪{i∈P2∪D2∪D3|e(i)=e}.In the second phase, each Beis ordered according to the CC principle and the Assumptions 1–4, but without taking into account the capacity of e. LetOe=[k1,…,k|Be|]denote the ordered Be. In the ordering, the moving state of the elevator at the current moment is taken into account. For example, if an elevator is moving at full speed, say 6 meter per second, and the deceleration is 1 meter per second square, it takes 18 meters to make a full stop. So all the requests that are within that region cannot be served without changing the travel direction.In the third phase arcs are formed. Set Aecontains arc (kg, kh), where kg, kh∈ Oe, if and only if g < h and elevator e can travel along arc (kg, kh) without violating any constraints or assumptions. To determine which arcs can be traveled by an elevator we follow the rules presented in Ruokokoski et al. (2015).Each subgraphGe=(Ve,Ae)has the following properties. 1) It is acyclic. 2) The length of any feasible route is a round trip at the maximum. 3) For any pickup vertex i ∈ Vethere is no path from vertexn+ito i.We define the RF on a directed graphG′=(V′=V∪{0},A′). Vertex 0 is an auxiliary terminal depot vertex at which each elevator ends its route. Arc set A′ consists of an arc (i, j) if at least one elevator can travel along it. Therefore in the RF we associate with each arc (i, j) a binary decision variable xijbeing equal to 1 if some elevator travels along it, otherwise equal to 0.The next example illustrates the graphs for both formulations and some concepts given above.Example 1Consider an example with two elevators,e1−e2,and five requests,r1−r5,of which r1 and r2 are on-board requests of e1. Elevator e2 is vacant and located at floor 1. Elevator e1 is standing at floor 2 and is about to move to floor 4. The example is visualized in Fig. 1. In the figure darts and circles represent origin and destination floors of the requests, respectively, and the arrows their directions. Squares represent elevator locations. Fig. 2illustrates the graph of the AF. Vertices 1 and 2 are missing since they have already been visited. Solid arrows represent the arcs of e1 whereas dashed represent the arcs of e2. The ordered sets formed during the arc forming procedure are:Oe1=[11,3,6,7,8,5,10,4,9]andOe2=[12,4,3,8,9,5,10]. The numbers next to vertices are vertex indexes. Fig. 3illustrates the graph of the RF. Vertex 0 is an auxiliary terminal depot vertex. Solid arrows represent the arcs.As described in the previous section, we define the AF on a directed acyclic multi-graphG=(V,A,E). We now describe the parameters involved in it and give some definitions.Each vertex i ∈ V is associated with a demand ωisatisfying for i ∈ T, ωi≥ 0, and fori=1,…,n,ωi≥ 0 andωn+i=−ωi. For i ∈ T, ωirepresents the initial load of elevator i and for i ∈ P, ωirepresents the number of passengers of request i. DenoteΩ(S)=∑i∈S|ωi|,where S ⊆ V.A time window [ai, bi] is also associated with every vertex i ∈ V, where aiand birepresent the earliest and latest time, respectively, at which service may start at vertex i. Given with each vertex i ∈ P is an elapsed time γi≥ 0, the time from the arrival time of request i to the current moment.Each arc (i, j) ∈ A is associated with cost τijwhich includes passengers transfer times at vertex i and elevator performance times between vertices i and j. In the next section we describe in detail how the costs are calculated.LetSeij={kg,kg+1,...,kh−1,kh}be a subset of Oe(recall that Oeis the ordered set of vertices of elevator e) such thatkg−1=iandkh+1=j. Each Seijis unambiguous. Seijcan be empty.We define the following decision variables. For each vertex i ∈ V and each elevator e ∈ E, let xeibe a binary variable equal to 1 if elevator e visits at vertex i, and 0 otherwise. For each vertex i ∈ V, let a continuous time variable tibe the arrival time and qibe the elevator load upon departure at vertex i.With this notation, the mathematical formulation of the AF is:(1)min∑i∈PωiΩ(P)(ti+γi)subject to(2)∑e∈Exei=1∀i∈P1∪D1(3)xe,2n+e=1∀e∈E(4)xei=xe,n+i∀i∈P1,e∈E(5)xe(i),i=1∀i∈P2∪D2∪D3(6)ai≤ti≤bi∀i∈P∪D(7)ti+τij−Mij(2−xei−xej)≤tj∀e∈E,(i,j)∈Ae(8)ti=0∀i∈T(9)qi+ωj−Ni(2−xei−xej+∑k∈Seijxek)≤qj∀e∈E,(i,j)∈Ae(10)qi=ωi∀i∈T(11)max{0,ωi}≤qi≤Ni∀i∈P∪D(12)xei∈{0,1}∀i∈P∪D,e∈EThe cost function (1) minimizes the average passenger waiting time. We use this objective function here as it is one of the most common objective functions used for the EDP. If the average journey time is minimized, the objective function becomes(13)min∑i∈D|ωi|Ω(D)(ti+γi).Equalities (2) and (3) together with binary constraints (12) ensure that each unassigned pickup and delivery vertex is assigned to exactly one elevator and each elevator starts its route at its depot vertex, respectively. For each request, both the pickup and delivery vertices are visited by the same elevator (4). Precedence inequalities (origin vertex of request i must be visited before delivery vertexn+i) are automatically satisfied as for any vertexn+i∈D1∪D2there is no path from it to i in any subgraph Ge, e ∈ E that contains the verticesn+iand i. Fixed requests cannot be reassigned (5).Inequalities (6) impose the time window constraints. For i ∈ P, lower bound of the time window is the remaining walking time of request i. Forn+i∈D1∪D2we setan+i=ai+τi,n+i. Forn+i∈D3we set the lower bound to the earliest time the elevatore(n+i)can reach vertexn+i. Upper bounds of the time windows are used to restrict the long waiting and journey times of passengers. In particular, we set for i ∈ P,bi=W−γiand forn+i∈D,bn+i=J−γi. Here W and J denote the maximum allowed waiting and journey times of passengers, respectively. In this way the waiting and journey times of a passenger never exceed the values of W and J, respectively.Consistency of the time variables, ti, is ensured by constraints (7). The constraint associated with arc (i, j) means that if elevator e visits at both vertices i and j then tjmust be at leastti+τij. This relation must hold even if vertex j is not directly visited after i since the triangle inequality holds for arc costs and subgraph Geis acyclic. In other cases the inequality must be redundant. This requirement is guaranteed by settingMij=max{0,bi+τij−aj}. For example ifxei=0andxej=1,then the remaining constraint isti−bi+aj≤tjwhich is redundant since ti≤ biand tj≥ aj(assumingbi+τij−aj>0).Consistency of the load variables, qi, is ensured by constraints (9), in a very similar way as for time variables. Since the triangle inequality does not hold for demands, we need an additional term,∑k∈Seijxek,to make the constraint associated with arc (i, j) redundant in the case elevator e visits, in addition to vertices i and j, any other vertex k between i and j, i.e., k ∈ Seijandxek=1. The validity of the constraints is ensured by settingNi=min{Q,Q+ωi}. For example ifxei=xej=1and∑k∈Seijxek=0,that is, vertex j is visited directly after vertex i, then the remaining constraint isqi+ωj≤qj,whereas ifxei=xej=1and∑k∈Seijxek=1,then the remaining constraint isqi+ωj−min{Q,Q+ωi}≤qj,which is redundant asqi≤min{Q,Q+ωi}and ωj≤ qj.Each elevator starts with its initial load (10). Finally, inequalities (11) impose capacity constraints. For example after leaving a pickup vertex i the load must be at least ωiwhereas leaving a delivery vertex j the load must be less than or equal toQ−|ωj|.Let us now consider how to calculate arc cost τijfrom vertex i to j. Let κ, α, andυdenote the jerk, acceleration and nominal speed of the elevators, respectively. Define f(i) to be the floor of vertex i. We assume that for each elevator the deceleration is the same as the acceleration. There are two cases to be considered: 1) start vertex of arc (i, j) is depot vertex, i ∈ T, and 2) start vertex is either pickup or delivery vertex, i ∈ P ∪ D. In case i ∈ P ∪ D, if f(i) ≠ f(j), cost τijconsists of passenger transfer time and constant door closing time at vertex i, a flight time θijbetween vertices i and j, and a constant door opening time at vertex j; otherwise τijjust consists of the passenger transfer time at vertex i. The passenger transfer time at a vertex is proportional to the demand of the vertex. A formula for the flight time from vertex i to j is a piece-wise nonlinear function (Roschier & Kaakinen, 1979). If the distance dijbetween f(i) and f(j) is less than or equal toυ2/α+αυ/κ(nominal speed will not be reached), thenθij=α2κ2+4dijα+ακ,otherwise (nominal speed will be reached)θij=dijυ+υα+ακ.If i ∈ T, the calculation of τijis a bit complicated and case-dependent since the state of the elevator (recall closing doors, opening doors, accelerating, decelerating etc.) must be taken into account, and is therefore omitted here.In the arc forming procedure we tacitly assumed that every elevator has a travel direction. If there is an elevator e without travel direction (i.e., it is standing idle without any requests on a floor), it is replaced by two elevators, euand ed, the travel directions of which are upwards and downwards, respectively. The new travel direction of e is determined based on whether edor eugets requests: if eugets requests, then the direction is upwards, and if edgets requests, then the direction is downwards. In order to ensure that only one of these two elevators receives requests, we introduce two additional binary variables, ydfor edand yufor eu, and add the following constraints(14)∑i∈Pxed,i≤|P|yd,(15)∑i∈Pxeu,i≤|P|yu,(16)yd+yu=1.Here constraint (16) requires that the travel direction of e is either upwards or downwards. Constraint (14) means that if direction is upwards, then edcannot get any requests, and correspondingly constraint (15) ensures that if direction is downwards, then eucannot get any requests.A traffic pattern can be characterized by its traffic components: incoming, outgoing and interfloor passengers (Siikonen, 1993). Incoming passengers depart from the entrance floor of the building and are destined to upper floors of the building. Outgoing passengers leave the upper floors and are destined to the entrance floor. Interfloor passengers travel only between the upper floors. Here we consider three well-known traffic patterns, up-peak, down-peak, and mixed. Table 1gives the proportions of the traffic components for each of these patterns.The next four theorems and corollaries show when the optimal solutions of the AF and RF are the same and when not. Observe that these results may not hold for other objective functions than those used here.Theorem 1For any instance arising during the up-peak traffic pattern in buildings with one entrance floor and with unlimited capacity of the elevators, the optimal solution of the AF is optimal for the RF.Consider any instance that satisfies the conditions given in the theorem. Suppose that the entrance floor is at the lowest floor. In order to prove the theorem, we need to show that for any feasible assignment of requests to elevators there is a unique route. Let us therefore consider the route construction of an elevator for a given assignment. Without loss of generality, we start the consideration from the point where the elevator is empty and is returning back to the entrance floor.When the elevator arrives at the entrance floor to serve passengers assigned to it, the service order of them is unique due to Assumption 2. In addition, Assumption 3 implies that the elevator cannot leave the floor before all passengers are on-board. After the passengers are served there, the elevator starts to move upwards. The first stop must be at the nearest floor where some passengers want to leave the elevator, otherwise reversal constraint is violated. At that floor, the order of the leaving passengers is unique due to Assumption 4. The same procedure holds also for the remaining floors at which the elevator has to visit. Since at each point in the route construction the next action is unique, for any feasible assignment of requests there is only a single route.□If the capacity is limited, the optimal solution of the AF is not necessarily optimal for the RF.Suppose that in the optimal solution for the RF at least one elevator needs to visit the entrance floor twice in order to transport all passengers assigned to it. That solution is not a feasible solution for the AF as two round trips are needed. This means that the optimal solution of the AF is not optimal for the RF.□For an instance arising in the down-peak traffic pattern the optimal solution of the AF is not necessarily optimal for the RF.We prove this by an example where the optimality fails. Suppose that for a vacant elevator e1 that is located at floor 1 doors open is assigned two down destination requests, r1 and r2. The first request, r1, is from floor 1 to 0 and the second one, r2, is from 14 to 0. Fig. 4illustrates this example. The floor heights and elevator parameters are the same as in Section 6. In this figure, the optimal solution of the AF is represented by dashed arcs. This solution differs from the optimal solution of the RF that is represented in the figure by the solid arcs. Table 2reports the waiting time (WT) and journey time (JT) for the requests and for both formulations. Column Avg tells the average waiting and journey times. The last column reports how much in percentages the average waiting and average journey times have decreased when using the RF instead of the AF.□For an instance arising in the mixed traffic pattern the optimal solution of the AF is not necessarily optimal for the RF.We prove this by an example, too. Suppose that for a vacant elevator e1 that is located at floor 14 doors open is assigned two destination requests, r1 and r2. The first request, r1, is from floor 13 to 0 and the second one, r2, is from 12 to 14. Fig. 5illustrates this example. In a similar way as in the proof of the previous theorem, in this figure the optimal solution of the AF is represented by dashed arcs and the optimal solution of the RF is represented by solid arcs. Table 3reports the waiting times (JT) and journey times (JT) for both formulations. Column Avg tells the average waiting and journey times. The last column reports how much in percentages the average waiting and average journey times are decreased when using the RF instead of the AF.□In this section, we describe briefly the branch-and-bound (BAB) algorithm used to solve the considered instances. First one more definition. Let X be a path that starts at some elevator origin vertex and is infeasible with respect to some of the four assumptions given in Section 2.For the AF we use the basic BAB algorithm while in the case of the RF we add some constraints into the model if and only if they are violated in an LP-relaxation during the search process. The reason is that in the RF the cardinality of some constraint families are exponential with respect to the number of requests, and therefore cannot be added a priori. These constraints are the precedence, fixed vertex and infeasible path constraints. We call separation algorithms of them at each node to detect violated constraints.The precedence constrains stipulate that for each request i, the pickup vertex i is visited before the delivery vertexn+iand both vertices are visited by the same elevator. We identify violated precedence constraints by solving maximum flow problems. For those readers interested in the technical details we refer to a paper by Ropke, Cordeau, and Laporte (2007). Fixed vertex constraints ensure that if vertex i has been fixed to elevator e, then other elevators cannot serve it. In other words, in the solution there must be a path from2n+eto i. We identify violated fixed vertex constraints using the same idea as in the case of precedence constraints. If the flow from2n+eto i is less than one, a violated fixed vertex constraint is identified.Infeasible path X can be eliminated by adding the following constraint∑(i,j)∈AXxij≤|AX|−1where AXis the set of arcs in path X. Recall that in the RF we associate with each arc (i, j) a decision variable xij. We separate violated infeasible paths by starting from an elevator origin vertex and then iteratively augment the path by adding an arc whose value in the solution is more than 0.9. If the augmented path becomes infeasible at some point, then the infeasible path constraint is added. This procedure is repeated for each elevator.The algorithm used in the experiments was implemented in C++ with IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio 12.5.1. The experiments were performed on a computer equipped with Intel dual core processor running at 3.0 gigahertz and having 8 gigabyte of memory. In the literature there are lots of data related to traffic profiles. Despite that, there are no data for single instances of the offline EDP. Therefore, we generate a set of random instances that is described next.Instead of generating pure random offline EDP instances, we first simulated a passenger traffic flow in a building by using a discrete-event simulator called Building Traffic Simulator (BTS) (Siikonen, Susi, & Hakonen, 2001) and then took some random instances solved during the simulation. BTS models the building, elevators, group control system and traffic generation. The traffic generator forms passengers according to the selected traffic pattern and Poisson distribution with arrival rate λ. Destination requests given by the passengers are assigned to elevators by solving the offline EDP instances using a genetic algorithm in the group control module.Numerical values for the parameters used in the simulations are as follows. The floor height of each floor is 3.6 meters. The lowest floor, 0, is an entrance floor. The population of each floor above the entrance floor is 50. Each elevator has rated capacity 21 persons, nominal speed 3 meter per second, acceleration 1.0 meter per second square, and jerk 1.6 meter per second cube. Door opening time is 1.5 seconds and closing time 3.1 seconds, passenger transfer time in both directions, into and out from an elevator, is 1.0 second. Passenger arrival rate, λ, was set so that the generated traffic corresponds to light or normal traffic condition. Finally, the walking time from a destination control panel to the waiting area is 0 seconds.We call the selected random instances basic instances. In practice each basic instance has only one non-assigned request since in a DC requests are assigned immediately and solving an instance takes usually a few milliseconds. In order to study how many calls our approach is able to assign we formed 5 instances from each basic instance by first removing the non-assigned request and 11 assigned requests and then adding 4, 6, 8, 10, or 12 of them back as non-assigned requests. This kind of instances can occur in an elevator system with a request prediction, in a DC with delayed assignment, or in a system where passengers have personal request giving devices, for example a smart phone, which makes possible to delay the announcement of the serving elevator. By varying the number of elevators and the traffic type in the BTS we selected 12 random basic instances and formed 60 instances in total. These instances represent instances arising in light and normal traffic conditions.Table 4provides the basic characteristics of the formed instances. The first column, |E|, gives the number of elevators, the second one, |F|, gives the number of floors whereas the third one, |C1|, gives the number of non-assigned requests. It is assumed that each elevator can serve any floor. The last 6 columns report the instance names for each traffic type and the total number of assigned and on-board requests, |C2, 3|. The first character in an instance name is an abbreviation for the traffic type whereas the first and second number are the number of elevators and the number of non-assigned requests, respectively. The traffic types are up (U), down (D), and mixed (M), whose traffic components are given in Table 1.The number of binary decision variables (|x|) for both formulations are given in Table 5. For the AF it is |E| × |C1| whereas for the RF it equals to the number of arcs in the graph associated with the instance.In all instances the maximum waiting and journey time is set to 400 and 800 seconds, respectively.Each generated instance was solved by both formulations and with both objective functions, average waiting time (AWT) (1) and average journey time (AJT) (13). A limit of 7200 seconds for CPU time was used. Tables 6–8provide the CPU time (CPU) and the objective value (z) for each instance and for both objective functions. When an instance could not be solved to optimality within the predefined CPU limit, a character * precedes to indicate that. An objective value for the AF is given in bold if it equals to that of the RF.From these tables one can observe that the BAB algorithm for the AF is faster than for the RF for almost all instances. To be precise, the AF with the AWT is faster for 58 instances out of 60 and with the AJT for all instances. For some instances the difference is quite huge. For example, the CPU time of the AF with the AWT on instance M_6_12 is about one second whereas for the RF it is more than one hour. On average, the AF with the AWT (AJT) is 62.46 percent (80.35 percent), 65.67 percent (93.41 percent), and 81.15 percent (95.40 percent) faster than the RF for up-peak, down-peak and mixed traffic instances, respectively. One major factor explaining the difference in CPU times is the number of binary decision variables which were given in Table 5. From the results one can also observe the change from the AWT to AJT makes instances much more difficult to solve for the BAB algorithm.When considering the absolute CPU times one sees that both models can solve only small instances to optimality within half a second which is usually the upper limit for the CPU time in real installations. For instances arising in a DC this may be enough as there the number of requests to be assigned is usually just one or two. However, in a DC with predicted destination requests or in systems where some requests can be reassigned this may not be fast enough.Let us next consider the objective values. First the focus is on the AWT objective values. The results show that for all instances solved to optimality, both formulations find the same solution. This observation indicates that during light and normal traffic such an instance is rare for which the optimal solution of both formulations are different. The major reason is the objective function itself. When the AWT is minimized, elevators try to get passengers on-board as fast as possible on average, and very often this is achieved by stopping pickup locations in a floor sequence. Also, when there is at least one passenger on-board their destination locations are visited in a floor sequence due to the reversal control principle.Typically when the formulations do not provide the same solution, some elevator receive requests that are very different in terms of destination and/or origin floors. See, for instance, the examples given in Theorems 3 and 4. However, when a group contains multiple elevators, often such requests are given to different elevators and thus there is no need to deviate from the CC principle.In case of the AJT objective function the situation is different. The results reveal that for almost all instances solved to optimality except up-peak instances, the objective value of the RF is better. The reason is that when the AJT is minimized, elevators try to visit delivery locations as fast as possible on average and often this is achieved by delaying the service of some passenger to subsequent round trips. On average, the difference in an objective value between RF with the AJT and the AF is 7.13 percent and 1.41 percent for down-peak and mixed traffic instances, respectively.When we consider the results of Inamoto et al. (2002) we observe that in their experiments, which are performed on random instances formed according to the mixed traffic, the RF with the AJT produces quite different solutions compared to the CC. In particular, they report that the difference is 27.7 percent in objective value over 50 instances with 3 elevators and 10 non-assigned requests. This result differs from our results. The reason for the difference is that in their RF the information related to forthcoming passengers is complete, that is, the origin and destination floors as well as the arrival times of all passengers who will appear in the planning period are known. This information can be utilized to dispatch elevators to the arrival floors of passengers long before the requests are registered. In contrast to this, in the comparison model based on the CC they assume that the origin and destination floors of a passenger are revealed once the destination request is registered. Thus, their results rather show that the use of early information related to passengers improves the service level.We finally compare the results given in Tanaka et al. (2005) to our results. Recall that they only study the single-elevator case. In their computational experiments they simulate up-peak and down-peak traffics with different arrival rates. Their results show that during light and normal traffic the both models, the CC and the RF with the AJT produce about the same service level of passengers whereas during heavy traffic the service level starts differing greatly. Our hypothesis is that this phenomenon also occurs in a multi-elevator case. However, we believe that this phenomenon is not so strong in the DC considered in this paper. The reason is that Tanaka et al. consider a DC with passenger guidance system that indicates the destination floors of passengers who should board the car when it stops there next. In this way they can more freely select which passenger should board the car. Unfortunately we cannot verify our hypothesis since our selected algorithm, BAB, is too slow for instances arising in heavy traffic.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
