@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An inventory–routing problem with the objective of travel time minimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider an inventory and routing problem to minimize maximum route travel time.We present tabu search algorithm with efficient improvement method in each iteration.Lagragian relaxation algorithm is proposed to obtain the lower bounds.It shows that results of tabu search are very close to the lower bounds.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Logistics,Distribution,Inventory routing,Tabu search,Lagrangian relaxation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we consider an inventory–routing problem (IRP) in a large petroleum and petrochemical enterprise group. Compared to many other IRPs, the problem in this paper includes some special aspects due to the operational constraints, such as hours-of-service regulations of the company and the industry. Also, in some cases, it is more important to avoid stock out for any station, rather than purely focusing on transportation cost minimization. The objective is to minimize the maximum of the route travel time, which is not addressed in the literature so far. We present a tabu search algorithm to tackle the problem, which builds in an efficient and effective procedure to improve the search quality in each iteration. Moreover, lower bounds of reasonable sized problems, which are intractable in the formulated mathematical model by existing optimization software, are obtained via Lagrangian relaxation technique. Computational results indicate that the lower bounds are tight and the tabu search is capable of providing near optimal, close-to-lower-bound solutions in a computational time effective manner.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper studies a problem which is observed in a large petroleum and petrochemical enterprise group in China. The company relies on the product of gasoline for the majority of its sales and owns almost 40,000 gas stations spread all over China. Hundreds of oil depots are also maintained to replenish gasoline to the gas stations. Considering the number of depots and gas stations involved, the daily operations of gasoline distribution within this network is particularly complex. Generally, the problem can be formulated as an inventory–routing problem (IRP) with the following features:1.The distribution of gasoline to gas stations is operated independently by each province. Therefore, the overall network is divided into sub-networks. For each province, there might be dozens of oil depots and thousands of gas stations. The network within each province is further divided into different districts according to the current company policy. Normally, each district has several oil depots and hundreds of gas stations. This is the basic operating unit for gasoline distribution within the company.For each operating unit, the depots are regularly replenished to maintain a proper level of inventory to avoid stock outs. A central scheduling office determines the time and the amount to be delivered to each gas station, which has limited storage capacity with the daily demand represented by a consumption rate.The product is distributed by a fleet of tank trucks, which belongs to a third party logistics (3PL) service provider. The 3PL previously belonged to the enterprise but now operates as an independent company to serve the function of transportation department of the enterprise.When a truck arrives at a gas station, the gasoline is delivered at a delivery rate, i.e., the delivery cannot be instantaneous. An order up to level policy is applied to each gas station for inventory replenishment. Therefore, the maximum inventory level will be reached once the gas station is visited by a truck.In order to improve the utilization of transportation resources, a minimum delivery quantity (Campbell & Savelsbergh, 2004a) is specified for each station. The inventory level in the gas station declines as the time elapses. Thus, this minimum delivery quantity specifies the earliest time that the station should be visited. Moreover, the central scheduling office should guarantee that each gas station will not run out of stock, which specifies the latest time that the station should be visited. These two constraints naturally pose a delivery time window for each gas station.Each day, a fleet of vehicles depart from the oil depot and visit the gas stations following the routes designated by the central scheduling office. At the end of the day, the fleet returns to the depot or a specified parking area. For IRPs, one objective is to minimize the total transportation cost, which has received much attention in the literature (Andersson, Hoff, Christiansen, Hasle, & Løkketangen, 2010). However, the consideration of time is also very important in this problem.In this paper, we address the IRPs from the perspective of travel time minimization. The objective is to minimize the maximum route travel time among all vehicles due to two reasons. Firstly, each vehicle should deliver products to each gas station earlier than the latest allowable visiting time. If a gas station runs out of stock, it might not only be viewed as a business problem, but also a social problem by the local community. Therefore, it can be argued that in some cases, it is more important to avoid stocking outs, rather than purely focusing on transportation cost minimization. The similar priority rule is also applicable to the distribution of some scarce resource such as blood, and critical resources stored for use in emergencies. The delivery of these resources has a strong focus on speed of delivery. Secondly, in the petrol delivery network, all vehicles should return to the depot within the work shift so that the total driving hours are maintained at a safe level and workers’ preference on getting off duty on time are catered for. Furthermore, the maximum amount of accumulated driving time is limited by the regulations of the company. Similar regulations can be observed in the US, Europe and many other countries (Goel, 2009, 2010; Goel & Kok, 2012). Hence, the hours-of-service of each vehicle should be leveraged so that each driver has similar working hours, while the hours-of-service regulation is complied with at the same time. Although there is a large body of research addressing IRPs with objective of transportation cost minimization (Coelho, Cordeau, & Laporte, 2012a; Ng, Leung, Lam, & Pan, 2008), there is almost no work considering time in the objective function.The IRPs are difficult to solve (Campbell & Savelsbergh, 2004a). According to the published work, it is not easy to develop an exact algorithm for solving IRP with reasonable sizes (Archetti, Bertazzi, Laporte, & Speranza, 2007; Engineer, Furman, Nemhauser, Savelsbergh, & Song, 2012). In practice, the tank of the gas station in urban area is relatively small due to limited space within the city and safety requirements. Thus, the delivery quantity for the gas station in the urban area is relatively small compared to vehicle capacity. As a first step, we concentrate on a simplified version of the problem, assuming that the vehicle capacity is un-constrained, which is similar to the uncapacitated assumption in Valle, Martinez, da Cunha, and Mateus (2011). However, we are well aware that in practice, more often than not, vehicles have limited capacity. We believe that our contribution will serve as a basis for solving more realistic cases.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We review the related literature in Section 2. The problem definition and the mathematical model are presented in Section 3 and a tabu search algorithm is proposed in Section 4. Section 5 employs the Lagrangian relaxation technique to obtain the lower bound for the problem. Section 6 presents computational results of the tabu search algorithm and the lower bounds, followed by the concluding Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
