@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimization models for a single-plant District Cooling System

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Models for the optimal design of a District Cooling System were developed.The objective is to minimize the sum of investment and operations costs.Proposed models consider both structural and technical constraints.Practical solvability of the models to optimality was demonstrated.Optimal and near-optimal solutions can be provided within a reasonable computing time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in energy,Network design,District Energy Systems,Compact MIP models,Reformulation Linearization Technique (RLT),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A District Cooling System (DCS) is an interconnected system encompassing a centralized chiller plant, a Thermal Energy Storage (TES) unit, a piping network, and clusters of consumers’ buildings. The main function of a DCS is to produce and deliver chilled water to satisfy the cooling demand of a scattered set of buildings. DCSs are recognized to be highly energy efficient, and therefore constitute an environment-friendly alternative to the traditional power-driven air conditioning systems being operated at individual buildings. In this paper, we investigate the optimal design and operation of a DCS so that the total investment and operational costs are minimized. This involves optimizing decisions related to chiller plant capacity, storage tank capacity, piping network size and layout, and quantities to be produced and stored during every period of time. To this end, mixed-integer programming (MIP) models, that explicitly capture the structural aspects as well as both pressure- and temperature-related requirements, are developed and tested. The results of computational experiments that demonstrate the practical effectiveness of the proposed models are also presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Driven by the anticipated increase in energy demand and knitted together with a rapid rise in CO2 emission levels, the notion of sustainable energy systems is gaining an ever-growing attention worldwide. One example of such systems is the so-called District Cooling System (DCS). The main function of a DCS is to mass-produce cooling requirements for a group of buildings while ensuring tailored provision to each of them, depending on their needs. Hence, DCS appears as an alternative to the power-driven air conditioning systems being operated at individual buildings. Worldwide, the current status quo of energy usage shows that at least 10 percent of electricity is used for cooling purposes (DHC/+ Technology Platform, 2009). This percentage is even much higher in some hot climatic countries such as the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, where air conditioning accounts for 50 percent of its annual electricity consumption (Booz & Company, 2012). For that reason, DCSs are recently gaining a remarkable market position across the globe as they can reduce electricity consumption by 40 percent–50 percent comparing to conventional air conditioning systems (Arab Construction World, 2012).Currently, DCSs are adopted in the United States, Japan, Korea and many Western and Eastern European countries such as Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Slovenia, and Sweden (Euro Heat & Power, 2013). Generally, the market of DCS has not matured enough as it emerged quite recently; yet, its adoption trend is on the rise. For instance, a 10-fold growth in its installed capacity was observed in Europe during the last decade (DHC/+ Technology Platform, 2009). Nonetheless, DCSs are recently gaining ground in the Middle East, particularly in the GCC countries due to their desert climate. For example, it was observed that 14 percent of GCC cooling demand was satisfied by means of DCSs in 2010 (Arab Construction World, 2012).Structurally, a DCS is an interconnected system encompassing a centralized chiller plant, a main distribution network and clusters of consumers’ buildings (see Fig. 1). The cooling effect, in form of chilled water, is produced in the plant and then distributed to individual customers through a piping network. In more advanced settings, DCS is complemented with a storage tank that is configured with the chiller plant. This optional installation increases the system’s overall flexibility as cooling requirements are not required to be met by chiller plant at all points of time; rather, excess cooling effect can be produced during non-peak hours and stored for future use, especially during peak hours (Powell, Cole, Ekarika, & Edgar, 2013).All together give a DCS the immense potential to unpack both environmental and economic benefits. Its consolidated production scheme allows tapping into the economy of scale; thus, making it a more energy efficient alternative when compared to building-specific cooling systems (Chow, Au, Yau, Cheng, Chan, & Fong, 2004). Moreover, its flexible operational conditions allows integrating various cooling technologies that utilize non-carbon energy sources and environmental friendly cooling mediums such as treated sewage effluent and sea water. Hence, DCSs contribute to the reduction in pollution levels with considerable cut-off in energy-use costs (Hart & Rosen, 1996).Even though a DCS is considered to be a long-term sound alternative, the investment costs required to build its infrastructure may hinder its adoption in some areas. It was found that 60 percent of its investment cost is attributed to the distribution network (ASHRAE Inc., 2009). This suggests that the structural optimization of a DC network is paramount and well justified. Despite this highlighted importance, the current literature dealing with the structural optimization of DCSs is relatively scant. Indeed, and unlike the great attention given to District Heating Systems (DHSs) in the operations research literature (see Aringhieri, 2003; Henning, Amiri, & Holmgren, 2006; Ming, Fenglan, & Hairui, 2012; Pinson, Nielsen, Nielsen, Poulsen, & Madsen, 2009; Rastpour & Esfahani, 2010; Sakawa, Kato, & Ushiro, 2001; 2002; Uhlemair, Karschin, & Geldermann, 2014, to quote just a few), only few studies were devoted to the optimization of DCSs. Clearly, the special characteristics observed in a DCS suggest having a customized optimization model that essentially differentiates it from any other energy distribution system. For instance, the type of cooling medium imposes certain constraints on the piping configuration. This is due to the system’s thermal and hydraulic attributes such as temperature differential and pressure drop, which eventually have impact on both the design of piping network and the overall system performance.One of the earliest attempts in the area of DC networks was pioneered by Chan, Hanby, and Chow (2007) who aimed at finding a near optimal network topology by using a modified version of the genetic algorithm (GA; Chan et al., 2007). In their study, a simplified version of the problem was addressed with the objective of minimizing both the fixed cost associated with building the piping configuration, and the pumping energy costs associated with running the plant operations. In parallel to this, relevant work was done by Soderman (2007) who developed an MIP model to find an optimal design of a DC network (Soderman, 2007). Proposed model sought to determine both structural and operational aspects of the problem so that both the annual operational and annualized investment costs are minimized. However, hydraulic- and temperature-related constraints were ignored. Likewise, Feng and Long (2008) directed their first effort to find a network layout that minimizes the total annual cost (Feng & Long, 2008). Interestingly, cooling energy losses in pipes were regarded as one of the cost parameters in their objective function. In their following study, Feng and Long (2010) utilized a standard GA to find an optimal network configuration while additionally incorporating the hydraulic stability constraints of the system (Feng & Long, 2010).In many cases, the structural optimization of a DCS was intended to reflect the optimization of one part of the system, being the piping configuration only without considering important network design aspects presented at both the upstream and downstream ends of the system. For instance, sizing the chiller plant is an important design parameter as the capacity produced by the plant drives the whole system. This is proved by the problem that was investigated by Soderman (2007) who considered finding an optimal operating capacity for both the chiller plant and the storage tank (Soderman, 2007). Moreover, the importance of ensuring a proper integration between the network and the connected customer substations was not evident in the reviewed published works.To stand out among the preceding few studies in the same area, we address the optimization of a DCS design while capturing structural constraints as well as both pressure- and temperature-related constraints. It was noticed that these technical constraints were overlooked in the majority of proposed models while they are crucially responsible for systems functionality and performance.In this paper, we make the following contributions:•We develop MIP models for the optimal design of a DCS by specifying the chiller plant size, the storage tank size, the piping network size and layout, and the quantities produced and stored during each period of time while considering structural and technical constraints (including temperature- and pressure-related ones). The objective is to minimize the sum of investment and operations costs.We present the results of computational experiments that demonstrate the practical usefulness of the proposed models, since solving large instances can be achieved within moderate CPU times.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the formal problem settings and introduces some notation and assumptions used in building our models. Section 3 presents the MIP models for a DCS design problem. Section 4 shows the results of a computational study that aims at demonstrating the solvability and effectiveness of the proposed models. Finally, Section 5 highlights concluding remarks and future research directions.We assume that a set of n customer buildings is to be connected to a single cooling source. The connection scheme is assumed to be indirect. It means that the customer cooling loads are to be supplied to the Energy Transfer Station (ETS) located at each customer building and not directly to the building air handling units. The cooling demand for each customer building is assumed to be deterministic, periodic (with a one-day periodicity), and stationary. For computational convenience, we assume that a day is divided into T time periods of equal duration (a period generally refers to one hour). We denote by τ the duration of every period t ∈ T. The demand for every customer j ∈ C during every period t ∈ T is denoted bydjt,and is expressed as a flow rate. Fig. 2 below illustrates an example of a daily cooling load pattern.For modeling purposes, we assume that we are given an undirected graphG=(V,E). The node set V includes three types of nodes: (i) a supply node (denoted by r), (ii) nodes representing customers’ substations (denoted by C), and (iii) facultative nodes representing pipe junctions (henceforth called Steiner nodes, denoted by S). These latter nodes are optional and may be included in the network to reduce the total investment cost. The edge set E includes all potential links. Given the input undirected graphG=(V,E),we define a bi-directed digraph by replacing each edgee={i,j}∈Ewith two arcs (i, j) and (j, i) with opposite directions. Hence, we denote by A the set of arcs.The overall piping network is assumed to take the form of a tree-like network. Hence, no loops/cycles are allowed. In other words, the network shall not accommodate any redundant pipes while ensuring connectivity. In our case, horizontal installation of pipes in underground trenches is assumed.The supply node represents a single facility that includes a chiller plant and a thermal storage tank. The location of this facility is known and given. However, we need to determine the capacity of both production and storage systems. For that reason, a set of possible capacities is given for each of the chiller plant and the storage tank based on market availability and demand needs. These sets are denoted by K and H, respectively. They are characterized by a fixed cost associated with building and installing them.FCkplantdenotes the fixed cost associated with every chiller capacity k (k ∈ K). Similarly,FChtankdenotes the fixed cost associated with every tank capacity h (h ∈ H). In addition to this, there are variable costs for producing and storing a unit of chilled water during every period t ∈ T and is denoted byVCtprodandVCtsto,respectively.An arc (i, j) ∈ A represents a possible direct connection between nodes i and j. If an arc is selected to be part of the main distribution network, then it should be assigned a pipe type for installation out of a set M of available pipe types. For every pipe of type m ∈ M, we are given: (i) λm: a unit investment cost covering all purchase and installation charges; (ii) dm: a pipe size (that is, the inner diameter size); (iii)Vminm: minimum allowable velocity, and (iv)Vmaxm: maximum allowable velocity. These two latter characteristics enforce lower and upper bounds on the allowable flow rate of chilled water in every pipe type. We denote these latter byφmminandφmmax,respectively.Part of the problem is to find an optimal layout while sizing pipes for installation so that the investment cost is minimized. The cost parameter presenting this part of the problem is the fixed investment cost denoted byCijm,which is a function of both pipe’s unit cost λmand edge length lij(that is,Cijm=λm×lij).Considering the hydraulic behavior of a DCS is vital to ensure the service continuity and the delivery of chilled water to all customers. Basically, a DCS is subject to two types of pressure changes; namely, pressure drop throughout the piping system, and differential pressure across the customers’ ETS. Both changes depend on the size and scheme of pumping system, along with the size and layout of the distribution network (that is, number, locations, loads and diversity of connected customers, type of connection schemes, and piping size and layout). Fig. 3 below illustrates typical pressure-related changes exhibited in a DCS.In the presented problem, a primary pumping scheme is assumed to be in use. Thus, the pumping head is located at the supply node and has the maximum pressure value in the system, denoted by pmax. Clearly and as the fluid moves down in the network, the pressure starts to drop due to fluid friction (major and minor losses). We denote by pjthe pressure value of incoming chilled water at any node j ∈ V. In addition, we denote byΔPijmthe pressure drop along the edge that connects node i to node j when a pipe of size m is installed. More importantly and as stated earlier, another differential pressure is experienced across customer’s ETS and denoted by δPj. This drop is encountered while customer’s heat-exchangers extract needed energy before returning the chilled water through the return pipe. Such hydraulic-changes dictate maintaining certain values of pressure at every node so that the system’s operations remain feasible.Given that the pumping pressure is designed based on the pressure drop through the critical path (Chan et al., 2007), a maximum allowable pressure drop ΔPmax is defined to ensure delivery of chilled water to all customers. Likewise, a minimum allowable differential pressure δPmin is defined to ensure proper integration between the customer’s ETS and the main distribution network while ensuring the service delivery to the most remote customer (critical customer). Both parameters are considered in our model by imposing upper and lower bounds on pressure values at every node in the network. To this end, two main assumptions were made to mathematically represent the pressure-related binding constraints. First, we assume that the pressure of chilled water decreases linearly as it moves downstream in a path. Secondly, we assume that the technical and structural behaviors of the supply and return lines are symmetric. As can be seen from Fig. 3, the pumping pressure depends on both the mean pressure value along a path, denoted byP¯,and a safety factor/cushion of which pressure cannot go below, denoted by πmin. In addition to this, the minimum pressure value in the system, denoted by pmin depends on two key parameters: (i) ΔPmax, and (ii) δPmin, as discussed earlier. Therefore, for any node j ∈ V:•pjshall not exceed a maximum pressure value pmax, known as the pumping pressure.pjshall not drop below pmin which equals to the maximum value of(P¯+12δPmin)and(pmax−ΔPmax).While the DCS hydraulic profile is essential to ensure system’s functionality, service delivery, and compatibility with customer’s ETS, the system’s temperature differential is another key design parameter that has significant impact on the DCS overall performance and economics. Practically, low delta T syndrome is a very critical and common industry problem. Operating low delta T dictates a need to increase the amount of produced flow rates to meet customers’ requirements; thus, results in wasted energy, oversized capacities (in plant and distribution network) and consequently, increased capital and operational costs. This also contributes to experiencing increased heat gains in the system while the chilled water is being pumped and transported through the unnecessarily oversized pipes. Therefore, proper control of system’s thermal behavior is crucial to ensure that customers’ loads are met with the least possible wastes. Fig. 4below illustrates typical temperature-related changes exhibited in a DCS.We denote by tjthe incoming temperature of chilled water at every node j ∈ V. As explained, experiencing heat gains in the system is possible and therefore can result in increasing the chilled water temperature while being transported. This encountered temperature increase is denoted byΔTijmand is cumulative along the path that connects the supply node with every customer node j ∈ C and vice versa. A maximum threshold for these heat gains is set depending on the contractual supply temperature as stipulated between the DC utility and the connected customers.Moreover, a minimum allowable temperature differential across customer’s ETS is introduced, and is denoted by δTmin. This is necessary to make sure that the system does not operate below-design delta T. Consequently, for any node j ∈ V:•tjshall not drop below tmin, known as the supply temperature from the chiller plant.tjshall not exceed a maximum temperature value tmax, that is controlled by both the guaranteed maximum supply temperature as contracted with customers, and the system return temperature that is needed to meet δT requirements of the DCS. Therefore, tmax equals to the minimum value of(T¯−12δtmin)and(tmin+ΔTmax).Our main focus is to develop and validate a comprehensive model that explicitly captures the practical features of the system, especially the ones that play vital role in determining the optimal network structure and operations as highlighted above. More precisely, the problem is to determine:(i)The capacity to be installed at the chiller plant.The capacity to be installed at the storage tank.The layout of the main distribution network as well as the sizing of each pipe in the network.The quantities of chilled water to be produced and stored at each period of time.The objective is to minimize the total investment and operational costs.In this section, a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model is formulated for a DC design problem as described in Section 2. First, all index sets, notations and parameters which are used in the model are summarized. Second, an MIP model is formulated for a single-source DC network. Then, the developed model is linearized using the RLT methodology. We assume that all relevant data (demand values, costs, capacities, and other parameters) are input data and to be collected from appropriate sources (e.g. market prices, service-specific metrics and load estimation).The indices and sets, parameters, and decision variables, are displayed in Tables 1–3.(1)Minimize∑k∈KFCkplantyk+∑h∈HFChstoragegh+∑t∈TVCtprodFt+∑t∈TVCtStoIt+∑(i,j)∈A∑m∈Mcijmxijmsubject to:(2)∑k∈Kyk=1,(3)∑h∈Hgh≤1,(4)Ft≤∑k∈KQkyk,t∈T,(5)It≤∑h∈HDhgh,t∈T,(6)It−1+τFt=It+τ∑j=1ndjt,t∈T,(7)Io=IT,(8)∑i∈Vj−zij=1,∀j∈C,(9)∑i∈Vj−zij≤1,∀j∈S,(10)∑m∈Mxijm=zij,∀(i,j)∈A,(11)∑i∈Vj−∑m∈Mfijtm−∑k∈Vj+∑m∈Mfjktm=djt,∀j∈C,t∈T(12)∑i∈Vj−∑m∈Mfijtm=∑k∈Vj+∑m∈Mfjktm,∀j∈S,t∈T(13)φmminxijm≤fijtm≤φmmaxxijm,∀(i,j)∈A,m∈M,t∈T(14)tjzij=tizij+∑m∈MΔTijmxijm∀(i,j)∈A,(15)tmin≤tj≤tmax∀j∈C,(16)tmin∑i∈Vj−zij≤tj≤tmax∑i∈Vj−zij∀j∈S,(17)tr=tmin,(18)pjzij=pizij−∑m∈MΔPijmxijm∀(i,j)∈A,(19)pmin≤pj≤pmax∀j∈C,(20)pmin∑i∈Vj−zij≤pj≤pmax∑i∈Vj−zij∀j∈S,(21)pr=pmax,(22)Ft,It≥0,t∈T,(23)yk,gh∈{0,1},k∈K,h∈H.(24)xijm,zij,∈{0,1},∀(i,j)∈A,m∈M,(25)fijtm,≥0∀(i,j)∈A,t∈T,m∈M,(26)tj,pj≥0∀j∈C∪S.The objective function (1) minimizes the sum of the fixed costs of building chiller plant and storage tank, the variable production and storage costs and the fixed costs associated with purchasing and installing distribution pipes.Constraint (2) ensures that only one capacity is selected for chiller plant installation. Constraint (3) indicates that the installation of a storage tank is optional, and is assigned at most one capacity. Constraint (4) ensures that the produced amount of chilled water does not exceed the installed capacity of the chiller plant. Likewise, Constraint (5) ensures that the amount of stored chilled water does not exceed the installed storage tank capacity. Constraint (6) imposes the balance constraints for the storage tank. Constraint (7) reflects modeling the steady state; hence, the transient state that occurs when we start operating the plant for the first time is not considered.Constraints (8) and (9) enforce the connectivity (as well as the non redundancy) of the network. They indicate that each customer node has exactly one incoming arc, and each Steiner node has at most one incoming arc, respectively. Since x is a binary variable, then by virtue of (8) and (9), z is necessarily a binary variable and the integrality of the z-variables is relaxed to z ≥ 0.Constraint (10) is introduced to ensure that only one pipe type is installed at any arc. Constraints (11) and (12) are the flow conservation conditions which must hold for all non-root nodes. Note that Constraint (11) holds only for customer nodes. At these nodes, part of the flow shall be delivered to satisfy cooling requirement, remaining flow (if any) shall be transported to the downstream node in the network. This is not applicable for Steiner nodes as these nodes are only pipe junction nodes with no cooling requirements, as expressed in Constraint (12). Constraint (13) represents flow capacity constraints. It enforces the logical relationship between the x- and the f-variables (that is, ifxijm= 1, thenfijtmshall take any value in [φmmin,φmmax], otherwisefijtm=0∀(i,j)∈A,m∈M,t∈T).The combination of Constraints (14–(17) ensure that supplied temperature of chilled water to all customer nodes and selected Steiner nodes is not exceeding the contractual/desired supply temperature. Indeed, we see that ifzij=1andxijm=1then we havetj=ti+ΔTijm. On the other hand, ifzij=0,thenxijm=0and we have0=0. Similarly, Constraints (18)–(21) guarantee that both pressure drop through pipes and across customer substation are not exceeded and within the allowable limits.Finally, Constraints (22)–(26) represent non-negativity, binary variables and integrality conditions.It is possible to further enhance the model representation by appending the following valid inequalities. These constraints were initially proposed for the Steiner tree problem (see for e.g., Polzin and Daneshmand, 2001). They explicitly emphasize that the resulted graph is a directed, acyclic and connected graph.(27)zij+zji≤1,∀(i,j)∈A,(28)zjk≤∑i∈Vj−zij,∀j∈S,∀k∈Vj+,(29)∑i∈Vj−zij≤∑k∈Vj+zjk,∀j∈S.Constraint (27) is usually called the two-node subtour elimination constraint. It indicates that the resulting subgraph cannot include two arcs of opposite directions. Constraints (28) and (29) assert special connectivity rules on Steiner nodes due to their facultative nature. Both constraints are in the form of conditional constraints. Constraint (28) indicates that no outgoing arc from any Steiner node shall be included in the network if there is no incoming arc to this node. Similarly, Constraint (29) ensures that at least one outgoing arc shall be included if there is one incoming arc.As observed, the model is composed of equations (1)–(29), and contains a couple of nonlinear inequalities (namely, (14) and (18)). For that reason, we utilize the Reformulation-Linearization Technique (RLT) proposed by Sherali and Adams (1990) and Sherali, Adams, and Driscoll (1994) to derive an equivalent linear representation of the model. The RLT is composed of two phases (i) reformulation phase and, (ii) linearization phase. In the reformulation phase, certain types of implied polynomial constraints, which include the aforementioned non-linear terms, are added to the formulation. This addition enables the utilization of new decision variables that replace the product terms in the original problem, as introduced during the linearization phase. A summary of the followed RLT procedures is presented in what follows.Reformulation phase: We append certain additional implied polynomial constraints to the problem. This is accomplished using the following steps:1.Using (8), we construct the following equalities:(30)[∑i∈Vj−zij=1]×tj,∀j∈C,(31)[∑i∈Vj−zij=1]×pj,∀j∈C,Similarly, using (9), we construct the following inequalities:(32)[∑i∈Vj−zij≤1]×tj,∀j∈S,(33)[∑i∈Vj−zij≤1]×pj,∀j∈S,In light of both (15) and (16), the following valid inequality can be derived.(34)[tmin∑i∈Vj−zij≤tj≤tmax∑i∈Vj−zij]×zij∀j∈S,Similarly, using Constraints (19) and (20), the following inequality is valid.(35)[pmin∑i∈Vj−zij≤pj≤pmax∑i∈Vj−zij]×zij∀j∈S,From Constraints (17) and (21); respectively, we construct the following valid equalities.(36)[tr=tmin]×zrj,(37)[pr=pmax]×zrj,From (25), we construct the following valid inequalities:(38)[1−zij−zji≤0]×tj,∀(i,j)∈A,(39)[1−zij−zji≤0]×pj,∀(i,j)∈A,The product of Constraint (27) by the bound-factors in (15) and (19) yields to:(40)[1−zij−zji≤0]×(tmax−tj),∀(i,j)∈A,(41)[1−zij−zji≤0]×(pmax−pj),∀(i,j)∈A,Using (28), the following inequalities are valid:(42)[zjk≤∑i∈Vj−zij]×tj,∀j∈S,∀k∈Vj+,(43)[zjk≤∑i∈Vj−zij]×pj,∀j∈S,∀k∈Vj+,From Constraint (29), we construct the following valid inequalities.(44)[∑i∈Vj−zij≤∑k∈Vj+zjk]×tj,∀j∈S,(45)[∑i∈Vj−zij≤∑k∈Vj+zjk]×pj,∀j∈S,Linearization phase: We introduce two new RLT variables to linearize Constraints (14), (18), and (30)–(45). Toward this end, we define(46)uij=tizij∀j∈V,∀(i,j)∈A,and(47)wij=pizij∀j∈V,∀(i,j)∈A,Furthermore, we derive the following identities from (18) and (22) for linearizingtjxijtmandpjxijtm; respectively.(48)tjzij=uij+∑m∈MΔTijmxijm∀(i,j)∈A,(49)pjzij=wij−∑m∈MΔPijmxijm∀(i,j)∈A,After this, we replace each product term in (30)–(45) by its corresponding single variable from (46)–(49). Hence, forming below linearized constraints.(50)∑i∈Vj−uij+∑i∈Vj−∑m∈MΔTijmxijm=tj∀j∈C,(51)∑i∈Vj−wij−∑i∈Vj−∑m∈MΔPijmxijm=pj∀j∈C,(52)∑i∈Vj−uij+∑i∈Vj−∑m∈MΔTijmxijm≤tj∀j∈S,(53)∑i∈Vj−wij−∑i∈Vj−∑m∈MΔPijmxijm≤pj∀j∈S,(54)uij+uji≤tj−∑m∈MΔTijmxijm∀(i,j)∈A,(55)uij+uji≥tj−tmax+tmaxzij−∑m∈MΔTijmxijm+tmaxzji∀(i,j)∈A,(56)ujk≤∑i∈Vj−uij+∑i∈Vj−∑m∈MΔTijmxijm∀j∈S,∀k∈Vj+,(57)∑i∈Vj−uij+∑i∈Vj−∑m∈MΔTijmxijm≤∑k∈Vj+ujk∀j∈S,(58)tminzij≤uij≤tmaxzij∀(i,j)∈A,(59)wij+wji≤pj+∑m∈MΔPijmxijm∀(i,j)∈A,(60)wij+wji≥pj−pmax+pmaxzij+∑m∈MΔPijmxijm+pmaxzji∀(i,j)∈A,(61)wjk≤∑i∈Vj−wij−∑i∈Vj−∑m∈MΔPijmxijm∀j∈S,k∈Vj+,(62)∑i∈Vj−wij−∑i∈Vj−∑m∈MΔPijmxijm≤∑k∈Vj+wjkj∈S,(63)pminzij≤wij≤pmaxzij∀(i,j)∈A,(64)urj=tminzrj∀j∈Vr+,(65)wrj=pmaxzrj∀j∈Vr+,Finally, the resulting model is an MILP model and is composed of (1)–(13), (15)–(17), (19)–(24), and(50)–(65).Fundamentally, both system’s design and operations are considered in globally optimizing a DCS. In such event, the sizing of the plant together with the distribution network and its configuration are considered for optimization at once. However, and given the description in Section 2, one can notice that the problem can be decomposed into two related subproblems without compromising the system global optimality. Actually, the original problem includes two families of variables (as presented earlier in Table 3)•Family 1 includes plant design- and operation-related variables: y, g, F and I.Family 2 includes network design-related variables: z, x, f, t and p.We observe that variables of Family 1 are used in Constraints (2)–(7), and (22)–(23) only. On the other hand, variables of Family 2 are used in the remaining constraints only. Hence, there are no coupling constraints for both families of variables (that is, there is no constraint that involves both families of variables). Consequently, the model can be decomposed into two independent sub-problems. These subproblems are:•Subproblem 1 addresses decisions related to the design and the operations of a chiller plant and a storage tank.Subproblem 2 addresses decisions related to the design of a main distribution network.Even though these two subproblems are closely related, in the sense that both designs are essentially dependent on cooling demand and other technical parameters, they are considered to be independent given the described problem setting. This independence is explained by the following reasons.1.The network design is only influenced by the quantity to be delivered to each customer at every period of time, and not impacted by the fact whether the distributed chilled water was just produced or was stored.The sizing of chiller plant and storage tank depends on the total quantities demanded by customers and not on the network topology or its pipes’ sizes. As a matter of course, there are two determinants for sizing a chiller plant: (1) customers’ cooling load/demands (chilled water flow); and (2) system δT. The latter is an important design consideration in a DCS, and any deviation from its designed value could result in significant efficiency and operational problems. In principle, the value of system δT is a function of both supply and return temperature from and to the plant (δT=Treturn−Tsupply); therefore, the return temperature is an equally important factor when optimizing systems capacity. Actually, low return temperature could adversely affect the available plant capacity. In our model, we catered for this by including δT as a design parameter (input data) and not as a variable to be optimized. Given that the value of system δT is controlled at customers’ ETS and not at the plant (through installing and operating proper heat exchangers, coils, valves etc.), imposing δTmin would necessarily control the value of return temperature to the plant; hence allows maintaining a desirable system performance level. This suggests that regardless how the solution network will look like; it has to adhere to temperature limits that are set in relation to a desired performance level.In the sequel, both problems could be addressed and solved independently following the below MILP formulations.•A model for optimal Plant Design and Operation (PDO):This model aims at optimizing Family 1 variables, by minimizing∑k∈KFCkplantyk+∑h∈HFChstoragegh+∑t∈TVCtprodFt+∑t∈TVCtStoIt,subject to Constraints (2)–(7), and(22)–(23).A model for optimal Network Design (ND):This model aims at optimizing Family 2 variables along with the two additional RLT variables, by minimizing∑(i,j)∈A∑m∈Mcijmxijm,subject to Constraints (8)–(13), (15)–(17), (19)–(21), (24)–(26), and(50)–(65).In this section, we present the results of a computational study that aims at demonstrating the practical usefulness of the proposed models. The proposed MILP models were coded, and then implemented and tested on instances of various sizes with the aid of an optimization software package; namely, ILOG CPLEX 12.5. These numerical tests were guided by two objectives:•To test and validate the solvability of the proposed models.To examine their performance when generating optimal solutions and compare it against generating near optimal solutions by setting an optimality tolerance.Given that our partner DC company refused to make real data public, hypothetical data were generated and then used to test the validity of the model while incorporating the full sense of a realistic case. More specifically, three classes of the problem were generated, in which each corresponds to a different network size. In our case, the size reflects the number of nodes that makes up a network; thus, generated problems cover small, medium and large scale networks. For each problem class, five instances were generated by varying the total cooling demands required during the peak hour/period. Hence, in so doing we generated a total of 15 instances. Table 4below illustrates the key characteristics attributed to every problem class and subclass.Table 5below gives an overview of the number of variables and constraints in models (PDO) and (ND) for each of the problem classes.The results that we have obtained after solving the developed instances optimally using IBM ILOG CPLEX 12.5 on an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-3520M CPU @ 2.90 gigahertz with 4.00 gigabytes RAM are presented in what follows.The CPU time required to solve each of these instances is given in Table 6.Additionally, results are reported for each class as shown in Table 7. These reported results include mean, minimum and maximum CPU time required for solving each of the proposed models (computed over all solved instances in each class).As noticed, an optimal solution for the proposed PDO model can be generated within a very short time (within seconds). In addition to this, the proposed ND model can be solved optimally within 1 hour and 30 minutes on average. Moreover, it can be noticed that the largest instance, with 60 nodes, requires on average 4 hours and 25 minutes to be solved optimally.In this section, we evaluate the performance of the heuristic strategy that amounts to solving the ND model while setting an optimality tolerance. In our experiments, we set the optimality tolerance to 1 percent, 2 percent and 5 percent. The results for each of these limits are displayed in Tables 8, 9and 10, respectively.We see from this table that, if a 5 percent-optimality tolerance is set, then significant reduction of the CPU time is achieved (by 40 percent on average), while the proposed solution exhibit a reduced optimality gap that is often less than 1.5 percent.The inherent benefits of a DCS when adopted under right conditions and settings cannot be overstated. By being the least localized cooling option with the ability to bring in cost and environmental advantages, a DCS stands as a more attractive alternative when compared with the other conventional cooling schemes. To capitalize on such benefits, a proper planning is undoubtedly required. The significant initial investment cost required to build a DCS prompts having sound and more ideally, optimal, decisions to reap as much benefits as possible. In view of this, this research investigates MIP models that aid in making decisions related to chiller plant capacity, storage tank capacity, distribution network size and configuration, and quantities to be produced and stored during every period of time. Unprecedentedly, the proposed models were built to capture and reflect constraints related to the unique practical characteristics of DCSs presented in both structural and technical sides. More specifically and unlike the previous efforts devoted in this area, models were built to include both thermal and hydraulic characteristics of the system. This was done by incorporating temperature- and pressure-related constraints. Given system’s complexity, the RLT was used to convert the resulted nonlinear formulation of the network design problem into an equivalent linear one. Computational experiments, carried out on networks with up to 60 nodes, demonstrated that both optimal and near-optimal solutions can be provided within a reasonable computing time. The presented research contributes to further strengthening the optimization efforts exhibited in the field of DCS design. More essentially, it is hoped that this work will not only help engineers to better design minimum cost DC networks, in a more efficient, effective, and operationally-feasible manner, but also further promotes DCS adoption in different part of the world.The optimization of a DCS is still in its infancy, and several research directions deserve to be investigated. Prospect works can build upon the current models by pursuing improvements or extensions, both scope and/or performance wise. This may include addressing trade-off between costs committed and Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission levels, and studying the possible cost/GHG reductions benefiting both customers and cooling utilities. Additionally, a challenging generalization of the model that was investigated in this paper is the multiple-chiller plant variant. In this latter problem, we seek to find the optimal mix of cooling technologies, location and sizing of several chiller plants and storage tanks, and the allocation of customers to plants/tanks during every period of time in such a way that minimizes the overall costs. This multiple-chiller location-allocation problem offers the additional benefits of flexibility and reliability through tapping into the underutilized potential of renewable energy, reducing primary energy consumption; thus, offering lower GHG emission levels. We expect that the solution of this large-scale complex network design problem will require the development of innovative exact and heuristic approaches. This is the topic of our on-going research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
