@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Risk-based factorial probabilistic inference for optimization of flood control systems with correlated uncertainties

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Risk-based factorial probabilistic inference was proposed.The proposed methodology was applied to optimize a flood control system.Probabilistic objective and constraints as well as their interactions were addressed.Decision makers’ risk preferences were taken into account in the decision process.Linear, nonlinear and interaction effects of risk parameters were quantified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Flood control,Multivariate inference,Probabilistic optimization,Risk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a risk-based factorial probabilistic inference method is proposed to address the stochastic objective function and constraints as well as their interactions in a systematic manner. To tackle random uncertainties, decision makers’ risk preferences are taken into account in the decision process. Statistical significance for each of the linear, nonlinear, and interaction effects of risk parameters is uncovered through conducting a multi-factorial analysis. The proposed methodology is applied to a case study of flood control to demonstrate its validity and applicability. A number of decision alternatives are obtained under various combinations of risk levels associated with the objective function and chance constraints, facilitating an in-depth analysis of trade-offs between economic outcomes and associated risks. Dynamic complexities are addressed through a two-stage decision process as well as through capacity expansion planning for flood diversion within a multi-region, multi-flood-level, and multi-option context. Findings from the factorial experiment reveal the multi-level interactions between risk parameters and quantify their contributions to the variability of the total system cost. The proposed method is compared against the fractile criterion optimization model and the chance-constrained programming technique, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Flooding is the most frequent and expensive natural disaster in Canada, which is typically caused by heavy rainfall, rapid melting of a thick snow pack and ice jams. In June 2013, extensive rainfall brought massive flooding across Alberta located in western Canada, affecting tens of thousands of families throughout the region, resulting in the loss of four lives, and displacing over 100,000 people from their homes (WaterSMART, 2013). It is estimated that the total damage of Alberta's super flood will exceed $5 billion, which is the costliest disaster in Canadian history (Gandia, 2013). Recent accelerations in population growth, economic development, as well as changes in climate and land use patterns have been increasing risks and vulnerability to flood hazards.Since losses cannot be avoided when a flood occurs, a sound flood mitigation plan is of vital importance for reducing flood damage. Optimization models play a crucial role in identifying effective flood mitigation strategies, which have been extensively used for flood management problems over the past decades (Braga & Barbosa, 2001; Labadie, 2004; Olsen, Beling, & Lambert, 2000; Unver & Mays, 1990; Wasimi & Kitanidis, 1983; Windsor, 1981). For instance, Needham, Watkins, Lund, and Nanda (2000) proposed a mixed-integer linear programming model to assist with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ flood management studies on the Iowa and Des Moines rivers. Wei and Hsu (2008) proposed mixed-integer linear programming models to solve the problem of the real-time flood control for a multireservoir operation system. Ding and Wang (2012) developed a nonlinear optimization approach for identifying the optimal flood diversion discharge in order to mitigate flood water stages in the channel network of a watershed. Karamouz and Nazif (2013) developed a multicriteria optimization model to select best management practices for flood mitigation in urban watershed systems. Woodward, Gouldby, Kapelan, and Hames (2014) proposed a multiobjective optimization algorithm to determine an optimal flood risk mitigation strategy for a flood protection system. These methods were useful for identifying optimal flood mitigation schemes and reducing the risk of flood damage. Due to the inherent variability and unpredictability (randomness) of flood control systems, however, many parameters cannot be exactly identified; they are often modelled as random variables. As a result, conventional optimization methods would fail to cope with random variables appropriately.In the past decade, a number of optimization techniques were proposed for addressing random uncertainties in water resources problems (Gaivoronski, Sechi, & Zuddas, 2012; Housh, Ostfeld, & Shamir, 2013; Pallottino, Sechi, & Zuddas, 2005; Wang & Huang, 2011, 2012, 2013; Zhou, Huang, & Yang, 2013). For instance, Bravo and Gonzalez (2009) developed a stochastic goal programming model for helping public water agencies allocate surface water among farmers and authorize the use of groundwater for irrigation under uncertainty. Chung, Lansey, and Bayraksan (2009) applied a robust optimization framework to design a reliable water supply system under parameter uncertainties. Wang and Huang (2014a) proposed a multi-level Taguchi-factorial two-stage stochastic programming method for supporting water resources management under interactive uncertainties. Among these methods, two-stage stochastic programming is recognized as a powerful method for tackling random variables with known probability distributions. In a typical two-stage stochastic programming, a decision is made in the first stage only when the distributional information on random variables is available. A second-stage decision or recourse decision can then be taken after a random event occurs. Such a method is suitable for dealing with the flood control problem in a two-stage fashion (Birge & Louveaux, 1988). For example, decision makers can determine an allowable flood diversion level according to the existing capacity of the floodplain before the flood season, and then they may want to carry out a corrective action when a flood occurs. Chance-constrained programming is another alternative for solving optimization problems that involve random uncertainties and supporting risk-based decision making (Charnes & Cooper, 1959). In chance-constrained programming, one or more sets of constraints are allowed to be violated with a specified probability since a solution that satisfies all possible outcomes can be prohibitively expensive. For the planning of flood control systems, allowing certain constraints to be violated with a low probability can be a reasonable and practical strategy for providing an in-depth analysis of trade-offs between economic outcomes and associated risks. Thus, an integration of two-stage stochastic programming and chance-constrained programming is necessary to support flood control planning and operations studies by taking into account randomness in different ways (Wang & Huang, 2014b).In flood control problems, the related economic data, such as regular costs of flood diversion and capital costs of floodplain expansions, commonly act as the coefficients of the objective function in a cost minimization model. They are often given as probability distributions obtained from the estimates of a group of decision makers or stakeholders, which play a crucial role in the decision-making process. It is thus indispensable to address randomness in the coefficients of the objective function. The fractile criterion optimization model or Kataoka's model is then introduced to deal with random coefficients by using statistical features (Geoffrion, 1967; Kataoka, 1963). In fact, the probabilistic objective function interacts with chance constraints in the decision process, and their correlations may have significant effects on the model output. To conduct a systematic analysis of random uncertainties, it is also desired to explore potential interactions between the probabilistic objective function and chance constraints.Therefore, the objective of this study is to develop a risk-based factorial probabilistic inference method for addressing stochastic objective function and constraints as well as their interactions in a systematic manner. Statistical significance for each of the linear, nonlinear, and interaction effects of risk parameters involved in stochastic programming will be uncovered through performing a multi-level factorial analysis. The proposed methodology will be applied to a case study of flood control to demonstrate its validity and applicability, and will also be compared with the fractile criterion optimization model and the chance-constrained programming technique, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a risk-based factorial probabilistic inference method has been proposed to address the probabilistic objective function and chance constraints as well as their interactions in a systematic manner. To tackle random uncertainties, risks associated with the objective function and constraints were taken into account in the decision-making process. Statistical significance for each of the linear, nonlinear, and interaction effects of risk parameters was uncovered through performing a multi-level factorial analysis.The proposed methodology was applied to a case study of flood control to demonstrate its applicability. A number of decision alternatives were obtained under various combinations of risk levels associated with the objective function and chance constraints, facilitating an in-depth analysis of trade-offs between economic outcomes and associated risks. These alternatives were helpful for decision makers to identify a desired flood control scheme based on their risk preferences. Multivariate inference was conducted by carrying out the factorial experiment. The results revealed the importance of risk parameters, as well as quantified their linear, quadratic, and interaction effects on the total system cost.Compared with the well-known fractile criterion optimization model and the chance-constrained programming technique, the risk-based factorial probabilistic inference method had advantages of allowing for the simultaneous consideration of the probabilistic objective function and chance constraints associated with different risk levels, as well as of revealing parametric interactions and their contributions to the variability of the total system cost. The multi-level factorial analysis was useful for decision makers to explore valuable information hidden beneath the interrelationships of risk parameters, facilitating informed decision making. Dynamic complexities were also addressed through a two-stage decision process as well as through capacity expansion planning for flood diversion within a multi-region, multi-flood-level, and multi-option context. The proposed methodology is not restricted to the flood control problem considered in this study. It is also applicable to other stochastic optimization problems.