@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multicriteria decision support to evaluate potential long-term natural gas supply alternatives: The case of Greece

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a multicriteria model to evaluate gas supply alternatives for Greece.We assess an additive value system via robust ordinal regression methodology.Considerable alternative gas supply corridors have been unveiled for Greece.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple criteria decision analysis,Natural gas supply,Energy policy,Robustness,Greece,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper assesses 27 alternative natural gas supply corridors for the case of Greece, according to a multicriteria analysis approach based on three main pillars: (1) economics of supply, (2) security of supply, and (3) cooperation between countries. The alternatives include onshore and offshore pipeline corridors and LNG shipping, determined after exhaustive investigation of all possible existing and future routes, taking into consideration all possible natural gas infrastructure development projects around Greece. A multicriteria additive value system is assessed via the robust ordinal regression methodology, aiming to support the national energy policy makers to devise favorable strategies, concerning both long-term national natural gas supplies and infrastructure developments. The obtained ranking shows that noticeable alternative corridors for gas passage to Greece do exist both in terms of maritime transport of LNG and in terms of potential future pipeline infrastructure projects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Natural gas is one of the most important primary fossil fuels with clearly distinct advantages over other conventional energy resources. Though a degree of uncertainty has emerged recently, concerning upstream Greenhouse Gas Emissions (Bradbury, Obeiter, Draucker, Wang, & Stevens, 2013; Jaramillo, Griffin, & Matthews, 2007; Skone et al., 2014), natural gas is increasingly gaining penetration, as it is distinguished by significantly lower pollutants compared to other conventional fuels and an improved efficiency degree reducing thereby the overall fuel consumption and therefore air pollution (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1986). All the above, constitute important factors in shaping the direction of the Greek energy policy that follows the global trend for increased use of natural gas in the energy mix compared to oil.Greece, like most of the countries in the European Union (EU), is fully dependent on natural gas imports, with the greater proportion of its supplies coming from Russia (www.rae.gr, www.depa.gr). Security of supply is one of the most important pillars of the Greek energy policy for natural gas. Events, such as the Russia–Ukraine rupture, which resulted in gas supply interruption in Greece for more than two weeks in January 2009, reflect the necessity of diversifying supply sources (Perusset, 2012; Westphal, 2009). On the other hand, the recent institutionalization of liberalization of natural gas markets (98/30/EC; 2003/55/EC; 2009/73/EC) throughout the European states aims to the development of flexible and competitive natural gas markets, with emphasis though on energy security issues. For these reasons, it is considered that the National Energy Policy for natural gas will keep supporting long-term contracts, as a means of ensuring the fuel supply, seeking though for favorable agreements for the future. Additionally, infrastructure projects (pipelines) are also of great importance as a means of approaching alternative sources.This paper focuses on a critical decision issue for Greece, relevant to the design of an energy strategy in the sector of natural gas supply. Lately, the Greek government has been in the process of discussing with Russia the potential of erecting a Russian–European consortium for the construction of Turkish Stream, a pipeline transferring 47 billion cubic meters of Russian gas from the Black Sea coast to the Greek–Turkish border and onwards to Central Europe (http://www.euractiv.gr, http://rt.com). Turkish Stream was proposed as an alternative to the South Stream project cancelled by Russia in December 2014 due to European Union's unwillingness to support it. On the other hand, Greece has been considering the possibility of diversifying from Russian gas, by participating in negotiations for channeling Azerbaijani natural gas via the Trans-Adriatic pipeline (TAP), to Europe (http://www.euractiv.com/). Such issues are significantly complicated, though very interesting, as they involve evaluation of both existing and possible future corridors from gas producing countries to Greece. The geographical position of Greece, close to many of the major natural gas producers, can prove beneficial, in terms of security of supply, if properly exploited in the framework of the national energy policy (Stournaras, Danchev, & Paratsiokas, 2011).Contrary to oil, gas is tied to fixed infrastructure in the form of pipelines or Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) terminals, rendering short-term substitution extremely expensive (Hübner, 2014). To support the national energy policy for natural gas the present study identifies all potential existing and future corridors for natural gas from important producing countries to Greece. The enumeration of alternative corridors is based on certain criteria concerning gas energy profile of countries and then by conducting an exhaustive research on existing and future natural gas projects. Reseller countries have not been taken into consideration.The problem has a multidimensional nature, as the evaluation of potential natural gas supply corridors in the framework of national energy policy is based on three axes: (1) economics of supply, (2) security of supply, and (3) cooperation between countries. Economics of supply concern the costs to be considered while evaluating supply alternatives. Over time different formulae for determining prices in long-term gas supply contracts have emerged with most identifiable the oil price escalation, the gas-to-gas competition, the bilateral monopoly, the netback and the regulation (Zajdler, 2012). However all mechanisms take into consideration the production and transportation cost that is passed to the client. Security of supply is a major issue for gas importing countries. In the framework of a gas supply corridor it can be measured by quantifying the energy security profile of the corridor and the level of reserves of the corresponding producing country (Neumann, 2007). Cooperation between countries is another important factor while evaluating potential long-term agreements. Cooperation indicates the possible collaborations which have already been developed between the two countries, and may be quantified in terms of financial transactions.The problem is also important from the environmental aspect, as the Greenhouse Gases emitted throughout natural gas life-cycle (extraction, processing, and transmission) contribute in global warming, with major concern for the methane emissions (Skone, Marriott, Littlefield, & Hamilton, 2012). The environmental evaluation of alternative corridors, in the framework of a detailed Life-Cycle Assessment methodology requires acquisition of accurate data on numerous properties for each life-cycle stage and therefore a detailed Life-Cycle Assessment is beyond the scope of this study; the environmental impact assessment of alternative future corridors, concerns a more technical issue to be normally conducted after the step of supporting energy policy makers on the evaluation of alternative gas supply corridors, in the framework of an environmental study.The problem has been modeled with the help of multicriteria analysis. An additive value model has been constructed via a synergy of direct assessment procedures and the UTA II disaggregation method to infer the criteria weights. The obtained ranking of alternatives has been subjected to robustness control analysis as is recently proposed by Hurson and Siskos (2014).A model has been proposed to support national energy policy makers for such an important, complicated and critical problem as the evaluation of potential long-term natural gas supply alternatives. The proposed modeling is original as it thoroughly reflects the multivariate nature of the problem while it simplifies the complex procedure of inferring the marginal value functions and the criteria weights by involving the decision maker (DM) in analytical and understandable procedures, taking advantage of his experience.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 an extended state-of-the-art survey is provided; in Section 3 the methodology used to enumerate the potential long-term natural gas supply alternatives for Greece is described, while Section 4 outlines the multicriteria evaluation system in terms of points of view and criteria. In Section 5 the overall evaluation model for decision support is described and in Section 6 the results are presented as well as some issues for further discussion. Section 7 provides the conclusions of the study.The issue of optimally devising energy supply strategies has often preoccupied the energy DMs at national and at international level. The ENCOURAGED (Energy corridor optimization for European markets of gas, electricity and hydrogen) project, funded by the European Commission under the 6th Framework Programme for Research, Technological Development and Demonstration, has identified and assessed the economically optimal energy corridors between EU and neighboring countries. In terms of identifying potential supply alternatives, Ratner, Belkin, Nichol, and Woehrel (2013) have analyzed the potential approaches that Europe might employ to diversify its sources of natural gas supply, Russia's role in Europe's natural gas policies, and key factors that could hinder efforts to develop alternative suppliers of natural gas.Mavrakis et al. (2006) have examined the supply potential of the energy corridor bridging gas reserves of the broader Caspian Region with the EU consumption centers. Focusing on the construction of an appropriate portfolio of natural gas purchases, from the point of view of a Local Distribution Company, Aouam, Rardin, and Abrache (2010) have proposed the convex combination of dynamic and naïve strategies to satisfy customers’ demand, taking into account the tradeoffs between cost and risk.Van de Graaf and Sovacool (2014) probe explanations of failure along social, technical, economic, political and psychological dimensions as regards two natural gas megaprojects, Nabucco and trans-ASEAN.In a recent application, Mutlu, Msaknia, Yildizb, Sönmezc, and Pokharela (2016) developed a model for LNG annual delivery program for suppliers. The authors suggest alternative delivery options, such as split-delivery and they propose an efficient heuristic solution which outperforms commercial optimizers. Similarly, Halvorsen-Weare and Fagerholt (2013) have proposed a routing and scheduling model for the LNG shipping problem with inventory and berth constraints.The risk of energy corridors is recognized as a very important factor for the development of secure supply strategies; Fertel and Waaub (2011) address the issue of security of supply by assessing the associated risks of unforeseen harmful events. In the framework of the European Commission's 7th Framework Programme Project REACCESS (Risk of Energy Availability: Common Corridors for European Security of Supply), factor analysis was employed for the quantification of country socio-economic risks. The overall risk of each country, in the framework of REACCESS, incorporates economy-driven risk, intrinsic-energy risk, political-institutional risk and socio-political risk (Doukas, Flamos, Karakosta, Flouri, & Psarras, 2010; REACCESS FP7 Project, in press). Flouri, Kladouxou, Karakosta, and Doukas (2012) applied Monte Carlo simulation to measure the reliability of EU countries, concerning their ability to face gas supply interruptions. Monorti and Szikszai (2010) developed a model to assess the robustness of the EU transnational gas transmission system during both normal and special operating conditions, including high-demand situations and/or supply shortages.Doukas, Karakosta, Flamos, Flouri, and Psarras (2011) have investigated the suitability of graph theory concepts on energy supply networks for Greece. The scope of their work was to identify the lower risk flows that satisfy the requested demand in oil and gas supply corridors of Greece. EPU-NTUA (2011) has examined, on behalf of the Public Gas Corporation S.A. (DEPA S.A.), the economic and socio-political risks for Interconnector Turkey–Greece–Italy (ITGI) and TAP projects.Mathematical programming as well as simulation has widely been exploited in the international scientific literature to support gas supply policy and infrastructure development. A clustered overview of 32 studies on mathematical programming and simulation models of the natural gas market is presented in Table A.1.Multicriteria analysis proves to be an invaluable tool for handling problems characterized by a multidimensional nature that are encountered in different sectors. The most recent applications of multicriteria analysis in the sector of energy planning incorporate a novel multicriteria approach proposed by Henao, Cherni, Jaramillo, and Dyner (2012) for the selection of energy generation systems for the improvement of livelihoods in rural areas as well as a robust approach to the optimization of bilateral contracts in energy management proposed by Gilbert, Anjos, Marcotte, and Savard (2015).Multicriteria analysis has been observed only in a few studies related to natural gas in the international scientific literature. Afgan, Carvalho, Pilavachi, and Martins (2007, 2008) have evaluated the potential supply routes for South East and Europe. In another study, Afgan, Pilavachi, and Carvalho (2007) have assessed the potential gas utilization in the energy sector using multicriteria analysis with priority given to resource, economic and social indicators. Gomes, Rangel, and Maranhão (2009) have outlined a multicriteria methodology with the use of TODIM method, in order to: (1) create a mechanism to assist in the process of analyzing and selecting the best options for gas destination, (2) enable decision agents to choose the investment best-aligned to the company strategy options, and (3) permit decision agents to identification opportunities, taking into consideration a larger and diversified base of principal aspects influencing the choice or recommendation. Brito, Almeida, and Mota (2010) have proposed a risk assessment multicriteria model for gas pipelines. Their model integrates Utility Theory and the ELECTRE TRI method.The thorough research in the international scientific literature revealed little exploitation of multicriteria analysis methodologies, for gas supply corridors evaluation. The present study demonstrates particular suitability of modern multicriteria analysis methodologies to support energy policy makers to manage energy policy issues related to the natural gas sector.A thorough assessment of long-term potential gas supply alternatives has been conducted for the case of Greece. Alternatives to be evaluated have been defined at corridor level, meaning that each alternative describes “gas produced in country X and transferred to Greece through corridor Y”. A corridor is considered as a sequence of countries from country X to Greece.This section outlines a methodology to enumerate the set of alternatives to be evaluated in the framework of the proposed multicriteria analysis model. The steps followed to enumerate the set of alternatives are described below:(1)Enumeration of the top 100 richest countries in terms of gas reserves (R); for these countries exports (E), production (P) and consumption (C) data have also been recorded.Based on recorded data from step 1, calculation of:aReserves-to-production ratio (R/P);Production−consumption (P−C).Determination of countries characterized by:aR/P>20;P−C≥0based on data from step 1 and on calculations from step 2.Exhaustive search on transportation infrastructure to identify all gas corridors starting from the countries preconceived from the previous step and terminating in Greece; within this step, existing infrastructure has been taken into consideration, in terms of gas pipelines (both onshore and offshore), liquefaction and regasification facilities, as well as projects under construction and planned. Countries that have revealed to have neither existing nor possible future gas corridor to Greece, have been omitted from the alternatives set. LNG alternatives have been based on EIA's report “The Global LNG Market: Status & Outlook” (EIA, 2003) and on the International Gas Union's report “World LNG Report (2011)”, (IGU, 2011).Table A.2 summarizes the natural gas pipeline infrastructure projects incorporated within the exhaustive search.Several projects are distinguished that have occasionally been considered as very promising.Nabucco Classic project was firstly proposed in the early 2000s to have a length of 3300 kilometers from Erzurum in Turkey via Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary to Baumgarten in Austria. The pipeline was designed to transport up to 31 billion cubic meters of gas per year. This version of the pipeline, was derided by market experts for being very expensive and it was replaced by Nabucco West. The Nabucco West model was proposed to have a reduced route from the Turkish–Bulgarian border to Baumgarten. The length, as a result, was reduced to around 1300 kilometers. The carrying capacity of the pipeline, in case of construction, would be 10 billion cubic meters (Global Gas Transport, 2013). This capacity was claimed to be served from the Shah Deniz II field of Azerbaijan.Nabucco West was for several years one of the most ambitious projects for the diversification of Central and Southern Europe from Russian gas supplies. However, the recent decision of the Azerbaijani Shah Deniz II consortium, to supply with gas the TAP project (http://www.trans-adriatic-pipeline.com), means according to some energy policy analysts, the abandonment of the implementation of the Nabucco (Hübner, 2014; Recknagel, 2013). This choice of Azerbaijan puts Greece at the forefront of developments as far as the energy security of Central and Southern Europe is concerned, since through TAP, Greece becomes a transition country from the main sources of Caspian gas. The exact route of TAP and Nabucco West project is shown in Fig. 1that depicts the Southern Gas Corridor that is EU's alternative routes plan to diversify its gas supply sources from Russia.Turkish Stream (Fig. 2) is aimed to provide security of supplies to European countries, by transferring Russian natural gas to the Turkey–Greece border, via an offshore part that crosses the Black Sea followed by an onshore part across the European part of Turkey (http://www.gazpromexport.ru/). The newly proposed pipeline is of great importance for Greece. Athens expects to "receive significant financial dividends for the pipeline's operations,” and that the pipeline will bring “extremely important profits to Greece, first of all, cheaper gas” (http://rt.com/).The methodology described has provided a set of 27 alternatives, each representing a potential natural gas supply corridor from a producing country to Greece; these alternatives have been given as input in a multidimensional assessment, important both for the country's long-term natural gas procurement strategy and for the overall energy policy, in relation to the most favorable natural gas infrastructure projects for Greece. The 27 alternatives evaluated within the current work are presented in Table 1. The set of alternatives consists of (onshore and offshore) pipeline corridors as well as of LNG corridors.The alternative Irn-Tur from Table 1 represents natural gas produced in Iran and transferred to Greece through Turkey via ITE pipeline, as shown in Fig. 3, while the alternative Alg-LNG represents natural gas produced and liquefied in the liquefaction plants in Algeria and transferred to the Greek natural gas LNG port terminal with ships via the route shown in Fig. 4.The multicriteria evaluation system proposed is based on three points of view to support decisions for long-term gas supply strategies, as indicated by the representative of the national natural gas energy policy involved: the economics and the security of supply as well as issues of cooperation between countries (see Fig. 5). From these points of view six decision criteria have been considered; they are defined in this section, as follows:The relative transfer cost (g2) and the overall risk of corridor (g4) criteria are inextricably linked to the countries that make up each corridor alternative, while the evaluation of alternatives for the remaining criteria is in essence, evaluation of the supply country of each corridor.In terms of economics of supply, the import price of natural gas is based on a cost-plus approach according to which it should include all costs that are involved from the production to the consumption region, plus the gross profit margin of the seller. Considering the same gross profit margin for all alternative supply countries, the import price is usually determined by production, transfer and transit cost (Hafner, Karbuz, Esnault, & Andaloussi, 2007).Production cost (g1): A measure of the total cost to produce (g1) natural gas is the upstream cost. The upstream cost includes lifting and finding costs. Lifting costs are the costs to operate and maintain gas wells and related equipment and facilities to bring gas to the surface. Finding costs are the costs of exploring and developing gas reserves and the costs to purchase properties or acquire leases that might contain gas reserves (Performance Profiles of Major Energy Producers; EIA, 2009, 2012a). Production of LNG is much capital intensive as it incurs the additional cost of liquefaction, shipping, storage and regasification that is estimated at 0.38 dollars per barrel of oil equivalent (Cornot-Gandolphe, Appert, Dickel, Chabrelie, & Rojey, 2003;USAID From the American People, in press).Transfer cost (g2): of natural gas depends highly on the mode of transportation, i.e., via onshore or offshore pipelines or as LNG. The economics of gas transportation is a function of distance. The relative cost of gas delivery by pipelines versus LNG has been calculated in the international scientific literature (Fig. 6) and is widely used to evaluate transportation alternative options (Durr, Coyle, Hill, & Smith, 2007; Odumugbo, 2010). Because of the cost of transportation, gas is normally consumed as close as possible to the source (Directorate General for Internal Policies, 2009).In order to yield the score of each alternative in terms of transfer cost, each corridor has been examined individually, to find out the consisting parts in terms of infrastructure type as well as the distance of each part. This information has been exploited to assess the score of each alternative for criterion g2.The liquefaction and regasification infrastructure incorporated within the connectivity check has been derived from the “World's LNG Liquefaction Plants and Regasification Terminals” report (http://www.globallnginfo.com; Global LNG Limited, 2013) and the distance for LNG from each potential liquefaction plant to the port of Revuthousa in Greece has been estimated using the online sea route and distance estimator at www.ports.com.Transit cost concerns the economic counterpart for the migration of natural gas commodities to the recipient country. Tariff levels in different countries vary according to the tariff setting methodology applied. Major differences stem from technical parameters, geographical conditions, and economic factors (Gas Transit Tariffs in Selected ECT Countries; Energy Charter Secretariat, 2006). Negotiation of transit fees often involves the concerned governments (Nuriyev, 2010).In general, methodologies for setting transit tariffs comprises two stages; (a) the calculation of total allowable costs for the operation of the system in order to determine the revenue requirement; and (b) the allocation of these costs to individual shippers. The two basic approaches commonly used for the regulation of transmission tariffs are rate-of-return and incentive regulation. Under rate-of-return or ‘cost plus’ regulation, the regulator sets the allowed revenue to cover the reasonable costs of the service, based on the costs of the fixed investment in pipeline networks, financing and operational costs as well as a reasonable return on the assets necessary to provide the service. The total cost base is usually set by a regulator or negotiated with the transmission system operator (TSO). In the case of incentive, or ‘cap’ regulation, prices or revenues are set in advance, inducing the TSO to cut costs by allowing it to retain additional profits gained through efficiency savings. At the end of the regulatory period, prices and revenues are then recalculated for the next period and revenues exceeding the allowed will be corrected. Normally, negotiated tariffs remain confidential (Energy Charter Secretariat, 2012) and therefore it was not possible to obtain accurate data for this cost factor. Based on this fact, transit cost was not explicitly taken into account in the present modeling.The energy supply profile of each corridor depends on the volumes of gas that can be transferred through the corridor in combination with the risks that these volumes are subjected to. The following two indices have been opted, to measure the energy supply profile of each corridor:Reserves-To-production (g3): The gas reserves of the potential supplier can be evaluated using the Reserves-to-production (R/P) ratio. R/P ratio is defined as the ratio of the reserves of natural gas barrels or cubic feet to the annual production. This index is measured in years and it expresses the years of adequacy of the reserves of a country if producing at the current rate (indexmundi database; BP Global, 2012; ChartBin website).Overall risk of corridor (g4): Security of supply is inextricably combined with the risk of energy corridors.The pipeline transport of natural gas often involves transit countries, whereby the number of transit countries in the corridor considered, has a direct impact on the security of supply (Ritter, 2011). Each border crossed, adds an additional layer of security risk with the potential for conflict within these transit countries (Stern, 2002). Transit might influence gas supply risks in several ways (Le Coq & Paltseva, 2011). According to Scotti and Vedres (2012) the relative weight of energy security lies apart from source on transit countries of the corridor.For the purpose of the current study, to score the overall risk of each alternative, the resulting from REACCESS project data has been utilized; each corridor is considered as a sequence of countries, with a minimum of one and a maximum of five countries per corridor (Table 1). The overall risk of corridor has been extracted by aggregating the political-institutional and the socio-political risk components of all the countries of each corridor and converting it to a percentage, according to the following formula:(1)(∑i=1xPol−InstCountryi+∑i=1xSocio−PolCountryi)−MinMax−MinwherePol−InstCountryiandSocio−PolCountryiare the values of political–institutional and socio-political component of country i of each corridor, while Max and Min are the theoretical maximum and minimum overall risk of corridor values for the corridor sample of the current study. Max would be observed in the case of a five-countries corridor, each of them scoring maximum values in both the political–institutional and the socio-political components. Min would be observed in the case of one-country corridor, with minimum values for both political-institutional and socio-political risk components. Max and Min are assessed for the current set of 27 alternatives under evaluation, and should be re-evaluated in case of addition or removal of alternatives.(2)Max=5*(Max(Pol−Inst)+Max(Socio−Pol))(3)Min=Min(Pol−Inst)+Min(Socio−Pol)The method exploited tends to reward LNG alternatives as less risky, compared to pipeline alternatives from the same supply source. This trend is reasonable; according to the “Energy and Security from the Caspian to Europe”report of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations (2012) “…LNG is often more reliable than pipelines whose taps can easily be switched off”.The cooperation between Greece and the potential gas supply countries is quantified based on the financial transactions between the two countries. The indices below provide an indication of the maturity level of the economic relations between Greece and each supply country, as a means of trustworthiness of the supplier of each alternative corridor.Total trade (g5): between Greece and each potential gas supply country X. The index used indicates the relevant level of total trading transactions between the two countries to the total global trading transactions of both Greece and country X and is calculated as:(4)ECountryX→Greece+EGreece→CountryXECountryX→Worldwide+EGreece→WorldwideIn formula (4) E stands for earnings from exports (in 1000 dollars). The details of the transactions were stem from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTADSTAT) database (UNCTADSTAT database). A relative index has been selected in order to indicate the relative economic cooperation between countries.Total energy trade (g6): has also been calculated exploiting formula (4), taking into consideration only energy transactions.Table 2summarizes the criteria evaluation scales and sources. Though several alternatives have received R/P≥200 years, within the current analysis 200 years have been considered as a maximum.Decision support models assist, rather than replace managerial judgment and they are aimed at improving the effectiveness – rather than the efficiency- of decisions (Bohanec, 2003). In this direction, apart from the points of view mentioned, several important issues do exist, capable to affect energy strategy decisions that cannot be incorporated in a decision support model. Such issues concern geopolitical developments, transnational alliances and conflicts, as well as the status of each project (Table A.1). Such characteristics cannot be quantitatively presented and therefore are not incorporated within the proposed model. However, they should be exploitable based on the experience of energy policy makers.The scores achieved by each of the 27 alternatives on the six criteria are presented in Table 3.In this section an overall evaluation model is assessed, in order to provide an overall evaluation and ranking of the potential gas supply corridors for Greece, as well as to evaluate future infrastructure projects.National supplies of natural gas in Greece are under the competence of the DEPA S.A., for which recently non-concluded efforts have been made by the government to be privatized. The interest of the national natural gas policy mainly extends in two axes: the exploration of potential natural gas suppliers to approach and the identification of the most advantageous actions to be followed at country-level in terms of infrastructure projects, agreements and participation in consortiums.The role of the DM was given to an executive of the national natural gas energy policy, whose knowledge and experience enhanced significantly the design of the model, including all dimensions of significance of the national natural gas supply policy.The multicriteria additive value system is defined by means of an additive value function u(g), described by the following formulae:(5)u(g)=∑i=1npiui(gi)(6)ui(gi*)=0,ui(gi*)=1,i=1,…,n(7)∑i=1npi=1(8)pi≥0,i=1,…,nwhereg=(g1,…,gn)is the performance vector of an alternative supply source through a specific corridor on the n criteria; ui(gi*) andui(gi*)are the least and most preferable levels of criterion gi, respectively;ui(gi),i=1,…,nare non-decreasing marginal value functions of the performancesgi,i=1,…,n. and piis the relative weight of the ith function ui(gi). Thus, for a given alternative a,g(a) andu[g(a)] represent the multicriteria vector of performances and the global value of the alternative respectively.The preferential independence of all the criteria, as described by Keeney and Raiffa (1976) and Keeney (1992) is a necessary hypothesis for the above additive value system. A pair of criteria (gi, gj) is preferentially independent from the rest of the criteria when the trade-offs between the giand gjcriteria are not dependent on the values of the rest of the criteria. All criteria are supposed to be preferentially independent when the same condition holds for all pairs of criteria. When the functions uihave been assessed, the linear model (5)–(8) exists if and only if the inter-criteria parameters (weights) are constant substitution rates (trade-offs) between ui.Traditional assessment techniques for weights include among others the “swing weights” and the trade-off method. The “swing technique” (von Winterfeldt and Edwards, 1986) is based on the direct analysis of the value advantage associated with swinging between the end points of each attribute range. The trade-off method requires indifference judgments among different multiattribute profiles (Beinat, 1997).Recently though, Multicriteria Decision Analysis methods based on indirect preference information and on the disaggregation technique (Jacquet-Lagrèze & Siskos, 1982, 2001) are considered more interesting, because they require less cognitive effort from the DM in order to express preference information (Greco, Mousseau, & Słowiński, 2009).Because of the objective difficulties to convince DMs in expressing trade-offs between heterogeneous criteria, the analysts usually prefer to infer the DM's additive value function from global preference structures, by applying disaggregation or ordinal regression methods The DM provides some holistic preferences on a set of reference alternatives, and from this information the parameters of the decision model are induced (Greco, Mousseau, & Słowiński, 2008, 2010; Jacquet-Lagrèze & Siskos, 1982, 2001). Hurson and Siskos (2014) recently proposed a synergy of complementary techniques including MAUT, MACBETH and UTA to effectively assess the DM's additive value model in order to face issues of legitimacy and technical difficulties when real DMs are involved. In a similar study, Siskos (2014) have exploited these methodologies to infer the DM's additive value function in order to evaluate the EU countries in terms of e-government integration in the public sector.In this application, the complex procedure of inferring the marginal value functions and the weights of criteria has been executed by involving the DM in analytical and understandable procedures, taking advantage of his experience.The marginal value functions of criteria have been constructed via a direct dialogue with the DM, guided by the analyst; then, the inference of criteria weights has been achieved by involving the DM in the assessment of couples from a virtual set of alternatives, built by the analyst according to the concept of the UTA II ordinal disaggregation methodology; the alternatives in each couple usually differ in two or three criteria so that it is easier for the DM to compare them. At the end of this dialogue, the DM's overall preference is expressed on a set of fictitious reference alternatives, in the form of a ranking. In order to take into account the incomplete determination of inter-criteria model parameters and obtain a robust evaluation of the alternative corridors the extreme ranking analysis algorithm (Kadzinski, Greco, & Slowinski, 2012) has been considered. The stability of the criteria's weights has also been studied, with the use of the Average Stability Index (ASI) introduced in Grigoroudis and Siskos (2002). This methodological approach is currently called “Robust Ordinal Regression” (Greco, Słowiński, Figueira, & Mousseau, 2010); an updated review and unified framework based on ROR for multiple criteria ranking has been recently published by Corrente, Greco, Kadzinski, and Slowiński (2013).Fig. 7shows the multicriteria methodology flowchart of the study in order to evaluate gas supply alternative corridors for Greece.The DM is asked to participate in a dialogue in order to determine the marginal value function of each criterion, according to his preferences. Below, an example is given of the dialogue between the analyst and the DM:Analyst: As far as the production cost is considered, taking into consideration that the lowest production cost (10 dollars) has a value of 1 and the highest cost (50 dollars) has a value of 0, what do you think is the value of 20 dollars?DM: No direct linear relation exists. I think that the value of 20 dollars should be 0.90.Analyst: Respectively, what value would you give to 40 dollars?DM: I would say 0.70.The information provided by the DM is used to approximate marginal value functions, taking into consideration also the two fixed points (0 and 1). The analyst may continue the dialogue to optimally fit the DM's knowledge with an approximate marginal value function. The procedure terminates when the approximate marginal value function of each criterion is accepted by the DM. In Fig. 8the analytical form of the marginal value functions for criteria g1 and g3 are shown. The analytical forms of the marginal value functions for the rest of the criteria are presented in Appendix A.4.Alternatively, if it is difficult to construct satisfactory marginal value functions via the direct dialogue with the DM, the UTASTAR (Siskos and Yannakopoulos, 1985), UTAGMS (Greco et al., 2008) or RUTA (Kadzinski, Greco, & Slowiński, 2013) ordinal regression methods can be exploited; in these methods the marginal value functions and the weights of criteria are in parallel inferred.The scores of each alternative on each criterion marginal value function are given in Table 4.The weights of criteria in formula (5) are assessed using the UTA II disaggregation method. According to this method, the analyst develops a dialogue with the DM in order to construct a virtual set of reference alternativesAR={a1,…,ak}, each representing a fictitious natural gas supply alternative corridor for Greece and helps the DM to express a set of preference statements; an example of this dialogue is given below:Analyst: Let us take the virtual alternative E with the following original value scores:{g1=25,g2=2.53,g3=106,g4=27.90,g5=1.41,g6=0.8}. Comparing to another virtual alternative F differentiated from E only in criteria{g3=155.5,g5=1.26}, which one would you prefer?DM: I think that these two alternatives are equivalent.In ARcouples differ in two or at least three criteria (Tables A.3.1 and A.3.2), so that it is easy for the DM to compare. The DM is asked to provide, according to his knowledge, a complete ranking on AR; suppose that ARis rearranged in such a way that a1 is the head and akis the tail of the ranking, and for a pair of consecutive alternatives holds: preference (amPam+1) or indifference (amIam+1). With the above substructure, UTA II involves further resolving the linear programming model (9)–(13), in order to find at least one compatible set of weightsp={p1,…,pn}:(9)minF=∑i=1k(σ+(ai)+σ−(ai))For m=1,2,…,k−1(10)∑i=1npi(ui[gi(am)]−ui[gi(am+1)])−σ+(am)+σ−(am)+σ+(am+1)−σ−(am+1){≥δ,ifamPam+1(i)=0,ifamIam+1(ii)(11)∑i=1npi=1(12)pi≥0,i=1,…,n(13)σ+(am),σ−(am)≥0,m=1,…,kIt is considered that the indication of the DM may include some overestimationσ+(am)or underestimationσ−(am)error for each of the alternatives in the virtual set ARto be minimized in (9). δ is typically a very small positive number indicating the confidence of the DM, to distinguish alternatives that differ slightly. Typical values for δ threshold are 0.001, or 0.0005. The DM is also provided with the option to decide that two alternatives differ so slightly that they are equivalent. In this case, the constraint to be modeled is of type (10ii).The process of determining a set of weights through solving the linear model (9)–(13) is terminated when the objective function (9) becomes zero. Any other case indicates that the DM has some over- or underestimation in some of the virtual alternatives meaning that the DM's ranking over the reference set is not consistent with the additive model. In this case the analyst assists the DM to reassess estimations, by guiding an exhaustive dialogue with the DM, to optimally fit with his knowledge in parallel with obtaining a ranking of the fictitious alternatives set with no over-/under-estimations. Specifically, the reference set is given back to the DM for reassessment and corrections. Then, the new linear programming problem formed is solved again and if the objective function reaches zero value, the criteria weights estimated are considered as valid (Siskos, 2014). The activities carried out in order to verify that a non-empty hyperpolyhedron of admissible solutions for the weights exists – meaning that many utility functions lead to a perfect representation of the preference relation of the DM- are presented in Fig. 9.The set of reference alternative corridors, the criteria evaluations and the DM's ranking are presented in Table 4; δ was set to 0.001. The set of weights produced by the optimization procedure described is shown in the first column of Table 5. Because of the inequality relations the compatible set of weighting factorspis not unique. Based on this fact, after having identified the existence of a compatible set that causes neither under nor overestimation in the DM’s appraisals, the model (9)–(13) can be reformulated in order to identify the maximum value of δ threshold (δMAX) and the most representative set of weightspREP={p1REP,…,pnREP}.In both cases, the decision variables representing the errorsσ+(am),σ−(am)are omitted. In order to calculate δMAXthe objective function is replaced bymaxZ=δwhile to obtain the most representative set of weightspREP={p1REP,…,pnREP}, the partial exploration of polyhedron of constraints is conducted by solving 12 linear problems, each of them minimizing/maximizing each criterion weight pi. The solution of these linear problems gives the interval variation of the weight of each criterion, providing consequently an idea of the importance of each criterion to the DM. This procedure concludes toδMAX=0.0029. The most representative weighting vector (pREP) is calculated as the mean of the weighting vector of the 12 minimization and maximization models (formula (14)). Each element in columns MIN/MAX of Table 5 represents the minimum/maximum weight resulted as a solution to the linear model described (9)–(13) when minimizing/maximizing weighting factor piof criterion gi. The most representative set of weights is computed as:(14)piREP=∑j=16(pjMAX(pi)+pjMIN(pi))12,i=1,…,6Fig. 10presents graphically the minimum, maximum and most representative weighting factor of each criterion that is given in Table 5, revealing the variation of the weighting factors for each criterion. The chart shows considerable stability for criteria weights. Of course, the representative weights satisfy the system of constraints (10)–(12), after eliminating the zero-errors because it is a convex combination of 12 extreme points of the polyhedron of solutions.It is observed that in the compensatory logic of criteria the overall risk of corridor (g4) is the highest weighted criterion followed by the total energy trade (g6) and the relative transfer cost (g2). Production cost (g1), R/P (g3) and total trade (g5) weight low for the DM involved. The weighting factors of criteria may vary between the range defined bypiMINandpjMAX, according to the DM to be involved, summing always into one. However in all cases, regardless the exact weights, the overall risk of corridor and the total energy trade always occupy the first and second positions, respectively.Jacquet-Lagrèze and Siskos (1982) were the first to emphasize that the inference of a decision model through optimization formulations may not be robust. Grigoroudis and Siskos (2002) developed ASI, as a measure to assess the stability and robustness of the inferred model. The ASI is defined as the mean normalized standard deviation of the estimated weights of the criteria and is calculated in the case of UTA II, as:(15)ASI=1−1n*∑i=1nm*∑j=1mpij2−(∑j=1mpij)2mnn−1wherem=12is the number of weighting instances,n=6is the number of criteria and pijis the weight of the ith criterion according to instance j. ASI is the global robustness index of the model, taking values in the interval [0,1]; the robustness of the weights is considered as adequate, when convergence to the maximum value of 1 is achieved (Siskos & Tsotsolas, 2015). The ASI is equal to 0.992, a value indicating that the six criteria's weights are adequately stable.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
