@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Defense against an opportunistic challenger: Theory and experiments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a proportional contest where an attacker reacts to multiple defenders.Defenders can act independently or form an alliance to provide common protection.Acting independently, defenders face an all pay auction to not be the weakest target.Alliances lower defense spending yielding higher profits for defenders and attackers.Laboratory experiments largely confirm the theoretical predictions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Game theory,Contests,Defense alliances,Experiments,Psychology of decisions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper considers a contest setting in which a challenger chooses between one of two contests to enter after observing the level of defense at each. Despite the challenger’s chance of success being determined by a proportional contest success function, the defenders effectively find themselves in an all-pay auction that largely dissipates the value of the defended resources because the challenger will target the weaker defender. However, if the defenders form a protective alliance then their expected profits increase despite the fact that a successful challenge is theoretically more likely, given the overall reduction in defense. Controlled laboratory experiments designed to test the model’s predictions are also reported. Observed behavior is generally consistent with the comparative static predictions although challengers exhibit the familiar overbidding pattern. Defenders appear to anticipate this reaction and adjust their behavior accordingly.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many situations that can be described as a contest, one of the participants (a challenger) can decide which contest to enter after observing the behavior of the other contestants (the defenders). For example, the challenger could be a terrorist who has a single bomb and multiple possible targets such as planes owned by different airlines. The terrorist has the advantage of being able to observe the relative strength of each target’s defense and respond accordingly. Intuition suggests that the terrorist would prefer to attack the weaker target thereby increasing the chance of success. Since the more strongly defended target does not get attacked, each defender has an incentive to be slightly better protected than its rival resulting in an all-pay auction among the defenders. Such a situation arises in other settings as well. Ceteris paribus, a criminal prefers to burgle the least protected house in a neighborhood, explaining the popularity of home security and “Beware of Dog” signs. An employee hoping to become a regional manager only needs to outshine the weakest current person in that position, just as a new politician can gain office by unseating the weakest incumbent.11Ryvkin (2010) discusses various types of tournaments for trying to identify high quality employees when talent is heterogeneous, although the structure of uncertainty is different in his setup.An entrepreneur looking to start a new retail store would prefer to operate where the competitor is the weakest. A young male animal would prefer to usurp the feeblest established male to claim mating rights. This situation also arises in the old joke about two people going hiking in an area inhabited by bears when one points out that they cannot outrun a bear, and the other says, “I just have to outrun you.”22Of course, any of these situations could involve multiple challengers: two burglars could operate in the same neighborhood; other employees may be seeking a promotion; etc. Allowing for more players may introduce multiple and/or asymmetric equilibria. However, this paper restricts attention to the case of two defenders and one challenger.Rather than providing separate defenses, in some settings the defenders could band together and form an alliance. For example, airplane security is done at the airport level rather than the airline level. Residential communities often form neighborhood watches. Incumbent firms may seek a zoning ordinance to keep potential entrants out. In fact, alliances are common throughout society and psychologists have argued that people favor the formation of an alliance when facing conflicts due to the competitive disadvantage of the lone individual confronting a group (Baumeister and Leary, 1995).In this paper, we construct a formal model to analyze these two strategic situations and test the model using controlled laboratory experiments. The theoretical results confirm that the challenger will prefer to attack the weaker defender when targets are protected independently leading defenders to invest heavily. A challenger who targets the weak link has the flair of previous research on the attack and defense of a network (e.g., Levitin, 2003a; 2003b; Major, 2002; O’Hanlon et al., 2002; Woo, 2002; 2003). In contrast, when the defenders work together in an alliance, the aggregate level of defense is much lower resulting in both a greater likelihood of a successful challenge and simultaneously higher expected profits for defenders.The normal intuition for an alliance is that the joint defense is greater than each individual defense and thus the alliance is better able to deter or handle a challenger. Research by Sheremeta and Zhang (2010) suggests alliances make better decisions in contests than individuals. Specifically, in lottery contests when team members are able to communicate, groups are found to make more rational decisions than individuals. While most of the literature on contests has not focused on alliances, there has been some work considering the impact of how the alliance shares the spoils of its success (Esteban and Sakovics, 2003; Katz and Tokatlidu, 1996; Konrad, 2004 Muller and Warneryd, 2001; and Warneryd, 1998).33An alliance in our setting reduces the game to a single battle, which is distinct from the setting in which the entire defense of a network is defended by a single decision maker as in Bier and Abhichandani (2002),Bier et al. (2005),Azaiez and Bier (2007) and Hausken (2008) where defense remains target specific. Kovenock and Roberson (2012a); 2012b) provide the necessary conditions for and discuss the misunderstandings in Hausken (2008) results.In these models there is typically a single prize to be allocated among members of the alliance.In general these models find that the internal conflict diminishes the contribution of alliance members. This outcome is also found when there are spillovers between independently defended targets in a network such as in Kunreuther and Heal (2003). However, Ke et al. (2010) conduct an experimental analysis of alliances and show that the future internal conflict does not prevent alliance members from fighting shoulder-to-shoulder. On average, they find that allies in a contest against an outside opponent devote the same contest effort irrespective of how they will share the spoils of victory. In addition, the collaboration in alliances is reasonably good, leading to higher success against a lone challenger than predicted. Garfinkel (2004) develops a positive analysis of alliance formation, building on a simple economic model that features a “winner-take-all” contest for control of some resource. When an alliance forms, members pool their efforts in that contest and, if successful, apply the resource to a joint production process. Due to the familiar free-rider problem, the formation of alliances tends to reduce the severity of the conflict over the contestable resource. Despite the conflict that arises among the winning alliance’s members over the distribution of their joint product, under reasonable conditions, this effect alone is sufficient to support stable alliance formation in a non-cooperative equilibrium.Our model is distinct from these papers in that each member of the alliance values its own item so that the alliance is about common protection rather than an arrangement for increasing the chance of claiming a shareable prize of a given size.44Our results are unchanged if alliance members agree to equally share all prizes that any member claims. The alliance structure in our paper is also related to the literature on group contests (cf. Muenster, 2009 who extends the axiomatic characterization of contest success functions of Skaperdas (1996) and Clark and Riis (1998) to contests between groups). Baik (2008) examines the equilibrium effort levels of individual players and groups in contests in which n groups compete to win a group-specific public-good prize. In the basic model the chance of success depends on total effort and only the highest-valuation players expend positive effort leading to under-investment in the contest for the group as a whole. Lee (2012) considers the situation in which the probability of winning follows a weakest-link rule so that it is the lowest-valuation players in each group who play the decisive roles. Ryvkin (2010) studies how aggregate effort exerted in contests between groups of heterogeneous players depends on the sorting of players into groups. Abbink et al. (2010) examine the impact of group members being able to punish each other.Thus, in our setting there is no distributional conflict within the alliance resulting from a successful defense. Further, in our model the challenger cannot claim more than one prize regardless of whether or not the defenders opt to form an alliance. Returning to the example of a terrorist with a single bomb attempting to attack a plane, if the terrorist is unsuccessful both airlines retain their respective planes but if the terrorist is successful only one airline incurs the entire loss while the other incurs no harm. In the example of an employee vying for a regional manager job, an incumbent who keeps her job is not harmed when someone else is let go.The paper most closely related to ours in structure is Dighe et al. (2009), which considers an attack and defense game with two possible targets and one challenger. In their game, defense is a binary choice and the outcome is deterministic, as an attack is only successful if launched against an undefended target. They compare a decentralized defense where different decision makers defend each target and a centralized defense where a single decision maker makes both defense decisions jointly thereby internalizing the externality associated with defense. In their setup, defense is unobservable and they find that centralized decision making is optimal since deterrence can be achieved in some scenarios by protecting only one target. Our paper is also similar to Hausken and Bier (2011) which considers a single defender with multiple attackers using a similar conflict success function. They show how the move order and relative values of the attackers will encourage some attackers to abandon the contest.We also report the results of controlled laboratory experiments designed to test the empirical validity of our model. In our laboratory experiments, defenders are observed to bid less when in an alliance as predicted by the model. However, the difference in the bids is not as dramatic as predicted. There are now several experimental papers on contests (cf. Sheremeta et al., 2012 for a thorough survey) and one of the common findings is that people overbid to the point that the equilibrium surplus is often fully depleted (cf. Davis and Reilly, 1998; Gneezy and Smorodinsky, 2006; Lugovskyy and Puzzello, 2008; Potters et al., 1998). Noussair and Silver (2006) address the effect of experience, showing that experience helps decrease over-bidding but does not eliminate it. Contrary to these previous contest experiments, we find that defenders under-bid when defending separately, perhaps because the theoretical predictions are relatively greater in our setting. Our results are also driven in part by the fact that the alliance members do not internalize the benefits of their defense investments for the other alliance members. This aspect of alliance behavior was pointed out at least as far back as Olson and Zeckhauser (1966). However, Ke et al. (2010) observe group members overbidding in a setting where the group shares a common bid against another party and equally split the proceeds from a successful bid. Recently, Nitzan and Ueda (2008) examine the effect of group size on performance in a collective contest and find that larger groups tend to be less effective at pursuing the collective interest.Consider a situation in which a single challenger has two possible targets, T1 and T2, each valued at P ≥ 0. Tiis valued at V ≥ 0 by defender i. Allocation of the targets is determined by the outcome of a contest resolved with a proportional success function (Tullock, 1980) based upon the level of investment by the relevant contestants. Let the investment (bid) by defender i be denoted by bi≥ 0 and the investment (bid) of the challenger be denoted by bC≥ 0. Before investing in defense, the defenders have the option to defend the targets independently or form an alliance. After observing the defense structure and the investments of the defenders, the challenger decides how to proceed. A key feature of this set-up is that a challenger can enter at most one contest and can claim at most one target.55If the challenger could enter both contests in the event that the defenders opted to defend separately, the result would be two independent standard Tullock contests. Allowing the challenger to claim both targets when defeating an alliance is discussed in footnotes 8 and 9.Our model is meant to capture the situation in which the second mover terrorist has a single bomb or the second mover burglar only has enough time to enter a single home.Formally, the game proceeds through three stages.Stage 1:Defenders decide to form an alliance or not.Conditional on the outcome of Stage 1, defenders independently select their investment levels.Conditional on the outcomes of Stages 1 and 2, the challenger decides which contest to enter and how much to invest.The appropriate solution concept is subgame perfection; therefore, we consider the stages in reverse order.How the challenger should respond depends on whether or not the defenders formed an alliance.At this stage, the challenger observes the defense investment at each target. The challenger’s problem is to decide which target if any to pursue and how much to invest. From pursuing target Ti, the challenger’s expected profit is(1)ΠC={bCbC+biP−bCifbC+bi>0P2else.where the second term is due to the fact that the winner is determined randomly if bC+ bi= 0. The optimal response by the challenger, derived from the first order condition for (1), is(2)bC*={Pbi−biifbi<P0else.When it is optimal to attack, substituting (2) into (1) yieldsΠC*=(P−bi)2,which is decreasing in bi. Therefore, the challenger finds it more profitable to pursue the less defended target and is indifferent between the targets if they are equally defended.In the alliance, the challenger faces the combined defense of the alliance members and if successful then randomly selects one of the targets to claim.66An alternative cooperative arrangement is for the defenders to communicate and coordinate their activity, essentially merging into a single decision making entity and thus internalizing the positive externality associated with investing. There are two possible implementations of this arrangement mirroring our independent and alliance set-ups. The parallel to the independent defense is such that the defender will choose to invest the same amount at each target because the challenger will still prefer to contest the weaker target and thus any additional investment on one target is wasted. Hence, the objective function of this single defender would beΠD=(1+bDP)V−2bDwhere D denotes the single defender and bDis the defender’s level of investment for each target. Notice that in this case the defender is assured of receiving V as one target will not be attacked. In this casebD*=V216Pand the optimal response by the challenger isbC*=V4(1−V4P)which is the same as the level of investment by the challenger in the alliance. The defender’s expected profit in this case would beV+V28Pand the challenger’s expected profit would be(1−V4P)(P−V4). The other set up would allow the one defender to jointly protect both targets. Here the objective function of this single defender would beΠD=(1+bDP)V−bDand the resulting expected profit to the defender would beV+V24P. Clearly, of these two choices a single decision maker would prefer to jointly protect the two targets. Spolaore (2010) goes through a similar exercise when looking at various alliances and political unions in geopolitical contests.At this stage, the challenger maximizesΠC=bCbC+b1+b2P−bC. The first order condition yields the optimal challenge given by(3)bC*={P(b1+b2)−b1−b2ifb1+b2<P0else.How the defenders should behave at this stage depends on whether or not they formed an alliance in the first stage and takes into account how the challenger will respond in the next stage.At this stage, the defenders know that the challenger will focus on the weaker target. The implication is that the stronger defender will claim the prize V with certainty while the weaker defender will earn V only if the ultimate contest with the challenger is unsuccessful. Equation (2) informs the weaker defender of how the challenger will react. Letting bwdenote the level of the weaker defense and using (2), the weak defender expects to earn(4)Πw={VbwP−bwifbw<PV−bwelse.Thus, the defender of target Tiearns V − biif bi> bj, the profit given by (4) with bw= biif bi< bj, or one of these two amounts selected randomly if bi= bj, for j ≠ i.77The interaction between the independent defenders has some similarity with the model of Baye et al. (1996); however our case is distinct in that the loser’s profit is not monotonically decreasing in the amount bid.Notice that the weak defender’s profit, if challenged, is maximized whenbw=V24P. Thus there are two cases to consider depending on howV24Pcompares to P, the defense bid above which the challenger drops out, as in Hausken and Bier (2011).If V ≥ 2P then the profit of the defenders is shown in Fig. 1(a). In this setting, the equilibrium is for both defenders to set a bid of P. It is clear from the figure that no defender would ever want to bid above P with any positive probability because her profit would be increased by increasing the probability of bidding P by that amount. It is also the case that no defender would bid below P with any positive probability in equilibrium. Obviously, neither defender would ever want to bid strictly below the lowest possible bid that the other defender might make. Hence, the two defenders would have to have the same lower bound for their bidding behavior, but then a defender could increase her expected profit by shifting weight from close to this lower bound to P.If V < 2P then the profit of the defenders is shown in Fig. 1(b). Here the defenders find themselves in an all-pay auction in which the low bidder’s profit is a function of her bid. The maximum profit a defender can assure himself is the same as the profit the defender would expect to earn if there was a single target (or he knew he would be contested with certainty). In that case, the defender would choose to defend at the levelb=V24P,which is the bid that maximizes (4). This level of investment,b, identifies the security profit for a defender,V24P(found by pluggingbw=V24Pinto Equation (4)). Based on a similar argument as before, a bidder will never find it optimal to bid belowbwith any positive probability. Regardless of whether or not the target would be contested, a defender would never find it optimal to bid strictly aboveb¯=V−V24Pbecause doing so would yield a profit strictly less than theV24Pprofit that can be assured by biddingb. It is straightforward to show that V < 2P impliesb¯<Pand hence in the region of interest, defender bids must be in the interval[b̲,b¯]. Following Baye et al. (1996), this all-pay auction with complete information will have a unique symmetric mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, f(b). Informally, no bidder can find it optimal to play a strategy that has mass points on some bids or gaps in the support of the distribution because the rival would react in such a way as to disadvantage the bidder. This means that the players are using a continuous distribution, which is uniquely identified by generating an expected profit equal to the security profit. Let F(b) be the cumulative density function associated with f(b). If the other defender is playing according to f(b), then defender i’s problem is to maximize(5)Πi=(bibi+bC*V−bi)[1−F(bi)]+F(bi)(V−bi).SubstitutingbC*from (2) into (5) yieldsΠi=(biPV−bi)[1−F(bi)]+F(bi)(V−bi).Since each strategy generates the same expected profit in equilibrium, it must be that(6)V24P=(biPV−bi)[1−F(bi)]+F(bi)(V−bi).Solving (6) for F(bi) yields(7)F(bi)=V24P−biPV+bi(1−biP)V.It is straightforward to show that F(b) = 0,F(b¯)=1,and (7) is increasing in bi. As f(bi) > 0 over the interval[b̲,b¯],Equation (7) defines the unique symmetric Nash equilibrium.At this stage, defender i maximizes her expected profit, given byΠi=bi+bjbC*+bi+bjV+(1−bi+bjbC*+bi+bj)V2−biwhich, taking (3) into account, simplifies to(8)Πi=(1+bi+bjP)V2−biwherei∈{1,2}andj=3−i.The first order condition of (8) leads to a best response functionbi*(bj)=V216P−bj,which implies that any pair of non-negative defender bids that sum toV216Pis an equilibrium ifV216P<Por V < 4P.88If the challenger was able to claim both prizes upon winning the contest the resulting sum of defender bids would beV28P,which is still low compared to independent defense levels.While there are multiple equilibria, the per capita equilibrium defender bid is unique (cf. Nti, 1998). The challenger responding to the total defense will bidbC*=V4(1−V4P). The average expected profit of the defender is(1+3V16P)V2while the challenger expects to earn(1−V4P)2P. If on the other hand, V ≥ 4P then the two defenders would prefer to bid a total of P and take the challenger out of the game. Again there are multiple equilibria, but in any equilibrium the average profit of a defender will beV−P2and the challenger will earn 0.In the first stage of the game, defenders independently decide to form an alliance or not. If both defenders opt to form the alliance, an alliance is formed. Otherwise, it is not. The expected profits to defenders, regardless of forming an alliance or not, depend on the relative values of V and P as summarized in Table 1.If V ≥ 4P defenses will be set such that the challenger drops out regardless of whether or not the defenders form an alliance. Because an independent defender would invest P and alliance members would invest at most P, defenders weakly prefer to form an alliance and per capita defender profits are strictly higher with an alliance.If V ∈ [2P, 4P) then the challenger will end up placing a positive bid when facing an alliance but not when facing independently defended targets. In this range, the appropriate comparison is the profit of V − P each defender receives from separate defenses and the(1+3V16P)V2−V232P(which reduces toV2+V216P) that an alliance member who provided the entire defense investment expects to earn. The−V232Pterm captures the difference in profit from the symmetric equilibrium where a defender pays half of theV216Pand the most inequitable equilibrium where the bidder pays the fullV216P. It is straightforward to show thatV2+V216P>V−Pand thus the defenders would always prefer to form an alliance for values of V in this range.Finally, for V ∈ (0, 2P) the challenger will bid regardless of the defense structure. In this region, an alliance generates greater expected returns, even to a defender that fully finances the alliance ifV2+V216P>V24P,which holds when V < 2P.Taking these comparisons together shows that defenders always prefer to form an alliance rather than engage in independent defenses.99The preference ordering for a defender depends on the values of V and P if a challenger who is successful against an alliance claims both targets.Because the formation of an alliance requires unanimity, both players opting to form an alliance and both opting to defend independently can occur in equilibrium. However, only both players opting to form an alliance satisfies the refinement of trembling hand perfection.As it turns out, the challenger never strictly prefers to face independent defenders. In the case that V < 2P, this can be shown by comparing the challenger’s expected profit against an independent defense,(1−V2P)2P,and the challenger’s expected profit against an alliance,P(1−V4P)2. The intuition is that under an alliance, the challenger faces a weaker defense and thus can obtain a high chance of winning at a relatively low cost. If V ∈ [2P, 4P) then the challenger’s expected profit is zero against independent defenders and is positive against alliance. Finally, when V ≥ 4P the challenger earns zero regardless of the defenders’ arrangement.Empirically, previous experiments have found that subjects in contests typically bid too aggressively. If this behavioral pattern applies similarly to both separate defenses and alliances, the comparative static predictions of the model should continue to hold. However, in non-contest settings, researchers have found strong evidence of altruism among in-group members. If the decision to form an alliance fosters this type of response, then alliances may bid even more aggressively, which could reduce or eliminate the theoretically predicted cost reduction associated with alliance membership.To empirically test the predictions of the model, we conducted controlled laboratory experiments. The experiments involved neutral language. No mention was made of challengers, defending, alliances, winning, etc. Instead, the task was framed as subjects bidding to claim two colored items. Defenders were identified as either Yellow or Blue and valued the item of the corresponding color at 256 (and valued the other item at 0). Challengers were identified as Green and valued both the yellow and the green item at 256.1010The use of neutral language is meant to reduce behavioral bias from the experimenter encouraging participants to view a decision in a particular way drawing on home-grown (i.e. outside the lab) preferences. Subjects likely apply some context to the decision problems they face and the use of neutral language may itself influence behavior, but not in a way that is anticipated to have a systematic effect on choices.Three experimental treatments were implemented: Independent, Alliance, and Endogenous. In the Independent treatment, Yellow and Blue (defenders) moved first and independently submitted bids for their respective items. In all cases bids were required to be non-negative and weakly less than the bidder’s value of 256. Once the bids were submitted, Green (the challenger) observed the bids, chose an item on which to bid, and then placed a bid for the selected item. The item upon which Green did not bid was awarded to the defender who valued it. The allocation of the item upon which Green did bid was resolved via a proportional contest success function as described in Section 2, Case 1 with the winner receiving her value for the item. The results were revealed to all three participants and each person’s profits were reduced by the amount of her bid and increased by the value of any item she claimed.In the Alliance treatment, Yellow and Blue simultaneously submitted bids, knowing those bids would be combined into a single bid against Green. Green observed the bid by Yellow and Blue and then submitted her own bid. The outcome was determined using a proportional contest success function as described in Section 2, Case 2 above. If Green won the contest, Green was randomly assigned one of the items and the other was awarded to the defender who valued it.1111It is possible that allowing the challenger to choose which target is claimed could impact behavior. For example, the challenger might be able to discourage defense investment by claiming the preferred target of the defender investing the most.If Yellow and Blue won the contest, then both claimed their respective items. Regardless of the outcome, each participant had her bid deducted from her earnings and had the value of any claimed item added to her earnings.The Endogenous treatment first presented Yellow and Blue with a binary choice to bid separately or to combine their bids. If both defenders opted to combine their bids then the experiment proceeded as in the Alliance treatment. Otherwise, the experiment proceeded as in the Independent treatment. Green knew that Yellow and Blue faced this choice and learned of the outcome before placing her bid. Because defenders’ expected profits are higher under an Alliance, defenders will opt into the alliance when given the chance in the Endogenous treatment and thus the expected outcomes are the same for these two treatments.1212Technically, there are two Pareto ranked Nash equilibria for the alliance formation game. Both opting to form the alliance and both opting not for the alliance are equilibria; however, the players have a weakly dominant strategy to indicate a willingness to form the alliance.Table 2gives expected bids and profits by treatment. This table highlights the two changes in defense behavior associated with being in an alliance: the structure of the equilibrium changes from a mixed strategy to a pure strategy and defense investment falls dramatically. Notice that despite the multiple equilibria that exist in the alliance, there remains clear separation in predicted defender behavior between treatments. Specifically, bids in the interval (16, 64) by defenders should never be observed.In each experimental session, subjects participated in 30 contests, 10 in each treatment. In half of the six sessions the treatment order was Independent, then Alliance and then Endogenous. In the other three sessions, the order of Independent and Alliance was reversed to control for ordering effects, but Endogenous was always implemented after subjects had familiarity with both defense methods so that their choice was informed.The directions and the experiment were computerized using z-Tree (Fischbacher, 2007). Subjects read treatment specific directions and answered comprehension questions just prior to participating in each segment of the experiment and did not know what if any other treatments would be implemented later in the session. Copies of the directions and comprehension questions are available in Appendix.When arriving at the lab, the 12 subjects in the session were seated at separate workstations isolated by privacy dividers. Subjects were then randomly assigned a color role that was maintained throughout the entire experiment.1313All defenders viewed themselves as being Yellow and viewed the other defender as being Blue. This increased the number of different pairings that could occur.However, each period subjects were randomly and anonymously rematched with other participants. This procedure eliminates the ability of subjects to build a reputation or engage in other repeated play strategies that might cause behavior to differ from the one-shot model described in Section 2.The 69 participants were undergraduate students at the University of Arkansas recruited from the Behavioral Business Research Laboratory’s subject pool.1414In one session only nine subjects were present.While some of the subjects had participated in other studies, none had participated in any related experiments. Subjects were paid in cash at the end of the approximately one hour experiment based upon their cumulative earnings. All of the values and bids in the experiment were denoted in Lab Dollars which were converted to $US at the rate 250 Lab Dollars = 1 $US. Because it is possible for subjects to lose money and in fact one of the three participants must lose money if they each place a positive bid, defenders were given an endowment of 750 while challengers were given an endowment of 1250. Asymmetric endowments were used for two reasons. First, challengers are involved in every contest while defenders are not. Second, with identical values for success in a contest, expected profits are greater for defenders in equilibrium. None of the subjects went bankrupt during the experiment. The salient earnings averaged $18.98. Subjects also received an additional $5 for participating.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
