@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
‘Too Little’ or ‘Too Late’: The timing of supply

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate two collaboration mechanisms with different timings.Timing of collaboration significantly influences supply chain production decisions.We formulate incentive mechanism to extract truthful information via collaboration.Information asymmetry reduces the impact of timing substantially.Production quantity and transfer can be incentives for truthful information sharing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Incentive contract,Asymmetric information,Supply chain collaboration,Production-planning decision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study examines the supply chain demand collaboration between a manufacturer and a retailer. We study how the timing of collaboration facilitates production decision of the manufacturer when the information exchanged in the collaboration is asymmetric. We investigate two collaboration mechanisms: ‘Too Little’ and ‘Too Late’, depending on the timing of information sharing between the manufacturer and the retailer. Our research results indicate that early collaboration as in the ‘Too Little’ mechanism leads to a stable production schedule, which decreases the need of production adjustment when production cost information becomes available; whereas a late collaboration as in the ‘Too Late’ mechanism enhances the flexibility of production adjustment when demand information warrants it. In addition, the asymmetric demand information confounds production decisions all the time; the manufacturer has to provide proper incentives to ensure truthful information sharing in collaboration. Information asymmetry might also reduce the difference in production decision between the ‘Too Little’ and ‘Too Late’ collaboration mechanisms. Numerical analysis is further conducted to demonstrate the performance implications of the collaboration mechanisms on the supply chain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, there have been several innovations to improve coordination and collaboration among supply chain partners in various industries. In particular, technology-enabled programs have been implemented to improve the availability of information and the efficiency of processes throughout the supply chain. Among these programs, the collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment (CPFR) approach is the most comprehensive and commonly adopted one. CPFR is a supply chain framework that includes a set of guidelines for formulating collaborative planning activities among supply chain parties. In essence, it calls for proactive management engagement in aligning goals and business processes, exchanging business information among parties, and coordinating business decisions in distribution and replenishment. CPFR approach is especially beneficial for industries with products that either are highly seasonal or have short life cycles, such as fashion apparels, personal computers and electronics products. In practice, many manufacturers such as Hitachi, Panasonic, Dell, Compaq, Nokia, and major retailers such as BestBuy (Ericson, 2002) have benefited from the adoption of such collaborative solutions. Successful CPFR programs reduce out-of-stocks, improve forecasting accuracy, reduce inventory, improve resource deployment, and facilitate asset utilization (Lehoux, D'amours, Frein, Langevin, &#38; Penz, 2011; Williams, Waller, Ahire, &#38; Ferrier 2014). Ultimately, CPFR provides a company with significant competitive advantages: increases its market share and improves its profitability (Burnette, 2010).However, there are still some major concerns in supply chain collaboration. These concerns have hindered the implementation of CPFR. The high cost of CPFR has limited its adoption in terms of both items and partners (Grocery Manufacturers of America –GMA, 2002). The collaboration process requires interactions among supply chain organizations at multiple levels—from the executive levels (in aligning goals, objectives, and business processes) to operational levels (in collaborating on forecasting and ordering activities). The high frequency of interactions at operational levels, especially when various products are involved, ties up planning resources and further increases the costs of collaboration. Therefore, it is a practical challenge to develop effective and cost-efficient collaboration solutions.Given that frequent collaborations are cost-prohibitive, and given that various pieces of information that are useful for supply chain planning are available to different trading partners at different times, it is understandable that timing of collaboration is a big concern in CPFR adoption. From a tactical perspective, the most important types of information that are shared among trading partners are “production plans, inventories and shipping information” and “true demand data” (Matchette and Seikel, 2004). For example, a retailer might share her insights regarding future demand with a manufacturer in return for the manufacturer's guarantee of supply. However, both production operation and market demand exhibit different degrees of uncertainty to trade partners at different times and make supply chain coordination a very complex task. In particular, if a retailer observes her demand early whereas her supplying manufacturer observes his production costs at a later time, it becomes a puzzle for the supply chain to determine the timing of the collaboration: should the manufacturer collaborate with and commit to the retailer at an early stage, or should the manufacturer delay collaboration until later?In addition, asymmetry of information is typical in supply-chain collaborations. The inclusion of such information in collaboration solutions inevitably introduces incentives that can distort supply chain decisions (e.g., Cachon &#38; Lariviere, 2001; Chakravarty &#38; Zhang, 2007). Therefore, it is a challenge to maintain the integrity of information in collaboration since parties often have opportunities to manipulate information in order to receive favorable outcomes for themselves. During the collaboration process, business savvy planners and managers tend to rely on their management insights and market specific information when making their decisions (Swaminathan &#38; Tayur, 2003). The very nature of the collaboration framework is therefore subject to the manipulation of information as a result of the ubiquitous existence of differences in objectives and interests among the involved organizations. Indeed, another major reason why firms are reluctant to adopt CPFR is their concern about “trust, verification and acceptance of the results between trading partners” (GMA, 2002). Information asymmetry therefore needs to be evaluated and addressed if trust is to be established in a long-term supply chain collaborative relationship.The purpose of this study is to investigate the impact of timing on supply-chain decisions regarding demand and production—given the asymmetry of information and the uncertainty of production costs. The study focuses on the establishment of truthful collaboration mechanisms. The specific research questions addressed in the study are:•How does information asymmetry affect production-planning decisions at different planning stages with different information available?How does information asymmetry affect the timing of the production decisions?How can production decisions convey incentives to extract truthful information under demand collaboration?This study addresses the above questions by considering two alternative collaboration mechanisms. The first mechanism focuses on demand forecasting in a scenario whereby a retailer observes her updated demand and is willing to share this information truthfully with a manufacturer (supplier) in return for an early guarantee of production quantity (available for future retailer order) and a financial incentive. Under this mechanism, although a future update of the manufacturer's production costs might improve the efficiency of supply chain production and distribution, the gains might be lower than the cost required to ‘capture’ this update within the collaboration process. This mechanism operates under the constraints of the production and demand information that is available at the planning stage, and hence is characterized as the ‘Too Little’ mechanism. The second mechanism allows the collaborative planning process to be carried out on the basis of all information. In this scenario, because certain information on production costs is available after demand update, waiting for the information to become available delays the lead-time sensitive planning process. This mechanism is therefore characterized as the ‘Too Late’ mechanism.By analyzing these two collaboration mechanisms under an available quantity-transfer contract form (the contract form or its variant has been considered in Cachon &#38; Lariviere, 2001; Donohue, 2000; Gurnani &#38; Tang, 1999; Iyer &#38; Bergen, 1997; Tsay, 1999) modeledafter the common demand collaboration process, we aim to improve the understanding of timing and information asymmetry on supply chain planning decisions. Numerical analysis is conducted to further demonstrate supply chain performance under different contracts. Some observations of the numerical analysis are reported and managerial implications are discussed.Our research results include several important aspects. (1) The extent to which production decisions respond to available information during demand collaboration depends on when and how the information is used. (2) Production quantity can be an effective incentive to extract truthful information, depending on information asymmetry. (3) The impact of timing in production decisions is reduced, counter-intuitively, in respect to the information asymmetry in demand collaboration.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study has established a supply-chain model, based on CPFR, to investigate two alternative collaboration mechanisms under conditions of asymmetric information. The two alternative collaboration mechanisms are: (i) collaborating early with limited information; and (ii) collaborating late with more information but potentially higher costs. These two supply-chain incentive mechanisms incorporate the asymmetric nature of the information exchanged in collaboration. In this research, we focus on the production quantity decisions made by the supply chain in response to the asymmetric information. This approach captures the behavioralaspects of collaboration management. The timing of information realization (and its utilization) has been studied in terms of its cost implications and its effectiveness in ensuring truthful information sharing in collaboration.We find that both the nature of the asymmetric information and the timing of the collaboration have significant effects on supply chain decisions. Specifically, (1) early collaboration (as illustrated in the ‘Too Little’ mechanism) leads to a stable production schedule without a later adjustment when more information becomes available; whereas late collaboration (as illustrated in the ‘Too Late’ mechanism) allows a flexible production adjustment when the observed demand signal is sufficiently high to justify the cost increase. (2) Under the ‘Too Little’ mechanism, the supply chain will produce less under asymmetric information if the demand distributions allow the collaboration mechanism to induce truthful information sharing through a monetary compensation. This usually happens when the retailer's observed-demand is relatively low. (3) Under the ‘Too Late’ mechanism, securing truthful demand information from the retailer leads to a smaller production adjustment when a monetary transfer is more effective than production quantity in capturing the information; a larger adjustment in production quantity will be needed when quantity is more effective under certain demand characteristics (usually the relatively high demand range). (4) The total production quantities under the two mechanisms differ according to the initial demand observation—a sufficiently small observed-demand at time 1 leads to a ‘Too Little’ initial production quantity that is smaller than the quantity under the ‘Too Late’ mechanism regardless of the cost type at time 2. (5) The existence of asymmetric information reduces the differences between the final production quantities under the two mechanisms, when the observed-demand is sufficiently high so that production quantities need to be adjusted.With regard to supply chain performance, numerical study reveals that ‘Too Little’ or ‘Too Late’ mechanism does not always dominate one another under the available quantity-transfer contracts. However, ‘Too Little’ mechanism tends to be more profitable when the mean of the demand information is high, or when the probability of High cost type is high. The ‘Too Late’ would be preferred when the opposite condition is true.In summary, this research contributes to the literature on supply chain collaboration by providing insights into how the timing of collaboration facilitates supply chain production decisions when the information exchanged is asymmetric. The study has shown that both the ‘Too Little’ and the ‘Too Late’ mechanisms are sensitive to the asymmetric nature of the information. More importantly, in the relatively low demand range, the presence of asymmetric information might actually cause the supply chain decisions to be more stable in the ‘Too Late’ mechanism than in the ‘Too Little’ mechanism. This result has significant implications for supply chain managers and provides support to exception-based control mechanisms suggested by CPFR. Although the purpose of supply chain collaboration is to extract as much information as possible to improve supply chain planning and management, a well-designed collaboration solution does not necessarily lead to more volatile requirements of production capacity. Whereas a less flexible production schedule inevitably affects costs elsewhere (for example, in distribution, transportation, and inventories), it can also serve as an incentive instrument to protect the integrity of the information-sharing process. Therefore, the expectation of that collaboration should result in a more responsive supply chain should be mitigated, in some cases, by the need to safeguard the truthfulness of the information and the stability of lower cost production.Supply chain managers should also note that the timing of the collaboration could be quite significant—depending on the nature of the information being shared and utilized in the planning process. Although the stylized nature of this study might mean that this result cannot be directly used to build supply chain collaboration solutions, the implications of the finding might be helpful in the design of better collaboration processes. Furthermore, other forms of contracting can be applied to customize collaboration and to increase the responsiveness and flexibility of supply chain decisions.Supply-chain collaboration is a ‘two-way street’ that requires a long-term perspective and trust-based relationships among supply-chain partners. We have shown that, by providing incentives (in production quantities and monetary compensation), downstream supply chain behavior can be controlled. It could be argued that upstream behavior can cause similar problems, if not more so, because upstream partner have more opportunities to manipulate information. A direct extension of this research would therefore be to consider a situation in which the manufacturer also has private information. Being an informed principal, the manufacturer then would be able to take advantage of his signaling capability to neutralize the privately informed retailer's position. Numerous industry reports have indicated such complicated situations hinder further implementation of CPFR. Extending our current research into this area should provide a more comprehensive understanding of supply chain collaboration.