@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulating the new British Electricity-Market Reform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper assesses through simulation the GB Electricity Market Reform.A system dynamics model supports the analysis of long-term effects of policy.Lessons from simulation indicate the effectiveness of policy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Simulation,Electricity markets,Environmental issues,Security of supply,Sustainability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The British government is implementing fully its novel Electricity Market Reform (GB EMR). Its objective, in line with European directives, aims at replacing existing nuclear and coal plant with low-carbon systems, to deliver reliable and affordable power. Though the GB EMR has proposed several policy instruments for meeting its objectives, and the academic literature has discussed the main issues, no known report includes a comprehensive and dynamic simulation exercise that assesses the extent of this profound and important initiative. This paper presents a system dynamics model that supports analysis of long-term effects of the various policy instruments that have been proposed in the GB EMR, focusing on environmental quality, security of supply and economic sustainability. Using lessons learned from simulation, the paper concludes that effectively achieving the GB EMR objectives requires this comprehensive intervention or a similar one that includes the promotion of low carbon electricity generation through the simultaneous implementation of various direct and indirect incentives, such as a carbon price floor, a Feed in Tariff (FIT) and a capacity mechanism.In the late 1980s, the British electricity industry pioneered the liberalisation of electricity markets in the industrialised world. The most important changes included the creation of a wholesale electricity market – based on long-term contracts and an electricity pool – and the separation of activities along the supply chain. The purpose of the government was to promote a competitive generation industry (Anderson & Cau, 2011; Bunn & Oliveira, 2007; Green, 2006; Newbery, 2006). In the late 1990s, a new set of reforms took place – New Electricity Trading Arrangements (NETA) – which, notably, removed centrally dispatched generation, seeking efficiency and transparency. In 2005, NETA was replaced by British Electricity Trading and Transmission Arrangements (BETTA), which incorporated Scotland within the England and Wales market (Green, 2010).During the past few years, the political trend in the British and European electricity markets has not only been directed at inducing a competitive electricity industry; but also seeking to achieve environmental targets and delivering secure, sustainable and affordable electricity (Newbery, 2011a). According to the EU goals, the UK commitment is to achieve 15 percent of its energy consumption from renewable sources by 2020; this target could be met with the support of renewable-based electricity generation (seeking up to a 30 percent contribution from renewables in the electricity generation sector) (National Grid, 2011). In addition, the Climate Change Act (2008) establishes that the UK 2050 target is to reduce 80 percent of Green House Gases (GHGs) with respect to the 1990 levels, where the power generation sector is the largest contributor to GHGs of all sectors (DECC, 2012a).Against this background, the withdrawal of 11.5 gigawatts of coal and oil plant is scheduled to occur by 2016, in order to follow the Large Combustion Plant Directive (LCPD), a European Directive. Further, plans are in train to close about 6.5 gigawatts of nuclear power by 2020, as these facilities are reaching the end of their operational life. In summary, before 2020 around 18 gigawatts of power will be shut down, about 22 percent of current capacity. To meet the decarbonisation and security-of-supply targets this power-generation gap should be filled by low-carbon capacity (Redpoint Energy, 2010).The Great Britain Electricity Market Reform (GB EMR) seeks three main objectives: (i) to achieve an efficient market, based on low-carbon sources in the power industry, (ii) to ensure security of supply, and (iii) to provide affordable prices to customers (DECC, 2011). These are conflicting objectives: although most renewable energies supply low-carbon electricity they do not contribute adequately to security of supply. In addition, as they are not yet competitive enough, their deployment must initially be supported with subsidies, which will be passed through to consumers (Moreno & Martínez, 2011).The Great Britain Electricity Market Reform (GB EMR) aims at achieving the aforementioned goals. Given the evolution of the British electricity industry, the EMR is grounded on market failures of the power sector. The first market failure is that carbon price does not sufficiently incentivise low-carbon generation, and the second one is that carbon price does not adequately promote security of supply (Helm, 2012). Therefore, under the present market conditions, investment in low-carbon technologies will not be resilient unless some subsidies are in place; this, because carbon prices will not deliver clear signals for the use of low-carbon technologies, given their relatively high capital cost and the dominance of gas and coal fired plant in the electricity mix (see Fig. 1). Accordingly, a reform such as the one proposed by the GB EMR seems necessary for achieving the right amount of investment.The British electricity industry confronts a number of challenges: (a) the retirement of about 18 gigawatts capacity before 2020 (EC, 2001), (b) electricity demand for transport and heating may increase, (c) the decarbonisation of the electricity sector entails the deployment of intermittent capacity (such as wind) and inflexible capacity (such as nuclear), and (d) the assessment of the demand response policies in the sector (Redpoint Energy, 2010).The main instruments being implemented by the GB EMR, to face such challenges, include:Carbon Market and Carbon Price Floor: The EU ETS market (European Union Emission Trading System) or carbon market has been mandatory for trading emission certificates in the UK. The demand side in this market includes all the polluting generators that buy emission allowances (Kirat & Ahamada, 2011) as they must offset each ton of CO2 emitted into the atmosphere by acquiring emission allowances in the EU ETS market or, alternatively, pay a penalty. As carbon prices in this market are dropping to very low levels, this may not offer a clear signal for promoting investment in low-carbon generation, and thus further legislation has introduced a Carbon-Price Floor in Britain. This should reduce volatility and induce the dismantling of carbon-intensive technologies more speedily, as well as potentially increasing electricity imports (DECC, 2011).Feed in Tariff with Contract for Difference (FIT CfD): Through the FIT CfD, the low-carbon generators will secure their revenues to a strike price, which is defined in long-term contracts. The low-carbon generators receive the electricity market price for their output, but they must pay or receive the difference between the strike price and a reference electricity market price (DECC, 2011). This scheme will be introduced for some technologies in 2017; the CfDs will be allocated through auctions (DECC, 2012b).Capacity Market: The required capacity is contracted through auctions that run alongside the energy market and CfDs. In this way the delivery body guarantees the necessary capacity margin to maintain the reliability standard defined by the government. The system operator will maintain a security margin to guarantee reliable supply (DECC, 2011).The preceding policies are supported by:Emission Performance Standard (EPS): The EPS establishes an emission threshold for new generators that use fossil fuels; the standard is 450 grams CO2 (carbon dioxide)/kilowatt hour. The EPS requires that new coal plants will be built with at least 300 megawatts of installed capacity with carbon capture and storage (CCS) (DECC, 2011).Renewable Obligation (RO): This instrument was introduced to increase the share of renewable generation; the government placed an obligation on licensed electricity suppliers to source a percentage of electricity from renewable sources. The RO will remain open to new generation until 2017, and between 2014 and 2017 the generators will be able to choose between CfD and RO (DECC, 2012b).On November 2012, the key aspects of the EMR were presented to Parliament in the proposed Draft Energy Bill (HM Government, 2012). The first FIT CfD contracts are expected by 2014; for the capacity market, the first auction is expected by 2014, for delivery in 2018/2019. The carbon price floor introduced from 1 April 2013 at around £15.70/tCO2, following straight line increases that will reach £30/tCO2 in 2020, rising to £70/tCO2 in 2030.In this context, the future of the British electricity sector is uncertain and poses questions, including: What are the long-term effects of the reform? What will the economic impact of the GB EMR policy be? Will the new policies guarantee investments in low-carbon electricity? How can security of supply be guaranteed under these complex conditions?The objective of this paper is to show how a simulation model, built specifically for this purpose, helps in responding to the preceding questions and thus in the assessment of: (i) the long-term effects of policy that promotes low-carbon power in the electricity sector in Britain, (ii) the economic impact of EMR policies and whether these deliver both affordable prices and security of supply, and also meet environmental goals, and (iii) the undesirable effects of the EMR in Britain.Much has been published in recent years regarding the GB EMR. Newbery (2011b) provides a clear explanation of why the EMR is necessary for reducing political failures while addressing market failures. It emphasises the necessity for the development of the EMR at least cost and proposes regulation for a proper long-term contract design for each low-carbon technology. The paper appraises the proposed FIT Contract for Differences (FIT CfD) as this increases costs to consumers and risks to investors, as well as likely windfall profits to investors. After the publication of the Draft Energy Bill more criticisms of the EMR have come about (Newbery, 2012), including: the weak long-term contract design, which does not seem promising; the carbon price floor efficiency; and the requirement for adequate R&D legislation on low-carbon technologies. Also, Helm (2012) presents complications embedded in the EMR and proposes a single auction (two-stage process) for both the FIT and the capacity mechanism; it also proposes the creation of a secondary market for the capacity mechanism.Foxon (2013) studies the long-term behaviour of the British electricity market to the year 2050, through scenario analysis. The proposed scenarios consider interactions between the actors in the market, government and civil society. Each of the posed scenarios takes into account the key institutional changes, roles of actors, and risks. The largest deployment of low-carbon generation is achieved in the scenario where market actors take a significant role. Low-carbon generation deployment is lowest in other scenarios, where the involvement of government or society is highest.Redpoint Energy (2010) analyses possible policies to be included in the EMR, using an investment decision simulator in which the build decision is based on long-run marginal costs LRMCs risk-adjusted and expected electricity prices. The LRMC risk-adjustment is computed through the Risk Adjustment Calculator, which considers a distribution of earnings for each investment. The expected prices are calculated using outturn results, such as demand, prices, costs, and CO2 emissions; the outturn results are taken from a volatility analysis model. Alternative scenarios and policy changes are also considered. DECC (2012c) developed an optimisation Dynamic Dispatch Model for analysing the impact of policies over investment decisions which are based on expected returns.The effect of policies for promoting the deployment of renewables and/or reducing CO2 emissions in the electricity sector has been studied by numerous authors that often use optimisation and simulation approaches, including Barreto and Kypreos (2004), Linares, Santos, and Pérez-Arriaga (2008), De Jonghe, Delarue, Belmans, and D'haeseleer (2009), Rathmann (2007), Sáenz de Miera, del Río González, and Vizcaíno (2008), Jaehn and Letmathe (2010), Boomsma, Meade, and Fleten (2012). From a different modelling perspective, this paper contributes to the analysis of carbon policy, globally, by proposing a system dynamics model (SD) for assessing the effect of policy changes in the electricity sector in Britain. In this context, SD modelling focuses on understanding how structure induces behaviour (Bunn & Larsen, 1994; Dyner, 2000), i.e. investment in cleaner technologies; and how these may lessen CO2 emission. This approach seems adequate, as SD facilitates the modelling of power markets' characteristics such as investment cycles that involve time delays, nonlinearities and feedbacks; these aspects are not always considered in classical market models, which suppose a long-run optimal equilibrium state (Olsina, Garcés, & Haubrich, 2006). Besides, alternative approaches such as econometrics usually depend on data of recent-past trends which in this case are not yet available.Much SD modelling on energy and environment has preceded this research. Ford, Vogstad, and Flynn (2007) assess wind-pattern investment after the implementation of a tradable green certificate in north-western USA. Ford (2008) evaluates the influence of a cap-and-trade carbon market in the Western US electricity sector. Zuluaga and Dyner (2007) study the effect of fiscal policies on the penetration of wind farms in Colombia. Also, Dyner, Franco, and Cardenas (2013) analyse the effect of internalising the emission of fossil fuel generators through a carbon tax. Finally, other more global models such as FREE (Feedback-Rich Energy-Economy climate model) incorporate the oil, gas, climate change dynamics and a carbon tax policy (Fiddaman, 1997); and the one by Sterman et al. (2012), grounded on economic-energy-environment simulations, considers long-term impacts on global greenhouse gas emissions. None of these, however, aim at closely assessing the broad carbon policy within the electricity sector at the national level.We present next the model that has been developed for evaluating the GB EMR policy, considering the basic elements of the market and the internalisation of emissions costs – Fig. 2shows the broad dynamic hypothesis. As may be observed, reserve margin depends on the difference between electricity demand and installed capacity; and this influences electricity price, which has an effect on electricity demand (negative feedback loop B1). The negative feedback loop B2 describes how electricity price provides a signal for capacity investment, which in the mid-term influences reserve margin. Feedback loop R1 discourages fossil technologies, which should favour carbon-free power. Feedback loop B3 shows the internalisation of environmental costs.Fig. 3shows the dynamic interaction of the capacity market and the electricity market. The negative feedback loops, B3 and B4, correspond to the capacity market dynamics. The future reserve margin depends on the projected installed capacity and expected electricity demand. If the future reserve margin decreases then the difference (between the reserve margin and the desired reserve margin) increases; triggering the capacity auctions, and as a consequence, the reserve margin increases (see feedback loop B3). The auctions also affect the price of electricity, which influences electricity demand and therefore the future electricity demand and reserve margin (see feedback loop B4).Here, the term reserve margin (system margin or capacity margin) means de-rated reserve margin. Note that “The de-rated reserve margin represents the excess of available generation capacity to peak demand and is expressed in percentage terms. Available generation takes into account the contribution of installed capacity at peak demand by adjusting it by the appropriate de-rating factors. The de-rating factors are derived from the analysis of the historical availability performance of the different generating technologies” (Ofgem, 2012).The dynamics and structural complexities of the British power market are taken into account in the detailed system dynamics model, where all modules are considered – model structure is described in Appendix A. Fig. 4shows the core of the system dynamics model in terms of stocks (i.e. power capacity and demand) and flows (i.e. demand growth and capacity investment rate).Power capacity is defined at two levels: capacity under construction and installed capacity. The construction initiation-rate increases due to expected profitability. The effect of profitability on investment is modelled by a step function that takes into account capacity to be built (x axis) and expected net profit of the technology (y axis). The effect of profitability on the disinvestment rate is similar but the expected net profit of the technology is negative. The most relevant model equations are discussed next. Stocks are integral equations that depend on incoming and outgoing flows, as can be seen below. Capacity under construction is fed by the flow from construction initiation-rate (Eq. (1)). At the same time, the construction completion-rate feeds installed capacity (Eq. (2)). The capacity market is added to the construction initiation rate (Eq. (3)).(1)Capacityunderconstructioni,t=Capacityunderconstructioni,0+∫(Constructioninitiationratei,t−Constructioncompletionratei,t)dt[megawatt](2)Installedcapacityi,t=Installedcapacityi,0+∫(Constructioncompletionratei,t−Depreciationratei,t−Disinvestmentrate)dt[megawatt](3)Investmentrateofcapacitymarketi,t=Requiredcapacityt+TT×18760hours·Availabilityfactori[megawatt/year]The expected net profit per kilowatt (Eqs. (4) and (5)) is the result of the calculated revenues from electricity sales minus the expected generation costs from fossil technologies or expected generation costs from low-carbon technologies. This net profit is divided by the investment cost per kilowatt, which is the levelised cost of the technology.(4)Expectedprofitfossili,t=Expectedelectricitypricei,t−Expectedgenerationcosti,t+Capacitypaymenti,tInvestmentcosti,t(5)Expectedprofitnon−fossili,t=Feedintariffi,t−Generationcosti,tInvestmentcosti,tIn each period, the system establishes whether the capacity market mechanism is triggered. This is based on the difference between expected system margin (projected demand vs. expected capacity) and the regulator's margin target (Eqs. (6) and (7)). The required capacity is calculated as indicated by Eq. (8).(6)Desiredcapacityt+T=Electricitypeakdemandt+T·×(1+Desiredcapacitymargin)[megawatthour](7)Totalinstalledcapacityt+T=∑iN[(Totalinstalledcapacityt,i+Totalnewinstalledcapacityt+T,i−Totalretiredinstalledcapacityi+T)·×8760hours·Availabilityfactori][megawatthour](8)Requiredcapacityt+T=Desiredcapacityt+T−Totalinstalledcapacityt+T[megawatthour]This section provides a large-complete description of the model used in this paper. We next discuss the model validation undertaken.Thorough model validation was conducted (Barlas, 1996; Sterman, 2000), but given that the paper's objective is to show the model's capability for policy assessment, this section focuses on the capacity of the model to reproduce the behaviour of the main endogenous variables: reserve margin, electricity price, emissions from power generation, and share of renewables out of the total electricity generation. The time horizon of the model is (2013–2030); the initial modelled values of the variables (for 2013) are compared with the historical values. In the case of the reserve margin, the simulated value in 2013 is around 6 percent, which coincides with the 2013 value (Ofgem, 2013). For electricity price, the initial simulated electricity price is around £53/megawatt hour; the electricity price in 2013 was around £57/megawatt hour according to (DECC, 2012a), hence the difference is small (around 7 percent). With respect to emissions, the model provides around 151 million tonnes of CO2, similar to the 153 million tonnes reported by DECC (2012a). Finally, the share of electricity from renewable sources produced in the model is 9.8 percent, not too far from the 9 percent value reported by (DECC, 2012a).In the mid-term, the final simulated values of the previous endogenous variables for some of the scenarios considered are in the range of variation of official projections (DECC, 2012b; Ofgem, 2013). For the scenarios where the capacity market is considered, the reserve margin is similar to the one projected by Ofgem (2013); likewise for the maximum wholesale electricity price attained (differences are due to a combination of considerations, e.g. learning curves of renewable technologies). Other validation tests carried out included dimensional consistency, equation adequacy and boundary conditions; also discussions with energy market experts. Appendix B contains the main relevant data that the model includes, and the different assumptions made. When conducting sensitivity analysis in Section 6, this paper examines model validation further.Fig. 5 shows that when the simulation time horizon is increased from 17 years (2013–2030) to 27 years (2013–2040), a cyclical behaviour is notable in all scenarios. While for the BAU scenario the capacity margin fluctuates at low levels, between 2 and 6 percent, for all other scenarios the range is from 6 to over 12 percent. Note that the CPF and the CPF + FIT + CM policies confer a greater stability and reliability on the system.The model incorporates three policy instruments and four simulation scenarios (Table 1). As established in Appendix B on model assumptions and data, all scenarios assume that the carbon market and emission performance standard are operating as these have been activated in recent years. This paper models four scenarios: First, in the Business as Usual (BAU) scenario, no policy instruments differing from the carbon market and emission performance standard are considered. As the BAU scenario seems a priori insufficient to attain the decarbonisation targets of the UK government, a second scenario incorporates a carbon price floor (CPF) into the BAU scenario. Furthermore, a third scenario complements the preceding one by including the FIT mechanism (CPF + FIT). Finally, the fourth scenario adds the Capacity Mechanism or Capacity Market (CPF + FIT + CM). The choice of order for the different scenarios aims at identifying policy completeness or redundancy.Medium- to long-term simulation results for each scenario are discussed separately, taking into account the dynamics of the most relevant system indicators: security of supply (reserve margin), environmental quality (carbon emissions and generation from renewables), and affordability (electricity price or unit electricity cost). It has been chosen in this way with the purpose of gauging policy costs and benefits.As described in the model assumptions and data in Appendix B, all scenarios are characterised by the on-going closure of coal and oil plant due to the LCPD. This explains why, in the BAU and CPF scenarios, the capacity margin falls greatly, threatening a blackout by as early as 2016 (Fig. 6) – this threat has been reported in the Electricity Capacity Assessment Report (Ofgem, 2012).In all scenarios, the investment and disinvestment dynamics induce fluctuations in reserve margin and other variables (as discussed ahead). Indeed, these fluctuations take place because of both capacity retirements and increases in demand-induced reserve margin drops, the latter followed by time-lags in building new capacity. This has been previously indicated in Fig. 2 (two coupled balancing feedback loops, involving delays).In the BAU scenario, the cyclical behaviour previously discussed is notorious; moreover given the insufficient incentives for capacity expansion and the rapid closure of some plant (coal plants), because of the disincentives of the carbon market as well as the emission performance standard, generation will not meet demand in the near future (see year 2016 in Fig. 6). Likewise, a period of power outage occurs between 2022 and 2025 as a consequence of the lack of adequate incentives to ensure security of supply under the decarbonisation era. As incentives for capacity expansion are fragile, when margin drops then only small investments in gas and onshore wind power plants are undertaken. Clear disincentives and weak incentives induce blackouts or very low reserve margin in the BAU scenario. Fig. 6 also shows that under the CPF scenario the system may face blackouts, though with less frequency. This is the case as the CPF leaves more room for investment in onshore wind capacity than in the BAU scenario. Although slightly more positive than the BAU scenario, CPF is not sufficient to avoid blackouts in 2016, which indicates that the policy is deficient. The CPF + FIT scenario provides a clearer signal for incentivizing the deployment of low-carbon technologies, especially onshore wind, offshore wind, biomass and solar energy. While this scenario presents a oscillatory reserve margin, with the addition of the capacity mechanism, the CPF + FIT + CM policy prompts better system performance from the perspective of security of supply, as the system margin oscillates close to the 10 percent target set by the regulator.Figs. 7 and 8show the evolution of carbon emissions and the percentage of renewable sources out of the total electricity generated for the four scenarios that are being considered. In the BAU and CPF scenarios, while carbon emissions rise as a result of electricity demand growth, electricity generation from renewables is lowest – remaining far from the 30 percent target set for 2020. Both the CPF + FIT and the CPF + FIT + CM scenarios show great progress but fail, by a small margin, to meet the 30 percent target. The environmental outputs show that the CPF + FIT + CM scenario is environmentally better that the CPF + FIT scenario.What is the cost of the reform? Fig. 9 shows the evolution of the average unit cost of electricity under the four different scenarios being studied. In this context, where intermittency is high, given the large participation of renewable sources an energy only market – scenarios without capacity mechanism – does not seem to be a good choice for the regulator as price volatility provides an inadequate signal to investors, which results in a lack of security of supply. In fact, in spite of the addition of the CPF, which consequently raises the electricity price (see Fig. 9), the system does not bring sufficient investment and induces blackouts, as previously indicated in Fig. 6. Note that although the first two scenarios result in cheaper electricity cost most of the time, they do not account for the cost of the black- or brown-outs that would occur during the latter part of the 2010s and early 2020s. The CPF + FIT and CPF + FIT + CM scenarios will avoid blackouts and would achieve the goals of the reform at a cost that might increase by 2 percent per annum in the case of CPF + FIT and a 4 percent per annum in the case of CPF + FIT + CM, in real terms, with respect to the base of about £50/megawatt hour. In the last scenario considered (CPF + FIT + CM), although CM raises the cost of electricity, oscillations of the average unit cost of electricity and reserve margin are damped.The evolution of the average electricity costs for the different scenarios evidences the long-run cyclical dynamics of the electricity market. Only when a capacity mechanism is incorporated the reserve margin behaviour is largely stabilised around the regulator's target – in this case, average electricity cost is stabilised as well.To assess the economic impact of energypolicies on the household and industry sectors, the paper considers first the impact on households. For this, two pieces of information are required: (a) the average household electricity consumption per year according to DECC (2013b), and (b) the average unit cost of electricity under the CPF + FIT + CM scenario, together with the total average household expenditure in the UK, taken from Advani, Johnson, Leicester, and Stoye (2013). With this information, we calculate the economic impact on households, which is measured as the ratio between the average household electricity expenditure per year and the total average household expenditure per year. From simulations, it was found that for 2030, under the CPF + FIT + CM scenario, the average household electricity expenditure represents 2.05 percent of the total average household expenditure, between 2013 and 2030 – an increase of 0.78 percentage points (seeTable 2). This average unit cost of electricity does not include the transmission, distribution and other charges that are components of the average household electricity bill. The average unit cost refers to generation cost and to the costs of the proposed policies for each scenario in this paper.Second, to assess the economic impact of policy reforms on the industrial sector, the paper considers the average unit cost of electricity in the CPF scenario and CPF + FIT + CM scenario. During the simulation period, the average unit cost of electricity in the presence of all the policies increases around 14 percent with respect the base-case scenario, which is significant, though lower than other analyses of BIS (2014). However energy-intensive industries are getting support from government to reduce the impact of the GB EMR (BIS, 2014).Figs. 10–13show the power capacity resulting from the different scenarios. The BAU scenario induces the withdrawal of coal, to be replaced by gas, because of the emission performance standard and the carbon market; and even these two succeed in promoting some renewables. However it does not guarantee a reliable reserve margin as neither gas technology provides a sufficient return (they operate infrequently) and renewables are not competitive enough. In the CPF scenario, coal is phased-out and gas is discouraged, while renewables take a larger portion of the market – but these measures do not avoid blackouts. In the case of the CPF + FIT scenario, the more intermittent capacity decreases the system margin; this reduction involves increasing electricity price, which provides a clear signal for investment in gas powered plant – the only profitable fossil technology – as the other profitable technologies, renewable based, take FIT. Under this scenario, the previously described cyclical investment behaviour is observed, and during some periods the reserve margin oscillates considerably.Sensitivity analysis enables us to address further questions, and make comparisons with the British assessment report (Ofgem, 2013): What value for the carbon price will ensure security of supply in the CPF scenario? And how much of the renewable deployment achieved might be attributed to FIT and to CPF in the CPF + FIT scenario? With respect to the first question, the carbon market together with the carbon price floor has been shown to be insufficient to promote the deployment of low carbon technologies. Simulations indicate that the floor should be around £475/tCO2 to make low carbon investment attractive and fill the energy gap between supply and demand. This floor level for carbon price would be extremely high and therefore unlikely; consequently, carbon markets alone cannot, in the short-term, provide the security margin required by the system.In relation to the second question, regarding the separate effect of FIT and CPF, this paper models a fifth scenario where only a FIT policy is added to BAU scenario, with the aim of comparing the FIT scenario against the CPF scenario and the CPF + FIT scenario. Fig. 14shows how FIT promotes renewables with no need of CPF, thus FIT seems to provide sufficient incentive to boost renewable deployment. However, Fig. 15indicates that CPF is required for boosting the reserve margin and improving system reliability. Here the CPF increases the average generation cost, improving the profitability conditions of technologies, i.e. gas plant can extend its life-cycle, given the profits yielded in this case.At this point, we have shown through simulations that even when a CPF policy could promote some low-carbon technologies, its corresponding cost will be too high. Thus, CPF on its own is insufficient to meet environmental targets. Nevertheless if FIT is implemented extensively then it is possible to achieve a cleaner power mix at a lower price, though with low reserve margin.This paper uses the system dynamics simulation methodology for learning about the GB Electricity Market Reform. A number of intertwined lessons are drawn from this research in at least three areas: policy assessment, modelling insights and simulation.This paper discusses scenarios where different policy instruments are explored; it is clear from the analysis that the relationship between policy instruments and modelling outputs is not linear.Simulation results show that if carbon markets are in place and no intervention is undertaken (i.e. GB EMR or similar), blackouts will occur as a result of lack of incentives for filling the energy gap that results from the closure of existing power generating capacity over the next decade. Thus, if government does not intervene in the electricity market, not only would emission-reduction and renewable-generation targets fail to be achieved but, worse, the system will be in serious trouble. The lack of power investment as a result of inadequate incentives is a market failure that suggests the need for the reform; and this should provide incentives that the current market conditions do not deliver.In the carbon price floor (CPF) scenario, the paper examines whether carbon markets with a CPF are adequate to guarantee security of supply and the deployment of low-carbon technologies. Results show that the system would not improve much (though emissions would be lower, and the electricity generated from renewable sources would increase), because the CPF does not provide a clear signal for achieving the required investment in new capacity, resulting in blackouts. Besides, when exploring whether raising CPF levels would deliver appropriate signals for security of supply, this research finds that these have to be so high that they would be unsustainable for consumers when electricity prices become unaffordable.From our results we also found that FIT is a key instrument for obtaining the deployment of low-carbon systems, and consequently emission reductions. Indeed when both instruments, CPF and FIT, coexist, the low-carbon deployment is attributable in major part to FIT. However the role of the CPF should not be ignored because it contributes by increasing the cost of generation by conventional fossil technologies.Results show that a policy that includes a carbon market with both CPF and FIT will promote low-carbon systems and also that the co-existence of these instruments improves security of supply conditions. With the addition of the Capacity Mechanism (CM) policy instrument, the system supply is more reliable; therefore a scenario with the CPF, FIT, and CM is proposed. The introduction of FIT dampens the fluctuations that result from the investment cycles; but the addition of the CM reduces completely the fluctuations in reserve margin and electricity price produced by the investment cycles, and it confers long-term market stability.Under the CPF + FIT and CPF + FIT + CM scenarios the environmental targets on emissions reduction and renewable generation would not be achieved, but would still make important progress. In these scenarios the target of generating 30 percent of electricity from renewable sources in 2030 is not achieved, but it is achieved in 2032; and the emissions are reduced for 2030 to 60 Million tonnes of CO2 instead of 49 Million tonnes of CO2, as the target indicates.The aim of this research was to learn from simulation modelling of the GB EMR, and from this approach draw conclusions on the efficiency, effectiveness, completeness and robustness of the reform.Simulation results show that policy efficiency might be attained when policy is comprehensive and, in this sense, complete. When policy seeks different objectives, under uncertain futures, it is necessary to consider worst-case scenarios; robustness, as discussed in this paper, is largely accounted by considering de-rated capacity and administered investment with the support of the capacity mechanism. For the purpose of effectiveness, policy should include carbon markets with a carbon price floor, a capacity mechanism and Feed in Tariffs. Under these conditions the low carbon deployment is most extensive, the targets on emission reduction and renewable generation are close to being achieved, and the security of supply is guaranteed. However, it is the most expensive policy as this involves assuming the costs associated with the Feed in Tariff, the capacity mechanism, and increases caused by a carbon price floor.Effective policy also has to be focused. Simulation results indicate that carbon price floor, though effective in discouraging fossil technologies, is not efficient for meeting the goal of renewables; though it does contribute to the deployment of some clean power capacity.Further policy options might have been considered, including those directed at the demand side, but these go beyond the focus of this research. Lessons learned here leave room for assessing the viability of extrapolating to other countries or regions policy being implemented in Great Britain, with possible adjustments, given the specificities observed elsewhere.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
