@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Inventory management for stochastic lead times with order crossovers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider the order-up-to policy with a stochastic lead time and order crossovers.We find the distribution of the number of open orders.The inventory distribution when orders and work-in-progress are correlated is found.We show minimal safety stock and inventory variance do not lead to minimum costs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic lead-times,Safety stock,Order cross-over,Order-up-to policy,Global supply chains,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study the impact of stochastic lead times with order crossover on inventory costs and safety stocks in the order-up-to (OUT) policy. To motivate our research we present global logistics data which violates the traditional assumption that lead time demand is normally distributed. We also observe that order crossover is a common and important phenomenon in real supply chains. We present a new method for determining the distribution of the number of open orders. Using this method we identify the distribution of inventory levels when orders and the work-in-process are correlated. This correlation is present when demand is auto-correlated, demand forecasts are generated with non-optimal methods, or when certain ordering policies are present. Our method allows us to obtain exact safety stock requirements for the so-called proportional order-up-to (POUT) policy, a popular, implementable, linear generalization of the OUT policy. We highlight that the OUT replenishment policy is not cost optimal in global supply chains, as we are able to demonstrate the POUT policy always outperforms it under order cross-over. We show that unlike the constant lead-time case, minimum safety stocks and minimal inventory variance do not always lead to minimum costs under stochastic lead-times with order crossover. We also highlight an interesting side effect of minimizing inventory costs under stochastic lead times with order crossover with the POUT policy—an often significant reduction in the order variance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Global sourcing often allows access to low-cost supply but is frequently associated with long and variable lead times. These longer and more variable lead times bring with them a number of complications and potential pitfalls, from both the cost and the service perspective (Stalk, 2006). In particular, inventory planners must now account for uncertainty in both demand and lead time when determining safety stock levels (Warburton & Stratton, 2002).We add to the literature on planning with stochastic lead times by formulating and testing a calculation of safety stock that reflects these real-world complications. Our method allows for order crossover and correlation between pipeline inventory and replenishment orders, a factor often ignored. We introduce a novel approach to better understand the distribution of outstanding orders when lead times are uncertain.This research was motivated by both practical and analytical issues. Practically, we have tracked and analyzed logistics data for global supply chains for both major forwarders and retailers, and are struck by the violations of the lead time normality assumption—see Fig. 1. Furthermore, most inventory models do not allow for order crossover where shipments are received in a different sequence from which they were dispatched, yet variable shipment delays, clerical errors, and random custom inspections can easily delay a shipment long enough for others to pass it. Robinson, Bradley, and Thomas (2001) also provide real-world examples of order crossover. Another investigation we have conducted is summarized in Figs. 2 and 3. Fig. 2 shows the distribution lead time between a supplier in Colorado, USA and a customer in Shenzhen, China. Fig. 3 tracks how many queue positions each shipment gained or lost between the date-sorted list of dispatches and the date-sorted list of arrivals. There are clearly a significant amount of order crossovers—nearly 40% of orders cross.From the analytical perspective, two prescriptions for inventory management are widely disseminated. These approaches use either an average (or maximum) lead time in the constant lead time reorder point solution or assume that the demand during the lead time is normally distributed and then use the mean and variance of a random sum of random variables to determine the reorder point. Neither approach is well-suited to global supply chains with long transit times and multiple hand-offs. Rationalizations have been made for what is clearly a suspect assumption (Chopra, Reinhardt, & Dada, 2004; Eppen & Martin, 1988; Tyworth & O’Neill, 1997).This paper develops an exact theoretical treatment of the impact of the stochastic lead times with order crossover on the probability density function (pdf) of the net stock levels. As we progressed in our investigations, we also began questioning the well-known assertion (Kaplan, 1970) that the order-up-to (OUT) model is always a good fit for global supply chains. We find that, when there is order crossover, lower average inventories are possible when the ordering strategy follows the linear proportional order-up-to (POUT) policy (Disney & Lambrecht, 2008). We also became aware that the orders and work-in-progress (WIP) are cross-correlated, an effect that does not happen under the assumptions of independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) demand, minimum mean square error forecasting, and OUT replenishment. However, whenever any one of these assumptions is relaxed, there is a co-variance term that must be accounted for. We believe this is the first treatment of this effect in the literature and this innovation allows one to relax a wide range of modeling assumptions in the study of order crossovers.In the constant lead time case it is known that piecewise linear convex inventory holding and backlog costs are minimized when the safety stock is set to the critical newsvendor fractile. In this case, the replenishment polices should be selected and designed to minimize inventory variance and the optimal policy is the OUT policy. The minimal cost design also leads to minimal safety stock requirements. We will show that in the stochastic lead time case with order crossovers these insights do not always hold. While it remains true that optimal availability is the critical fractile, we find a linear policy that is always more economical than the OUT policy which sometimes requires less, sometimes more, safety stock. The inventory levels under our policy have less variance than the OUT policy. As an additional side benefit, our solution significantly reduces the variance of the replenishment orders even though our objective function is only concerned with inventory related costs.Thestructure of the paper is as follows. After a review of the relevant literature (Section 2), we discuss some of the major assumptions and choices that we make in Section 3. We discuss the POUT/OUT policy with a constant lead time in Section 4.1. This establishes the notation for the stochastic lead time analysis. Developing further the approach of Robinson et al. (2001), we provide a new method to determine the distribution of the number of open orders for the stochastic lead time in Section 4.2. We then study the POUT policy and present a new method for determining the pdf of the inventory levels in Section 4.3. This method allows for order crossover and is required as the orders and the WIP become correlated in the POUT policy. Section 5 presents a numerical example. Section 6 applies our theory to the empirical lead time distributions in Figs. 1 and 2. Section 7 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
As globalization accelerates, lengthening supply chains bring complications and pitfalls associated with increasing uncertainty in both demand and lead time. We determined how these characteristics actually impact the safety stock required to minimize inventory holding and backlog costs. We began by presenting global logistics data that violated the traditional normality assumption about lead times. We also provided a real-world example of order crossover.We introduced a new approach for calculating the distribution of open orders. This allowed us to formulate and test a method that resulted in an exact solution for the safety stock calculation. Since the enumeration of open orders is combinatoric in nature, it explicitly allowed for order crossover. We showed that using the POUT strategy always results in lower inventory costs when stochastic lead times with order crossover are present. Our model settings were motivated by real-world settings and consisted of a discretely distributed lead time and a continuously distributed demand process.Our novel contribution is a new method to obtain the distribution of the inventory levels in the presence of correlation between the WIP and orders, via the so-called scaled shortfall distribution. This builds upon another unique contribution—the M-matrix and the associated method to determine the probability of the pipeline being in each of its possible2k+states. Furthermore, we considered the impact of correlation in orders and the covariance between orders and WIP in a stochastic lead time setting with order crossovers. Our methodology can be used to investigate the impact of auto-correlated demand, non-MMSE forecasting methods, more sophisticated replenishment policies, and information sharing strategies.In the constant lead time case, or the non-crossover stochastic lead time case,β=1will minimize the variance (or equivalently the standard deviation) of the inventory levels and result in the minimum inventory costs when the safety stock is set to the critical fractile (Brown, 1963). However, in the stochastic lead time with order crossover case, minimizing the variance of the inventory levels, by tuning β, will not always result in minimal costs. While the optimal β*, may be near unity, it is never unity and changes significantly with the availability target, see Fig. 9.The stochastic lead time case with order crossover results in a surprising paradox. Minimizing inventory costs does not always lead to minimum safety stocks. However, the relationship between holding and backlog costs and the availability achieved at the most economical solution does still hold. This leads to an important insight: costs should be used to design the system because focusing on minimizing inventory variance, or safety stocks, can lead to an incorrectly specified system. We conclude that care must be taken when determining safety stock requirements under a stochastic lead time with order crossovers. One cannot simply use the first two moments of the inventory distribution; one needs to use whole pdf because the distribution of the inventory levels is multi-modal.We have demonstrated that the OUT policy is not the optimal policy when order crossover exists, as the linear POUT economically outperforms it. We have not proven the optimality of the POUT policy itself. Indeed it is known that the optimal policy is non-linear, see Srinivasan et al. (2011). However, the POUT policy has a long history and has been successfully implemented in practice. See Potter and Disney (2010) for details of an implementation at the UK grocery retailer, Tesco and Disney et al. (2013) for an implementation in a global printer manufacturer.We note that our model/approach takes no account of state dependent or autocorrelated lead times. Seasonal congestion in ports is a well observed phenomena and this would lead one to suspect that lead times are positively auto-correlated. Furthermore, in order to avoid an imminent stock-out, companies may air-freight cargo leading to a lead time that is a function of the state of the supply chain. We have also not considered the consequences of non-normal demands. If demand is not normally distributed, then the complete pdf of each sub-process has to be obtained. Presumably this could be achieved with convolution but this it is beyond the scope of the paper. These issues remain interesting areas for future work.