@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Emergency lateral transshipments in a two-location inventory system with positive transshipment leadtimes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We suggest a transshipment policy based on the timing of all outstanding orders.We relax the common assumption of exponential leadtimes.We incorporate positive transshipment leadtimes.This paper extends the model considered in Moinzadeh (1989).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory control,Lateral transshipments,Emergency replenishments,Pooling,Doubly stochastic Poisson process,,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a single-echelon continuous review inventory system for spare parts with two parallel locations. Each location faces independent Poisson demand and backorders are allowed. In this paper we consider the possibility of lateral transshipments between the locations. The transshipment leadtime is positive and deterministic, and there is an additional cost for making a transshipment. We suggest a transshipment policy which is based on the timing of all outstanding orders, and develop and solve a heuristic model by using theory and concepts from doubly stochastic Poisson processes and also partial differential equations. A simulation study indicates that our heuristic works very well, and that the relative cost increase of disregarding the transshipment leadtime may be quite high. Our results also indicate that it is, in general, worth the effort of reducing the transshipment leadtime, even if it is already relatively short.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Consider a manufacturing company that provides its customers with spare parts. For example, the packaging-machine producing company Tetra Pak Technical Service acts also as a provider of spare parts to its customer’s when a random failure has occurred in a packaging machine situated at a customer site. When a failure at a machine has occurred it is crucial to replace the failured spare part quickly in order to maximize the up-time of the customers production system. Evidently, long waiting times for spare parts cause long production stand stills, which in turn lead to large costs in terms of loss of production and revenue. Another type of costs that are common in these kind of production systems are inventory perishing costs. Consider for example packaging of dairy products. Then, due to the nature of the product, if the production down-time exceeds a certain time limit, a whole batch of the dairy product is wasted. Consequently, the backorder cost in such situations may be very high.A possible option to reduce downtimes at the customer sites is to introduce lateral transshipments between the customer sites. Given the development of information systems it is possible and relatively cheap to keep track of units in supply chains. For instance, by using so called RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) it is possible to update residual leadtimes continuously. Very few earlier papers dealing with lateral transshipments use information about the timing of outstanding orders. Moreover, most earlier papers in this area assume that transshipment leadtimes are negligible. The most relevant papers in connection with our model are Axsäter (2003a) and Yang et al. (2013). Axsäter (2003a) considers a continuous time inventory system with negligible transshipment leadtimes where lateral transshipments are allowed. Assuming full information about the state of the system (such as residual replenishment leadtimes) an optimal transshipment rule is derived given that no further transshipments will take place. As a heuristic, this rule is repeatedly used. Hence, in Axsäter (2003a) a decision to make a transshipment is based on the timing of outstanding orders and the status of inventory levels. Yang et al. (2013) are dealing with a spare parts inventory system with positive transshipment leadtimes. Using a heuristic they introduce so called customer oriented service levels, which means that a customer order is assumed to be satisfied if it is completed within a certain time window. Other papers that assume non-negligible transshipment leadtimes are, e.g., Wong et al. (2006) and Reijnen et al. (2011).This paper extends the literature in several directions. First, we provide a new way of modeling lateral transshipments in inventory systems with constant replenishment leadtimes based on information about the age of the units in the system. We also relax the assumption of negligible transshipment leadtimes by assuming a constant positive transshipment leadtime. Although our model is quite similar to the model presented in Yang et al. (2013), there are some important differences. First, our solution procedure is more general. In fact, it turns out that the solution method in Yang et al. (2013) is a special case of our approach. Yang et al. (2013) use the results obtained from a model without lateral transshipments and then replace the demand rates with adjusted demand rates when incorporating lateral transshipments in the model. However, in our model we derive the exact solution when allowing lateral transshipments conditioned on the adjusted demand rates. In this paper we consider backorder costs (or sometimes called down-time costs) instead of a pre-specified target service level. To the best of our knowledge, it is relatively common in practice that service providing companies in situations like this one, are obliged to pay penalty fees, per unit of time, whenever they cannot deliver service as agreed upon. Therefore, we consider time dependent down-time costs instead of customer oriented service levels. Another reason for doing this is the practical problem of measuring service levels (e.g., fill rates) effects over a short period of time. To measure fill rates correctly, historical data for a relatively long interval of time are needed, which may be a problem at many companies when evaluating the performance of the system after a relatively short period of time.This paper can also be viewed as an extension and generalization of the model considered in Moinzadeh (1989). Moinzadeh (1989) considers an (S − 1, S) inventory system with Poisson demand where it is assumed that an arriving customer is backordered with a given probability α and therefore lost with probability 1 − α. Under these assumptions Moinzadeh (1989) develops an exact solution for the expected total cost. In this paper, we will as a spin-off from our lateral transshipment model develop an exact solution to a slightly more general version than considered in Moinzadeh (1989).The literature concerning lateral transshipments in inventory systems is relatively rich. For a very recent and extensive review see, e.g., Paterson et al. (2011). In general, inventory models including lateral transshipments are considerably more difficult to analyze than their counterparts with regular supply. This is the case since the state (e.g., inventory on hand, residual leadtimes of items, etc.) at the receiving location depends on the state at the sending location, and vice versa. In fact, it is interesting to note that no (non-trivial) exact solution exists for models considering continuous review centralized inventory systems with lateral transshipments and deterministic replenishment leadtimes. However, when the replenishment leadtimes are assumed to follow an exponential distribution (which is quite artificial), there exist several models dealing with lateral transshipments that provide exact solutions. This simple fact demonstrates the extreme complexity of the problem when assuming the more realistic case of non-exponential leadtimes.As mentioned, there is a large family of papers concerning continuous review centralized inventory systems with lateral transshipments, and a majority of these are based on exponentially distributed replenishment leadtimes and negligible transshipment leadtimes. Axsäter (1990) falls under this category and uses a queueing theoretical approach in order to derive expressions for fill rates, etc. Some other papers in the same spirit as Axsäter (1990) are, e.g., Alfredsson and Verrijdt (1999),Grahovac and Chakravarty (2001),Kukreja et al. (2001) and Olsson (2009); 2010). In a recent paper, Zhang and Archibald (2011) develop a semi-Markov decision model with lateral transshipments and phase-type distributed leadtimes. Since a phase-type distributed random variable approaches a deterministic value when the number of phases grows larger, this is an interesting extension to the common assumption of exponentially distributed leadtimes. Another recent paper, Van Wijk et al. (2009), derive the optimal transshipment policy assuming exponential replenishment leadtimes.A related family of inventory systems concerns so called emergency replenishments instead of lateral transshipments. In these systems it is possible to replenish from an outside supplier, which provides a fast emergency replenishment but incur additional costs. In fact, it turns out that the model developed for lateral transshipments in this paper can also be used for the purpose of analyzing inventory systems with emergency replenishments. A few papers related to ours, considering emergency replenishments that take pipeline information into account are, e.g., Song and Zipkin (2009) and Howard et al. (2014).In the next section, we formulate our model in detail and give a list of relevant notation. In Section 3 we present our solution technique, and in Section 4 we use this technique in order to derive expressions for various performance measures. In Section 5 we evaluate our model in a numerical study and give some implications from both a tactical and strategical point of view. Finally, in Section 6, a concluding discussion is provided.We consider a single-echelon continuous review inventory system with two parallel locations (location 1 and location 2). Each location faces independent Poisson demand and backorders are allowed. In this paper we will concentrate on spare part products, which are often expensive low demand products. This means that it is reasonable to use (S − 1, S) replenishment policies. Hence, in a standard situation without lateral transshipments, location i orders directly from an outside supplier when a demand occurs at location i, and the order will arrive after a fixed leadtime. Let us introduce some useful notation:λi−CustomerarrivalintensityatlocationiLi−Regularreplenishmentleadtimeforlocationiℓ−Transshipmentleadtime(ℓ<Li)Si−Order-up-tolevelatlocationiILi−Inventorylevelatlocationihi−Holdingcostperunitandunittimeatlocationibi−Backordercostperunitandunittimeatlocationiτ−Transshipmentcostperunit≜−Equalsperdefinitionx+−max(0,x)x−−max(0,−x)Po(m)−Poissondistributionwithmeanm.In this paper we consider the possibility of lateral transshipments between two parallel locations. Since we want to utilize information about the pipeline situation, let us keep track of the ages of items in the system. For the sake of convenience and clarity we separate the system into two sub-systems. Sub-system 1 consists of the items in stock at location 1 and the items which have not yet arrived at location 1 from the supplier. Sub-system 2 is defined in the same way as sub-system 1, but for location 2 instead. LetT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i),i ∈ {1, 2}, represent the age of the items in sub-system i which are not assigned for waiting customers, i.e., the Siyoungest items in sub-system i (note that the other items in the sub-system are already assigned for waiting customers). We defineT1(i)as the age of the oldest item andTSi(i)as the age of the youngest item. Hence, we have the order0≤TSi(i)<TSi−1(i)<⋯<T1(i)<∞. In this model we assume that the age of an item is measured from the time an order for an item is placed.As mentioned, most previous papers concerning lateral transshipments make the simplifying assumption that transshipment leadtimes are negligible. In this paper we will, however, relax this assumption and assume that transshipment leadtimes are positive and fixed. Obviously, additional problems arise regarding how to construct a reasonable transshipment rule. In earlier papers where the transshipment leadtime is disregarded it is commonly assumed that a transshipment is always realized as soon as an arriving customer faces zero stock on hand, while another location has positive stock on hand. This is the classical complete pooling strategy. However, in the case with a positive transshipment leadtime it may be unwise to initiate a transshipment from location i to location j if an outstanding order from the supplier is arriving to location j very soon. In this case a lateral transshipment may give rise to extra costs instead of reducing costs. Hence, we need to construct a more sophisticated transshipment rule when transshipment leadtimes are non-negligible. In this paper we consider the following heuristic transshipment policy:Policy 1A lateral transshipment is realized from location i to location j if the following two conditions are satisfied when a customer arrives at location j.(i)Location i has positive stock on handT1(j)<Lj−ℓIf the two conditions in Policy 1 are not satisfied when a customer arrives at location j, a regular order is placed. Policy 1 is quite intuitive and states that a lateral transshipment is only triggered if the residual leadtime for the oldest item (not assigned for a waiting customer) in sub-system j is longer than the transshipment leadtime. It should be emphasized that Policy 1 is not optimal. For example, it may be unwise to make a transshipment in situations where the residual leadtime at location j is just slightly longer than ℓ. Hence, condition (ii) in Policy 1 could be changed toT1(j)<ϵ,where ε > 0 is a decision variable that should be optimized. Another possibility, which is not reflected in Policy 1, would be to only allow a transshipment if the sending location has sufficiently many units in stock (i.e., the sending location might want to hold back some inventory for its own customers). However, in order to keep the model simple and tractable we will only consider Policy 1 in this paper and leave possible policy improvements for future work. It is also important to realize that, in our model, it is not possible to use techniques based on exponential leadtimes since no useful information can be obtained about residual leadtimes in such cases (due to the memoryless property).In order to analyze the system and develop explicit formulations for expected costs we will, as an approximation, treat the two sub-systems as independent of each other and derive the joint density ofT1(1),T2(1),…,TS1(1)andT1(2),T2(2),…,TS2(2),respectively.In view of Policy 1, it is clear that when an arriving customer at location i finds0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓ,a transshipment from location j is realized if location j has stock on hand. Hence, given the fill rate at location j,P(T1(j)≥Lj),the average demand rate at location i isλi−λiP(T1(j)≥Lj)for0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓ. Similarly, if an arriving customer at location i findsLi−ℓ≤T1(i)<Li,no transshipment is realized. Finally, when a customer arrives at location j and0≤T1(j)<Lj−ℓ,a transshipment is realized from location i to location j if location i has stock on hand, i.e.,T1(i)≥Li. So, given the probabilityP(0≤T1(j)<Lj−ℓ)the average demand rate at location i, in this case, becomesλi+λjP(0≤T1(j)<Lj−ℓ). To conclude, given that we assume that the sub-systems are independent of each other and by conditioning onP(T1(j)≥Lj)andP(0≤T1(j)<Lj−ℓ),the customer demand stream at location i is approximated as a doubly stochastic Poisson process (this means that the intensity is also a stochastic process) with state dependent intensityλi(T1(i)),where(1)λi(T1(i))={αi≜λi−λiP(T1(j)≥Lj),for0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓβi≜λi,forLi−ℓ≤T1(i)<Liγi≜λi+λjP(0≤T1(j)<Lj−ℓ),forT1(i)≥Li.It should be noted that, in general, the variability in the system is reduced when replacing the real arrival process at each location by a doubly stochastic Poisson process. This is the case since the overflow process constituting of lateral transshipment demands often is substantially burstier than Poisson demands (recall that transshipment demands at a location only occur in specific situations, that is, when (i) and (ii) in Policy 1 are fulfilled). Hence, by approximating the demand process at each location as a doubly stochastic Poisson process, we should expect that the expected number of backorders and the expected stock on hand at each location are underestimated.In the following analysis in this section the main challenge is to derive the limiting joint densityfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,t2,…,tSi)given the probabilitiesP(T1(j)≥Lj)andP(0≤T1(j)<Lj−ℓ). Later, in Section 3.2, we will develop a recursive scheme in order to obtain these probabilities.A related problem to find the densityfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,t2,…,tSi)is considered in Moinzadeh (1989) who studies a single location (S − 1, S) inventory system with Poisson demand with intensity λ. In Moinzadeh’s model, the customer is backordered with a given probability α (and therefore lost with probability 1 − α) if there is zero stock on hand when a customer arrives. Hence, in Moinzadeh (1989), the demand intensity switches between two levels, λ and αλ, respectively, depending on the stock level. Clearly, in view of (1), we generalize Moinzadeh (1989) by considering three levels of demand intensity which depend on the age of the oldest unit of the Siyoungest units in the system. In Moinzadeh (1989), the idea is to keep track of the residual leadtimes of all outstanding orders, which may be an arbitrarily large number. However, it is worth noting that it is sufficient to only keep track of the ages among the youngest S units in the system, since the other outstanding orders (if any) are already assigned to waiting customers. Also, precisely as in Moinzadeh (1989), our solution method is exact (given that we have separated the two sub-systems and given the intensities αi, βiand γiin (1)).It is interesting to note that our model, as a special case, also can be viewed as an inventory model with emergency replenishments. If S2 → ∞ and λ2 → 0, then location 2 can be seen as another external supplier to location 1. Hence, in this situation location 1 has one regular supplier and one supplier which may provide a quick replenishment if needed. Our solution technique for such a model will be exact. However, the model will still be approximate due to the heuristic emergency transshipment policy.Consider the Si-dimensional stochastic processTi(t)={T1(i)(t),T2(i)(t),…,TSi(i)(t),t≥0}with densityfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1,t2,…,tSi). That is,T1(i)(t)represents the age of the oldest unit at time t among the Siyoungest units in sub-system i, etc. Next, we compare the state of the process at time points t and t + δ, where δ is a small positive number. Considering (1), three different intervals of time are analyzed.Consider first the case when 0 ≤ t1 < Li− ℓ andtSi≠0. Given that there is no demand during [t, t + δ), all units in sub-system i will age δ time units. Hence, we have(2)fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t+δ,t1,…,tSi)=fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1−δ,…,tSi−δ)·(1−αiδ+o(δ))+o(δ).Using the trick of telescoping sums we are able to derive the partial differential equations (PDEs) describing the process. In other words, by adding and subtracting terms, (2) can be formulated as(3)fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t+δ,t1,…,tSi)−fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1,…,tSi)δ+1δ∑k=1Si{fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1−δ,…,tk−1−δ,tk,…,tSi)−fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1−δ,…,tk−δ,tk+1,…,tSi)}=−αi·fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1−δ,…,tSi−δ).Letting δ → 0, the identity (3) reduces to(4)∂∂tfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1,…,tSi)+∑k=1Si∂∂tkfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1,…,tSi)=−αi·fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t,t1,…,tSi)Since we are interested in the stationary distribution offT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i),let t → ∞. This yields(5)∑k=1Si∂∂tkfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)=−αi·fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi).In complete analogy with (5), we obtain(6)∑k=1Si∂∂tkfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)=−βi·fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)for the case when Li− ℓ ≤ t1 < LiandtSi≠0. Similarly, when Li≤ t1 < ∞ andtSi≠0,we have(7)∑k=1Si∂∂tkfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)=−γi·fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi).Before we are ready to state the general solution of the PDEs defined in (5)–(7), it is important to recall that the demand process for sub-system i is a doubly stochastic Poisson process with state dependent intensity according to (1). This means that(8)X(t1)=thenumberofdemandoccurrencesatlocationiintheinterval(0,t1]∈Po(∫0t1λi(t)dt),which in this specific case, forT1(i)=t1,is equivalent to(9)X(t1)∈{Po(αit1)for0≤t1<Li−ℓPo(αi(Li−ℓ)+βi(t1−(Li−ℓ)))forLi−ℓ≤t1<LiPo(αi(Li−ℓ)+βiℓ+γi(t1−Li))fort1≥Li.It is also interesting to note that in the classic case with constant demand rate, i.e., λi(t) = λi∀t ≥ 0, the joint density ofT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)is relatively straightforward to derive,(10)fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)=λiSie−λit1,when λi(t) = λi∀t ≥ 0, using the joint density of the Sifirst demand occurrences, see e.g., Gut (1995). We continue by giving the general solution to (5)–(7), which are first order linear PDEs. We have:Proposition 1The general solution to (5)–(7) is(11)fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)=ϕ(t1−tSi,t2−tSi,…,tSi−1−tSi)·exp{−∫0t1λi(t)dt},for0≤tSi<tSi−1<…<t1,and where ϕ is a differentiable function of Si− 1 variables.Eqs. (5)–(7) can be collected into the following form(12)∑k=1Si∂∂tkfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)=−λi(t1)·fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi).Change variables according to,x1=tSi−1−tSix2=tSi−2−tSix3=tSi−3−tSi…xSi−1=t1−tSixSi=t1.By applying the chain rule for partial derivatives it follows directly that∑k=1Si∂∂tkfT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)=∂f∂xSi=∂f∂t1=−λi(t1)·f.So, this implies∂∂t1(f·exp{∫0t1λi(t)dt})=0,which meansf·exp{∫0t1λi(t)dt}=ϕ(x1,x2,…,xSi−1)=ϕ(tSi−1−tSi,tSi−2−tSi,…,t1−tSi),where ϕ is a differentiable function of Si− 1 variables. This proves the result.□In Proposition 1,ϕ(tSi−1−tSi,tSi−2−tSi,…,t1−tSi)is a differentiable function that is determined by the boundary conditions describing the process when a demand occurs. In our specific case, the functionϕ(tSi−1−tSi,tSi−2−tSi,…,t1−tSi)is just a constant (precisely as in (10)). This can be shown by using the same arguments as in Schmidt and Nahmias (1985) or Gnedenko and Kovalenko (1968) who are dealing with similar techniques but in different contexts. For complete details, see Schmidt and Nahmias (1985). Hence, settingϕ(tSi−1−tSi,tSi−2−tSi,…,t1−tSi)=Ci,where Ciis a constant and using (9), (11) can be restated as(13)fT1(i),T2(i),…,TSi(i)(t1,…,tSi)={Ci·exp{−αit1},for0≤t1<Li−ℓCi·exp{−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βi(t1−(Li−ℓ)))},forLi−ℓ≤t1<LiCi·exp{−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βiℓ+γi(t1−Li))},fort1≥Li.The density in (13) will be used later, in Section 4.1, when calculating the average stock levels at the locations. Now, before deriving Ciin (13), let us for simplicity reasons first calculate the marginal density ofT1(i). We get(14)fT1(i)(t1)=∫0t1∫0t2⋯∫0tSi−1Ci·exp{−∫0t1λi(t)dt}dtSi…dt2=Ci·exp{−∫0t1λi(t)dt}t1Si−1(Si−1)!,for t1 ≥ 0. In analogy with (13),fT1(i)(t1)in (14) can be stated more explicitly as(15)fT1(i)(t1)={Ci·exp{−αit1}·t1Si−1/(Si−1)!,for0≤t1<Li−ℓCi·exp{−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βi(t1−(Li−ℓ)))}forLi−ℓ≤t1<Li·t1Si−1/(Si−1)!,Ci·exp{−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βiℓ+γi(t1−Li))}fort1≥Li.·t1Si−1/(Si−1)!,Using (15), Ciis obtained by integrating the marginal density ofT1(i)over the entire domain,(16)1Ci=∫0Li−ℓe−αit1t1Si−1(Si−1)!dt1+∫Li−ℓLie−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βi(t1−(Li−ℓ)))t1Si−1(Si−1)!dt1+∫Li∞e−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βiℓ+γi(t1−Li))t1Si−1(Si−1)!dt1.We shall now give a numerical procedure for finding the correct values ofP(0≤T1(j)<Lj−ℓ)andP(T1(j)≥Lj)which were assumed to be given in (1). Let us introduce the following notation for these probabilities at each location,(17)ui≜P(0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓ),(18)vi≜P(T1(i)≥Li),i ∈ {1, 2}. Using the density ofT1(i)in (15), uiand viin (17) and (18), respectively, are obtained as(19)ui=P(0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓ)=∫0Li−ℓCi·e−αit1t1Si−1(Si−1)!dt1=CiαiSi(1−∑n=0Si−1e−αi(Li−ℓ)(αi(Li−ℓ))nn!),(20)vi=P(T1(i)≥Li)=∫Li∞Ci·e−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βiℓ+γi(t1−Li))t1Si−1(Si−1)!dt1=e−αi(Li−ℓ)−βiℓ+γiLi·CiγiSi∑n=0Si−1e−γiLi(γiLi)nn!.Let us now develop an iterative procedure for finding the correct values of uiand vi, i ∈ {1, 2}. In each iteration step we shall calculateui{k}andvi{k},i ∈ {1, 2}, which are the values of uiand vi, respectively, at each iteration step k. In Proposition 2 below we prove that the iterations converge. Moreover, the iterative procedure is outlined in the proof.Proposition 2The sequences{ui{k},k=0,1,…}and{vi{k},k=0,1,…}converge.Following the well known Theorem of monotone convergence, it is sufficient to show that the sequences{ui{k},k=0,1,…}and{vi{k},k=0,1,…}are monotone and bounded. First, it is clear that the sequences are bounded below by 0, and bounded above by 1. Let us continue by showing that the sequences{ui{k},k=0,1,…}are increasing and that the sequences{vi{k},k=0,1,…}are decreasing if we setu1{0}=0andv1{0}=1as a start condition. Inserting these values in (1) generates the valuesu2{0}>0andv2{0}<1(sinceu2{0}=0andv2{0}=1are not possible to get for any positive values of λi, Si, Liand ℓ). Now, insert the valuesu2{0}andv2{0}in (1) and calculateu1{1}andv1{1}. Obviously, we must haveu1{1}>u1{0}=0andv1{1}<v1{0}=1due to the same reason as above. Continue by insertingu1{1}andv1{1}in (1), which gives a higher α2 and a higher γ2 than for the case withu1{0}andv1{0}. Given this increase in α2 and γ2, it is possible to show thatu2{1}>u2{0}andv2{1}<v2{0},see Appendix A. The proof is completed by induction over k to formally show that the sequences{ui{k},k=0,1,…}are increasing and that the sequences{vi{k},k=0,1,…}are decreasing. Now, since these sequences are monotone and bounded it is clear, by using the well known Theorem of monotone convergence, that the iterations will converge. It is also important to emphasize that, if a sequence converges, then its limit is unique.□In all numerical cases considered in Section 5 the iterative procedure described above is converging very fast. Typically, only a few iterations are needed for a sufficiently low tolerance. This suggests that the iterative procedure indeed can be used efficiently when evaluating a large set of different policies (i.e., optimizing the decision variables).We are now ready to derive explicit expressions for the average inventory on hand and the average number of backorders at location i. Starting with the average stock on hand at location i, note that k units in stock at location i is equivalent to0≤TSi(i)<TSi−1(i)<⋯<Tk+1(i)<Li≤Tk(i)<⋯<T1(i)<∞. Hence, using (13) we have(21)Pk(i)=P(ILi=k)=∫Li∞∫Lit1∫Lit2⋯∫Litk−1∫0Li∫0tk+1⋯∫0tSi−1Ci·e−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βiℓ+γi(t1−Li))dtSidtSi−1…dt2dt1=CiLiSi−k(Si−k)!(k−1)!e−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βiℓ−γiLi)·∫Li∞e−γit1(t1−Li)k−1dt1=CiLiSi−kγik(Si−k)!e−(αi(Li−ℓ)+βiℓ),for k > 0. Here we have used that the integral in (21) can be re-written as a distribution function of an Erlang distribution with mean k/γi. Using (21), the expected stock on hand at location i is obtained as(22)E(ILi+)=∑k=1SikPk(i).We continue by deriving the average number of backorders at location i ∈ {1, 2}. Consider a situation where an arriving customer at location i faces no stock on hand. Then, if location j has stock on hand and0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓ,a lateral transshipment is realized and the customer is backordered ℓ units of time. On the other hand, if0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓbut location j has no stock on hand, no transshipment is realized and the customer will have to waitLi−T1(i)units of time, where0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓ. Finally, ifLi−ℓ≤T1(i)<Li,obviously no transshipment is realized and the waiting time becomesLi−T1(i)units of time, whereLi−ℓ≤T1(i)<Li. In view of this discussion, the expected waiting time for a customer arriving at location i, E(Wi), can be obtained as(23)E(Wi)=P(0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓ)·P(T1(j)≥Lj)·ℓ+(1−P(T1(j)≥Lj))·∫0Li−ℓ(Li−t1)fT1(i)(t1)dt1+∫Li−ℓLi(Li−t1)fT1(i)(t1)dt1.By applying Little’s formula together with (23) we obtain(24)E(ILi−)=λiE(Wi)Finally, let LTidenote the event that a lateral transshipment is realized when a customer arrives at location i. Then, the probability for this event is(25)P(LTi)=P(0≤T1(i)<Li−ℓ)·P(T1(j)≥Lj),since a lateral transshipment from location j to location i is realized when a customer arrives at location i and findsT1(i)<Li−ℓandT1(j)≥Lj.As mentioned, in this paper we consider three different types of costs: inventory holding costs, backorder costs, and costs for lateral transshipments. By using (22), (24) and (25), the total expected cost per unit of time, EC, becomes(26)EC=∑i=12(hiE(ILi+)+biE(ILi−)+τλiP(LTi)).Regarding the optimization procedure, we find lower and upper bounds for the optimal base stock levels,Si*. Obviously, a lower bound forSi*isSi*=0. As a conjecture, an upper bound forSi*can be found by optimizing a single location problem (i.e., minimizing the total cost for a single location with respect to Si) with arrival rate λ1 + λ2. This corresponds to a situation where all demands at location j are directed to location i. Note that, this would no longer be a conjecture if we could prove that the optimal value of Siis non-decreasing with the average demand rate at location i. The conjecture is intuitive and true in many situations. For example, if a location faces pure Poisson demand, then it is easy to see that the optimal value of S is non-decreasing with the average demand rate. The difficulty of proving the conjecture comes from the fact that we reduce the variability in the system by approximating the demand process as a doubly stochastic Poisson process (as discussed in the beginning of Section 3). Hence, due to this fact, it may be that the optimal Siis larger for the real demand process with average demand rate, say, r > 0 than for the corresponding doubly stochastic Poisson process with average demand rate r + δ (where δ is a small positive number). So, to conclude, given that each location faces a complex demand process it is very hard to prove the conjecture.To summarize, in order to obtainS1*andS2*,we use complete enumeration within the lower and upper bounds forS1*andS2*. Moreover, although our approach involves iterative procedures, our solution method is quite fast. In general the computation time (with a standard PC) for optimizing the system is only a few seconds.In this section we evaluate our heuristic model in a simulation study. For each test problem we evaluate the performance of our technique and compare with the results obtained by simulation. For each test problem we find the optimal values of S1 and S2 generated by our technique and by simulation, respectively. From a managerial point of view it is particularly interesting to capture the implications of having a positive transshipment leadtime. An important related issue is to investigate the benefit of shortening the transshipment leadtime. Hence, given a system with a positive transshipment leadtime, we will in this section focus on the following aspects: What are the tactical and strategic implications of shortening the transshipment leadtime? What are the implications of using a model with negligible transshipment leadtime (which is a very common assumption in the literature) when optimizing the base stock levels? How much to stock at the two locations?In the initial set of 20 problems, see Table 1, we consider a very similar set of problems as in Axsäter (2003b). More specifically, all combinations of λ1 ∈ {1, 2}, λ2 ∈ {1, 2}, b1 ∈ {20, 40}, b2 ∈ {20, 40}, and τ ∈ {0, 2}. In all test problems in Table 1 we have h1 = h2 = 1, L1 = L2 = 2, and ℓ = 0.5. Hence, in this set of problems we consider relatively high backordering costs, which is often the case in connection with spare parts. Moreover, when lateral transshipments between two locations are allowed, it is necessary that these locations are geographically close to each other. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that L1 = L2 (although this is not necessary from a modeling point of view). In Table 1 we present the minimal total cost, and the associated optimal base stock levels obtained from our approximation and compare with the results obtained from simulation. We also present the results obtained from: (1) a standard model where lateral transshipments are not allowed, and (2) a model where lateral transshipments are allowed, but with ℓ = 0. Each test problem is simulated 10 times for 60, 000 customer events (at each location) so that the standard deviations of the mean values become satisfactorily low.From Table 1, it seems that our technique works very well. In fact, in all cases considered our approach generated the true optimal base stock levels. In the case where no transshipments are allowed, the optimal base stock levels are the same or slightly higher than the true optimal values. On the other hand, the optimal base stock levels obtained from a model with lateral transshipments and ℓ = 0 are in general either the same or slightly lower than for the transshipment model with ℓ = 0.5. Hence, if a manager wants to optimize base stock levels for a system with positive lateral transshipment leadtimes, and for this purpose uses either a standard model without lateral transshipments or a classical transshipment model with negligible transshipment leadtimes (ℓ = 0), the results may be inaccurate in terms of too high or too low base stock levels. It is interesting to note that, in Table 1, the total cost is slightly underestimated by using our heuristic approach. This should, however, be expected since the average number of backorders at each location is underestimated (as noted in Section 3) and because biis substantially larger than both hiand τ in almost all practical settings.In order to investigate more explicitly these potential inaccurate results, we introduce the error (cost increase), E,(27)E=ECsim(S1*,S2*)−ECsim(S¯1*,S¯2*)ECsim(S¯1*,S¯2*),as an indicator of the quality of each heuristic method. In (27), ECsim( ·, ·) is the simulated cost,Si*are the optimal base stock levels found by the heuristic method, andS¯i*are the optimal base stock levels found by simulation. It turns out that, our technique gives E = 0 for all cases considered in Table 1. For the model with no transshipments allowed, the base stock levels differ from the optimal base stock levels in 14 out of 20 cases. For these 14 cases, the maximum value of E is 6.1 percent. For the classical transshipment model with negligible transshipment leadtimes (ℓ = 0), the base stock levels differ from the optimal base stock levels in 18 out of 20 cases. For these 18 cases, the maximum value of E is 20.9 percent. This indicates that there may be quite substantial errors when using standard lateral transshipment models with zero transshipment leadtime as an approximation when optimizing base stock levels, although the replenishment leadtime is substantially longer than the transshipment leadtime.For the same problems as in Table 1, we present in Table 2, average stock on hand, average number of backorders, and average number of transshipments per unit of time,(28)E(TR)=λ1P(LT1)+λ2P(LT2).All performance measures seem to be quite accurate, especially the average stock on hand at the locations. The average number of backorders are slightly underestimated while the average number of transshipments per unit of time is somewhat overestimated. The main reason for this is that we assume thatT1(1)andT1(2)are independent stochastic variables, which is clearly not the case. However, the results from Table 2 indicate that the errors generated by using our approximation seem to be very reasonable. However, one should note that the performance of our approximation may be less accurate when ℓ → 0, since the assumption that the demand process at each location is a doubly stochastic Poisson process, is less accurate when ℓ is very short. This is, however, not a very serious problem since there already exist several papers dealing with lateral transshipments with ℓ = 0.In Table 3, we consider a second set of problems. In these problems we consider larger variations in λ1, λ2, b1, and b2. Hence, this means that, in Table 3, we test the performance of our heuristic for both relatively small and large values ofSi*. The effect of different values of h = h1 = h2 is also included in Table 3. First, it is interesting to note that our technique still performs very well. Also, as expected, the optimal base stock levels are decreasing as hiincreases. Another interesting feature that can be found in Problem 22, Table 3, is that the optimal base stock levels can be slightly higher when lateral transshipments are allowed compared with the no-pooling case. This result may be counter intuitive at first glance since inventory pooling often leads to reduced total stock due to the possibility of sharing stock. However, since h is relatively large, the service level (e.g., fill rate) will be quite poor when the locations are working independently, i.e., the no-pooling case. Hence, in order to improve the poor service level (or equivalently, the expensive backorder costs) it may be beneficial to add another unit to the system when lateral transshipments are allowed. Since the locations will share this extra unit via lateral transshipments, the extra holding costs will not be as heavy as if both locations added one extra unit independently. On the contrary, in situations where hiis substantially lower than bi, the service level may already be very high when no lateral transshipments are allowed. Then, in such situations, it may be beneficial to lower the base stock levels when lateral transshipments are introduced and still maintain high service levels. From a managerial and a strategic point of view, this means roughly that when introducing lateral transshipments, the optimal base stock levels will most likely be lower or equal to the optimal base stock levels without lateral transshipments. Similarly, if the service level at each location is quite low without lateral transshipments, it should not come as a surprise to a manager if the optimal base stock levels should increase (or stay the same) when lateral transshipments are introduced into the system. Finally, it should be noted that the optimal base stock levels, for a system with lateral transshipments, do not necessarily need to be symmetric, even if the parameters are the same for each location, see e.g. Problem 22 in Table 3.The value of shortening the replenishment leadtime has been investigated in several previous papers regarding lateral transshipments. Hence, in this paper, we will concentrate on the managerial implications of shortening the transshipment leadtime. In Figs. 1 and 2, the average number of transshipments per unit time, E(TR), for Problem 7 and Problem 12, respectively, are plotted as a function of ℓ. As can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2, E(TR) is decreasing in ℓ, as expected. Moreover, it is clear that E(TR) → 0 as ℓ → L (for simplicity, let us assume that L = L1 = L2). In Fig. 1, we see that E(TR), for the case with ℓ = 0, is about 3.4 times larger than in the case with ℓ = 0.5. This means that, although ℓ = 0.5 is relatively small compared to Li= 2, the number of transshipments made per unit of time can be increased quite dramatically by reducing ℓ, due to the non-linear behavior of E(TR) as a function of ℓ. For example, from Problem 7 in Table 1, we can conclude that a total cost reduction by 21 percent can be achieved just by reducing ℓ = 0.5 to ℓ ≈ 0. Hence, if the transshipment cost, τ, is moderate compared to other costs (which is often the case for spare parts), there is quite a potential of reducing total costs by reducing an already short transshipment leadtime to an even smaller value.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have presented a new way of modeling lateral transshipments in inventory systems with non-negligible deterministic transshipment leadtimes. Our solution technique is approximate since the demand stream at each location, when lateral transshipments are allowed, is approximated as a doubly stochastic Poisson process. Since lateral transshipment leadtimes are positive, a transshipment policy was evaluated which takes pipeline information into account. As a spin-off from our modeling technique, this paper also contributes to the literature dealing with single location inventory problems. More specifically, this paper extends the combined backordering and lost sales model considered in Moinzadeh (1989). The modeling technique presented in this paper is quite general in the sense that many other similar inventory problems can be solved by modeling customer demands as a doubly stochastic Poisson process, where the demand rate depends on the age of the items in the system. Hence, the techniques used in this paper are possible to generalize to other related problems.Our transshipment policy was evaluated in a simulation study from which we can conclude that our model performs very well. From a strategic point of view we investigated the impact of using a standard lateral transshipment model with negligible transshipment leadtimes when optimizing base stock levels for a corresponding system with non-zero transshipment leadtimes. The results indicated that there may be a substantial cost increase when using such standard transshipment models when optimizing base stock levels, although the transshipment leadtime is relatively short. Another managerial insight is that there often is quite a potential of reducing costs by reducing an already quite short transshipment leadtime since the number of transshipments per unit of time grows exponentially when the transshipment leadtime is getting shorter.One possible direction for future work would be to extend the model to incorporate transshipments between more than two locations. However, from our simulation study we find that the average probability (for all problems considered) for not being able to initiate a transshipment, if it is requested, is less than 1.5 percent. Hence, this direction of research must be considered to be more of theoretical than of practical interest. Another obvious topic for future research would be to generalize our model to a multi-echelon model. This extension would be quite straight-forward since complete information about the timing of outstanding orders are available by using our approach. A more interesting and challenging line of research would be to generalize the base stock ordering policy to a more general batch ordering policy.