@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Financial portfolio management through the goal programming model: Current state-of-the-art

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine different goal programming variants applied to the portfolio selection.Classification of the goal programming model within the portfolio selection.The perspectives of the goal programming for the portfolio selection.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-attribute portfolio management,Goal programming,Typology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since Markowitz (1952) formulated the portfolio selection problem, many researchers have developed models aggregating simultaneously several conflicting attributes such as: the return on investment, risk and liquidity. The portfolio manager generally seeks the best combination of stocks/assets that meets his/her investment objectives. The Goal Programming (GP) model is widely applied to finance and portfolio management. The aim of this paper is to present the different variants of the GP model that have been applied to the financial portfolio selection problem from the 1970s to nowadays.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the current globalized economy several companies have developed their own business network which implies a portfolio approach due to the extent of vertical, horizontal or diagonal integration or due to the setting of a corporate venture capital program. This approach backs to the financial portfolio selection model developed by the American economist Harry Markowitz in 1952. His model has revolutionized the way people think about portfolios of assets and started the portfolio financial modern theory. This model is based on a simultaneous optimization of two conflicting and incommensurable criteria, namely: a) the return of the portfolio and b) the risk related to the financial losses. Hence, in order to obtain the best portfolio, the Financial Decision-Maker (FDM) is requested to make some compromises (trade-offs) among these criteria, based on his/her preferences, experience, intuition and judgement. Markowitz (1952) suggests that the FDM diversifies the portfolio components by attempting to achieve an overall balance of risk and return rather than to focus on the risk of each position. Markowitz (1952, 1959) gave the foundations of the financial portfolio selection theory and his model has been extended and applied several times within the field of finance. This decision-making process presents several steps in which the FDM could be involved. It also requires the evaluation of the stock market and the individual stocks’ performance (Aouni, 2009, 2010).Over the years we have observed a significant increase in publications related to the topic of multi-attribute portfolio selection. Most of these papers have proposed different portfolio selection formulations based on operational research models. In their papers, Elton and Gruber (1987) and Zopounidis and Doumpos (2013) present various quantitative techniques that have been applied to portfolio selection such as: stochastic dominance, multi-attribute utility models, discriminant analysis, heuristics, neural networks, optimization models, multi-criteria analysis and multi-objective programming. Zopounidis and Doumpos (2013) present an exhaustive literature review on the applications of multi-criteria decision aid tools to financial problems. They highlight the contribution of the operational research discipline to finance. The Goal Programming (GP) is one of these models that have been widely utilized for selecting financial portfolio based on several attributes. The GP model aggregates multiple objectives and allows obtaining the portfolio where the deviations between achievement and the aspirations levels of the attributes are to be minimized.The GP model is easy to understand and to apply. This model is based on mathematical programming supported by some powerful software packages such as Lindo and CPLEX. The GP describes the spectrum of the FDM’s preferences where some trade-offs can be made through a user-friendly and learning decision-making process. Such process will help generating scenarios where the FDM can interact and make changes into the model parameters in a way that improves the decision-making process. It is a progressive and evolutionary process. The investment decisions are taken by the FDM and the mathematical model is to help and not to substitute the FDM.This paper aims at updating the literature review on application of GP models to financial portfolio management. This manuscript can be very helpful for researchers and practitioners interested in this area. The structure of the manuscript is as follows. Section 2 presents the general formulation of the portfolio selection based on several objectives. The general formulation of the multi-objective programming and the GP are given in Section 3, which provides the FDM with some guidelines to choose the appropriate GP variant to be utilized for financial portfolio selection among all GP variants. This paper seeks to limit its domain of coverage just to GP variants applied to the financial portfolio selection. This survey is an extension of some previous papers related to GP and portfolio management, such as Lin and O’Leary (1993), Aouni (2009, 2010), and Azmi and Tamiz (2010). We provide in Section 4 some concluding remarks.Markowitz (1952) proposed the first bi-criteria portfolio selection formulation, where two conflicting and incommensurable criteria are to be optimized simultaneously, namely: (a) the expected return and (b) the risk. He had the insight that while diversification reduces risk, it would not generally eliminate it. This model requires some compromises based on the FDM’s preferences. Markowitz (1952) formulation can be summarized as follows:Objective1:Max.∑j=1nEjxjObjective2:Min.∑j=1n∑k=1nxjσjkxkSubject to:(1)∑j=1nxj=1,(2)x∈F,where Objective 1 is the expected return of the portfolio; Objective 2 is the variance; xjis the proportion to be invested in the stock (security) j, Ejis the expected return of security j, σjkis the covariance of the returns of securities j and k, and F is the set of feasible solutions.When a multinormal distribution of return on assets is assumed, it affects the probability of extreme events and argues that the dependence between assets does not vary during market downturns or upturns. However, under normality assumption, the mean, the variances and the correlations can be easily constructed from historical data. Through the constraint (1), the sum of the proportions to be invested in stocks should to be equal to 1. In other words, the total investment amount has to be allocated. The set of constraints (2) are restrictions related to the portfolio including the diversification conditions. In order to manage the investment risk, the FDM may diversify the portfolio by investing in different securities. Both constraints determine the efficient portfolios. Markowitz (1952) model allows obtaining the best portfolio that may increase the FDM earning and minimizes at the same time the risk of financial losses. The aggregation of these two attributes can be done as follows:Min.∑i=1n∑j=1nxiσijxjSubject to:∑i=1nEixi=E∗∑i=1nxi=1,x∈F,where E∗ is the target value of the return.The objective function of this model is quadratic and the constraints are linear. Solving this model allows finding the efficient frontier of portfolios among which the FDM will make a choice based on his/her preferences regarding the attributes of return and risk. Indeed, the FDM needs to make a compromise between an acceptable level of risk and a desired return. This formulation is known, in the literature, as the mean-variance model. However, the portfolio selection problem cannot be limited to only two attributes as pointed out by Ferretti (1970) who introduced two categories of objectives: (a) objectives related to the shareholders and (b) performance objectives.In the literature, researchers have considered different attributes in the portfolio selection problem. Levy and Sarnat (1972) extended the number of attributes by considering the following objectives: (a) the value of the stocks, (b) the present value of the stock return, (c) the share price-return ratio, (d) the dividend, and (e) the income per share and the growth value of stocks. Lee and Lerro (1973) established a GP portfolio selection model with four levels of priorities and the six following types of objectives: (a) expected portfolio return, (b) portfolio variance, (c) covariance, (d) dividend yield, (e) unexplained price variance, and (f) investment budget. Moreover, Lee and Chesser (1980), Zopounidis, Doumpos, and Zanakis (1999) and Zopounidis and Doumpos (2002) proposed fifteen objectives which can be summarized into the three following categories: (a) the corporate validity, (b) the stocks acceptability by the FDM, and (c) the financial vigor. The complete list of the objectives as proposed by Zopounidis et al. (1999) is as follows: (i) gross book value per share, (ii) capitalization ratio, (iii) stock market value of each firm, (iv) the marketability of each share, (v) financial position progress, (vi) dividend yield, (vii) capital gain, (viii) exchange flow ratio, (ix) round lots traded per day, (x) transaction value per day, (xi) equity ratio, (xii) price/earning ratio, (xiii) structure ratio, (xix) equity/debt ratio, and (xv) return on equity.As the bi-criteria model proposed by Markowitz (1952) does not reflect the complexity and the multi-dimensionality of the decision-making process in the financial portfolio selection problem, the issue of considering several criteria in the portfolio selection problem is now a reality (Aouni, 2009, 2010). Several multi-dimensional approaches have been proposed in the literature in order to aggregate conflicting and incommensurables attributes, such as: Multi-Attribute Utility, Outranking Methods, Multi-Objective Programming, and GP. In their paper, Zopounidis and Doumpos (2013) provide a complete and commented literature review of the different multi-criteria aggregating procedures applied to financial portfolio selection and corporate performance evaluation. Since the 1970s, the GP has been applied to portfolio management. In the 2000s, the higher levels of computerized automation of the solution and modeling process brought a wider use of the GP model within the field of financial portfolio management (Azmi & Tamiz, 2010; Tamiz & Jones, 1998).Table 1shows that during the last five decades, the GP model has been widely applied to the portfolio management problem. The highest number of applications of GP to portfolio selection was observed during the 2000s. Moreover, the most popular variant is the Weighted GP.GP was first introduced by Charnes, Cooper, and Ferguson (1955) and Charnes and Cooper (1961). The main idea behind this model is the determination of the aspiration levels of an objective function and the minimization of any (positive or negative) deviations from these levels. Over the years, the GP model has become the most popular model within the field of Multi-Objective Programming. If we assume to optimize simultaneously p different conflicting objectives fi, i∊I={1,2,...,p}, the GP model will be an appropriate tool that allows the FDM to obtain the best portfolio.In fact, the GP model is a distance function where the unwanted positive and negative deviations, between the achievement and aspiration levels, are to be minimized. According to Steuer and Na (2003), 69% of the published papers related to the application of multiple criteria decision making techniques use the GP and Multi-Objective Programming models. Meanwhile, 29% dealt with portfolio selection problem. In this section, we present the main GP variants that have been applied to portfolio selection.The Lexicographic Goal Programming (LGP) or the pre-emptive GP is based on the optimization of the objectives according to their relative importance for the FDM. The most important objectives will be at the highest level of priority, while the less important ones will be at the lower priority levels. The obtained values of the deviations of a higher level of priority will be introduced as constraints within the mathematical programs related to the objectives placed in lower levels of priority. In fact, the objectives in the lower priority levels will play a marginal role in the decision-making process. The LGP was widely applied in financial portfolio selection till the 1980s and its mathematical formulation is as follows:Lex MinL=l1(δ-,δ+),l2(δ-,δ+),…,lq(δ-,δ+)Subject to:fi(x)+δi--δi+=gi,(fori=1,2,…,p)∑j=1nxj=1,x∈F,δi-,δi+⩾0(fori=1,2,…,p)where L represents an ordered vector of unwanted deviations; and q indicates the different priority levels.The first formulation of the LGP model for portfolio selection problem was provided by Lee (1972). The author considered the three following objectives: (a) minimum dividends, (b) the growth of earnings, and (c) 50% dividend payout ratio. Lee and Lerro (1973) and Sharma and Sharma (2006) applied the LGP for mutual funds. The authors highlighted that their model generates good results comparatively to Markowitz (1952, 1959) and Sharpe (1967), as they incorporate the trade-offs between financial risk and inflation risk. Kumar, Philippatos, and Ezell (1978) and Kumar and Philippatos (1979) presented a LGP for dual-purposes funds where the investment company issues two kinds of securities, namely: (a) income shares and (b) capital shares. They provided empirical demonstrations to show that dual-purpose funds managers can improve their investment selection and the subsequent performance by using the GP model. They identified the following objectives: systematic risk, unsystematic risk, income return, capital return, individual security allocation, and cash allocation. Muhlemann, Lockett, and Gear (1978) stressed on decision making under uncertainty and Booth and Dash (1979) emphasized on bank portfolio.LGP was quite popular in the 1980s. Lee and Chesser (1980) illustrated a conservative portfolio selection model with the two following objectives: portfolio return, and percentage of investment in different beta risk securities. Levary and Avery (1984) compared the performance of the standard GP variant to the LGP for portfolio selection. Alexander and Resnick (1985) used the LGP to immunize bond portfolios. Batson (1989) and Colson and De Bruyn (1989) applied LGP to financial planning and portfolio management, respectively.Recently, Bahloul and Abid (2013) introduce a combined analytic hierarchy process and GP approach to international portfolio selection in the presence of some barriers to international investment.The FDM’s appreciation of the positive and the negative deviations can be different based on the relative importance of the objective, and in the GP model this can be expressed through the weightswi+andwi-, respectively. The mathematical formulation of the weighted GP (WGP), as it has been applied to the financial portfolio selection problem, is as follows:Min.Z=∑i=1p(wi+δi++wi-δi-)Subject to:fi(x)+δi--δi+=gi(fori=1,2,…,p),∑j=1nxj=1,x∈F,δi-,δi+⩾0(fori=1,2,…,p).Callahan (1973) and Kvanli (1980) illustrated a WGP investment planning model with profit and risk or safety goals. Sharma, Sharma, and Adeyeye (1995) were the first to deal with selection problem. Then Tamiz, Hasham, Jones, Hesni, and Fargher (1996) adapted Lee (1972) model and gave a WGP formulation for the Portfolio Selection Problem with two stages: (i) prediction of the sensitivity of the shares to specific economic indicators and (ii) selection of the best portfolio based on the FDM’s preferences. Then, Tamiz, Hasham, Fargher, and Jones (1997) reasserted that the objective of all rational investment decision is the maximization of the FDM’s satisfaction or utility. Bravo, Pla Santamaria, and Garcia-Bernabeu (2010) studied a portfolio selection problem with multiple benchmarks. Cooper, Lelas, and Sueyoshi (1997) presented a WGP model for the evaluation of security portfolio and regression relations. Dominiak (1997) showed an application of interactive multiple goal programming on the Warsaw Stock Exchange. Pendaraki, Doumpos, and Zopounidis (2004), Pendaraki, Zopounidis, Doumpos, and Pendaraki (2005) and Zopounidis, Doumpos, and Pendaraki (2005) applied the WGP to mutual funds selection and composition in the Greek market. Other applications of WGP to funds management can be found in Lee and Sevebeck (1971), Sharda and Musser (1986), Zaloom, Tolga, and Chu (1986), and O’Leary and O’Leary (1987). To cope with asset liability management, WGP was used by Kosmidou and Zopounidis (2004) and Tektas, Ozkan-Gunay, and Gunay (2005). Booth and Bessler (1989) developed two WGP models (Forecast Model and Duration Model) to assist a bank in creating optimal strategies to manage interest-rate risk.The incorporation of skewness into an investor’s decision making process causes a major change in the construction of the portfolio comparatively to a portfolio based on the mean-variance model. The importance of skewness in financial economics and the pricing of stocks has been pointed out by Arditti and Levy (1975). They showed that assets returns are not normally distributed. Lai (1991) proposed a primal approach to determine mean-variance-skewness portfolio frontiers. In his Polynomial GP (PGP) model, the author incorporated the FDM’s preferences regarding the skewness and other objectives:MinZ=[d1p1+d3p3]Subject to:∑j=1nxjEj+d1=E∗,∑j=1nxjrj-Ej3+d3=S∗,∑j=1n∑k=1nxjxkσjk=1,∑jxj=1,x∈F,d1andd3⩾0.where p1 and p3 are preference parameters (towards expected excess return and skewness) which describe various combinations of portfolio compositions. The first and the second constraints describe the difference between the achievement level and the corresponding goals for both the expected return and the skewness criteria. Lai (1991) focused on unit variance portfolios solely. In this context, it makes sense since a non-unit variance portfolio can always be rescaled. According to Lai (1991), the PGP model integrates the FDM’s preferences regarding the skewness objective and it is more efficient than the LGP model. Indeed, the PGP model presents the flexibility of incorporating investors’ preferences in terms of higher moments of the probability distributions of the rates of return, and a relative computational simplicity. Thus, Chunhachinda, Dandapani, Hamid, and Prakash (1997) and Prakash, Chang, and Pactwa (2003) applied Lai’s (1991) PGP model by considering the investor’s preferences for positive skewness to find the best portfolio namely in the international stock markets, in Latin American, US and European capital markets. They discussed various degrees of investor trade-off between the importance of skewness and return. A more recent PGP model is developed by Sun and Yan (2003), who examine individual equities (in the Japanese and US markets) while Chunhachinda et al. (1997) and Prakash et al. (2003), in common with this paper, examine indices. All three papers show the importance, in portfolio selection, of explicitly considering higher moments. Lai, Yu, and Wang (2006) extended Lai’s (1991) model by analyzing a mean-variance-skewness-kurtosis-based portfolio model. Canela and Collazo (2007) revised the different PGP formulations proposed by Lai (1991), Chunhachinda et al. (1997), Prakash et al. (2003) and Sun and Yan (2003) because these formulations may lead to unfeasible solutions. In their paper, Lucey, Tully, and Poti (2004) showed the impacts on the portfolio composition due to the changes in skewness and other objectives. Finally, Davies, Kat, and Lu (2009) revealed the importance of equity market neutral funds as volatility and kurtosis reducers, and of global macro funds as portfolio skewness enhancers.In many real financial contexts, the FDM has to take decisions under uncertainty. Hence, the objective functions and the corresponding goals are, in general, random variables. The Stochastic Goal Programming (SGP) model deals with the uncertainty related to the decision making situation. Mainly, in the SGP, we assume that the goal values are stochastic and follow a specific probability distribution. The general formulation of the SGP is as follows:MinZ=∑i=1p(δ̃i++δ̃i-)Subject to:∑j=1naijxj+δ̃i--δ̃i+=g̃i,(i=1,2,…,p)x∈F,δ̃i+,δ̃i-⩾0(i=1,2,…,p),whereg̃i∈N(μi;σi2).The concept of satisfaction function developed by Martel and Aouni (1990) has been utilized to incorporate explicitly the decision-maker’s preferences for the portfolio selection problem. The general shape of the satisfaction function is shown in Fig. 1.The satisfaction functions are defined on the interval [0,1]. Therefore, the satisfaction functions have a value of 1 when the decision-maker is totally satisfied; otherwise, they are monotonically decreasing and can take values between 0 and 1 (see Fig. 1). There are three types of thresholds, as follows:(a)αidthe indifference threshold: total satisfaction when the deviations are within the interval,αiothe nil satisfaction threshold: no satisfaction when the deviations reach this threshold, but the solution is not rejected,αivthe veto threshold: rejecting any solution that lead to deviations larger than this threshold.The existence of veto thresholds makes this model partially a non-compensatory model in the sense that a bad performance on one objective cannot be compensated by a good one on another objective. The SGP with satisfaction function (Aouni, Ben Abdelaziz, & Martel 2005), which incorporates explicitly the decision-maker’s preferences, is as follows:Max.Z=∑i=1p(wi+Fi+(δi+)+wi-Fi-(δi-))Subject to:∑j=1naijxj+δi--δi+=μi,(i=1,2,…,p)x∈F,∑jxj=1,0⩽δi-⩽αiv-,(i=1,2,…,p)0⩽δi+⩽αiv+(i=1,2,…,p).Aouni et al. (2005) applied this model to a portfolio selection problem involving 45 stocks of the Tunisian Stock Exchange. Moreover, Ji, Zhu, Wang, and Zhang (2005) developed a stochastic linear GP for multistage portfolio selection. They generate scenarios and they optimize several objectives. In their paper, Ben Abdelaziz, El Fayedh, and Rao (2009) proposed a discrete SGP model to generate financial portfolios for the United Arab Emirates Equity Market. They considered five objectives, namely: capital appreciation, current income, price earnings ratio, market value to the book value ratio and risk. The authors analyzed data collected from March 2002 to September 2005. Ballestero, Pérez Gladish, Arenas-Parra, and Bilbao-Terol (2009) combined the SGP model and the Fuzzy Logic to formulate a model for portfolio selection problem: they apply this formulation to the buy-and-hold choice of fund portfolios (using the Eurostoxx market index) where several uncertain states of nature are taken into consideration. Maggis and La Torre (2012) considered a SGP model for risk minimization of a financial portfolio managed by an agent subject to different possible criteria and they extended the classical risk minimization model with scalar risk measures to the general case of set-valued risk measure. Recently, Ballestero and Garcia-Bernabeu (2012) introduce a mean-variance SGP approach to portfolio selection with multiple time horizons.Another alternative way to include randomness in the GP model is to consider the so-called scenario-based models. If we assume that the space of all possible events or scenarios Ω={ω1,ω2,…,ωN} with associated probabilities p(ωs)=ps is finite and the objective functions and the corresponding goals depend on the scenario ωs, the above SGP model with satisfaction function can be extended to:Max.Z=∑i=1p(wi+Fi+(δi+)+wi-Fi-(δi-))Subject to:∑j=1naij(ωs)xj+δi--δi+=μi(ωs)(∀i∈I),x∈F,∑jxj=1,0⩽δi-⩽αiv-,(i=1,2,…,p)0⩽δi+⩽αiv+(i=1,2,…,p).where ωs∊Ω is fixed. This approach was introduced by Aouni and La Torre (2010) and Aouni, Colapinto, and La Torre (2010) to analyze portfolio optimization model and then extended by Aouni, Ben Abdelaziz, and La Torre (2012) in the context of venture capital decision-making.The Fuzzy Goal Programming (FGP) model was developed to deal with some decisional situations where the decision-maker can only give vague and imprecise goal values. The FGP is based on the fuzzy sets theory developed by Zadeh (1965) and Bellman and Zadeh (1970). The concept of membership functions, based on the fuzzy set theory, has been introduced and used by Zimmerman (1976, 1978, 1983) and Freeling (1980) for modeling the fuzziness related to decision-making context parameters. The Narasimhan (1980) and Hannan (1981a, 1981b) FGP formulations use also the concept of membership functions to deal with the fuzziness of the goal values. The general formulation of the membership function requires two acceptability degrees (lower and upper) (Zimmerman, 1990) and the functions are assumed to be linear. Dhingra, Rao, and Kumar (1992), Rao (1987), and Zimmerman (1978, 1988) have developed an approximation procedure for the non-linear membership functions. In their papers, Narasimhan (1980) and Hannan (1981a) have used the family of triangular membership functions (see Fig. 2). The use of such triangular functions is questioned by Ignizio (1982) and Chen and Tsai (2001) as they consider that it can lead, in some cases, to undesired results.The general formulation of FGP model as developed by Hannan (1981a) is as follows:Max Z=λSubject to:fi(x)Δi+δi--δi+=giΔi(for∀i∈I,λ+δi-+δi+⩽1(for∀i∈I),x∈F;λ,δi-andδi+⩾0(for∀i∈I),where Δiis the constant of deviation of the aspiration levels gi. This constant is specified by the decision-maker. In their paper, Arenas-Parra, Bilbao-Terol, and Rodriguez Uria (2001) utilized this model for the portfolio selection. They considered criteria return, risk and liquidity as fuzzy terms and they applied their model to 132 Spanish mutual funds. Chen and Tsai (2001) developed a pre-emptive GP model in a fuzzy framework. Bilbao-Terol, Arenas-Parra, Jiménez, Pérez Gladish, and Rodrìguez Urìa (2006) integrated the knowledge of the expert and the preferences of the FDM. They made an extension of Sharpe model where the data are fuzzy and the betas are estimated on basis of the historical data. They illustrated their model through a case study of 26 Spanish mutual funds (1996–2000). Bilbao-Terol, Arenas-Parra, Rodrıguez, and Antomil (2007) designed flexible decision-making models for portfolio selection including expert’s knowledge and imprecise preferences and included them in a GP decision-making model for portfolio selection. Mansour, Rebaï, and Aouni (2007) developed an imprecise GP model for portfolio selection based on the satisfaction functions. The FDM’s intuition, experience and judgment were explicitly expressed through the satisfaction functions. This model was applied to select a financial portfolio within the Tunisian Stock Exchange market (34 Tunisian listed companies during the period from January 1999 to December 2002). Three objectives were considered: rate of return, the liquidity and the risk. Other contributions using FGP in portfolio selection are: Watada (1997), Inuiguchi and Ramik (2000), and Wang and Zhu (2002). Moreover, Ignizio (1982), Sharma, Sharma, and Jana (2009), and Gupta and Bhattacharjee (2010) developed a FGP approach for portfolio management in different contexts.In this subsection we present all other GP variants used in portfolio management over the years. According to (Romero, 1991), the MinMax GP variant falls as much under the subject of Linear Programming as GP model. Deng, Li, and Wang (2005) presented a MinMax model on optimal portfolio selection with uncertainty of both randomness and estimation in inputs. A second variant is the non-linear GP model used by: Stone and Reback (1975) with a focus on risk and dividend goals subject to transaction costs; Booth and Dash (1977) in the bank portfolio context; Powell and Premachandra (1998) for accommodating diverse institutional investment objectives and constraints; Dash and Kajiji (2005) for efficient asset-liability management of property liability insurers; and Li and Xu (2007) in portfolio selection.Harrington and Fisher (1980) proposed integer GP and simulation to solve the dynamic multiple-objective problem, followed by Muhlemann and Lockett (1980). Whilst other researchers proposed mixed-integer GP models Rostamy, Azar, and Hosseini (2003), Stoyan and Kwon (2011), and Aouni, Colapinto, and La Torre (2013). In particular, Stoyan and Kwon (2011) studied a stochastic-goal mixed-integer programming approach for integrated stock and bond portfolio optimization.Ballestero and Romero (1996) and Ballestero (1998) were the first to apply the Compromised Programming (CP) model to the portfolio selection problem. Ballestero and Pla-Santamaria (2003, 2004) developed a CP model to optimize the investor utility function regarding the risk applied to the Madrid Exchange Market. Arenas-Parra, Bilbao-Terol, Rodriguez Uria, and Pérez Gladish (2006), Bilbao-Terol, Pérez Gladish, Arenas-Parra, and Rodrìguez Urìa (2006), Bilbao-Terol, Pérez Gladish, and Antomil-Ibias (2006), and Ballestero, Günther, Pla-Santamaria, and Stummer (2007) developed a Fuzzy CP where the distance between a fuzzy ideal values of the goals and the achievement levels are to be minimized. Amiri, Ekhtiari, and Yazdani (2011) proposed a CP method whose results are more consistent with the FDM’s purposes. Aouni, Ben Abdelaziz, and El Fayedh (2003) and Ben Abdelaziz, Aouni, and El Fayedh (2007) developed a Chance Constrained Compromise Programming (CCCP) Model for the portfolio selection problem and applied it to the Tunisian Stock Exchange Market. The CCCP and the SGP formulations are based on the assumption that the aspiration levels of the objectives are normally distributed with known means and variances. In a recent paper, Boswarva and Aouni (2012) extend the CCCP model to other probability distributions such as uniform, triangular and skew triangular. The authors illustrate different formulations by using 25 securities of the Toronto Stock Exchange Market. Interactive GP models for portfolio management have been introduced by Spronk (1980, 1981), Hallerbach and Spronk (1986), Spronk and Wijst (1987), and Pérez Gladish, Jones, Tamiz, and Terol (2007).Other alternative applications of GP in the context of portfolio optimization can be found in: Konno and Yamazaki (1991), Jobst, Horniman, Lucas, and Mitra (2001), Allen, Bhattacharya, and Smarandache (2003), and Sharma, Ghosh, and Sharma (2007). In particular, Konno and Yamazaki (1991) represent a central contribution with respect to the use of alternative measures of investment risk and alternative linear programming procedures for portfolio selection.To conclude, we present two tables summarizing the results of our survey according to different formulation of the GP model (Table 2) for portfolio selection and according to the typology of the information used (Table 3).These classifications can act as guidelines for the FDM and it facilitates the comprehension and the choice of the appropriate GP variant to deal with a specific portfolio selection situation depending on the nature of the information available on the financial market.Since 1952, portfolio theory has been improved, enlarged, and completed in several directions. The current literature review introduces readers to all different GP model variants that have been applied to the multi-dimensional financial portfolio selection problem. The GP variants are characterized by the flexibility to incorporate the FDM’s preferences (experience, intuition and judgment) and by a relative simplicity of computational requirements. From this literature review, we notice that the GP model has been widely applied within the field of financial portfolio selection problem where several incommensurable and conflicting attributes are aggregated simultaneously. The satisfying philosophy behind the GP model fits well with the problem of finding the best compromise where the FDM is requested to accept/choose some trade-offs in order to obtain the best portfolio. We have also noticed, that still there is lack in developing computerized decision support systems based on the GP variants to assist the FDM to express explicitly and easily his/her preferences and to evolve to the best portfolio that provides the highest satisfaction. Indeed, both the mathematical model and the decision-support system will not substitute the FDM role, but it will be considered as a helpful tool to facilitate the decision-making process.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
