@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A classification of the literature on the planning of substitutable products

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Created a taxonomy of the literature on the planning of substitutable productsTaxonomy criteria – substitution mechanism, decision maker, & substitutability direction.Suggested a detailed guidance for related research in the future.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Product substitution,Choice model,Assortment decision,Pricing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A company's assortment of products and corresponding inventory levels are constrained by available resources, such as production capacity, storage space, and capital to acquire the inventory. Thus, customers may not always be able to find a most preferred product at the time of purchase; this unsatisfied demand is often substituted with an alternative. In the extant literature, there have been an increasing number of studies that consider product substitution when planning product assortment, inventory, and capacity, in conjunction with pricing. In this paper we classify the literature on the planning of substitutable products published in the major OM and marketing journals during the past thirty years (1974–2013) and present a comprehensive taxonomy of the literature. One criterion is adopted to discuss modeling objectives, and three major criteria are provided to define the nature of product substitution, including substitution mechanism, substitution decision maker, and direction of substitutability. We also identify research gaps to provide guidance for related research in the future.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Product substitution in general refers to “the use of one product to satisfy demand for a different product” within a specific product category (Chopra & Meindl, 2010). Although the concept of a “category” of merchandise is not well defined (Van Ryzin & Mahajan, 1999), the term refers to a group of homogeneous or similar products composed of alternative attributes (such as color, size, and speed variations). The phenomenon of product substitution has recently gained considerable attention in the operations management (OM) literature because it affects the effectiveness of companies’ decisions with material/product planning, pricing and control.The primary objective of this paper is to delineate the studies on assortment, inventory, capacity, and pricing of substitutable products. Specifically, we break down the current literature by the four major criteria: modeling objective, substitution mechanism, direction of substitutability, and substitution decision maker. A comprehensive taxonomy is developed not only to enhance understanding of the common characteristics in product substitution models but also to help identify the dearth in the literature which necessitates future research.The terms, choice and substitution, are often used interchangeably in the literature, creating ambiguity. It is necessary to understand the semantic variations of these terms. “Choice” frequently refers to choice within a product category (assortment), and the term is popular in the product assortment problems (Mahajan & van Ryzin, 1999). Likewise, “substitution” may refer to the act of switching from one product to another in the assortment, choosing an alternative voluntarily that may not be the first choice (Gaur & Honhon, 2006). For instance, customers may exhibit probabilistic preference of one alternative to another, and customers’ probabilistic choice is associated with customers’ unpredictable behavior to a certain degree. In this case, a voluntary substitution happens even if the first preference is in stock. This concept of substitution is technically identical to the meaning of choice. The other semantic usage of substitution is associated with choosing a substitute when the first choice is out of assortment or out of stock (Kök & Fisher, 2007; Yücel, Karaesmen, Salman, & Türkay, 2009). Since our objective is to provide a clear taxonomy of the literature, we try to adhere to stricter definitions of choice and substitution. The term choice in the present study refers to the initial choice or a preferred product in the given assortment at the time of purchase. Substitution refers to the act of selecting any other alternative (substitute) when the preferred choice is unavailable.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we explain the modeling objectives and the nature of problems in general – assortment planning (AP), inventory decision (ID), capacity planning (CP), and pricing decision (PD) – associated with product substitution. In Section 3, we explore a set of specific criteria to classify the relevant literature, and we provide a detailed survey of each class. In Section 4, we summarize technical details of the methodology, such as objective functions and constraints. Finally, we provide suggestions for future research in Section 5.In order to create a taxonomy of product substitution research, we begin our discussion with the following scenarios.Scenario 1A customer wanted to purchase a Brand-A pain reliever. While visiting a drug store, the customer realized that a new pain-reliever had been released. Rather than purchasing the Brand-A pain-reliever, the customer decided to try the new pain-reliever.The most popular 2 gigabyte flash drives are almost out of stock due to the recent fire at the supplier's factory. The management of a computer manufacturer decides to substitute 4 gigabyte flash drives for 2 gigabyte ones to continue production.A customer who plans to visit China recognizes that prices of economy class tickets have increased significantly, owing to a sharp increase in demand for the route. Although the customer's initial choice is a seat in the economy class, the customer reserves a business class seat.The above scenarios describe various mechanisms for product substitution, i.e., substitution mechanism. We use the term, substitution mechanism, to describe explicit stimuli that may incite to customers’ or suppliers’ product substitution behavior. In Scenario 1, the customer voluntarily chooses a substitute, triggered by the fact that the substitute is newly added in the assortment. This type of substitution mechanism can be best described as assortment-based substitution. Strictly speaking, the action of choosing an alternative out of the pull of substitutable products is customers’ choice problem. Diverse patterns of consumers’ choice lead to an assortment planning problem for the retailer who must decide upon the collection of products to maximize its revenue or profit.If demand for a specific product could not be met, the demand remains unfulfilled or it may be fulfilled with a substitute as illustrated in Scenario 2. In other words, stockouts of a customer's first choice motivates the customer to defer the purchase or to choose available substitutes. This scenario is an example for inventory-based substitution mechanism. The company must make optimal quantity (or lot-sizing) decisions, considering substitution among the products, in order to minimize the total inventory costs which may include shortage cost. Scenario 3 is unique because the customer's substitution behavior is driven by a change in the relative price of substitutable product. This type of substitution mechanism is named price-based substitution. Since a particular product's price affects the demands for other substitutable products, the company must identify the optimal pricing policy to maximize its revenue or profit. The details of these substitution mechanisms will be described again in Section 3.Using various substitution mechanisms described in the scenarios above, researchers have focused on the four areas of decisions: assortment planning (AP), capacity planning (CP), inventory decision (ID), and pricing decision (PD) as illustrated in Fig. 1as well as the first column of Table 1. A number of studies deal with joint problems, combining two or more areas of decisions.Assortment planning (for retailers in particular) is to define a set of substitutable products to carry in the assortment which usually represents a homogeneous product category. In the simplest form of assortment planning, prices of products are fixed constant, and the primary decisions are binary – whether to include a certain product into the assortment or not. Due to resource constraints such as budget and space, retailers are unable to offer a complete selection of products with unlimited inventory levels, a strategy that has many advantages from a marketing perspective (Quelch & Kenny, 1994). One of the benefits of adding variants to an assortment is to increase the likelihood that consumers will purchase something from the assortment (Van Ryzin & Mahajan, 1999). On the other hand, offering a full-range assortment is likely to entail substantial costs, including costs for inventory, shipping, and merchandise presentation (Smith & Agrawal, 2000). More alternatives reduce the volume of demand for each variant and increase the relative variability of demand for each variant (Van Ryzin & Mahajan, 1999). Substitution among products makes it possible for a retailer to maximize profit with an assortment that is smaller in range than the entire product population. Thus, it may not be beneficial for a rational profit maximizer to offer a full-range of assortment to capture all demand.In the assortment planning problems, the demand function is known or deterministic, and product substitution is readily possible at a certain degree of substitution cost. It is also assumed that product variants carried are horizontally differentiated. Identical prices and costs are often incorporated for modeling convenience (Van Ryzin & Mahajan, 1999). However, several models relax these assumptions of identical prices and costs. For example, Li (2007) develops a generalized model with unequal cost parameters. Pentico (1974) considers probabilistic demand patterns with stockouts, substitutions, and holding costs, and Pentico (1976) extends the assortment problem by adopting a non-linear cost function. Pentico (1988) also explores a two-dimensional substitution problem; for example, both length and strength might be evaluated when choosing a steel beam.In another stream of research, assortment planning is integrated into inventory decision problems (joint decisions of product assortment and inventory). The width of assortment and the depth of inventory tend to move in opposite directions under customers’ substitution behavior. Indeed, an increasing number of studies have recently investigated the joint decisions of assortment and inventory. These models revolve around whether a possible variant in a product category is to be carried and what the inventory level of each product should be. Various substitution mechanisms are applied, including assortment-based (Chand, Ward, & Weng, 1994; Li, 2007; Van Ryzin & Mahajan, 1999), inventory-based (Honhon, Gaur, & Seshadri, 2010; Rajaram & Tang, 2001; Smith & Agrawal, 2000; Vaagen, Wallace, & Kaut, 2009), and both (Gaur & Honhon, 2006; Kök & Fisher, 2007; Yücel et al., 2009). See Table 1 for a detailed classification of literature that addresses this modeling direction.Several researchers, including Kök and Fisher (2007), use the term assortment planning to represent a joint inventory and assortment decision, stating that “assortment planning is defined as specifying the set of products carried at each store and setting their inventory levels.” However, it is necessary to distinguish inventory decisions from assortment decisions since a sequential relationship usually exists between assortment and inventory decisions. In other words, a typical retailer would decide on assortment given demand patterns prior to making inventory decisions.Product substitution allows the decision maker to gain flexibility in inventory or lot sizing decisions. Although the decision maker must plan for inventories before customer choice, production substitution by nature offers room to pool risks associated with uncertain demand or random yield (Bassok, Anupindi, & Akella, 1999; Hsu, Li, & Xiao, 2005). The structure of inventory decision models with substitution stems from a variety of conventional inventory models, including periodic-review, EOQ, and the newsvendor models. For instance, McGullivary and Silver (1978), one of the pioneering studies on product substitution, adopt a periodic review policy with order-up-to replenishment and investigate the effects of product substitution on inventory control rules and the corresponding inventory costs. Drezner, Gurnani, and Pasternack (1995) extend EOQ to modeling of product substitution, with an assumption that a product can substitute for another only after stockout. They investigate the effectiveness of inventory policies by comparing no, partial, and full substitutions between two substitutable products. Khouja, Mehrez, and Rabinowitz (1996) propose a two-item newsvendor model in which the optimal quantities for two-way substitutable products are searched for, with an objective to maximize the expected joint profit. The experimental results from the simulation indicate that the effect of product substitution on the expected profit is positive. Specifically, the expected profit from the proposed model is in general higher than that from the counterpart newsvendor model with no substitution.Pasternack and Drezner (1991), Bassok et al. (1999), and Hsu and Bassok (1999) collectively show common features of inventory problems with product substitution. The first feature is a fixed assortment composed of N substitutable products that are distributed to a fixed number of N customer classes with deterministic or stochastic demand. The assumption of fixed assortment differs particularly from the dynamic assortment problems whose goal is to dynamically determine a set of substitutable products in the same product category. While earlier studies deal with a fixed assortment of two substitutable products, more recent studies expand their modeling scope to N substitutable products (Huang, Zhou, & Zhao, 2011; Rao, Swaminathan, & Zhang, 2004; Shah & Avittathur, 2007). The second feature is the assumption of fixed prices and costs. This assumption leads to linear functions for each product's total cost and total revenue, which are proportional to the order quantity (or lot size). The lack of a price component in the models has resulted in the natural development of joint-pricing and inventory models (Aydin & Porteus, 2008; Hopp & Xu, 2005; Hsieh & Wu, 2009; Karakul, 2008; Karakul & Chan, 2008; Tang & Yin, 2007).Inventory decision problems under production substitution cover various operational issues, including inventory anomaly (Yang & Schrage, 2009), bundling (Ernst & Kouvelis, 1999), co-production (Bitran & Gilbert, 1994), random yield (Bitran & Gilbert, 1994; Duenyas & Tsai, 2000), re-manufacturing (Bayindir, Erkip, & Güllü, 2005, 2007; Li, Chen, & Cai, 2006), information sharing (Ganesh, Raghunathan, & Rajendran, 2008), inventory stocking level (Chiang, 2010; Pasternack & Drezner, 1991), supply chain coordination (Gürler & Yilmaz, 2010; Kraiselburd, Narayanan, & Raman, 2004), and joint-ordering policies (Yadavalli, Van Schoor, & Udayabaskaran, 2006).In typical inventory decision problems, capacity is assumed to be unconstrained to meet the demand. However, in capacity planning models, a firm has limited capacity, and capacity is considered a tool to respond to an uncertain demand environment. Therefore, product substitution models for capacity planning are an extension of counterpart inventory planning models and must be understood as a generalization of inventory decisions under product substitution. Price is usually incorporated as a decision variable, and capacity utilization is optimized by altering the prices of substitutable products, capitalizing on the fact that demand for a product is dependent on not only its own price but also on the prices of substitutable products.Birge, Drogosz, and Duenyas (1998) propose a pioneering capacity model in which a firm can determine the optimal capacity levels and prices for two partially substitutable products in a single period. Customers prefer one product over the other, and customers’ preferences are associated with the prices of both products. A certain level of capacity is predetermined for each product, and if capacity is added, the cost for adding capacity should be recovered from the additional revenue created. This study shows that capacity and pricing decisions considerably differ, depending on the decision maker's strategic objective to maximize either an individual product's profit or system-wide profit. Netessine, Dobson, and Shumsky (2002) consider the problem of dedicated and flexible capacity decisions for one-way, downward substitutable services. They found that correlations among different classes of demands are an influential factor for determining the optimal capacity allocation decisions. Bish, Liu, and Suwandechochai (2009) explore a flexible capacity problem for two substitutable products, and Bish and Suwandechochai (2010) investigate dynamics between the level of substitutability and the optimal capacity decision.Pricing under product substitution has been investigated in the revenue management context for decades. Dynamic pricing or price discrimination, combined with partitioning of available capacity, reconfigures the composition of products carried (i.e., the same products or services having different prices due to different conditions and restrictions) and corresponding inventory levels for each product. Nonetheless, the total amount of aggregate inventory is unchanged before and after pricing because the inventory level of the “raw” product is prearranged by capacity (e.g., the fixed number of seats on an aircraft). The modeling framework of Akçay, Natarajan, and Xu (2010) is in line with such a problem.The other area for the use of pricing under product substitution is joint pricing-inventory models. This group of research used to be a minor topic in the literature, stemming from the conventional pricing-inventory models for a single product (Karlin & Carr, 1962; Mills, 1959; Whitin, 1955). Lately, an increasing number of studies have incorporated pricing components. The recent trend reflects an observation that although retailers tend to broaden their product lines and assortment in an effort to increase market share, ineffective pricing causes cannibalization among the products within the product category, resulting in a disappointing increase in revenue (Aydin & Ryan, 2000).Pricing and service level of a product are important factors for customers’ product choice. The two factors interact to determine how demand should be distributed among the products in the same product category. Accordingly, the primary decision variables in joint pricing-inventory models are the price and inventory level of each product carried. The assortment is assumed to be generally fixed, and only two substitutable products are considered for the purpose of simplicity in the modeling structure (Karakul & Chan, 2008; Karakul & Chan, 2010). For example, Karakul and Chan (2008) consider a single-period pricing-inventory model in which an extant product can be substituted by an improved product in the case of a shortage. Karakul and Chan (2008) show that under the optimal policy the price and the amount of safety stock of the improved product are relatively higher than those of the extant product. Later studies on this topic simultaneously consider assortment, inventory, and price decisions (Maddah & Bish, 2007; Tang & Yin, 2010), which are more complex in identifying the optimal policy.As shown in Fig. 2 and summarized in the second through the fourth columns in Table 1, we provide the three product substitution classification criteria: substitution mechanism, substitution decision maker, and direction of substitutability. The term, substitution decision maker, is adopted to indicate the active party in planning decisions for substitutable products. For instance, Scenario 1 is a general case of supplier-driven substitution since the retailer should be the sole decision maker of assortment planning, acknowledging that customers may exhibit product substitution behavior. Direction of substitutability indicates whether substitutability is unidirectional or bidirectional between a pair of two substitutable products.Note that these criteria are not mutually exclusive. Thus, any formal model can be defined through a combination of the three dimensions: 1) substitution mechanism – assortment-based, inventory-based, and price-based; 2) substitution decision maker – supplier-driven (V) and customer-driven (C); and 3) direction of substitutability – one-way and two-way. For example, Scenario 2 can be described as inventory-based, customer-driven, one-way substitution, or “I, C, one” as described in the second, the third, and the fourth columns respectively in Table 1. The notations as a whole imply that the substitution problem is to be modeled as a one-directional substitution problem of inventory planning from the customer (manufacturer in this scenario)’s perspective.In this section, we provide the details of three different substitution mechanisms that may incite to customers’ product substitution behavior as illustrated in the three scenarios in Section 2. The origin of product substitution problems is rooted in choice models in the economics and the marketing literature. Choice models (or choice modeling in general) refer to the analytical models in which choice decision processes of a customer or a market segment are systematically investigated. The choice models were initially classified as static or dynamic models (Mahajan & van Ryzin, 1999). The terms, static and dynamic, indicate the property of assortment, as defined by the information of product availability at the time of purchase. Characterizing the specific details of all choice models may be beyond the scope of present research, yet the substitution mechanisms used to define the process of customer choice is central to any analytical models involving product substitution. Therefore, we present a classification of the choice literature as illustrated in Fig. 3. With respect to substitution mechanism, Fig. 3 is related to the assortment-based substitution specified in Fig. 2 and represents diverse ways of how customers compare alternatives and choose an alternative at the decision stage.In static choice models, a customer's initial choice of a product is independent of the inventory status of all alternatives. If a customer chooses a product not included in the assortment, the sale is either lost or postponed until the product is available. In static choice models, the actual substitution never happens although a number of possible rules can be applied to a choice in the assortment. This is a mechanism of assortment-based substitution in the static choice models. Possible customer actions within this model are demonstrated in Fig. 4. The retailer's problem then becomes to create a product assortment that captures as many customers as possible under resource constraints. If customer choice is dynamic, the unavailable first choice is substituted with available items, following a sequential (multi-stage) decision rules, often with an execution of inventory-based substitution. Consumers’ dynamic choice decisions create a complex challenge for retailers – how to form an optimal product assortment and corresponding inventory levels, given the possibility of second choices (Pentico, 1976).It is possible that the set of alternatives is fixed even in dynamic models with multi-stage decision rules (e.g., Yücel et al., 2009). This modeling approach implies that the customer must choose an available alternative or must give up the purchase since the preferred choice is not available in the seller's assortment. In other words, the customer makes a decision governed by a predetermined set of assortment rules – assortment-based substitution. For more details of conceptual and analytical comparisons between static and dynamic choices, refer to Mahajan and van Ryzin (2001b), Van Ryzin and Mahajan (1999) and Gaur and Honhon (2006).As described in Scenario 1 and shown in Fig. 4, customers’ choice is mainly driven by the fixed choice set (S) in the static choice models (Mahajan & van Ryzin, 1999; Smith & Agrawal, 2000; Van Ryzin & Mahajan, 1999). To operationalize assortment-based substitution in modeling, customers’ choice behavior should be considered a priori, a set of parameters representing customers’ preferences expressed by all pair-wise comparisons among the alternatives in a single product category. The preference relations are defined in the following theorem Kreps (1988):Theorem 1If X is a finite set, a binary relation < is a preference relation if and only if there exists a function u: X→R (called a utility function) such that x < y iff u(x) < u(y).Preference relations should satisfy properties of asymmetry and negative transitivity among n alternatives. Then, customers would make a rational decision by choosing an alternative with the maximum utility and an appropriate set of attributes. In terms of generating preference relations for customers’ choice mechanism (assortment-based substitution), there exist three dominant modeling approaches – attribute models, utility models, and imperfect probabilistic models.Choice models directly define preference relations based on product attributes. To use this type of models, product characteristics should be clearly identified into measurable and comparative attributes. The rules for ranking alternatives should then be decided. Two kinds of modeling directions are popular in assigning product attributes: lexicographic and address models.In the lexicographic models, a product is represented by a composition of binary attributes. A strict dominance relationship exists among the attributes which are prioritized based on preference relations. A product that possesses a dominant attribute is always preferred to products that do not possess the attribute. Possession of a specific attribute is operationalized by binary coding. Suppose a customer tries to buy a thermal jacket with four attributes (see Table 2), prioritized in order of light weight, medium price, black color, and goose down. Product B will never be chosen because it does not possess the attribute of light weight that dominates the other three attributes. As the customer considers the second attribute (medium price), product A, which does not possess this attribute, will be eliminated from consideration. In the next iteration, product C will be chosen over D because C is the only product that meets the first three attributes.In the address model, m attributes are specified on an m-dimensional attribute space. Each product, composed of predetermined values with m attributes, is represented as a specific point. Customers choose products that are closest to their ideal points of integrated attributes. This model is frequently known as Locational Choice Model (LCM). The LCM originates from Hotelling (1929) and has been extended by Lancaster (1966, 1975,1990). To locate a product in the attribute space, it is essential to decide the length of interval for each product attribute in the attribute space; the distances between a customer's ideal points and corresponding product attributes should be strictly quantifiable. The sum of these distances may represent a customer's disutility. Of course, this idea can be extended for multi-customer market environments. In most models in which horizontally differentiated products are considered, differences in product characteristics do not affect quality or price. Rather, it is the matter of customer preference.All of the aforementioned preference relations can be reframed with probabilistic components. Probabilistic models are useful because not all customers have deterministic or identical preference relations. Uncertain behavior may arise if the decision maker is unable to observe all the relevant variables that affect customer choice. Customers may deliberately seek variety, and this opportunistic behavior may be attributed to probabilistic changes in choice over time. For a more complete survey of probabilistic preferences, refer to Block and Marshak (1960). For examples of the address and the lexicographic models such as the Tversky model (Tversky, 1969), refer to Mahajan and van Ryzin (1999).In other modeling approaches, product design decisions (selection of product attributes) may be irrelevant or unnecessary so that the utility of each alternative is specified directly. For the representation of reality, probabilistic preference relations are frequently used in this class of utility models. One such example is a specific group of Binary Logit models and Multinomial Logit (MNL) models, a generalization of binary logit models. In an MNL model, utility values vary by customer due to customers’ heterogeneous preferences.Random components of customer utilities can be added for a product variant. In this case, a double exponential (Gumbel) distribution is commonly utilized. Preference relations with respect to utility are devised to satisfy the assumptions of asymmetry and negative transitivity. The modeling framework using the Gumbel distribution is popular due to its convenient property of closedness under maximization (Gumbel, 1958; Kök & Fisher, 2007). However, violation of the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) property – where the probability of selecting one product is independent of the probability of choosing another – must be carefully considered while the model is implemented (Anderson, De Palma, & Thisse, 1992; Kök & Fisher, 2007; Mahajan & van Ryzin, 1999). The nested MNL model proposed by Ben-Avika (1973) can avert such a restrictive property. Typical use of utility approaches is found in Cachon, Terwiesch, and Xu (2005), Li (2007), and Van Ryzin and Mahajan (1999).There are a few notable differences and similarities between the MNL models and LCM. Due to structural properties, each model is adopted for different purposes. LCM is appropriate when a product attribute is directly linked to heterogeneous customer preferences. Thus, LCM is suitable for design problems for product attributes in a continuous functional form. In contrast, MNL models well illustrate product selection decisions, particularly when the product attributes are discrete valued in the finite set of assortment (Mahajan & van Ryzin, 1999). In MNL models substitution is possible between any pair of products whereas in LCM substitution occurs between two neighboring product variants (Li, 2007).Gaur and Honhon (2006) have compared the findings from their LCM with those from Van Ryzin and Mahajan (1999) MNL model. The two studies analogously find that the retailer may choose not to cover the entire market, thereby leaving some segments of the attribute space uncovered by any product. An important finding is that the optimal assortment need not include the most popular product because carrying more of the most popular product may lead to much weaker demand for other products. Economies of scale attained from the most popular product should at least compensate diseconomies of scale for the remaining products in the assortment. Otherwise, the most preferred product should be excluded from the assortment.Rational choice is a conventional assumption for modeling of social and economic behavior of ordinary customers. A group of scholars in economics has challenged the assumption that customers make rational and stationary choices strictly following their preference relations. Indeed, people may make decisions under bounded rationality due to imperfect information, cognitive distortions, insufficient time, and social influences such as trend and peer pressure.In order to accommodate customers’ bounded rationality or unexpected choices, a set of exogenous axioms by the researcher is added to probabilistic preference relations. In other words, as specific rules are applied to customers’ probabilistic utility functions, the customers’ actual choice may deviate from what the utility functions suggest due to the intervention of exogenous axioms. These exogenous models govern probabilistic demand for each product and the probability of substitution if the customer's first choice is unavailable (Li, 2007). Although demand and substitution are commonly determined exogenously in this category of choice models, each model adopts a uniquely defined set of rules. Therefore, generalization may not be possible. Smith and Agrawal (2000) represent substitution with a general exogenous choice model specified by first-choice probabilities and a substitution matrix. Kök and Fisher (2007) employ an exogenous model and develop an estimation methodology for the consequence of product substitution. In Fadiloglu, Karasan, and Pinar (2010), an exogenous substitution model is developed to focus on shelf-space allocation. The advantage of an exogenous model is that it does not require specific assumptions about demand distribution.Two types of inventory-based substitutions can function as an impetus for customer's product substitution, that is, out of assortment or stockout. In the OM literature, inventory-based substitution is often called stockout-based substitution. Substitution in the static choice models naturally occurs in a way that all the products in the fixed assortment set are a possible substitute even if the customer's favorite is available in the retailer's assortment. In this case, the execution of substitution is a single-stage decision that cannot be distinguished technically from choice. In reality, however, the choice set (S) may dynamically change due to limited resources or inventory status as shown in Fig. 5. The choice set is governed by the retailer's assortment decision, which is affected by predetermined customer preference relations and demand rates of individual products. The necessary information given to customers includes the availability of each product variant within the assortment.Fig. 5 illustrates a dynamic choice model in Mahajan and van Ryzin (1999) and Gaur and Honhon (2006). In this model, not all customers who encounter unavailability of their first choice choose other alternatives. Only customers who find out relevant alternatives would substitute an alternative for the first choice. Otherwise, they leave empty-handed. The customers’ product substitution must result in an actual purchase, even if the customer's final choice is not the customer's most preferred (xi*). Hence, inventory status defines the set of possible choices (a subset of the assortment), and this choice circumstance is also coined as inventory-based substitution. It is worthy to note that the lack of preferred product in dynamic choice models does not necessarily relate to a stockout condition. Instead, the product is not included in the retailer's product assortment in the first place. The possibility of “out of assortment” leads to different class of problems – both assortment-based substitution and inventory-based substitution.In the OM literature, a generic form of inventory (stockout) based substitution is the most popular. As the preferred choice is out of stock, the customer accepts an alternative as a substitute as long as the second choice is in stock. If all possible alternatives are out of stock, a penalty in the form of shortage cost demises profit. The substitution ratios among the alternatives are usually imposed by a substitution matrix. The retailer's objective is to maximize profit by optimizing the inventory level for each item, subject to a fill rate constraint.Kök and Fisher (2007) and Yücel et al. (2009), using both assortment and inventory-based substitution, introduce an advanced model that evolved from the dynamic choice models (Mahajan & van Ryzin, 1999). In the assortment-based substitution process, each customer has a predetermined initial choice from N where N is the set of all alternatives, and substitution happens when the initial choice is not in S (i.e., the retailer does not include the product in its assortment). Accordingly, S is a subset of the set of all possible alternatives as shown in Fig. 6. Customers’ choice is later confirmed by availability.The dynamic choice model (Mahajan & van Ryzin, 1999) differs from the inventory-based substitution models in Kök and Fisher (2007) and Yücel et al. (2009). In the inventory-based substitution models as illustrated in Fig. 7, customers initially have assortment information, and their initial choices are made based on available information. The initial choice is either confirmed or rejected by the additional information of availability. Substitution (second choice) occurs when the initial choice of product i is out of stock.The two modeling approaches are similar, but a crucial difference exists in their modeling directions. While assortment-based substitution models aim to create an economical way to assort products based on customer preference, most inventory-based substitution models focus on inventory policies from the perspective of inventory (risk) pooling to reduce the possibility of stockouts. See Table 1 for a detailed identification of the models in these categories.The research on price-based substitution finds that customer preference and product substitution are driven by product price rather than attributes. In other words, each product's price is an important determinant of utility. By using price as a variable rather than a parameter, researcher not only characterize total benefits and surplus, but also identify the equilibrium price and the optimal price respectively to maximize revenue and profit with the use of price sensitive demand functions.In this modeling approach, customer utility is often expressed as a disutility term in the price-dependent demand function. One modeling premise is that customers have choices from price-discriminated, homogeneous (or near-identical) products. For example, airline companies provide multiple flight services to the same destination in a day. Although flight services may be homogeneous, the ticket price varies depending on the time of service and the demand rate. Accordingly, many price-based substitution models deal with revenue management issues.For example, Akçay et al. (2010) develop a utility model with MNL in which the utility is determined by the price of each product. Hsieh and Wu (2009) consider a supply chain with two vendors that supply competing products to a retailer. Note that a substitution component can be integrated to price-based substitution models, as inventory decisions or stockout conditions are combined with customer choice. The recent trend is leaning toward these joint decision problems. The joint problem of price-based substitution and inventory decisions is considered in Dong, Kouvelis, and Tian (2009), Gürler and Yilmaz (2010), and others.A supplier (or vendor) can plan for production, taking product substitution into account. Substitutes should be equivalent to the original product in terms of performance and should conform to such design specifications as size, speed, and texture. In supplier-driven substitution, the supplier is the active party that optimizes its assortment, inventory, and substitution decisions, depending on product availability, customer preference, and demand rates. Customers are assumed to willingly accept the substitutes. As the price variable is introduced in the model, the modeling objective of supplier-driven substitution is to maximize revenue or profit from various product offerings. A product with a higher price tag and better performance could substitute for a low performance product although doing so may reduce profits. For example, a supplier should prepare for a possible stockout of preferred component by planning for a substitutable component to run its manufacturing system without stoppage. In this case, the substitutable component must perform better to meet the customer's quality standard and may be tagged with a higher price accordingly.Customer preference and willingness to substitute are a priori in supplier-driven substitution models and do not physically interfere with or interact with the modeling outcome. Substitution is not exercised by customers, but is rather what the supplier expects in the planning stage. In this context, most of the models in this category relate to decision makers’ planning of assortment, inventory, capacity, or price.Drezner et al. (1995) propose an economic order quantity (EOQ) model with two substitutable products. They compare total costs under three substitution scenarios – no substitution, full substitution, and partial substitution; they show that full product substitution never allows the decision maker to achieve the minimum cost level. Full substitution occurs as all customers are willing to accept a substitute when a preferred choice is not available at the time of purchase. Under partial substitution, however, only a fraction of customers would substitute the alternative for the preferred choice. Chand et al. (1994) attempt to generalize Pentico (1976) and propose a substitutable part-selection model using dynamic programming. Chand et al. (1994) show that the segmented policy proposed by Pentico (1976) remains the optimal policy for more general cost functions, including substitution costs. A segmented policy is defined as “a supply policy in which stocked sizes and substitutions are grouped into blocks or segments, with the largest size in each segment serving as a source for all sizes in the segment (Pentico, 1976).” Gürler and Yilmaz (2010), Karakul and Chan (2010), and Li et al. (2006) show recent research trends in this class of product substitution problems.Unlike the supplier-driven substitutions, decisions with customer-driven substitution are made by different entities, typically with the adoption of a two-stage modeling process. First, the supplier (mostly the retailer) decides product assortment and inventory level for each product, in conjunction with pricing on occasion. Second, customers decide on substitution if the first choice is out of stock. In general, this class of substitution is defined as customer-driven substitution for two-way, substitutable products; the direction of substitutability – one-way vs. two-way – is described in the following section. If the modeling environment consists of competitive market conditions with multiple players, game-theoretic approaches are applied as well (Hopp & Xu, 2008; Parlar, 1988).The terms, two-way substitution and customer-driven substitution, are not always interchangeable. A variety of customer-driven substitution models do not employ two-way substitutions. For example, Shah and Avittathur (2007) consider a problem of substitution and cannibalization between standard and customized products. If the customized product is out of stock, customers will purchase the standard product. This phenomenon is customer-driven and is an example of one-way substitution.The direction of substitutability among products is either one-way or two-way. Under one-way or unidirectional substitution, product A can substitute for product B, but product B cannot substitute for product A. Product variants are chosen with respect to performance or utility, and a substitution occurs in only one direction, which is guided by the customer's preference relations. One-way substitution is typically adopted in utility models (refer to Section 3.1). One-way substitution can be applied both to the manufacturer's part selection and to the customer's choice of products in the retail environment.The property of one-way substitution differs in its direction, downward vs. upward. A downward substitution occurs when high-end products are substituted for low-end products (Duenyas & Tsai, 2000; Hsu & Bassok, 1999). In airline services, for instance, passengers are often traded up to remaining business-class seats when no economy-class seats are available due to overbooking. For part selection problem, substitutable components should perform equally well as the original component. Assuming that the original component is the best choice to meet the minimum requirements of attributes and features, the only feasible direction of substitutability is downward. An example of upward substitution occurs with lexicographic models of consumer choice; less attractive alternatives usually substitute for the most preferred product (usually at a lower price). However, if a customer decides to purchase products that possess only a particular set of attributes, the search space expands beyond the minimum requirements. Thus, a downward substitution may occur.Under two-way, or bidirectional substitution, product A can substitute for product B and vice versa. Two-way substitution occurs among equally compatible products with respect to their attributes or utilities. In two-way substitution models, substitution rates are exercised as a function of prices of alternative products in order to facilitate customers’ substitution behavior. For example, Parlar (1988) proposes a game-theoretic inventory model in which two manufacturers compete and acknowledge the substitution rates between their products.In this section, we briefly explore the methodology (model formulation and modeling base) utilized, and an outlook of the methodology is provided in the sixth and the seventh columns in Table 1. Regardless of substitution mechanisms, the objective of modeling in most of the assortment literature aimed at the retail environment is to maximize expected profit of a product category (Gaur & Honhon, 2006; Kök & Fisher, 2007; Mahajan & van Ryzin, 2001b; Smith & Agrawal, 2000; Van Ryzin & Mahajan, 1999; Yücel et al., 2009). While profit maximization is the common objective in the retail environment, cost minimization is more popular in the production environment (Chand et al., 1994; Drezner et al., 1995). Cost minimization is rationalized for part selection to ensure that price or demand for the final product remains unaffected. The selection of decision variables is driven by modeling objectives which include configuration of product assortment, the amount of inventory in units, and the amount of safety stock to achieve a certain service level. Price can also be set as a variable that affects the utility of a product and customers’ substitution behavior (Aydin & Porteus, 2008; Aydin & Ryan, 2000; Tang & Yin, 2007). A unique variable might be a set of suppliers from whom the retailer sources its assorted products (Yücel et al. 2009). The optimal policy is devised as the retailer's selection of suppliers, given that each product variant is sourced from a unique supplier.In shaping the modeling environment, a variety of modeling methods are adopted, including EOQ, newsvendor, integer programming, and game theory. Drezner et al. (1995) present a relatively simple EOQ model with two-way substitutable products with known demand. In contrast, Parlar and Goyal (1984) suggest a single period newsvendor problem for two substitutable products and identify optimal order quantities for both products. Van Ryzin and Mahajan (1999) propose a joint assortment and inventory model for static substitution using the newsvendor modeling approach. The use of the newsvendor model has created a number of extensions (Huang et al., 2011; Khouja et al., 1996; Serin, 2007; Wu, Petruzzi, & Chhajed, 2007). A unique extension of the newsvendor model is given in Gürler and Yilmaz (2010) who consider supply chain coordination with return contracts in a two-level supply chain.A significant portion of literature utilizes mixed integer programming (MIP) for a binary selection of products to be assorted. Chand et al. (1994) construct a dynamic MIP model that selects a subset of one-way substitutable parts in the production environment in order to minimize total operating and overhead costs. This model is an extension of Pentico (1976), uses a non-linear function of purchase price, and deals with a condition in which the substitution is decided by the manufacturer. Mahajan and van Ryzin (1999) and Gaur and Honhon (2006) formulate an MIP and compare static and dynamic two-way substitution problems. Similarly, Honhon et al. (2010) present a dynamic programming algorithm to determine assortment and inventory levels in regards to inventory-based substitution.Parlar (1988) proposes a game-theoretic model with two independent decision makers whose products may be substituted if one runs out of stock. The model shows the existence of a Nash equilibrium solution. Later, Boyaci (2005), Chiang (2010), Hopp and Xu (2008), Netessine and Rudi (2003), Serin (2007), Wu et al. (2007), and Xia (2011) also adopt a game-theoretic approach.Customers’ product substitution behaviors are a double-edged sword for a firm, creating both desirable and undesirable consequences in assortment and inventory decisions. Full substitution in the competitive environment may raise uncertainty while managing product assortment and inventory. In contrast, partial substitution in the same product category may induce a risk-pooling effect, enhancing the overall service level of the inventory system. Because of these complicated effects of product substitution, a growing body of literature has investigated diverse issues associated with product substitution. In this paper, we summarized important issues with assortment, capacity, inventory, and pricing models under product substitution. We also provided three technical criteria for classifying the substitution literature, including substitution mechanism, substitution decision maker, and direction of substitutability. The proposed taxonomy is summarized in Table 1.There are several possible areas for future research. One is competition with respect to strategic capacity planning. As shown in Table 1, capacitated models are quite rare in the product substitution literature. In fact, most competitive inventory models involving product substitution are aimed at inventory-based competition in which each player's inventory level is assumed to be unlimited, an assumption that is not always realistic. Apple, for instance, suffered from its supplier's insufficient capacity, experiencing a shortage of iPads which opened a door for Samsung's Galaxy Note series. This example illustrates why capacity planning in relation to competition of substitutable products may be a meaningful research direction.Another possible direction is exploring the locational choice model based on customer-driven, one-way substitution. One reason for the popularity of the MNL model is its tractability with two-way preference relations, despite its restrictive property of violating IIA. Practical examples exist in which one-way substitution is the dominant form. For example, most of Apple's iPhone users may be willing to substitute a new model for an old one, but not the other way around. Future research may rely on the one-way locational choice model, which is more flexible in representing preference relations for such cases.One may consider relaxing assumptions that inventories in a single product category have identical values over time. In typical inventory-based substitution models, for example, the value of leftover inventory is not considered, is fixed constant, or is assumed to be zero. The linear function of salvage value (deterioration over time) may be considered. The diminishing value of products is easily found in the automobile and telecommunication industries, where the value of extant products dramatically deteriorates as new lines of products are introduced to the market.Finally, there exists ample opportunity to extend substitution research in the area of supply chain coordination and supply chain contracts. Besides, the opposite behavior of substitution – complementing or supplementing – can be modeled, built on the implications from the literature on product substitution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
