@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of the effectiveness of manufacturer-sponsored retailer gift cards in supply chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze a supply chain with a manufacturer-sponsored gift card with purchase.The gift card is redeemable on all products at the retailer.We identify optimal wholesale price, retail price, and gift card value.We identify conditions under which gift cards make all parties better off.We develop an incentive scheme to improve supply chain performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pricing,Retail,Supply chain management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Some manufacturers sponsor “free” retailer gift cards to be given to consumers who purchase their products. These gift cards are paid for by the manufacturer and are redeemable on all products at the retailer. We develop a model of such a supply chain. We analyze cases in which the gift cards’ redemption rate is constant or increasing in gift card value. The results indicate that in addition to the redemption rate and consumers’ valuation for gift card dollars, the profitability of manufacturer-sponsored gift cards depends on the average gross margin of the retailer and the type of purchases consumers make with gift cards. Furthermore, we show that under certain conditions, free gift cards will increase the expected profits of the retailer and manufacturer as well as decrease the retail price of the product. These conditions include a retailer with large average gross margin and consumers using gift cards to purchase products they would not buy with cash otherwise. Furthermore, all consumers, including those who do not redeem the gift card, are more likely to benefit from a reduced retail price when their probability of redeeming the gift card after purchase is equal to their estimated redemption probability at purchase time. We show the conditions under which gift cards are more profitable than cash mail-in rebates. We develop an incentive scheme to improve the performance of supply chains with gift cards.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Consider the promotion shown in Fig. 1where a consumer gets a free $20 Home Depot gift card for buying a Delta faucet from Home Depot for $89 or more. Here, the manufacturer (he) pays for the gift card which benefits both the retailer (she) and the consumers. Fig. 1 also shows a promotion in which consumers get a free $25 gift card for buying $75 or more of Avery products and $10 gift card for buying Proctor and Gamble products. This use of “free” gift cards paid for by the manufacturer and redeemable at the retailer differs from promotions studied in the literature and offered by the retailer or the manufacturer.Manufacturers and retailers have used various promotional instruments to increase their sales and profits. Manufacturer promotions can be directed at the retailer through incentives, such as rebates (Taylor, 2002) or buybacks (Pasternack, 1985), or directed at consumers through coupons (Anderson and Song, 2004), instant rebates (Caliskan-Demirag et al., 2009), and mail-in rebates (Khouja and Zhou, 2010). Retailers use similar promotions targeted to consumers. Another promotion which has gained popularity in recent years has been the use of “free” gift cards and gift certificates given to consumers by retailers with the purchase of certain products or with purchases of certain amount or larger.Retailers use gift cards in two ways. The more common way is to sell gift cards to consumers who use them as gifts (Offenberg, 2007). The second way is to use gift cards to increase sales by giving them “free” to consumers who fulfill some requirements, such as reaching a threshold amount in a single purchase (Khouja et al., 2011) or buying a particular product (Khouja et al., 2013). For gift cards given “free” to consumers spending an amount equal to or greater than a threshold, the retailer bears the entire cost of the card. For gift cards given “free” with the purchase of a particular product, the cost of the gift card may be entirely incurred by the retailer or by the manufacturer of the product as shown in the examples of Fig. 1. While the cost of a promotion, i.e. gift cards, can be shared between the manufacturer and the retailer, such as in cooperative advertising models (Seyedesfahani et al., 2010), we are not able to find any examples of sharing the cost of gift cards in industry.In this paper, we analyze the use of manufacturer-sponsored retailer-issued gift cards in a single-manufacturer single-retailer supply chain. We use a Stackelberg game framework where the manufacturer is the leader, because he pays for and determines the value of the gift card, and the retailer is the follower. This supply chain structure is commonly used in the literature (Esmaeili et al., 2009). Other power distributions where power is equally distributed between the retailer and the manufacturer (Bichescu and Fry, 2009) or the retailer is the leader (Aust and Buscher, 2012) are possible.We first analyze a decentralized supply chain and then a centralized supply chain to use as a benchmark. In both cases, we analyze supply chain performance under constant gift card redemption rate and a variable rate which is increasing in gift card value. In a decentralized supply chain, we first assume that the manufacturer keeps the wholesale price fixed when introducing the gift card and that the redemption rate of gift cards is constant. We show that under certain conditions, gift cards not only allow manufacturers to pass savings directly to consumers, but also may encourage retailers to reduce the retail price. This decrease in the retail price is more likely to occur when the retailer’s average gross margin, hereafter margin, on products is large, consumers use the gift cards to buy products they would not have purchased with cash, and when their estimates of the redemption probability at purchase time is the same as their actual redemption probability post-purchase. We also analyze in which the manufacturer changes the wholesale price and show that in this case the manufacturer keeps a larger share of supply chain profits and makes twice as much profit as the retailer. Also, for this case, the manufacturer’s average margin increases and on average, consumers are worse off when it is optimal for the manufacturer to sponsor gift cards. In a centralized supply chain, we show that when gift cards are introduced, demand, profit, and retail price increase. In this sense, while the supply chain benefits, consumers may not, especially those who do not redeem the gift cards. Finally, we examine the effects of consumer behavioral inconsistency and a pricing scheme the manufacturer can use to improve the effectiveness of gift cards. We show that an incentive scheme in which the manufacturer imposes a negative relationship between gift card value and the retail price can improve the performance of the supply chain and can ensure that all consumers, the manufacturer, and the retailer are better off with gift cards.Section 2 contains a literature review followed by model preliminaries in Section 3. Analysis of a decentralized supply chain with manufacturer-sponsored gift card and fixed wholesale price is in Section 4 followed by the analysis with unrestricted wholesale price in Section 5. The use of gift cards in a centralized supply chain is analyzed in Section 6. Section 7 contains a comparison of gift cards with manufacturer cash mail-in rebates, analysis of effects of consumer behavioral inconsistency, a pricing scheme to improve supply chain’s performance, and numerical examples. Section 8 contains the conclusions and directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
