@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Network data envelopment analysis: A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper reviews articles on network data envelopment analysis.Network structures and models for studying network DEA are categorized.Network DEA studies are classified according to the structure and model discussed.Directions for future studies are suggested from the review.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Network,Efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Network data envelopment analysis (DEA) concerns using the DEA technique to measure the relative efficiency of a system, taking into account its internal structure. The results are more meaningful and informative than those obtained from the conventional black-box approach, where the operations of the component processes are ignored. This paper reviews studies on network DEA by examining the models used and the structures of the network system of the problem being studied. This review highlights some directions for future studies from the methodological point of view, and is inspirational for exploring new areas of application from the empirical point of view.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Efficiency measurement is an important task in management, to better understand the past accomplishments of a unit and planning for its future development. Since the seminal work of Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), data envelopment analysis (DEA) has been widely recognized as an effective technique for measuring the relative efficiency of a set of decision making units (DMUs) that apply multiple inputs to produce multiple outputs, with many theoretical developments and practical applications being reported (see, for example, the review of Cook & Seiford, 2009; Emrouznejad, Parker, & Tavares, 2008; Liu, Lu, Lu, & Lin, 2013a, 2013b; Seiford, 1996; Zhou, Ang, & Poh, 2008).DEA was originally developed to measure the efficiency of a DMU as a whole unit, without considering its internal structure. In other words, the system is treated as a black box, within which inputs are supplied to produce outputs, with there generally being a positive correlation between the two. However, there are empirical studies that indicate this may not always be true. For example, Cron and Sobol (1983) showed that IT (information technology) had little effect on business performance. A later study found that the operation of banking and similar industries had two processes, capital collection and investment (Wang, Gopal, & Zionts, 1997), and that while IT was useful for the former, whether the firms would actually make a profit or not was dependent on correct investment decisions being made. This indicates that to study the performance of a DMU, it is necessary to study its component processes, so that the cause of any inefficiencies can be identified.The first paper discussing this idea is probably Charnes et al. (1986), which found that army recruitment had two processes: the first created awareness through advertisements, and the second created contracts. Separating large operations into detailed processes helps identify the real impact of input factors. The simplest case is to separate the whole operation into two processes, as Charnes et al. (1986) and Wang et al. (1997) did. There are many more complicated cases in which the whole operation is separated into more than two processes. These may have a series structure, a parallel structure, or a mixture of these. These structures are generally called network structures, and the DEA technique to measure the efficiency of systems with a network structure is called network DEA (Färe & Grosskopf, 2000).Another issue that should be noted is that ignoring the operations of the component processes may obtain misleading results, and a number of examples have been presented to show that an overall system may be efficient, even while all component processes are not (Kao & Hwang, 2008). More significantly, there are cases in which all the component processes of a DMU have performances that are worse than those of another DMU, and yet the former still has the better system performance (Kao & Hwang, 2010). These findings indicate that a network DEA model is required to produce correct results when measuring efficiencies.Hundreds of works that discuss network DEA have been published since Charnes et al. (1986). Some develop models to measure efficiencies under specified conditions, some examine the properties possessed by certain models, and others apply existing models to solve real world problems. Cook, Liang, and Zhu (2010) reviewed a number of models for the basic two-stage system, in which the system has only two processes connected in series, and the second only consumes all the outputs from the first for production. Castelli, Pesenti, and Ukovich (2010) reviewed shared-flow, multilevel, and some network models. The network models they reviewed are of the general network DEA form developed by Färe and Grosskopf (2000), leaving many others untouched.This paper carries out a systematic review of studies related to network DEA. The classification of the articles is based on the model developed or used in the study, and the structure of the network systems of the problems studied. For each type of structure, the models, applications, and data types that have appeared in the literature are reviewed. It is anticipated that the results of the current study will inspire the development of new models, the solving of practical problems, and the presentation of new applications in network DEA.Let Xijand Yrjdenote the ith input (i=1,…,m) and rth output (r=1,…,s) of the jth DMU (j=1,…,n). The DEA model developed by Charnes et al. (1978) for measuring the relative efficiency of DMU 0 under the assumption of constant returns to scale in multiplier form is as follows:(1)E0=max.∑r=1surYr0s.t.∑i=1mviXi0=1∑r=1surYrj-∑i=1mviXij⩽0,j=1,…,nur,vi⩾ε,r=1,…,s,i=1,…,mwhere urand viare virtual multipliers, and ɛ is a small non-Archimedean number used to avoid ignoring any factor in calculating efficiency (Charnes & Cooper, 1984). This model is conventionally referred to as the CCR model. If the returns to scale are allowed to be variable, then an unrestricted variable u0 is subtracted from∑r=1surYr0in the objective function and∑r=1surYrjin the constraint set (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984). Model (1) is input-oriented. The DEA model can also be formulated as an output-oriented one. In this case, the model under constant returns to scale is the same as Model (1), whereas the one under variable returns to scale adds an unrestricted variable v0 to∑i=1mviXi0and∑i=1mviXijin the constraint set (Banker et al., 1984). The model which allows returns to scale to be variable is usually referred to as the BCC model.Model (1) has a dual, which can be formulated as follows:(2)E0=min.θ-ε∑i=1msi-+∑r=1ssr+s.t.∑j=1nλjXij+si-=θXi0,i=1,…,m∑j=1nλjYrj-sr+=Yr0,r=1,…,sλj,si-,sr+⩾0,j=1,…,n,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,sθunrestricted in signThis model is input-oriented, and is of the envelopment form. If a model with an output orientation is desired, then the objective function is changed to “max.θ+ε∑i=1msi-+∑r=1ssr+” and the variable θ attached to Xi0 is moved to Yr0. Furthermore, when the assumption of constant returns to scale is changed to variable returns to scale, then a convexity constraint of∑j=1nλj=1is added.Model (1) (or Model (2), equivalently) does not take the internal structure of the system into account in measuring efficiency, and thus is usually called the black-box model. The black-box model only considers the inputs Xiconsumed by and the outputs Yrproduced from the system. In contrast to the black-box model, a network model takes the operations of the component processes into account in measuring efficiency. When the internal structure of a system is considered, the inputs supplied from outside can be used directly by all processes, and the outputs of every process can be either the final outputs of the system or the intermediate products to be used by other processes for production.Suppose a system is composed of p processes. Other terms, such as subunits, sub-DMUs, divisions, and components, have also been used, and this paper will use the term processes when there is no ambiguity. DenoteXij(k)andYrj(k)as the ith input supplied from outside, i∊I(k), where I(k) is the index set of the exogenous inputs used by process k, and the rth final output of the system, r∊O(k), where O(k) is the index set of the final outputs produced by process k, k=1,…,p, respectively, of the jth DMU. Clearly, the sums ofXij(k)andYrj(k)for all p processes are the system input Xijand system output Yrj, respectively, i.e.,∑k=1pXij(k)=Xijand∑k=1pYrj(k)=Yrj. Further, letZfj(a,k)denote the fth intermediate product produced by process a, f∊M(k), where M(k) is the index set of the intermediate products used by process k, andZgj(k,b)denote the gth intermediate product to be used by process b, g∊N(k), where N(k) is the index set of the intermediate products produced by process k. The same intermediate product f produced by different processes for process k to use can be aggregated asZfj(k), i.e.,∑a=1pZfj(a,k)=Zfj(k). Similarly, the same intermediate product g produced by process k for different processes to use can also be aggregated asZgj(k)=∑b=1pZgj(k,b). With these notations, the general network structure can be depicted, as shown in Fig. 1.Assuming the most general case where the technologies of all processes are allowed to be different, the production possibility set defined by the general network structure of Fig. 1 isT={(x,y,z)|∑j=1nλj(k)Xij(k)⩽xi,i∈I(k),∑j=1nλj(k)Yrj(k)⩾yr,r∈O(k),∑j=1nλj(k)Zfj(k)⩽zf,f∈M(k),∑j=1nλj(k)Zgj(k)⩾zg,g∈N(k),λj(k)⩾0,j=1,…,n,k=1,…,p}. The input-oriented model for measuring the system efficiency can be formulated as:(3)min.θs.t.∑j=1nλj(k)Xij(k)+si-(k)=θXi0(k),i∈I(k),k=1,…,p∑j=1nλj(k)Yrj(k)-sr+(k)=Yr0(k),r∈O(k),k=1,…,p∑j=1nλj(k)Zfj(k)+sfo(k)=Zf0(k),f∈M(k),k=1,…,p∑j=1nλj(k)Zgj(k)-sgo(k)=Zg0(k),g∈N(k),k=1,…,psi-(k),sr+(k),sfo(k),sgo(k),λj(k)⩾0,i∈I(k),r∈O(k),f∈M(k),g∈N(k),j=1,…,n,k=1,…,p,where the non-Archimedean number ɛ in the objective function has been omitted for simplicity of expression. Note that if an inputXc(k)of process k is the same as one of its input intermediate products,Zc(k), then they should be aggregated in the above formulation. This concept also applies to outputs (Färe & Grosskopf, 2000).If an output efficiency is desired, then θ in the first constraint is removed and a variable ϕ is attached toYr0(k)in the second constraint, with the objective function changed to “max ϕ”, where the efficiency score is 1/ϕ. When the returns to scale of every process are allowed to be variable, then the convexity constraints of∑j=1nλj(k)=1,k=1,…,p, are added. The efficiency of process k, θ(k), can be measured by changing the objective function in Model (3) to “min.∑k=1pθ(k)”, with the right-hand side term of the first constraint replaced withθ(k)Xi0(k).Another way to measure the efficiency of the system is to find the multipliersu,v,w, andwˆwhich produce the maximum efficiency under the constraint that the aggregation of the outputs is less than or equal to that of the inputs for all processes. In symbols, this is:(4)E0S=max.∑r=1surYr0∑i=1mviXi0s.t.∑r∈O(k)ur(k)Yrj(k)+∑g∈N(k)wˆg(k)Zgj(k)-∑i∈I(k)vi(k)Xij(k)-∑f∈M(k)wf(k)Zfj(k)⩽0,j=1,…,n,k=1,…,pur(k),vi(k),wf(k),wˆg(k)⩾0,r∈O(k),i∈I(k),f∈M(k),g∈N(k),k=1,…,pThe fractional form of the objective function can be linearized by equating the denominator to 1, as a constraint, and using the numerator as the objective function. Notably, the linearized model is the dual of Model (3).If an inputXc(k)of process k is the same as one of its input intermediate products,Zc(k), then they should have the same multipliervc(k)(orwc(k)) in the above formulation. The same concept also applies to outputs. The efficiency of process k is the ratio of the aggregation of its outputs to that of its inputs:(5)E0(k)=∑r∈O(k)ur(k)Yr0(k)+∑g∈N(k)wˆg(k)Zg0(k)∑i∈I(k)vi(k)Xi0(k)+∑f∈M(k)wf(k)Zf0(k)as is seen from the constraint of Model (4).Models to measure the efficiency of network systems have been developed from these two basic models, and they will be discussed in the next section. Note that Models (3) and (4) have different strengths and weaknesses, with Chen, Cook, Kao, and Zhu (2013) containing a detailed discussion of these.Various models have been developed to measure the efficiency of network production systems. Since some are similar, they can be classified as of the same type in order to carry out a more systematic analysis of them. This paper thus classifies these models into the following nine types.The simplest way to measure the efficiencies of the system and the component processes of a network system is to treat each of them as independent DMUs, and measure their efficiencies separately. Since the system and processes are handled independently, their technical and scale efficiencies can be measured using the BCC and CCR models.A system distance measure model is used to find either the minimum input distance measure θ or maximum output distance measure ϕ to be the system efficiency, based on Model (3). In order to make the minimum of the input parameter comparable with the maximum of the output parameter, the latter is usually expressed in reciprocal or negative form.The distance function can also be directional, that is, the distance is measured along a direction g. In this case, the objective function is to maximize the distance parameter θ, with the right-hand side terms in the constraints of Model (3) replaced withXi0-θgiXandYr0+θgrYfor inputs and outputs, respectively. This type of model is especially useful for cases with undesirable outputs, where a lower amount of these is wanted.In the system distance measure model every process is required to have the same distance parameter θ when measuring the system efficiency. An extension of this model is to allow each process to be associated with a different parameter,θ(k), which represents the efficiency of this process, and the system efficiency is a weighted average of these individual process efficiencies: min.∑k=1pω(k)θ(k). If the parameter is defined from the output side, then minimization is changed to maximization. For processes defined from different orientations, a minus sign is attached to those with different directions of optimization to make them comparable.The directional distance function has also been used to develop models in this category. The idea is the same as that in the system distance measure.The most general case of the distance measure model is to allow every factor to have different parameters, and the objective function is to minimize the weighted average of these. In order to make the parameters attached to inputs and outputs comparable, those attached to the outputs are expressed in reciprocal form. Note that when there is only one process in the system, this model boils down to the Russell efficiency measure. The reciprocal expression makes the model nonlinear. To overcome this, a ratio form of the average of the input factor parameters to that of the output factor parameters has been used.A simplification of this type of model, where the factors are classified according to their types, e.g., input, output, and intermediate product, and the same parameter is attached to factors of the same type has also appeared in the literature. The distance can also be measured along a direction g in this type of model.Tone and Tsutsui (2009) proposed a slacks-based measure (SBM) model to measure the system and process efficiencies of a network system. The slack variables are adjusted by dividing by observations of the DMUs being evaluated to make different factors comparable. They can also be adjusted by directional vectors or the range of the corresponding factor. Two forms of the objective function have been proposed, one does not consider intermediate products, while the other does (Tone & Tsutsui, 2009). Fukuyama and Mirdehghan (2012) noted that the slack variables associated with the intermediate products must also be accounted for, and proposed a two-phase method to identify inefficient DMUs. The SBM model has also been widely used for cases with undesirable outputs.The efficiency of the system can also be measured as the ratio of the aggregation of the exogenous outputs to that of the exogenous inputs,E0S=∑r=1surYr0∑i=1mviXi0. A special form of this type of model is the relational model proposed by Kao (2009a) for general network systems, which requires the same factor to have the same multiplier in the aggregation, no matter which process the factor corresponds to. Models of this type are usually expressed in multiplier form. However, since the multiplier and the envelopment forms have a primal–dual relationship, models in this category normally have a counterpart in the system distance measure one.Similar to the ratio-form system efficiency model, the efficiency of a process can also be measured as a ratio of the aggregation of its inputs to that of its outputs, as shown in Eq. (5). In contrast to the system efficiency model, where system efficiency is the primary concern in searching for the most favorable multipliers, and a relationship between the system and process efficiencies is then derived, the primary concern of a process efficiency model is process efficiencies, with a driving force of their aggregation, usually in the form of a weighted average,∑k=1pω(k)E0(k). With a proper choice of the weightω(k), a linear form of the model is usually obtained.In the Nash bargaining game with p players, it is required that each player’s payoff is at least as large as the player’s breakdown payoff. With respect to a set of breakdown payoffs (b1,…,bp), each player’s payoff can be obtained via solving the problem of “max.∏k=1p(uk-bk)”, where ukis player k’s payoff. With a proper choice of breakdown payoffs (b1,…,bp), and by defining ukas the efficiency of process k, the best strategy, expressed as the multipliers for calculating efficiency scores, is determined, and the associated efficiencies calculated. The constraints are conceptually the same as those of Model (4).The value-based model is concerned with maximizing either the aggregate output,∑r=1surYr0, or the profit,∑r=1sPryr-∑i=1mCixi, of a network system within the constraints of Model (4).While most of the above-mentioned models have variations, they are not specifically indicated, unless they are conceptually important. In the review presented in the following section, they will be explained whenever necessary.Network systems have various types of structure. Every study on network DEA is associated with a structure, based on which a model for measuring efficiency is developed, an application to real world problems is carried out, or a data type is discussed. This paper thus reviews the works on network DEA according to the structure that the studies are based on, which can be classified as series, parallel, mixed, hierarchical, and dynamic. Since a large number of studies are based on two-stage structures, which are special cases of series ones, they are separated from those with the series structure in the following discussion.The simplest network structure is the basic two-stage one shown in Fig. 2, where all inputs, Xi, from outside are supplied to the first process to produce intermediate products, Zg, for the second process to produce the final outputs, Yr.Wang et al. (1997) investigated the effects of IT on the performance of 22 banks among the top 100 most efficient users of information systems in the world, where the system is divided into two processes, funds collection and investment. Seiford and Zhu (1999) examined the performance of the top 55 US commercial banks, where the operations of a bank are divided into two processes to measure profitability and marketability. Based on this work, studies have been carried out of the Fortune 500 companies (Zhu, 2000), 245 banks in the US with assets greater than one billion US dollars (Luo, 2003), 14 financial holding companies in Taiwan (Lo & Lu, 2006, 2009), US S&P 500 firms (Lo, 2010), 40 IC fabless firms in Taiwan (Lu & Hung, 2009), 19 construction firms in Greece (Tsolas, 2013), and 13 commercial banks in Greece (Tsolas, 2011). Other similar studies include the R&D invention efficiency and marketability of 28 Taiwanese IC-design firms (Lu, 2009), the productivity of 13 retail stores in the US (Keh & Chu, 2003), the front-office and on-field operations of 30 teams in two Major League Baseball leagues (Sexton & Lewis, 2003), the operating efficiency and effectiveness of 28 online stockbrokers in Taiwan (Ho & Oh, 2008), the marketing and services performance of 49 hotels in an Asia–Pacific hotel chain (Keh, Chu, & Xu, 2006), the operational and profitability efficiencies of 11 life insurance companies in Taiwan (Tsai & Wang, 2010), and the performance of manager- and physician-controlled processes in physician care (Chilingerian & Sherman, 2004).All of these studies used the conventional CCR or BCC models to measure efficiency, except Narasimhan, Talluri, and Das (2004), which applied the super-efficiency model of Andersen and Petersen (1993) to measure the flexibility and execution competence of 70 cases from the National Association of Purchasing Managers.The system efficiency of these studies was calculated for each DMU, independent of their two component processes. There are also studies that use the process efficiencies to form the performance of the system. For example, Yang (2006) used the average and the CCR-concept model to measure the production and inventory efficiencies of 72 life and health insurance companies in Canada.Chen, Cook, and Zhu (2010) applied a system distance measure model to measure the system efficiency of a basic two-stage system. One important feature of this paper is that it is able to find the projection of the intermediate product. Yang, Wu, Liang, Bi, and Wu (2011) measured the supply chain efficiency of 17 bank branches of the China Construction Bank in Anhui Province, China. This model has also been extended to include two more objectives, in addition to maximizing the output distance parameter, in a goal programming setting by Sheth, Triantis, and Teodorović (2007) studying 60 bus routes in the Christiansburg–Blacksburg region in Virginia, US, from the perspectives of both provider and passenger.Lewis, Mallikarjun, and Sexton (2013) proposed an iterative method of minimizing the input parameter θ and maximizing the output parameter ϕ at the same time. This method was applied to measure the performance of 20 Major League Baseball teams during the 2009 season.Chen and Zhu (2004) used a process distance measure model to find the input efficiency of process one and the output efficiency of process two, with weights representing the relative importance of the processes in forming the system efficiency. This idea has been widely discussed in the literature. For example, Saranga and Moser (2010) used this model to evaluate the purchasing and supply management performance of 120 international firms with more than three billion US dollars turnover. Chiu and Huang (2011) measured the performance of 57 international tourist hotels in Taiwan. Liu and Lu (2012) applied this model and centrality measures for ranking, in a study that is similar to that of Liu, Lu, and Lin (2010), where the R&D efficiencies of two processes of 32 research institutes in Taiwan, technology development and technology diffusion, were measured independently. Rho and An (2007) added the non-Archimedean number ε to the objective function.A variation of this model has been used by Holod and Lewis (2011) in studying the role of deposits in the bank production process, as whether these should be treated as an input or output. The bank holding companies in the US for the period 1986–2008 were examined, with the number of companies varied from year to year, ranging from 899 to 2158.The factor distance measure model, in ratio form, has also been applied to the basic two-stage structure, with Yu (2012) measuring the production efficiency and service effectiveness of 15 air routes operated by a domestic airline in Taiwan.Fukuyama and Weber (2010) proposed an SBM model that maximized the average slacks to measure the performance of 869 Japanese banks, in which undesirable output were involved. The slack variables were adjusted by directional vectors, instead of the observations of the DMU being evaluated. The model can easily be modified to account for undesirable inputs, and was used by Akther, Fukuyama, and Weber (2013) to measure the performance of 21 commercial banks in Bangladesh.Kao and Hwang (2008) proposed a relational model to measure the efficiency of 24 non-life insurance companies in Taiwan. The system efficiency can be decomposed as the product of the two process efficiencies. Kao and Liu (2011) discussed how to calculate efficiency when observations were fuzzy data. Since multiple solutions may occur in this model, Kao and Hwang (2008) suggested using two mathematical programs to determine a unique solution, and Liu (2011a) developed a big-M method to combine these into one. Chen, Liang, and Zhu (2009) proved that the process distance parameter model is equivalent to this model under constant returns to scale.The relational model has been used by Cao and Yang (2011) to measure the marketability and profitability of 40 internet companies, by Liu and Wang (2009) to measure the production and profitability performance of 23 printed circuit board manufacturing firms in Taiwan, and by Yang and Liu (2012) to measure the efficiency of 55 branches of two banks in Taiwan. It was also used by Chen, Zhu, Yu, and Noori (2012) to evaluate the design performance of 534 carlines from more than 20 manufacturers that aim to have lower environmental impacts, where the first stage was an industrial design module and the second was a bio design one.The model proposed by Kao and Hwang (2008) is under constant returns to scale. In order to measure scale efficiency, Kao and Hwang (2011) used a BCC input model to measure the scale efficiency of the first process and an output model to measure that of the second one, and decomposed the system efficiency into the product of the technical and scale efficiencies. Changes in performance of the basic two-stage system in two periods have also been studied by Kao and Hwang (2013) using the relational model. They showed that the Malmquist productivity index (MPI) of the system is the product of those of the two processes.In ratio-form process efficiency model category, Chiou, Lan, and Yen (2010) used the average of the two process efficiencies as the criterion to measure the technical and scale efficiencies of 39 intercity bus companies in Taiwan which produce non-storable commodities. However, Lim and Zhu (2013) showed that this model was unusable due to the lack of an efficient algorithm, and they thus suggested using the sequential method from Liang, Yang, Cook, and Zhu (2006) to obtain an approximate global optimal solution. Chen, Cook, Li, and Zhu (2009) set the weight of each process to be the aggregate input of the process in that of the two processes, resulting in an aggregate efficiency. By defining this aggregate efficiency as the system efficiency, it becomes the weighted average of the process efficiencies. For this reason, Chen, Cook, et al. (2009) called this an additive model. Lu, Wang, Hung, and Lu (2012) proposed using a BCC model for each process to measure the production and marketing efficiencies of 30 airline companies in the US. Wang and Chin (2010) showed that if the weight of each process is defined as the aggregate output of the process in that of the two processes, then the aggregate efficiency is a weighted harmonic average of the process efficiencies.Du, Liang, Chen, Cook, and Zhu (2011) proposed a game theoretic model to measure the process efficiency, in which the breakdown payoffs are the worst case efficiencies of the two processes. It is noted that the product of the two process efficiencies is the system efficiency. Zhou, Sun, and Yang (2013) proposed a similar model with different breakdown payoffs. They calculated the CCR efficiency for the two processes separately to obtainEmax(1)andEmax(2), and applied the relational model of Kao and Hwang (2008) to obtain the system efficiencyE0S. The ratios ofE0StoEmax(1)andE0StoEmax(2)are the breakdown payoffs. They also proved that with their settings the two process efficiencies are uniquely determined.Liang, Cook, and Zhu (2008) proposed non-cooperative and centralized models to measure the efficiencies of the two processes. In the centralized model, the two processes (regarded as the manufacturer and retailer in a supply chain) work jointly to achieve maximum profit, in terms of the aggregate efficiency in product form. The model is exactly the same as the relational model presented by Kao and Hwang (2008).Another type of structure that has been widely discussed in the literature is a generalization of the basic two-stage structure, which allows both stages to consume exogenous inputs supplied from outside and to produce final outputs (Fig. 3).The first work on network DEA was carried out by Charnes et al. (1986), which examined army recruitment, and where the system was divided into two processes, awareness creation and contract establishment, and each process was treated as a DMU to measure its efficiency.Similar to Seiford and Zhu (1999) with regard to the basic two-stage structure, Soteriou and Zenios (1999) investigated the operational and marketing measures of quality of 144 branches of a commercial bank in Cyprus. In a fundamental analysis of stocks, Abad, Thore, and Laffarga (2004) applied a two-stage DEA to link financial data to firm value, and two independent BCC models were applied to 30 stocks in the Spanish manufacturing industry in the years 1991–1996. Simon, Simon, and Arias (2011) analyzed the productivity growth of 34 Spanish university libraries using an MPI. The library production system was composed of two processes, internal production and service delivery, and their efficiency and productivity growth were calculated independently.Golany, Hackman, and Passy (2006) proposed three models to measure the efficiency of a two-stage system with shared inputs. The system allows each process to acquire resources from the other in exchange for delivery of the appropriate intermediate or final products. The one related to the system distance measure is used to achieve the largest equal reduction in efficiency via “min. θ”.Färe and Whittaker (1995) developed an output system distance measure model to measure 137 dairy farms in Lake States of the US. Färe and Grosskopf (1996b) proposed a similar model with the MPI also being calculated. Löthgren and Tambour (1999) included customer satisfaction in studying the performance of 31 Swedish pharmacies. The system consists of the production and consumption processes, and a firm-specific allocation of input resources to the two processes was allowed. Yang, Hsiao, and Yu (2008) studied a problem of farrow-to-finish swine production, where pollution was produced in the first process and a pollution abatement technology was applied in the second. The performance of 39 randomly selected farms in Taiwan was measured using the proposed model.The distance function can also be directional. Lozano, Gutierrez, and Moreno (2013) separated the airport operations into aircraft movement and landing in studying the performance of 39 Spanish airports, with undesirable outputs generated from the first process.In studying efficiency measurement with shared inputs, Golany et al. (2006) also proposed two process distance measure models. One is to minimize the process distance parameter θ(1) (or θ(2)), the other is to maximize the radial contraction in the aggregate consumption of resources originally employed before integration. A hypothetical example was used to illustrate how the two processes can significantly improve their operational efficiencies via integration.Based on Chen and Zhu’s (2004) process distance measure model for basic two-stage systems, Chiu, Huang, and Ma (2011) extended it to cases where the second process also consumes exogenous inputs to measure the repair performance for stricken cultivated land and the agricultural efficiency of 31 regions in China. Chiu, Huang, and Chen (2012) used the same model to measure the performance of R&D, as a value-chain framework, of 21 high-tech businesses in China. Chiu, Huang, and Ting (2011) modified the model to allow for uncontrollable input, undesirable intermediate product, and undesirable output to measure the transit and economic efficiencies of 30 regions of China. Xie, Fan, and Qu (2012) analyzed the environmental efficiency, in addition to economic benefits, in relation to the efforts of power systems to achieve sustainable development. The objective was to minimize the weighted input process distance parameters, and 30 provincial administrative regions in China were used for illustration. Yu and Lee (2009) used the minimum of the ratio of the input parameter to the output parameter as the objective function to measure the production and marketing efficiencies of 58 international tourist hotels in Taiwan, with shared inputs. Yu and Chen (2011) applied the same model to measure the production and consumption efficiencies of 15 domestic air routes of an airline in Taiwan.Taking the non-storable feature into account, Yu (2008a) divided the transportation service into two stages to study the production efficiency and service effectiveness of 40 railways around the world. The distance measure used was a directional one. Yang (2009) used an output directional distance measure model to measure the production and environmental efficiencies of farrow-to-finish pig production. The performance of 31 pig farms in Taiwan was evaluated.Chen, Chang, Yu, and Hsu (2012) developed a factor distance measure model to examine the trade-offs between efficiency enhancement and pollution abatement of 22 incineration plants in Taiwan. The system had two processes, waste treatment and energy generation, where the latter had both desired and undesired outputs.Avkiran and McCrystal (2012) proposed a slacks-based model of using the ranges of the inputs and outputs of all DMUs to adjust the slack variables. They found that the conventional observation-adjusted and their own range-adjusted approaches produced positive and significant ranking correlations.Kao and Hwang’s (2008) relational model for the basic two-stage system was extended by Kao and Hwang (2010) to allow for the inputs to be shared with the second process. Guan and Chen (2010) used the same model to measure the high-tech innovation efficiency of 26 regions in China.For the two processes with shared inputs, Chen, Liang, Yang, and Zhu (2006) used the average, and Chen, Du, Sherman, and Zhu (2010) used a weighted average, of the two process efficiencies as the objective function to find the best distribution of the IT-based resources. For a feedback system, Liang, Li, and Cook (2011) developed two models to measure the efficiency. One is to maximize the average of the two process efficiencies, and the other is to give a higher priority to one process. These two models were applied to measure the performance of 50 universities in China.For the general two-stage structure shown in Fig. 3, Liang et al. (2006) treated the seller and buyer in a supply chain as the two processes, and proposed an efficiency aggregation model to maximize the average of the two process efficiencies when they have a cooperative relationship. Fang and Zhang (2008) proposed a similar model, which allows some inputs to be allocated between the two processes. Bichou (2011) used the same model to study the operations of container ports, which were viewed as supply chains between the gate and yard-quay. Ten container terminals from various countries were examined, based on 70 terminal-year data.Premachandra, Zhu, Watson, and Galagedera (2012) extended the additive model of Chen, Cook, et al. (2009) for the basic two-stage system to allow for exogenous inputs for the second stage in studying the performance of 66 large mutual fund families in the US. Guan and Chen (2012) used the same model to measure the innovation efficiency of 22 OECD countries, although constant returns to scale were assumed. Amirteimoori (2013) studied a car manufacturing problem, where some of the products were defective and thus needed to be repaired.Wu and Birge (2012) proposed another type of ratio-form process efficiency model to measure the system and process efficiencies, when the prices of all outputs are known. The objective function was to find the maximum output produced by the two processes, in terms of monetary value. The output efficiency of process k was the value actually produced divided by the maximum value which could be produced. This model can be used to analyze potential gains from the merger of two serial-chain models, and a case of 36 branches from a large Canadian bank undergoing a banking operations merger was conducted to illustrate the proposed approach.The game theoretic model for the basic two-stage system can also be applied to systems with shared inputs. Zha and Liang (2010) used the product of the two process efficiencies as the profit to maximize, and 30 US commercial banks were used to illustrate this. For general two-stage systems, Chen, Liang, and Yang (2006) studied a supply chain problem by treating the supplier and manufacturer as the two players in a bargaining game. Li, Chen, Liang, and Xie (2012) used the same model to study the regional R&D process of 30 provincial level regions in China.The series structure refers to a number of processes connected in sequence, where each process consumes the exogenous inputs and intermediate products produced by the preceding process, and produces exogenous outputs and intermediate products for the succeeding one to use. As shown in Fig. 4, the structure is a generalization of the general two-stage one.Although a series system can have as many processes as desired, except for theoretical studies, the largest system that has appeared in the literature has only five processes. Park and Park (2009) studied a multi-period system without intermediate products. Their model is a conventional system distance measure, and was applied to measure the performance of 20 cable TV service operation units in South Korea for the period 1999–2001. Tone and Sahoo (2003) modified the system distance measure model to investigate returns to scale in the presence of indivisibilities in all multi-stage production processes.Wei, Yan, and Pang (2011) discussed a basic multi-stage system without intermediate products. Their model aims to find the minimum of the sum of the distance parameters associated with all processes, from both the input and output sides. They showed that the system is efficient if and only if all processes are, when measured independently.Matthews (2013) studied the risk management and managerial efficiencies of 15 banks in China with an SBM model. The system was divided into three processes, where non-performing loans were inputs for the third one. Tsutsui and Goto (2009) used a weighted SBM model to study the performance of 90 vertically integrated electric power companies in the US. There are five levels (processes) being considered, generation, transmission, distribution, sales, and general administration, and the weights were the cost shares.Kao and Liu (in press) measured the performance of 22 commercial banks in Taiwan for the period 2009–2011 considered as a multi-period system without intermediate products. To investigate the energy efficiency of the vegetable oil industry, Nouri et al. (2013) identified five processes in the production system, and used the system efficiency as the objective function to measure the system and process efficiencies of 15 plants in Iran.Lee and Johnson (2012) applied the relational model of Kao (2009a) for general network systems, with a modification for variable returns to scale, to investigate the performance of 15 US Airlines. A hybrid production system of four processes, capacity design, demand generation, operations, and demand consumption, was designed. Kao (2014) attached a dummy process to each original one to carry the exogenous inputs and outputs to change the general series structure to a basic multi-stage one, and obtained a property that the system efficiency is the product of the efficiency of each stage, where each stage had a parallel structure composed of the original and the dummy processes.Amirteimoori and Kordrostami (2005b), Kordrostami and Amirteimoori (2005), and Amirteimoori and Shafiei (2006) proposed similar efficiency aggregation models to measure the performance of a series system. In the first study, each process consumed exogenous inputsXij(k)to produce outputsYrj(k), and a portion of each output served as an endogenous input for the succeeding process. The objective function was the weighted average of the p process efficiencies. In the second study, undesirable inputs and outputs were allowed. In the third study, the intermediate products of process k to be used as endogenous inputs by process k+1 were allowed to be different from the outputs.Troutt, Ambrose, and Chan (2001) proposed a value-based model of maximizing the throughput per unit of input at the first process for the basic multi-stage system, where the flow into a process was required to be equal to that out of a process. Wei and Chang (2011) proposed a model to optimally design a DMU’s input and output portfolios, in terms of profit maximization, given the DMU’s available budget.There are two basic structures for network systems, one is series and the other is parallel, where all processes operate independently as shown in Fig. 5. Structurally, the parallel system is the same as the multi-period system. They differ only in factor definitions, in that the multi-period system requires the inputs and outputs of every period to be the same.Färe, Grabowski, Grosskopf, and Kraft (1997) is one of the earliest works on parallel systems, and their model aims to maximize the output system distance function. In their study of 57 Southern Illinois grain farms, the land was shared for crops of corn, soybeans, wheat, and double crop soybeans. Bi, Feng, Ding, and Khan (2012) classified the production activities of a business into core and non-core ones, operating in a parallel manner. The inputs were shared, and the outputs were the contribution of both processes. The conventional input system distance function was used to assess 20 convenience stores by applying a parametric bootstrap method.Yu (2008b) studied the performance of multi-mode transit firms, where the bus services were separated into highway and urban ones. A process distance measure model was then used to measure the performance of 60 bus companies in Taiwan. Tsai and Mar Molinero (2002) investigated the performance of 27 acute hospital trusts in the UK under five categories, medical, surgical, maternity, psychiatric, and others, using a process distance measure model. Diez-Ticio and Mancebon (2002) applied the idea of Beasley (1995), Mar Molinero (1996), and Mar Molinero and Tsai (1997) to analyze the efficiency of the Spanish Police Service. The services were separated into “crime control” and “protection and maintenance of order”, with the number of policemen as a shared input, and observations from 47 provincial capitals were collected for measurement. Chao, Yu, and Chen (2010) separated the functions of financial holding companies into banking, insurance, security, and others, and measured the performance of 12 financial holding companies in Taiwan. Shared inputs were also incorporated to find the most favorable share for each process in the measurement.Directional distance measures have also been applied to measure efficiency for parallel systems when undesirable outputs appear. Yu and Fan (2006) studied the performance of multi-mode transit firms, where the bus services were separated into highway and urban ones. This model was applied to measure the performance of 24 bus companies in Taiwan, with the number of accidents as an undesirable output.Yang, Ma, and Koike (2000) used the conventional model of the multiplier form to measure system efficiency. It was found that the system efficiency is equal to the maximum of the process efficiencies measured from the CCR model independently. Cook and Hababou (2001) studied the performance of banks, with sales and services as the two major functions. They found that the efficiency of the system is the most favorable ceiling that the two process efficiencies will not exceed. Cook, Hababou, and Tuenter (2000) proposed a model to measure the performance of a system where several functions were performed. Cook and Green (2004) followed the same idea to study the performance of 10 steel plants, where each plant had four components for production.Jahanshahloo, Amirteimoori, and Kordrostami (2004a) studied the performance of 39 branches of a commercial bank in Iran, using a ratio-form system efficiency model in which the functions were classified as deposits, sales, and services, and shared-inputs were involved. It was found that the system efficiency is a weighted average of the process efficiencies. Jahanshahloo, Amirteimoori, and Kordrostami (2004b) extended this model to incorporate non-discretionary inputs. Amirteimoori and Kordrostami (2005a) built a model to study a case with imprecise data, i.e., the data were of bounded value and ordinal ranks. Amirteimoori and Nashtaei (2006) also classified the functions of a bank into deposit, sales, and services, and assumed that some outputs were the contribution of all three functions.Kao (2009b) proposed a relational model to measure the system and process efficiencies in one model for parallel systems, with the property that the system efficiency is a weighted average of the component process efficiencies. Kao (2012) applied the same model to measure the teaching and research efficiencies of 52 chemistry departments in the UK (using the data compiled by Beasley (1995)). Kao and Lin (2011) measured efficiency when the factors were qualitative, while Kao and Lin (2012) measured it when the observations were fuzzy numbers, with both works using the data in Beasley (1995) for illustration purposes. Bi, Ding, and Luo (2011) followed the main idea of Kao (2009b), with some modifications, to study problems related to resource allocation and target setting. A set of common weights was chosen such that the worst behaved unit was improved as much as possible.Rogge and Jaeger (2012) analyzed cost efficiency in the treatment of solid waste in 293 municipalities in Flanders, Belgium, using a ratio-form system efficiency model. There were six types of solid waste, residential, other municipal, packaging, other EPR, green, and bulky, with a shared input of handling costs. Da Cruz, Carvalho, and Marques (2013) applied the same model to measure the efficiency of the drinking water and wastewater services of 45 water utilities in Portugal with shared resources.In measuring the performance of the chemistry and physics departments in UK, Beasley (1995) developed a model to aggregate the efficiency of teaching and research, with the weight being the proportion of inputs consumed.Vaz, Camanho, and Guimarães (2010) assessed the performance of 78 retail stores in Portugal with five sections of groceries, perishables, light bazaar, heavy bazaar, and textiles, using a value-based model with the aim of maximizing overall sales. The floor area was a shared input allowing for reallocation.There are network systems whose structures are neither series nor parallel, but a mixture of them. Lovell, Walters, and Wood (1994) investigated the performance of secondary education in the US. A sample of 1032 high schools in the US was used in the investigation, and each process was treated as an independent DMU, with both CCR and BCC models being applied. Lewis and Sexton (2004) extended the study of Sexton and Lewis (2003) from two processes, front-office and on-field operations, to five, where the former was split into two processes and the latter into three. The performance of each process was measured independently, and the 30 teams in National League and American League of Major League Baseball in the US were evaluated. Adler, Liebert, and Yazhemsky (2013) analyzed the performance of 43 airports in 13 European countries, where two stages of operations were identified. The first stage had one process of generating passengers and cargo, and the second had two processes of aeronautical and non-aeronautical activities. The two stages were evaluated independently.Prieto and Zofío (2007) undertook network efficiency analysis within an input–output model that allowed the potential technical efficiency gains by comparing technologies corresponding to different economies to be assessed. An output system distance measure model was used to measure the performance of five OECD countries with four sectors (processes). Zhao, Triantis, Murray-Tuite, and Edara (2011) proposed an evaluation approach for a travel demand management strategy, taking into account transportation service providers, the users, and the community (as three processes). Both system distance and slacks-based measures were proposed.Wang, Lu, and Huang (2013) studied the profitability and marketability efficiencies of 65 high-tech firms in Taiwan. Different from the conventional two-stage studies, the first stage in this study was composed of two processes, basic production and R&D effects, operating in parallel. The weighted average of the input distance parameters of the first stage and the output distance parameter of the second one, in negative form, was minimized.Yu and Lin (2008) separated the railway operations into two stages, production and consumption, where the former was further separated into two processes, passenger and freight. The objective was to maximize the weighted sum of the process distance parameters with respect to a direction vector. The performances of 20 railway firms around the world were measured. Yu and Fan (2009) used the same model to measure the performance of 23 bus companies in Taiwan, with the passenger and freight processes in the production stage being replaced with highway and urban ones.Avkiran (2009) applied an SBM model to measure the performance of 15 UAE banks, where three profit centers were involved. Yu (2010) investigated airport performance by decomposing the operations into production and services, where the latter were further separated into airside and landside. The model showed that the system efficiency of the airport was the product of the production and service efficiencies, and the latter was a weighted harmonic average of airside and landside service efficiencies. The model was used to measure the performance of 15 domestic airports in Taiwan. Amatatsu, Ueda, and Amatatsu (2012) evaluated industrial efficiency and the corresponding returns to scale, and discussed the proposed merger of 47 prefectures by the Japanese government. The input–output tables of regional economies were used as the data. Lin and Chiu (2013) separated Taiwanese domestic bank’s operation systems into three stages, production, services, and profitability, where services were further separated into corporate and consumer banking in parallel, and applied a network SBM model to measure the performance of 30 banks.Kao (2009a) proposed a relational model to decompose the efficiency of a network system into a linear combination of those of the component processes. Kao (in press) studied a case in which the data were fuzzy numbers. Hsieh and Lin (2010) analyzed the production efficiency and service effectiveness of 57 international tourist hotels in Taiwan by separating the production operations into rooms and restaurants. Chen and Yan (2011) evaluated the performance of supply chains under the concepts of centralized, decentralized, and mixed organizational mechanisms. The system was composed of one supplier and two manufacturers, and it was concluded that the system efficiency is the product of the supplier and manufacturer efficiency under a centralized mechanism.Cook, Zhu, Bi, and Yang (2010) extended the additive model of Chen, Cook, et al. (2009) for maximizing the weighted average of the two process efficiencies in the basic two-stage structure to the general network structure of p processes. In studying the process efficiency of a network, Castelli, Pesenti, and Ukovich (2001) proposed the idea of comparative comparison, in which the relative efficiency of a process with respect to another is the ratio of the efficiencies of the former to the latter, and a process is efficient if its relative efficiency compared to the best process is 1.The primary purpose of network DEA studies is to open the black box of a system, taking the operations of its component processes into consideration when measuring its performance. Strictly speaking, every DMU must have the same number of processes and the corresponding process of each DMU must perform the same function to have the same basis for comparison. However, if one does not care about the one-to-one correspondence of the processes of different DMUs, one can still measure the system and process efficiencies, as long as the same inputs are applied to the system to produce the same outputs.A hierarchical structure can have several levels, and the existing papers discuss only two levels. If there is only one level and there is no interaction between the headquarters and subordinate units, then the system can be viewed as a parallel one. For example, Kao (2009b) treated the subordinate working circles of a forest district as a set of parallel processes operating independently, and used a parallel model to measure the efficiency of forest districts.Castelli, Pesenti, and Ukovich (2004) proposed a model to measure the performance of a hierarchical system with one and two levels. For one-level systems, the system efficiency is the ratio of the aggregate output to the aggregate input. The same idea can be extended to systems with two levels. Two conditions were discussed in the study, one was weight balancing and the other was flow balancing.Cook and Green (2005) discussed a hierarchical system composed of several layers based on the idea presented in Cook, Chai, Doyle, and Green (1998). The headquarters has several divisions, and each division in turn has several subdivisions. They used 10 Canadian power plants, comprising 40 power units, to explain the case of one layer.Färe and Primont (1984) proposed a distance model to measure the efficiency of multi-plant firms, and Kao (1998) applied it to measure the efficiency of eight forest districts, with a total of 34 subordinate working circles (processes), in Taiwan. The basic idea was to measure the efficiency of each process, with the technology constructed from all 34 processes.Dynamic structures concern the repetition of a single-period system connected by carryovers, where the single-period structure can be any of those discussed in the preceding subsections. Färe and Grosskopf (1996a) presented a detailed discussion of this type of structure. Structurally, the dynamic structure resembles the series one, except that the dynamic structure is more general, in that each period can have a network structure. Physically, the dynamic structure is a special type of series structure, because the inputs, outputs, and intermediate products (carryovers) are the same for every period.Silva and Stefanou (2007) used the conventional input system distance parameter to measure the long-run efficiency of a system, where the carryover, gross investment, was treated as an output. They developed models in the context of an adjustment-cost technology and inter-temporal cost minimization, and applied them to measure the performance of 61 Pennsylvania dairy operations in the US in 1986–1992. Jaenicke (2000) studied the effects of crop rotation, which generates higher yields than when identical crops grown in isolated monocultures. A dynamic model was proposed to measure the output efficiency of a rotation by using 16 observations from an experimental farm in Pennsylvania, where three crops, small grain, corn, and soybean, made up a rotation, and the soil organic matter played the role of carryover.Chen (2009) and Chen and van Dalen (2010) claimed that dynamic systems are subject to lagged production effect. Therefore, the real output in a specific period is actually a weighted sum of those observed in the p preceding periods. The model was used to evaluate advertising efficiencies of seven automobile producers and eight pharmaceutical companies in North America, with panel data spanning from 1997 to 2005.Bogetoft, Färe, Grosskopf, Hayes, and Taylor (2009) studied the impact of public capital on technology and productivity, using a process distance measure model. The state level data of the US manufacturing sector in the years 1978–1999 was used for illustration, where the carryovers were private and public investments. Emrouznejad and Thanassoulis (2005) applied an input process distance measure (one parameter for each period) to check whether an assessment path is dynamically efficient. The distance parameters were attached to both the inputs and carryovers, and the carryovers were represented by stock inputs. The model was applied to 15 universities in the UK from 1994 to 1998. Jahanshahloo, Soleimani-damaneh, and Reshadi (2006) stated that every process distance parameter must be less than or equal to 1 to be able to obtain efficient paths. Chen (2012) studied a problem of pig-raising, where each period had two processes, breed-to-farrow and wean-to-finish, operating independently. The breed-to-farrow process produced weaned pigs as the carryover, and the wean-to-finish process used the carryover from the preceding period to produce finished hogs in each period. The performances of 29 pig farms in Taiwan were evaluated.Skevas, Lansink, and Stefanou (2012) constructed a directional distance parameter model to investigate the dynamic effects of pesticides in production decisions. Each of the four types of factors, inputs, outputs, carryovers as inputs, and carryovers as outputs, had a directional distance parameter associated with it. The objective was to maximize their sum, and 703 observations from 188 farms in the Netherlands over the period 2003–2007 were collected for empirical study.Von Geymueller (2009) proposed an SBM model to evaluate the performance of the 50 largest electric transmission system operators in the US during the period 2000–2006. Notably, the output slacks were adjusted by(sr++Yr0), instead of the conventional Yr0. Avkiran and Goto (2011) used an SBM model for maximizing the slacks adjusted by ranges of observations to evaluate the overall efficiencies and annual inefficiencies of 52 Japanese regional banks for the period 1998–2007, where dividends and retained earnings were carryovers. Tone and Tsutsui (2010) proposed three SBM models for studying dynamic structures, input-, output-, and non-oriented. It was shown that the system efficiency is the arithmetic average of the period efficiencies for the input-oriented model, and the harmonic average for the output-oriented model. A non-oriented model was applied by Moreno, Lozano, and Gutiérrez (2013) to measure the performance of 26 US wireline telecommunication companies from 1997 to 2007.Lu, Wang, and Kweh (2014) applied an input-oriented SBM model to evaluate the performance of 34 life insurance companies in China for the period 2006–2010, where debt and equity capitals were treated as carryovers. Alperovych, Amess, and Wright (2013) analyzed the efficiency of 88 private equity backed leverage buyouts completed and exited during the period 1999–2008 in UK, with shareholders’ equity as the carryover. Tone and Tsutsui (2014) extended their SBM model for black-box dynamic systems (Tone & Tsutsui, 2009) to one in which each period had a network structure. Three forms of models, input-, output, and non-oriented, were proposed. An example of 21 US electric utilities with three stages connected in series over five years was used for illustration.Kao (2013) constructed a relational model to measure the performance of a dynamic system. The performances of eight Taiwanese forests were measured, where the forest stock played the role of carryover. The results showed that the system efficiency would be overstated when the dynamic nature of the data was ignored.The value-based model has often been used to examine dynamic structures, where the monetary value of the output, or profit, is to be maximized. The classic work with regard to this model is attributed to Nemoto and Goto (1999), in which the objective was to minimize the total cost incurred in the periods being considered. Nemoto and Goto (2003) applied this model to measure the performance of nine privately owned Japanese electric utilities (with 135 observations) during the period 1981–1995. Sueyoshi and Sekitani (2005) extended this model from constant returns to scale to variable returns to scale. Soleimani-damaneh (2009,2013a,2013b) published a series of works to improve the method presented in Sueyoshi and Sekitani (2005). Ouellette and Yan (2008) proposed a model similar to that of Nemoto and Goto (1999); however, the restrictions on the capital investment were weaker. De Mateo, Coelli, and O’Donnell (2006) used profit maximization as the objective function and examined 35 Chilean retail department stores for the years 2000 and 2001. The results identified an optimal path of adjustment for the input quantities, and provided a measure of the potential cost savings.Färe, Grosskopf, and Fukuyama (2011) proposed a model to maximize the total output of two consecutive periods by allocating the output from the former period to be either the final output or the intermediate product to be consumed by the later one. Amirteimoori (2006) constructed a model to measure the revenue efficiency of 11 gas companies in Iran during 2003 and 2004. The optimal output and carryover were calculated using the prices of the output and the carryover (represented by the revenue of gas sold). Based on this, the revenue efficiency of each period was calculated, and the efficiency of the whole period was a weighted average of those of individual ones.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
