@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Surgical scheduling with simultaneous employment of specialised human resources

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We address surgery scheduling and resources assignment in an operating theatre.We detail the treatment of specialised human resources in a practical case.An individual of a speciality can perform more than one surgery simultaneously.We give a formulation of the problem and develop integer programming heuristics.We report numerical results on a number of scenarios inspired by real data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surgical scheduling,Mathematical modelling,Relax-and-fix heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Surgical scheduling is a challenging problem faced by hospital managers. It is subject to a wide range of constraints depending upon the particular situation within any given hospital. We deal with the simultaneous employment of specialised human resources, which must be assigned to surgeries according to their skills as well as the time windows of the staff. A particular feature is that they can be assigned to two surgeries simultaneously if the rooms are compatible. The objective is to maximise the use of the operating rooms. We propose an integer model and integer programming based heuristics to address the problem. Computational experiments were conducted on a number of scenarios inspired by real data to cover different practical problem solving situations. Numerical results show that relaxations provide tight upper bounds, and relax-and-fix heuristics are successful in finding optimal or near optimal solutions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Operating room management has been recognised as a main source of income for hospitals. It is important to improve performance by using surgical resources as efficiently and effective as possible. It has been reported in the literature that the operating theatre is one of the most critical and costly functional areas in a hospital (Guinet & Chaabane, 2003). It represents a bottleneck in many hospitals and it consumes a significant amount of a hospital’s annual budget because it typically utilises the most expensive resources. See, for instance, the recent surveys by Cardoen, Demeulemeester, and Beliën (2010), Guerriero and Guido (2011), May, Spangler, Strum, and Vargas (2011) and Rais and Viana (2011). As in other service sectors, the decision process comprises different decision levels – from capacity and facility planning to detailed scheduling.In this paper, we concentrate on the detailed surgical scheduling of elective patients on a daily basis. Elective patients are those for whom the surgery is not completely unexpected and can be planned in advance. Broadly speaking, surgical scheduling consists of the selection of surgical interventions to be performed in each available operating room along with dates, starting times and the allocation of required resources. Surgical scheduling problems are very hard to solve, and different optimisation modelling approaches have been proposed in the literature to face different situations. Meskens, Duvivier, and Hanset (2013) observed from visits to several hospitals that problems are specific to each institution. Indeed, as also noted by other authors, for instance, Cardoen et al. (2010); Riise and Burke (2011), each hospital has its own established practices reflecting specific constraints related to both human and material facets. These specific constraints may vary from medical staff availabilities (e.g., regular working hours or surgeon preferences) and patient priorities (e.g., children or diabetics) to operating room versatilities and the limited capacity of human and material resources (e.g., number of nurses, auxiliary staff, medical instruments, recovery beds or places in intensive care unities).We deal with surgical scheduling in a hospital in Brazil. The hospital has 14 non-identical operating rooms dedicated to elective interventions – some are multifunctional, some have particular medical devices installed that cannot be moved, and some are restricted in size. Each surgeon has a set of patients, so that each operation has to be carried out by a specific surgeon. However, decisions assigning surgeries to operating rooms is part of the problem, and scheduling starting times are subject to surgeries and surgeon’s time windows, among other constraints. Time windows may capture patient priorities in terms of time of the day that interventions must occur, e.g., children should be operated upon early in the morning (Riise & Burke, 2011) or there should be later starts for out-of-town patients (Vijayakumar, Parikh, Scott, Barnes, & Gallimore, 2013). There are also medical staff preferences, which can be viewed as an attempt to improve working conditions (Roland, di Martinelly, Riane, & Pochet, 2010). The problem is also constrained by limited shared resources. We may have surgery requirements on renewable and/or nonrenewable resources, a characteristic already observed in the case studied by Roland et al. (2010). Renewable resources (human or material) are those allocated to a surgery strictly for its duration, like nurses or auxiliary staff and medical equipment. On the other hand, nonrenewable resources are those allocated to a surgery for the entire day, in our case places in the intensive care utility.A particular feature of our case study is the simultaneous employment of specialised human resources. Anaesthetists, for instance, are identified due to specialities, training skills and availabilities. An anaesthetist has his/her own time windows. Each surgery is associated with a subset of anaesthetists able to perform that intervention. An anaesthetist can perform more than one intervention simultaneously depending upon the room in which the surgeries are taking place. Thus, the simultaneous employment of specialised human resources is constrained by room compatibilities. This leads to another decision to be made jointly with assigning and scheduling surgeries, as anaesthetists must be assigned and scheduled according to surgery requirements and subject to room compatibilities and to their own time windows. The objective is to maximise the use of the operating rooms. In fact, recent surveys list a number of objectives studied in the literature including minimisation of costs or makespan, and maximisation of throughput or utilisation (Cardoen et al., 2010; Guerriero & Guido, 2011; May et al., 2011). In our case, the manager of the hospital where the study was conducted suggested the maximisation of the utilisation of the operating rooms.We propose an integer programming formulation to model the particular surgical scheduling problem in hand. Preliminary computational experiments have shown that the linear relaxation of the proposed model could provide good upper bounds to the optimal solution values. Based on these early experiments, we decided to develop integer programming-based heuristics to obtain high quality feasible solutions with a posteriori performance guarantees. The heuristics in the first step draw from relaxation candidate assignments of surgeries to rooms and periods, and then in the second step they address a reduced model to obtain feasibility. We test the proposed approaches on a variety of scenarios inspired from real data. Computational results show that it is possible to find optimal or near optimal solutions for most of the instances.The paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we present a literature review which is focused on deterministic models for surgical scheduling. In Section 3, we formulate the integer programming model. We describe, in Section 4, the integer programming-based heuristics. In Section 5, we report on computational experiments on real-based instances, and in the last section we draw concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
