@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Part logistics in the automotive industry: Decision problems, literature review and research agenda

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We structure the field of part logistics in the automotive industry.All relevant process steps and belonging decision problems are described.We survey the relevant literature.Important future research needs are identified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automotive industry,Just-in-time,Part logistics,Survey,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the ongoing trend of mass-customization and an increasing product variety, just-in-time part logistics more and more becomes one of the greatest challenges in today’s automobile production. Thousands of parts and suppliers, a multitude of different equipments, and hundreds of logistics workers need to be coordinated, so that the final assembly lines never run out of parts. This paper describes the elementary process steps of part logistics in the automotive industry starting with the initial call order to the return of empty part containers. In addition to a detailed process description, important decision problems are specified, existing literature is surveyed, and open research challenges are identified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Whenever a stock-out at an assembly line of an automobile manufacturer occurs, one of the following reactions is required:•If the shortfall is detected before having finally released a car body requiring one of the missing parts into final assembly, the workpiece may be retained from central storage and an alternative car is released into the free production slot. This, however, causes nervousness in production and logistics. For instance, parts already being sorted according to the initially planned production sequence need to be reshuffled and a delayed car body may lead to a late delivery and a dissatisfied customer.Alternatively, an express delivery can be initiated provided that the stock-out is anticipated early enough. For example, if a truck is delayed on its way to the factory, some additional (fast) vehicle or even a helicopter can be called in to quickly fetch the relevant parts. If the parts have already arrived at the factory but not at the consuming station, an emergency delivery is typically executed by bicycle or some other in-house vehicle.Another possible reaction is to proceed with assembly as though nothing had happened and simply skip the missing part. Once available, the left-out part needs to be retrofitted in the rework area by highly trained (and therefore well paid) assembly workers. These workers may have to first partially disassemble (and later reassemble) the car in order to mount the missing part.In the worst case, if indispensable parts are missing, an assembly line has to be stopped. This results in hundreds of assembly workers being idle and every 60 to 90 seconds, which is the typical range of cycle times in automobile assembly, the profit of one car is lost.All aforementioned reactions to missing parts cause high penalty costs. Hence, strict requirements with regard to reliable operations are imposed on part logistics. However, in today’s automotive production some recent trends further increase the relevance of part logistics (Battini et al., 2013):•Firstly, value creation has been withdrawn from the main line. According to Dudenhoefer (2006) an average compact car requires merely 15 hours of assembly time at its original equipment manufacturer (OEM). A study by Krcal (2007) indicates that over the last decade, average production depth in automobile industry declined from about 43 percent to 25–35 percent. In addition to the widespread trend of concentrating on core competencies, this way salary differences between an OEM and its suppliers can be exploited.To satisfy individual customer needs, today’s car buyers can customize their cars from a wide range of individual options (e.g., cruise control yes/no) resulting in billions of different (theoretically possible) car models (see Pil and Holweg, 2004, for detailed figures). Clearly, an increasing catalogue of options increases the variety of parts to be handled. Furthermore, in particular luxury car manufactures offer their customers the chance to update the configuration until a few days before production starts, e.g. at BMW a car’s configuration can be changed until seven days before production. This marketing tool has proven to be successful in generating higher revenues per car. From a logistics point of view, however, this sales instrument increases uncertainties about the parts needed and, therefore, considerably reduces planning cycles of part logistics.To quickly react on varying demands over time, nowadays, most OEMs assemble not only a single but multiple car models on the same assembly line, i.e. a mixed model line. The factory in Bratislava (Slovakia) of Volkswagen, for example, assembles multiple models of different brands (Touareg by Volkswagen, Q7 by AUDI, and Cayenne by Porsche) in facultative sequence on the same line.Inspired by the Toyota Production System, Just-in-Time (JIT) became a fundamental concept for OEMs all over the world. Delivering parts just when they are needed reduces inventories at the OEM. However, the logistics effort at the OEM can be further reduced if parts are delivered Just-in-Sequence (JIS). JIS means that parts are pre-sorted into bins by the supplier, so that assembly workers can withdraw these parts in the right order just as defined by the production sequence. Both concepts, JIS and JIT, shorten delivery cycles and increase the reliance on well-planned and reliable logistics operations.All these trends lead to an increasing number of parts delivered from a wide range of suppliers in short planning and delivery cycles. At the medium-sized automobile plant of BMW in Dingolfing, for example, more than 13,000 containers delivered by about 600 suppliers on more than 400 trucks need to be processed every day (Battini et al., 2013).Starting with a call order reaching a supplier, parts are transported via external logistics to the OEM. Once arrived, in-house logistics takes over until parts are delivered to the line. Finally, empty bins and containers need to be returned to suppliers in order to be refilled with parts, which is the task of reverse logistics. This paper reviews the process of part logistics in the automotive industry from an operational research perspective.For this purpose, the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the scope of this review by describing the elementary process steps of part logistics in the automotive industry. The process is broken down into three subprocesses, namely external, in-house, and return logistics, and a separate section is dedicated to each subprocess. Within each of these three sections, the basic steps of each subprocess are described and their elementary decision problems are defined. Then, the scientific literature providing solution procedures and decision support tools for these problems is reviewed and future research needs are identified. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.This paper deals with logistics operations, i.e., receiving, storing, packing, transporting, returning goods and exchanging associated information within an automotive supply chain. The scope of our review starts upstream with the call order submitted to a supplier. Downstream, we have the assembly process of the final assembly line where parts are finally consumed. Therefore, the last process steps treated are the line side presentation of parts in appropriate racks and bins prior to final assembly and the management of returning empty bins. In between these two interfaces this review covers all process steps required for external logistics from (supplier) plant to (OEM) plant (Section 3), for internal logistics from receiving store to final assembly (Section 4), and for reverse logistics of returning empty bins (Section 5).In addition to the functional restriction of excluding all manufacturing activities within the automotive supply chain, a temporal delimitation is required. Our survey is restricted to the operational planning process. On the one hand, this excludes all strategic decision problems, such as all problems concerning the location of warehouses and plants (see, e.g., Klose and Drexl, 2005), layout of facilities (see, e.g., Drira et al., 2007), supplier selection (see, e.g., Choi and Hartley, 1996; Cusumano and Takeishi, 1991), as well as investment decisions in machinery, equipment and personnel. Also real-time monitoring of logistics execution is excluded from our review. Often external (mostly truck deliveries) and internal logistics are monitored by the global positioning system (GPS) or some manufacturing execution system (MES) system, respectively. Once a potential stock-out is detected, one of the aforementioned reactions, i.e., delaying a car, express delivery, proceeding with assembly, or line stoppage, needs be initiated. In conclusion, Fig. 1schematically depicts the scope of this paper.The core process steps of operational part logistics are shown in Fig. 2, which can be subdivided into the (traditional) forward chain and the reverse chain. The former covers the way of parts from the supplier to final assembly and consists of the two subprocesses: external logistics and in-house logistics.External logistics entails all activities required to supply parts from an external or internal supplier’s facility to the OEM’s plant, whereby especially two process steps are essential: JIT part supply requires long-term supplier relationships and frame agreements. Within such a contractual framework short-term call orders are submitted on a regular basis. These orders include the demand of the final assembly for a specific part and time horizon and, therefore, initiate the part logistics process. Then, these items are produced JIT at the respective part supplier or pre-produced units are taken from a warehouse and external transport is initiated to ship the parts from the supplier’s plant to the OEM’s facility typically by truck.Afterward in-house logistics takes over and all steps from receiving parts up to arranging them in appropriate racks and bins at the line are executed. Starting with goods receipt, parts are taken in charge from the supplier or carrier into the responsibility of the OEM. Then, if not directly delivered to the line in a fully concerted JIS process, parts need to be intermediately stored in a warehouse and later-on sorted into bins (sequenced) as defined by the assembly sequence of the line. Subsequently, bins are delivered to the line, e.g., by an industrial truck or some automated guided vehicle, and, finally, parts are unloaded and presented at the line, e.g., by placing bins on a rack directly accessible by an assembly worker.Following final assembly several reverse logistics activities are required. We restrict our survey to the return of empty bins, whereas the return processes of defective parts or those disassembled from returned automobiles are excluded. Analogously to the forward chain, reverse logistics can be subdivided into internal and external parts.Clearly, not all parts to be assembled pass through this routine in an identical fashion. In order to distinguish alternative pathways through the general part logistics process the sequencing point concept introduced by Swaminathan and Nitsch (2007) seems especially valuable. The authors define the sequencing point as the location in an automotive supply chain where parts are sorted into “the same sequence as the vehicles in which they will be installed”. From the logistics perspective, it seems sufficient to mark three potential locations of the sequencing point: prior, during or after the logistics process:•The sequencing point can be located at the supplier, where parts are sorted and then transported JIS as defined by the production sequence of the final assembly line. In such a setting, the process steps of intermediate warehousing and sequencing of parts at the OEM are not required and parts are delivered directly to the line. Such a reduction of throughput time and inventory costs is especially advantageous for large and valuable parts showing high variety, e.g. car seats.Parts can also reach the OEM in a JIT fashion, which means that all parts required for an upcoming production period are delivered but not yet sorted in the proper sequence. Then, an intermediate storage and sequencing of products during the logistics process at the OEM is executed, so that JIT parts have to pass through all process steps defined by our general part logistics process. As noted before JIS logistics requires short delivery-times and, hence, is connected with frequent deliveries and high transportation costs, so that JIS is often not profitable for medium valued, medium sized and medium variety parts, e.g., door panels. Here, a JIT-supply including the sequencing of parts at the OEM is often better suited.Finally, the sequencing point can also be located at the final assembly, which means that parts are delivered lot-wise to the line in homogenous bins and the assembly worker has to identify and extract the appropriate part as required by the current workpiece from the respective bin. Clearly, for a lot-wise presentation an additional sequencing step during the logistics process is not required. As the space at the line is often very scarce, such a lot-wise representation is only suitable for small, low valued products having low variety, e.g., headliners (see Hua and Johnson, 2010).Fig. 3illustrates the different pathways of parts through the general logistics process. Note that the parentheses behind each pathway define those process steps that are left out by the respective part type.Some literature is concerned with assigning parts to either of the latter two alternatives of locating the sequencing point. These alternatives are also denoted as kitting, i.e., JIT parts are sequenced in some in-house logistics area, and line stocking, i.e., products are stored lot-wise directly at the line. The choice among both alternatives is a long-term decision and, thus, beyond the scope of our survey, so that the papers treating the choice among kitting and line stocking are just briefly listed here: Bozer and McGinnis (1992) present some analytical equations to approximate some key performance indicators per alternative. Hua and Johnson (2010) discuss the general pros and cons of kitting and line storage and present a case study from electronics assembly. The paper of Limère et al. (2012), which is based on the thesis of Limère (2011), presents a more detailed decision model, which partitions the scarce space of the stations between kitting and line storage.To the best of the authors’ knowledge there exists no survey paper especially dedicated to part logistics in the automotive industry. The survey paper of Meyr (2004) covers the complete planning process of the automobile industry and, thus, treats a much broader topic containing part logistics as one among many other planning tasks. Other survey papers treat a single process step in detail, e.g., transport logistics (Laporte, 1992; Golden et al., 2008), warehousing (de Koster et al., 2007; Gu et al., 2007; 2010a), or reverse logistics (Fleischmann et al., 1997; Carter and Ellram, 1998), but are not specially dedicated to the automotive sector.After defining the scope of our review as well as the part logistics process, every step is now investigated in detail. First, each step is characterized and alternative logistics pathways within each process step are discussed. Then, basic operational decision problems, when choosing one of these paths, are introduced. Finally, the relevant literature is reviewed and future research challenges are identified.The call order initiates part logistics by transferring the following information to a supplier: number and types of parts to be delivered, specific transfer point at the OEM, and point in time. To ensure reliable part deliveries long term framework contracts are negotiated, which define a minimum and maximum amount of ordered parts, price (often also including price reductions over time), order intervals, and penalty fines for late deliveries. Given such a contract, a call order merely defines the number of parts (within the given margins) for the next delivery event. Typically, call orders are directly transferred between the ERP systems of both parties without requiring any human communication via phone, fax, or (electronic) mail. Depending on how the information associated with a call order is gathered by an OEM, we differentiate two alternative logistics pathways:CO1:With push call orders the number of parts is deduced from the prospective demand for end products, which is defined by the planned production sequence of cars during the respective time interval. Typically, the production sequence is finally fixed three to four days before production starts. Call orders deduced from prospective demand are especially suited for high valued JIS and JIT parts, e.g. axles or engines.Pull call orders, on the other hand, derive the amount of needed parts from their consumption. Depending on the inventory control system applied (for an overview see, e.g., Nahmias, 2009) an order to refill consumed part inventory is triggered by some event (e.g., emptying a Kanban bin or reaching a review period). Note that uncertainty, e.g., with regard to customer demands or delivery times, is typically not the argument for installing a pull based system, because part demands are known once the final production sequence of cars is given and delivery times are closely controlled in a JIT system. It is rather a matter that the effort of a push system is often too high for low valued parts, so that this logistics pathway is chosen for low valued LOT parts, e.g., cover bolts, or for pulling parts from stage to stage (from central receiving storage to the stations of the line) within in-house logistics.Both pathways and their associated decision problems are described in more detail in the following paragraph. First, we sketch the order process to gain a basic understanding on how the final production sequence, the input data of call orders along pathway CO1, is derived.In today’s automobile industry, any produced car is associated with an order. This must not necessarily be a customer order but may also stem from a dealer ordering cars to be sold from stock to his/her customers. In Europe, roughly 50 percent of all orders are specified by car dealers. In Germany the number is smaller but still exceeds 30 percent (Williams, 2000). Once an order arrives, a due date is assigned during the so-called order promising. The due date depends on the order backlog, but a minimum waiting time of about six weeks is standard for many OEMs. The given pool of orders is the input data for master production scheduling (MPS). MPS partitions the order pool among the periods of the planning horizon, so that every model receives a date of production. Typically, MPS refines the production volume in a step-wise manner within multiple planning runs by first determining week, then day, and finally shift schedules (Monden, 2012; Decker, 1993; Boysen et al., 2009a). A detailed literature review on both interdependent planning steps of order promising and MPS is provided by Volling et al. (2012). Three to four days before production starts sequence planning takes over and specifies the production slot for each car model to be produced during a shift. Sequencing mixed-model assembly lines is a prominent field of research, which is surveyed in detail by Boysen et al. (2009b). After freezing the sequence, many OEMs aim to maintain this sequence through all production stages, i.e., body shop, paint shop, and final assembly. In German such an unaltered production sequence is commonly called “Perlenkette”. In automobile production, especially the paint-shop is a major source of (unplanned) sequence alterations due to rework of paint defects (see Boysen et al., 2011). Thus, resequencing buffers are often applied (especially after the paint shop) to regain the initially planned production sequence. Research on resequencing a mixed-model assembly line is reviewed by Boysen et al. (2012). Realizing the Perlenkette is especially desirable from a logistics point of view, because otherwise JIS parts need to be resorted according to the altered production sequence. An overview on the complete production planning process is provided by Boysen et al. (2009a).From a planning perspective, the push call order of pathway CO1 leaves few degrees of freedom. Once the order intervals are fixed by a long-term contract the number of parts to be ordered is defined by the part demand between two successive order events and requires no planning. In most cases the points in time call orders are released follow a certain rhythm. However, given the minimum and maximum order quantities and the minimum and maximum stock levels at the OEM, order intervals can be also varied after the production sequence has been fixed to save delivery costs by joint deliveries of multiple part types from the same supplier or logistics provider (CO1-order interval).Along pathway CO2 the information required to specify a pull call order is gathered from their consumption. There are two basic policies of how to organize the information retrieval. As an essential part of the Toyota Production System, Kanban systems are often applied in the automotive industry to steer the order process. Kanban uses the rate of demand to control the rate of production by passing a call order to a preceding (external) production or (in-house) warehousing stage once a Kanban bin is emptied. In external logistics these systems normally involve three Kanban bins, i.e., one bin on the factory floor at the OEM, one bin in their store, and one bin at the supplier’s store. For in-house logistics processes, Kanban is often used for ordering material via a tow train from a supermarket. The basic operational decision variables to be determined for each Kanban system are the number of bins and their capacity for parts. We briefly denote the planning of both interdependent decision variables as CO2-Kanban sizing.Alternatively, an inventory control system (subject to uncertainty) can be applied. In such a system, a call order is triggered by some event, which may be reaching either a minimum stock level (continuous control) or a predefined point in time (periodic review system). Determining minimum and maximum stock levels, order sizes, and/or review periods in all its potential varieties is widely investigated in inventory theory (e.g., see Nahmias, 2009). We denote this decision problem as CO2-reorder policy.To the best of the authors’ knowledge only a single paper deals with determining the order interval for a deterministic part demand (CO1-order interval). de Souza et al. (2008) consider this problem for a Brazilian car producer where order intervals and order quantities (restricted to some predetermined bin sizes) need to be determined for feeding an assembly line. In the objective function inventory cost at the line and handling costs due to the frequency of point-to-point deliveries (see Section 3.2) resulting from a specific bin choice for a part are considered. For solving the problem the authors propose a greedy randomized search procedure (GRASP) consisting of a repeatedly executed construction and a local search phase. The approach of de Souza et al. (2008) mainly focuses on the basic trade-off between inventory and delivery cost. However, multiple further real-world aspects could be integrated into the problem, e.g., minimum and maximum order quantities and more complex delivery patterns like a milk-run (see Section 3.2). However, integrating multiple suppliers (e.g., of a milk-run) into the planning of the order intervals requires the consideration of transportation costs and distances among the suppliers, so that a complex integrated vehicle routing and order interval planning problem arises.Ever since the introduction of the Toyota Production System (Monden, 2012), setting up a Kanban system (CO2-Kanban sizing) became one of the classics of production control and is widely discussed in every textbook. Thus, it is beyond the scope of this paper to summarize all of the hundreds of papers dealing with this topic. Instead we refer to the excellent surveys of Berkley (1992),Price et al. (1994), and Akturk and Erhun (1999). Analogously, inventory control systems (CO2-reorder policy) are a custom topic of production control and inventory theory (e.g., see Axsäter, 2006; Nahmias, 2009), where the automotive context does not add specific requirements.Transport logistics bridges the distance between a supplier’s and OEM’s plant by moving the ordered parts between both locations. The standard transport mode of part logistics in the automotive industry is the road transport by truck. Few OEMs also receive part deliveries by train (see Klug, 2010, p. 214 ). In this case, the train schedules negotiated with the rail network operator pre-determine the loading and unloading times at the facilities, so that little planning flexibility remains. Nonetheless, trains are commonly used for outbound logistics in the automotive sector to distribute the finished cars to dealers and customers.The fundamental trade-off common to any transport task, i.e., between higher inventory cost at the receiver and lower distribution cost whenever fewer transport moves are executed (and vice versa), is, obviously, also relevant to the automotive industry. Yet, due to the tremendous number of parts required (see Section 1), the automotive industry is effectively restricted to a frequent small-lot supply. Note that exceptions especially for small and low-valued parts may of course be reasonable. The well-known pathways for setting up a small-lot supply are (e.g., see Chopra and Meindl, 2012, pp. 409–439):TL1:A point-to-point network (also denoted as a direct shipping network) introduces a transport relation between each single supplier and the OEM, so that each supplier separately delivers its parts to the OEM plant. With frequent small-lot deliveries in the automotive industry, direct shipping bears the risk that only small vehicles with half-full truckloads are moved and, thus, excessive transport cost occur. This threat, however, is not very distinct if the suppliers are located in direct vicinity to the OEM and mainly valuable, large parts are moved. Overall, the point-to-point transport is especially useful for moving high valued and large JIS parts from neighboring suppliers to the OEM.In a milk-run system, a transport cycle starts with an empty trailer followed by loading the supplier’s parts on the truck at the first stop on the route. The trailer then visits a number of other suppliers, loading additional parts before arriving at the manufacturer’s plant. Such a system enables an economic transport of a frequent small-lot part supply by aggregating multiple smaller shipments to full truckloads. Clearly, collecting parts from multiple suppliers prolongs the tour compared to direct shipping, which is less of a problem if all suppliers of a cycle are located nearby in a geographic region. However, the increased lead time of the milk-run system makes this pathway especially suited for JIT and LOT parts, where synchronization requirements are less strict.In a cross docking system, the same effect of milk-runs—the consolidation of smaller shipments to full truckloads—is achieved in a different way. Here, additional nodes (denoted as cross docks) are integrated into the supply network. At these intermediate nodes inbound shipments of multiple suppliers arrive, are unloaded, sorted, moved across the terminal, and consolidated to full truckloads in order to directly leave the terminal toward the OEM. Analogously to the milk-run system, the additional stopover at a cross docking terminal increases the lead time, so that it is mainly applied for JIT and LOT parts.Obviously, all three pathways can also be combined, e.g. the deliveries of multiple suppliers to a cross docking facility can be unified in a milk-run cycle.The main decision problem to be solved for all three pathways is the routing of trucks in order to deliver the required parts in a timely manner (TL-routing). However, unlike typical routing problems where the transportation cost for a predetermined set of transport requests are to be minimized, in the automotive industry we need to meet a time-varying deterministic part demand as defined by the final assembly sequence. There exists additional flexibility to deliver parts prior to their deadlines, which, however, causes inventory cost at the OEM. Consequently, truck routing for automotive part supply has to resolve the basic trade-off between delivery cost for the part supply by truck and inventory cost at the OEM. Further peculiarities originate from the general preference of many logistics managers in the automotive industry for stable and leveled processes. A widespread policy is to repeat identical routes in a fixed frequency (e.g., Chuah and Yingling, 2005), similar to a bus schedule. Such stable and leveled operations ease process control and are also an elementary requirement of the Toyota Production System, i.e., the heijunka principle (e.g., Hüttmeir, 2009). In the following, we briefly review existing papers integrating these peculiarities of truck routing in the automotive industry into the aforementioned routing problems for all three pathways.If truck routes in a point-to-point delivery network are to be determined (TL1-routing), then each single delivery requires the traversal of an arc from a supplier’s plant to the OEM plant. The general structure of this routing problem resembles an arc routing problem (e.g., see Dror, 2000; Wøhlk, 2008; Corberán and Prins, 2010), whereby the intention is a reduction of total travel cost for traversing all given arcs. In a very basic form of our problem, the number of parts for each traversal can be predetermined, so that the inventory aspect is abstracted and earliest and latest traversal times are introduced for each arc. Thus, a good starting point for integrating the peculiarities of the automotive industry could be the arc routing problem with time windows. Yet, integrating the inventory aspect in detail prohibits the direct application of arc routing procedures.Another potential starting point may be some recent extensions of traditional machine scheduling, where jobs release items into inventory in order to satisfy deterministic, time varying demand (see Boysen et al., 2013a; Drótos and Kis, 2013). If point-to-point deliveries are interpreted as jobs, then a parallel machine problem with sequence-dependent setup times resembles our routing problem for a given vehicle fleet. However, both existing approaches exclusively treat the inventory aspect and are reduced to the single machine case, so that they are indeed only starting points and plenty of future research needs remain.In a milk-run system (TL2-routing) each vehicle is assigned a capacity which may not be exceeded by part shipments jointly loaded in a cycle. If furthermore an earliest arrival date and a deadline is associated with each shipment, the established vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW; see Solomon, 1986; Bramel and Simchi-Levi, 1997; Cordeau et al., 2007) can be seen as a starting point for modeling JIT milk-run routing problems. Nevertheless traditional vehicle routing abstracts from inventory aspects, which rather fall into the domain of the well-known inventory routing problem (IRP; see Dror et al., 1985; Baita et al., 1998; Cordeau et al., 2007). The IRP combines the inventory and vehicle-routing problem but usually deals with the distribution of finished goods rather than the supply of parts. Within this context stochastic or constant consumption rates instead of deterministic demand as well as a one-to-many distribution structure instead of the many-to-one case relevant in supply networks are presupposed. Overall, standard problems of transport logistics are, thus, not directly applicable to part logistics. In the following we summarize the few literature approaches specifically tailored to the automotive industry.Inspired by the routing problem of an automotive plant in the USA, Chuah and Yingling (2005) treat a special JIT supply routing problem, where each supplier is integrated into a single tour, which is repeated on a daily basis. Distribution and inventory costs are jointly considered in the objective function, while given average part demand rates need to be satisfied and storage space at the OEM is limited. As solution methods, column generation and tabu search strategies are employed. A similar problem setting is tackled by Jiang et al. (2010) and Hosseini et al. (2013) with an alternative tabu search procedure and harmony search, respectively.Du et al. (2007) present a real-world dispatching system, which dynamically integrates newly arriving tour requests from supplier to OEM plant and from OEM to customers for milk-run deliveries into existing truck tours. While the overall system consists of a complex architecture of seven cooperating modules, the optimization module implements simple best-fit insertion and local search exchange moves in order to integrate new request in existing milk-runs.The optimization model of Sadjadi et al. (2009) specifically addresses JIT milk-runs in the automotive industry as an extension of the well-known vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW). As additional aspects, holding costs at the OEM plant and minimum safety stock levels for satisfying given average demand rates are integrated. The problem is solved by a genetic algorithm whose details are explained in Safaei et al. (2006). A similar problem setting for the electronics industry is investigated by Satoglu and Sahin (2013).All existing approaches assume average demand rates which need to be satisfied. This assumption is especially suited for mid-term planning problems, where truck routes and prospective supply frequencies are to be determined. However with regard to short-term planning, the peculiarity of a time-varying deterministic part demands should be considered, which requires that varying inventory levels and delivery batches are planned over the complete planning horizon; future research could start right here.With a cross docking terminal as an intermediate point of consolidation, the resulting routing problem (TL3-routing) has to coordinate three closely coupled decisions: (i) The delivery of parts from the suppliers to the cross dock, (ii) the consolidation process in the cross dock, and (iii) the delivery of parts from the cross dock to one or multiple OEM plants. Given a unique vehicle fleet for executing both types of tours (i) and (iii), the overall problem requires to trade off transport and inventory cost in the cross dock. There exist a few papers which integrate cross docks into the traditional vehicle routing problem by considering the three aforementioned decision problems in different levels of aggregation, e.g., Lee et al. (2006),Wen et al. (2008), and Liao et al. (2010). A recent survey on synchronization in vehicle routing is provided by Drexl (2012). All of these approaches treat the routing problem with cross docking in a general context. To the best of the authors’ knowledge there is no paper specifically addressing the aforementioned peculiarities of the automobile industry. Certainly, this can be explained by the difficulties of integrating cross docking alone, so that additional extensions indeed pose a huge challenge for future research.After a truck delivery arrives at the OEM’s plant the receipt of parts (RP) needs to be organized. The arriving inbound trucks are registered at a gate and—after a potential interim stay at a parking lot—assigned to a dock door. Alternatively, trailers can be detached from inbound trucks, intermediately stored in a trailer yard, and then retrieved by a switcher (or spotter) (Yano et al., 1998). Once docked, trailers are unloaded and part receipt needs to be recorded into the OEM’s information system, which is either accomplished by bar code scanner or fully automated by radio frequency identification. Finally, parts are moved on to their next destinations, i.e., intermediate storage (JIT and LOT parts) or final assembly (JIS parts). Note that, usually a dedicated quality control of parts is not executed at the OEM, but at the suppliers. High contractual penalties for defective parts detected during the assembly process or even worse by the customers enable such an outsourcing of quality control.Two alternative logistics pathways during this process step are taken if either (i) JIS or (ii) JIT and LOT parts are received:RP1:Since JIS parts are especially time critical, their unloading dock is normally specified over a longer time horizon. An inbound truck can, thus, directly enter its dedicated dock door to be unloaded. For instance, at a major plant of German car producer VW seats are delivered this way. At the dedicated dock door a forklift unloads seats being arranged in some special rack and feeds them into a conveyor system, which delivers the seats directly to the dedicated line segment in a JIS manner.JIT and LOT parts have no predefined dock door. Instead, these trucks are processed via a so-called truck control center. At the center, inbound trucks are registered and assigned to a parking lot. Once their dedicated processing slot is reached, truck drivers are informed about their dock door for unloading, e.g., via a pager handed out when arriving at the truck control center.With regard to logistics pathway RP1, there remain no noteworthy operational decision problems to be solved for JIS parts. Merely a sequencing problem needs to be solved, whenever two or more trucks compete for the same dock. This, however, is seldom the case as each truck receives a strict time window for unloading. If, nonetheless, an unloading sequence needs to be determined, simple priority rules, e.g., first-come-first-served, are typically applied. Another decision problem is the definition of unloading time windows, which is discussed in more detail in the following paragraph..If pathway RP2 is applied, the receipt of parts is organized in a two-stage process. First, each supplier has to receive a time window a few days ahead of the actual truck delivery (RP2-time window). For this purpose, a supplier (or the respective logistics provider subcontracted) has to register in an (web-based) information system, where favored time windows (from the supplier’s view) can be announced. These information systems also contain a decision support tool, which defines a truck schedule at the dock doors and, then, fixes the time windows around the anticipated completion times of trucks. The truck schedule determined at this stage is only a preliminary one for planning purposes, whereas the resulting time windows are fixed and communicated to the suppliers. The underlying scheduling problem has to ensure a leveled utilization of unloading docks, so that congestions of trucks and forklifts in- and outside the terminal are avoided. In the objective function, the preferences of the suppliers for a suited time window need to be traded off against the OEM’s own objectives, e.g., for choosing a dock door which ensures short distances to the parts’ dedicated destinations within the plant.In the second stage, the daily unloading process needs to be coordinated, i.e. each truck waiting in a parking lot is assigned to a dock door and the sequence of truck processing per door is defined (RP2-truck scheduling). In this context the time windows appointed in step one are especially important. If a truck arrives after its time window, typically, a contractual penalty needs to be paid and the OEM is freed from all time restrictions of serving this truck. If, however, the OEM is not able to serve a truck within the appointed time window, the supplier receives a demurrage depending on the truck’s waiting time. Therefore, OEMs aim at a schedule that minimizes their contractual penalties. Additionally, other objectives, e.g., minimizing the resulting distances of parts to the line, and restrictions, e.g., avoiding stock-outs and congestions, are relevant. At a major German automobile producer, up to 500 trucks per day and 70 unloading docks need to be coordinated by the truck control center. The decision problem is further aggravated by the fact that some trucks may have to visit multiple docks (see Klug, 2010 p. 338), so that additional precedence relations between unloading points need to be considered depending on the storage of bins inside a truck. Furthermore, the assignment of trucks to docks might be restricted, because either special unloading devices or additional space for unloading large containers sideways are required.Literature on receiving parts in the automotive industry mostly deals with the strategic facility layout problem, which determines the number and locations of dock doors for unloading inbound trucks (see Kamoun and Yano, 1996; Yano et al., 1998).To the best of the authors’ knowledge there exists no scientific literature to either problem (RP2-time window) and (RP2-truck scheduling) in the automobile industry. However, some inspiration from related problems in other field is available.The assignment of trucks’ appointment windows (RP2-time window) resembles the appointment scheduling in health care. Here, appointment windows for medical treatments are arranged with patients. An in-depth review on this topic is provided by Gupta and Denton (2008). However, unlike in health care with no-shows, the truck control center has rather accurate information on who will come and how long his treatment (unloading) will probably take. Nonetheless, arrival times are often delayed by traffic holdups and remain a major source of uncertainty in part logistics of the automobile industry. Thus, at least customizing the given approaches from health care poses a future research challenge. In this context, quantifying the value of more accurate truck arrival times would be a valid contribution for the practitioner having to decide whether or not an ongoing supervision of trucks by GPS is a suited policy.Unloading trucks (RP2-truck scheduling) can be interpreted as a job and the dock doors as the processors, so that a close relationship to traditional machine scheduling becomes obvious. As the number and kind of parts delivered is known in advance and, typically, enough historical data are available, the unloading (processing) times of trucks can be determined with precision. Hence, a deterministic parallel machine scheduling problem with time windows, multiple objectives, and many additional constraints needs to be solved (see above).Existing research on operational truck scheduling is mainly related to the field of cross docking, where rapid transshipments of goods between inbound and outbound trucks processed at the dock doors of some intermediate distribution center need to be enabled. Respective truck scheduling models and procedures are, e.g., presented by Yu and Egbelu (2008),Chen and Lee (2009),Chen and Song (2009),Miao et al. (2009),Boysen et al. (2010),Boysen et al. (2013b) as well as Boysen (2010). A recent survey and classification of truck scheduling problems at cross docks is provided by Boysen and Fliedner (2010). Certainly, truck scheduling at cross docks bears some similarity and some solution procedures might be a good starting point for adapting scheduling procedures.Storage of parts means that items are kept in some logistics area in order to bridge the time gap between the receipt of parts and their delivery to the line. In spite of all efforts excited by the Toyota Production System, doing completely without any intermediate warehousing is still not possible in the automotive industry. The stock up of JIT and LOT parts may arise along two logistics pathways. First, parts can be held in centralized storage, i.e., at the receiving store (ST1). Secondly, parts can be moved closer to the line and stored in some decentralized logistics area, which in the automotive industry is called a (JIT-)supermarket (ST2). Pathway ST1 suffers from long distances to the line, which at some large plant might exceed several kilometers. Traveling long distances results in a (comparatively) inflexible part delivery in (relatively) large lots and, thus, high inventories at the stations. Conversely, decentralized storage introduces an additional stage to the delivery process (double handling) and occupies space on the shop-floor where space is extremely scarce (Battini et al., 2013). In recent years, JIT supermarkets which also serve as a depot for tow trains delivering the parts (see Section 4.4) became very prominent in the automotive industry.The central receiving store is typically some warehouse applying rack or ground storage, so that the traditional decision problems, i.e., layout of racks and storage locations of parts (e.g., see de Koster et al., 2007; Gu et al., 2010a) arise in the context of ST1, too.Most of the decision problems realizing JIT supermarkets (ST2) are long-term problems and, thus, only briefly noted: (i) the number of supermarkets to be erected and their exact positions on the shop floor have to be determined (see Battini et al., 2010; Emde and Boysen, 2012b), (ii) the set of stations to be supplied with parts is to be assigned to each supermarket, and (iii) the layout of the supermarket and the storage locations of parts are to be determined. Within this framework operational decision problems remaining are inventory decisions at a supermarket and the organization of the (large-lot) replenishment from the central receiving store (ST2-replenishment).For general literature on the storage function we refer to the recent survey papers of de Koster et al. (2007) and Gu et al. (2007); 2010a).To the best of the authors’ knowledge there exists no literature explicitly modeling the replenishment of JIT supermarkets (ST2-replenishment) in an automotive context. However, this problem resembles the so-called forward-reserve problem of traditional distribution centers. Here, the amount of products (parts) to be stored in a compact area close to the input-output-point (supermarket) for fast-moving items and resupplied from bulk storage (central receiving store) is determined. Analogously to our problem, the trade-off between additional space required by the fast-picking area when increasing the items stored forward and a less-frequent replenishment is modeled by the forward-reserve problem. Hackmann and Rosenblatt (1990) were the first that formulated a mathematical model to allocate space in a continuously divisible forward area and proposed a greedy heuristic. Further contributions stem from Frazelle et al. (1994), who extend the model by regarding the size of a forward area as a decision variable, Van den Berg et al. (1998) who optimize unit-load replenishment that takes place during busy and idle periods, Bartholdi and Hackman (2008), who analyze two wide-spread real-world stocking strategies for small parts in a forward area, Gu et al. (2010b), who provide a branch-and-bound algorithm for solving the allocation of space and the selection of suitable products, and Walter et al. (2013), who investigate discretized problem versions. All these papers are certainly valuable preliminary work to the ST2-replenishment problem. However, there is a dire need for future research investigating whether the optimization approaches developed for order picking are indeed directly transferable to JIT supermarkets.Part sequencing is a special retrieval process where selected JIT/LOT parts are taken from storage (ST1) or JIT supermarkets (ST2) and arranged into bins right in the order of their assembly. The later part of this definition distinguishes part sequencing from traditional order picking in distribution centers. Here items are retrieved and packed into some bin or shipping package without any specific order. In the automotive industry, part variants realizing the same basic function, e.g., rear view mirrors of different specification, are packed into a bin or kit in the sequence of their retrieval at the assembly station. This allows the assembly worker to quickly access a required part without loss of assembly time, i.e., for identifying and searching the right part. On the downside, parts wrongly sequenced are not detected before their retrieval at the assembly station (Limère, 2011). At that time any emergency delivery comes too late, so that, typically, wrong parts are nevertheless assembled to not further obstruct successive stations. After assembly, these wrong parts have to be exchanged in the rework area (see Section 1). Since rework is expensive special emphasis is put on error free sequencing processes in the automobile industry, e.g., by applying the Poka-Yoke methodology of the Toyota Production System (e.g., see Shingo, 1986). As in traditional warehouses, two general logistics pathways can be differentiated for picking (de Koster et al., 2007):In a parts-to-pickers system (pathway SP1), parts are retrieved from an automated storage and retrieval system (ASRS) and conveyed to a picker packing the required parts into bins. As JIS parts are already sequenced and JIT parts are delivered only right before consumption, typically, only small and low-valued LOT parts are stored in an ASRS. The operational decision problems to be solved in the automotive industry do not deviate from other ASRS, e.g., the sequencing of storage and retrieval machines (e.g., Lee and Schaefer, 1996). Consequently, we refer to an in-depth review paper provided by Roodbergen and Vis (2009).Larger and valuable JIT parts are, typically, retrieved and sequenced according to the picker-to-parts paradigm (pathway SP2). Here, parts are stored at some fixed storage locations, e.g., in racks or some bins stored on the ground, so that pickers have to visit the respective positions when retrieving items according to their pick list. To ensure quick access to stored items, in the automotive industry, parts are either stored in ground storage in the containers they have arrived in or in low racks directly accessible by material handlers. The main operational decision problems associated with a picker-to-part retrieval are the batching and routing problem (Gu et al., 2010a). The batching problem consists of partitioning the set of parts to be retrieved during the planning horizon into subsets of items to be jointly collected during a single tour SP2-batching. The subordinate routing problem seeks a sequence of part retrievals during each single pick tour SP2-routing. Both problems aim to reduce the distances to be traveled by material handlers, because travel constitutes a large part of the total picking effort (Tompkins et al., 2003). However for the sequencing step in the automotive industry, we, typically, have specially structured pick lists. Each bin or kit to be filled with sequenced parts is associated with a specific station. When planning the layout of a sequencing area all variants of the same part type have usually been unified in a compact area, so that—unlike in traditional distribution centers—a reduction of walking distances is not the (only) main objective. Instead, automotive parts are often large and heavy, e.g., seats or windshields, so that lifting them causes considerable ergonomic stress for the workers. Many Western OEMs face an aging workforce and strong labor unions, so that ergonomics has become a major issue in the automobile industry (e.g., Otto and Scholl, 2011; 2013). In addition to minimizing the walking distance many OEMs also aim to reduce or at least equally balance the ergonomic stress among the workforce during part sequencing.There is a vast body on literature on batching SP2-batching and order picking SP2-routing in traditional distribution centers. We refer to the excellent review papers published on these topics over the past years, e.g., de Koster et al. (2007) and Gu et al. (2007); 2010a). To the best of the authors’ knowledge there is only the paper of Glock and Grosse (2012) especially dedicated to sequencing parts in the automotive industry. Although not explicitly mentioned in the paper, personal communication with the authors revealed that in fact the order picking processes of a major German truck manufacturer are investigated. As mentioned before, pick lists are specially structured in the automotive industry. During sequencing only variants of a specific part type are required, which can, thus, be unified in a compact area. Many OEMs unify part variants in a u-shaped area near a depot, e.g., some iron-barred box released by a forklift. For this problem setting, Glock and Grosse (2012) consider some layout aspects, e.g., where to place the movable depot, the question for the right product locations in the u-shaped racks, and the short-term batching and routing problem. For the latter two problems they provide a simple start heuristic, which is then tested in a comprehensive computational study. Future research should build on this first attempt to model the peculiarities of part sequencing in the automotive industry. For instance, exact procedures could be developed and a closer investigation of the interdependencies between (long-term) layout planning and (short-term) batching and routing would be a valuable contribution. Finally, there remains a dire need for integrating ergonomic aspects into order picking. For instance, minimizing the ergonomic burden adds an additional objective to the problems and, thus, requires multi-objective optimization.Another essential step prior to the assembly of cars is the delivery of parts to the consumptive stations of the line (DL). In general, three logistics pathways can be differentiated according to the transport vehicle applied (Battini et al., 2009; Battini et al., 2013): forklift (DL1), tow train (DL2), or conveyor system (DL3).Forklifts (DL1) have proven their applicability in multiple industrial settings, also in the automotive industry. Especially, their ability of lifting heavy pallets and containers makes them inevitable whenever heavy items need to be retrieved from or stored in racks. However, due to their relatively low transport capacity many OEMs aim to replace forklifts by other transport vehicles with higher capacity, such as tow trains. From the operational research perspective, two decision problems need to be solved, if forklifts are applied:•A set of given transport jobs needs to be partitioned among forklifts available (DL1-assignment), andthe sequence of transport jobs per forklift needs to be determined (DL1-sequencing).Clearly, both decision problems are heavily interdependent and resemble a parallel machine scheduling problem. In addition to traditional objectives of machine scheduling, e.g., minimizing the makespan, especially minimizing the required number of forklifts and minimizing the part inventory at the stations (in line with the JIT philosophy) appear as valid objectives within this context. As constraints, the part demands of the stations of the line need to be considered, so that material shortages are avoided with great certainty.A tow train (DL2), on the other hand, consists of a motorized towing vehicle connected to some un-powered wagons carrying the material bins. Typically, sharp turns in the narrow aisles of the shop floor restrict the number of wagons per tow train (or tugger) to at most a handful. Nonetheless, a tow train capacity is usually large enough to serve multiple stations in a milk-run. Starting from a decentralized JIT supermarket (ST2), where wagons are coupled and filled with bins by logistics workers according to the part demands of the respective stations, a tugger sets off (typically, according to a fixed schedule, see, e.g., Domingo et al., 2007) delivering parts to, and collecting empty bins from, the stations laying on its pre-determined route. Some automobile producers have even fully automated the tugger delivery process (Emde and Boysen, 2012b): Instead of a human operator, a tow train may be pulled by some automated guided vehicle (AGV) and for the stopovers so-called shooter-racks may be applied. This special kind of gravity flow rack allows the tugger to dock, opening gates at the back of the rack and the docked wagon such that full bins are ejected onto the rack by elastic springs while empty ones slide back to the train. These shelves reduce the unloading time to just a few seconds and render reliable part delivery processes possible. Moreover, some OEMs have installed display panels at each station similar to those of bus and railway stations. Here, a countdown until the tow train’s next arrival is announced, so that anticipating material shortages in a credible and timely manner gets much easier for assembly workers and team leaders.The essential operational decision problems associated with this logistics pathway can be summarized as follows (Battini et al., 2013):•First, a subset of stations needs to be assigned to each tugger. As turns of a tow train within the narrow aisles are often not possible, the assigned stations are served in the flow direction of the line. Therefore, this basic decision determines the route of each tugger (DL2-routing).Then, for each tugger and its associated route a delivery schedule needs to be determined (DL2-scheduling). A tugger schedule depicts the departure and return times in the logistics area and the time span of each stopover at the stations of the assembly line. OEMs in the automotive industry often aim at a steady part supply by applying cyclic schedules, e.g., a loaded tugger departs every 30 minutes, on a fixed route. However, tow trains can also be utilized with non-cyclic schedules and varying routes. Obviously, tow train routing and scheduling are heavily interdependent. As a basic objective the number of required tuggers can be minimized, so that, e.g., labor costs are reduced. On the other hand, part inventories at the stations need to be reduced, because of the limited space. As constraints, routing and scheduling need to consider the limited tugger capacity and the part demands of the stations.Finally, for a given route and schedule the number and types of parts to be loaded per tugger tour need to be determined (DL2-loading). OEMs aim at a JIT loading plan, so that exactly the number and types of parts being consumed by the stations to be served during two successive stops are loaded on a tugger’s wagons. However, considering the limited capacity of a tugger such plans might not always be feasible and preceding tours have to deliver additional parts. In the resulting decision problem inventory at the stations should be reduced, while given station demands and limited tugger capacity are considered as constraints. Again, this problem is heavily interdependent with the former two problems, although, in practice, they are typically solved sequentially.As a third transportation mode, a conveyor system can be applied (DL3). A conveyor system, e.g., a belt or overhead conveyor, either delivers parts from a central receiving store or internal subassemblies directly from a feeder line. As the delivery sequence is pre-determined by the production sequence of the main line, no sophisticated operational decision problems are associated with this type of delivery. On the other hand, the main assembly line can itself be used as a part delivery device. In this case, a set of different parts dedicated to a single car are unified in some special bin and stored either directly on the assembly line or in the car, e.g., in the trunk. These special bins are also known as traveling kits (see Bozer and McGinnis, 1992; Limère, 2011) and typically contain related parts, e.g., a door-kit comprises all interior linings. The kits travel down the assembly line and each worker requiring a specific part removes it from the kit until it is depleted. As the space on the main assembly line or in the car body is extremely scarce, only few kits containing relatively small parts can be applied in real-world assembly systems without causing considerable obstructions. The main problem associated with traveling kits is to choose the right type and number of parts for a kit (DL3-selection).Kozan (2000) jointly treats the assignment (DL1-assignment) of transport jobs to forklifts (DL1) and the sequencing of jobs per forklift (DL1-sequencing) for managing the part supply in an Australian truck plant. The optimization model presented is an extension of the traditional vehicle routing problem with multiple time periods, so that the given shift schedules of forklift drivers can be considered. For the solution a genetic algorithm is presented. The results show an impressive reduction of the delivery times compared to the simple real-world policies applied.Boysen and Bock (2011) investigate a real-world sequencing problem of material bins to be fed into a hoist system of an OEM (DL1-sequencing). A forklift collects the bins in the given sequence arriving at the exit of the hoist and delivers them to the respective stations of the line. The objective is to find a sequence which minimizes the weighted maximum inventory level over all stations while station demands for parts are met with certainty. For the solution of the problem an exact bounded dynamic programming approach and a heuristic simulated annealing procedure are introduced.With regard to the part delivery using forklifts (DL1) existing research only treats isolated real-word cases. Therefore, a systematic description of all relevant constraints (e.g., shift schedules, inventory constraints at the stations) and suited objective functions (e.g., reduced driving times of forklifts, reducing inventory at the stations) is required. In addition the parallel machine scheduling problem, where jobs (bins delivered by forklifts) processed by processors (forklifts) build up inventory consumed by given varying demand for parts as defined by the production sequence, seems a valid field for future research. A first attempt in this latter direction is provided by Boysen et al. (2013a) as well as Drótos and Kis (2013).Vaidyanathan et al. (1999) present a VRP formulation to solve the routing problem (DL2-routing) of tow trains (DL2), which the authors call a Just-in-Time Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (JITCVRP). They discard the scheduling aspect and assume that the same route, once assigned to a vehicle, will be served in continuous repetition over the planning horizon without breaks. The authors further presuppose a constant demand rate at every station which does not change over time. To ensure that deliveries are just-in-time, their model follows the classic VRP aim of minimizing the total travel time along the routes. The quantity delivered per trip is just enough to supply the station until the next arrival of the tow train, hence shorter trips also mean less inventory. The paper also presents a nearest neighbor and an improvement heuristic for solving the JITCVRP.A joint routing (DL2-routing) and scheduling (DL2-scheduling) problem of tow trains is considered by Emde and Boysen (2012a). They present a nested dynamic programming approach to find fixed routes and cyclic as well as non-cyclic schedules, so that part inventories at the stations having time-varying demand and the number of tuggers applied are minimized. In a computational study, they show that the additional degrees of freedom of non-cyclic delivery schedules considerably reduce inventories compared to cyclic tours. For a similar problem setting Rao et al. (2013) present some hybrid genetic algorithm and simulated annealing approach.The loading problem of tow trains (DL2-loading) is investigated by Emde and Boysen (2012a). Given the limited tugger capacity and station demands, a loading plan for successive tugger tours is determined so that simultaneously the sum and the maximum inventories are minimized. A polynomial solution procedure is presented and tested.Golz et al. (2012) present a case-study from a major German OEM where the tugger concept has been implemented. They develop a heuristic procedure to decide on the routes (DL2-routing), schedules (DL2-scheduling) and load (DL2-loading) of the tow trains, aiming to minimize the number of vehicles and operators while avoiding stock-outs at the line, where the routing is limited to picking a path from a predefined set. Another holistic approach jointly treating the routing (DL2-routing), scheduling (DL2-scheduling) and loading (DL2-loading) of the tow trains is investigated by Choi and Lee (2002). They aim at minimizing the deviations of optimal delivery times per bin delivery and present a local search procedure (insertion heuristic method), which is tested in real-world case of automobile industry. For a related holistic problem, Faccio et al. (2013) present a case study from the industry analyzed by way of a simulation model.As shown, several research papers deal with milk-run deliveries of tow trains (DL2) each investigating a specific case. Yet, multiple constraints and objectives might be relevant in the real-world: tugger routes can either be identical or vary from tour to tour, only disjunct routes may be allowed to avoid obstructions of tow trains whereas in other settings non-disjunct tours may be unproblematic, tours may be cyclic or non-cyclic, either minimizing the number of tuggers or reducing the inventory at the stations may be the relevant objective or even multi-objective solution procedures might be required. Thus, a classification of all relevant constraints and objectives for tugger deliveries would be a valid task for future research. Then, relevant optimization models along with complexity proofs can be derived in a systematic fashion and suited optimization procedures can be developed.Finally, the problem of selecting (DL3-selection) suited parts for traveling kits moving down the assembly line (DL3) has yet not been investigated by scientific researchers.The final logistics step before parts are assembled into cars is the line side presentation. Within this context material bins delivered by some transport vehicle need to be deposed on a suited storage space next to the assembly line. The line side presentation involves two elementary pathways:LP1:Simple ground storage is applied for large load carriers (unit-loads) carrying large subassemblies, e.g., cockpit modules or wheels.Smaller bins, e.g., for headlights, are stored in racks. In most cases gravity flow racks are applied, which consists of tilted shelves to be replenished by logistics workers from the back and depleted by the assembly worker from the front. From the assembly worker’s point of view, rack storage is advantageous, because parts can be handled in a more ergonomic and timely fashion (Finnsgård et al., 2011). On the other hand, double-handling of bins to be stored in racks enlarges the effort for logistics workers delivering the parts (Limère, 2011).For the line side presentation especially the placement problem (LP-placement) has to be solved. which involves the location of each bin either on the ground or in a rack while considering the scarce space at a station. In modern assembly lines, a vehicle typically spends between 60 and 90 seconds at each workstation. Walking can take up a sizable portion of the total cycle time, so that unproductive walking times should be minimized. Considering the steadily moving car body on the conveyor belt and the resulting triangular movement of a worker from a mounting place to a bin and back to the next mounting place, optimal bin positions minimizing distances for workers can easily be calculated. However, an isolated calculation of each bin’s position will most probably result in overlapping bin positions, so that a simultaneous placement problem of all bins with varying dimensions competing for scarce space arises. In real-world applications, the problem is often further complicated by forbidden areas, e.g., occupied by columns or unmovable machinery, and the fact that assembly workers may be able to collect multiple (especially smaller) parts per walk to a station’s storage area. Moreover, different cars with optional configurations have varying optimal bin positions, so that also the model-mix of cars produced during a shift and the production sequence influence the placement decision. As a consequence the placement of bins is continuously replanned, which justifies classifying this problem as an operational problem.Existing literature mostly deals with the ergonomic impact of positioning bins in the workplace on assembly workers. For instance, this impact is quantified by empirical ergonomic studies stemming from Lin et al. (2001),Eklund (1995),Falck et al. (2010), and Finnsgård et al. (2011). Klampfl et al. (2006) investigate the placement problem inside a workstation from an operational research perspective. The authors determine optimal bin positions minimizing walking distances of assembly workers in different settings. Two non-linear models are presented where an overlapping of bins and/or a crossing of stations borders are allowed. These models can be applied for determining lower bounds for the real-world walking distances. A third non-linear optimization model allows stacking of bins in vertical direction and considers non-overlapping bins and stations borders as constraints. The different models are tested in a case study of an automotive assembly line.A more aggregate view on the placement problem is taken by Bukchin and Meller (2005). Here, the total space along the line is partitioned among stations and within each station sufficient space is assigned to each part to be stored. The aim of the resulting space allocation problem is to maximize the fill-rates of parts, so that the probability of a line stoppage due to a material-shortage is minimized given the scarce space. They present a myopic procedure for generating a feasible initial solution. The procedure is shown to deliver near-optimal results and to outperform simple rules-of-thumb.While constituting important initial steps, the existing papers leave plenty of space for future research. The existing models need to be extended with many additional real-world requirements: the possibility of storing bins on both sides of the line is not considered; typically multiple workers jointly assemble in a station; different storing policies for the same part family (e.g. high runner variants in original carrier load, low runners in bins in racks); different car models with varying part demands are produced; forbidden areas restrict the bin locations; and workers may be able to collect multiple parts per walk to the storage area. Furthermore, efficient solution procedures are required for solving the resulting optimization models.The internal return of empty bins covers the route from the assembly line back to some logistics area. After their arrival bins are either loaded on trucks to be returned via an external return process back to a supplier or refilled in the sequencing step (see Section 4.3) in order to directly re-supply final assembly. In general, two alternative logistic pathways can be differentiated:IR1:The return flows can be integrated into the forward chain, so that the same transportation device supplying a filled bin takes back its empty counterpart. For in-house delivery three potential (forward) transportation modes were differentiated (see Section 4.4): forklift, tow train, and conveyor system. Obviously, if the latter alternative is applied an integration into the forward chain is often not possible, since typical conveyor systems flow unidirectional. However, for both vehicles types, forklifts and tow trains, an integration is certainly feasible. An integration into the forward chain is advantageous, because no additional cost for setting-up an extra return pathway occur. On the other hand, this approach prolongs each stopover and requires an additional stop of a tow train at a deposit area, which slows down the time-critical forward processes.Alternatively, a separate return process can be established by applying additional vehicles or some extra conveyor system exclusively for returning empties. A conveyor system causes high investments and is inflexible with regard to re-arranging the layout of the line. A wide-spread solution is to use some tow train traveling through the stations to collect empty bins. In contrast to the forward processes, returning empties is not time-critical as long as (i) there is enough space at the stations and (ii) sufficient bins at the sequencing step. In contrast to IR1, a separate return process requires additional resources, but releases the forward processes from uncritical return tasks.An integration of returns into the forward chain (IR1) defines no separate decision problems, but constitutes additional aspects to be integrated in the decision problems of the forward steps. Especially, the delivery step (see Section 4.4) has to consider the extra effort of returning bins. In addition, decision makers need to ensure that enough bins are available in the storage areas where parts are picked and sequenced, so that subsequent delivery cycles can be executed without delays.A separate return process (IR2) typically employs tow trains traveling through stations to collect empty bins. The supplementary decision problems to be solved are the routing (IR2-routing) and scheduling (IR2-scheduling) of tow trains. Within the routing problem assembly stations have to be partitioned among the tow trains available and a visiting sequence per vehicle is determined. Clearly, applying more trains requires more resources but allows more frequent visits. The trade-off is usually resolved by estimating the maximum visiting cycle given the scarce space at each station and, then, deriving the number of vehicles required for enabling timely returns. The scheduling problem decides on the departure times of each tow train’s tour in the deposit area and the arrival times at each stopover for collecting bins. Here, the sequencing step of the forward chain (see Section 4.4) defines a demand for bins to be (newly) filled with parts, so that the tow train schedule has to ensure that enough empty bins are available when required.Literature on the internal returns of empty bins in the automobile industry is, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, currently non-existent, so that future research is required.The process steps enabling the external returns of empties cover the route from an OEM’s plant back to a supplier, where the returned bins or containers can be refilled with parts to be resupplied in a closed-loop supply chain. For instance, each day the plant in Ingolstadt of German car producer Audi processes about 600 inbound trucks and only 230 outbound trucks exclusively filled with empties. The reduced number of outbound trucks is due to the fact that many bins and containers are foldable and require less stowage space.Standardized shipment carriers, e.g., EUR/EPAL-pallets, are often part a cross-company deposit system and, thus, can be returned to a nearby return station. Bins or containers designed for special part types, on the other hand, remain in their supplier’s property. Both alternatives define two potential return pathways, where ER1 denotes the way back to some nearby return station of a cross-company deposit system and ER2 the way back to the supplier of the respective container or bin.With regard to ER1, especially the transportation planning of when to return how many bins to the nearest return station needs to be solved (ER1-transportation). The general structure of this problem resembles a traditional lot-sizing problem of the forward chain. Lost deposit payments when postponing returns need to weighed against the transportation cost given the limited capacity of trucks. See, for instance, Richter and Sombrutzki (2000) and Richter and Weber (2001), who present different lot-sizing problems in the reverse logistics context. However, in the specific case of the automotive industry, the amount of bins to be returned is very high and quickly surmounts a single truck’s capacity, i.e. unifying carriers of multiple periods in order to save transportation costs is often not possible. Instead, the problem reduces to initiating another transport to the return station whenever a trailer is completely filled with standardized bins.Other empties not being part of a cross-company deposit system must be returned to the respective suppliers. A straightforward solution would be to return each bin to its original supplier. However, today’s OEMs often operate in international production networks distributed all over the globe, so that the return of empty bins is often consolidated within a network (ER2-consolidation). Consolidation is feasible whenever the same kind of bins or containers are utilized for multiple parts and/or in multiple production sites. For instance, a skeleton container is a widespread carrier for many different part types. The resulting decision problem has to determine how many bins from which plant to return to what supplier and resembles some multi-period transportation problem. Supply and demand to be matched over time are defined by the number of containers of a specific type available at a plant and the containers per type once delivered and now to be returned to a supplier, respectively. Given the transportation cost between OEM plants and suppliers as well as contractual penalty costs depending on the time lag between delivery and return of a container, the aim is to reduce the overall cost. Over the last year several car producers have installed a decision-support tool for this planning task. However, scientific papers on the consolidation problem are currently not available.Given the transport orders for returns, the physical transport, typically executed by truck, has to be organized (ER2-transportation). Analogously to internal returns, an important decision to be taken is whether returns are integrated into the forward chain or separately organized. Furthermore, similar to the pathways of inbound logistics (see Section 3.2), three general network structures exist: point-to-point deliveries, milk-run, and cross-dock-consolidation. Combining both dimensions of the problem leads to six general problem classes for the transportation planning of returns. The three problem classes for the separate structure resemble the three problem classes of the forward chain (see Section 3.2) only with reverted flow directions. If return flows are to be integrated into the forward chain, each of the three alternative pathways and their resulting decision problems need to be extended by the interdependencies between forward and reverse flows. Any container must first be delivered before being returnable, so that precedence constraints and/or time lags covering each bin’s average duration of stay before depletion have to be integrated into the resulting pick-up and delivery problems. To the best of the authors’ knowledge no solutions procedures to this problem specially dedicated to the peculiarities of the automobile industry exist.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
