@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Online retailers’ promotional pricing, free-shipping threshold, and inventory decisions: A simulation-based analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Online retailer’s optimal profit margin, free-shipping threshold and inventory decisions are analyzed.Publicly-available statistics are used to perform the analysis.We use Arena to simulate the online retailing system and OptQuest to optimize the decisions.We perform sensitivity analysis to draw managerial insights.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Profit margin,Contingent free-shipping,Inventory,Simulation with Arena,Optimization with OptQuest,Sensitivity analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a two-stage decision problem, in which an online retailer first makes optimal decisions on his profit margin and free-shipping threshold, and then determines his inventory level. We start by developing the retailer’s expected profit function. Then, we use publicly-available statistics to find the best-fitting distribution for consumers’ purchase amounts and the best-fitting function for conversion rate (i.e., probability that an arriving visitor places an online order with the retailer). We show that: (i) a reduction of the profit margin does not significantly affect the standard deviation of consumers’ order sizes (purchase amounts) but increases the average order size; whereas, (ii) variations in a positive finite free-shipping threshold affect both the average value and the standard deviation of the order sizes. We then use Arena to simulate the online retailing system and OptQuest to find the retailer’s optimal decisions and maximum profit. Next, we perform a sensitivity analysis to examine the impact of the ratio of the unit holding and salvage cost to the unit shipping cost on the retailer’s optimal decisions. We also draw some important managerial insights.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Online retailing is an important distribution channel and it is continuing to expand quickly. As information technology (IT) advances rapidly, consumers can access the Internet more conveniently, safely and cheaply, and they are thus more interested in online shopping. To successfully compete, online retailers frequently implement promotions. Promotions are of special importance to business-to-consumer (B2C) firms because search costs are lower in online markets than in traditional ones, and the competition in online markets is thus very stiff. Moreover, Advertising.com’s survey [1] indicated that around 56% of consumers consider price discounts as the most enticing promotion offered by online retailers. Price promotions are thus a critical marketing strategy for online retailers.For online retailing operations, shipping costs are also an important determinant of a consumer’s purchase decision. As Dinlersoz and Li [12] discussed, shipping costs are of capital importance to online markets, even though they are irrelevant to consumers’ purchase decisions in offline distribution channels for most product categories. To reduce the negative impact of the shipping fees, online retailers have been implementing a variety of shipping-related promotions, which can be divided into the following three categories: (i) unconditional free shipping (UFS) policy, under which an online retailer absorbs the shipping costs for all orders; (ii) contingent free shipping (CFS) policy, under which a retailer pays for the shipping costs but only for those orders equal to or larger than a predefined cutoff level; and (iii) consumers absorb the shipping costs by paying the fees that are increasing in their order sizes. In [26] Lewis reported that the CFS policy is the most effective promotion in increasing the revenues of online retailers. However, a critical question for the CFS policy remains: What CFS cutoff level should be set by the online retailer?As the above discussion illustrates, pricing and CFS strategies are two most effective tactics that influence consumers’ online purchases. In order to satisfy consumers’ demand during the promotion period, the retailer also needs to make a decision on how many products should be stocked for the sales. We learn from Anderson et al. [3] and Breugelmans et al. [10] that the inventory decision for a promotion period is also of great significance to the success of an online retailer.We conclude from our above discussion that decisions on (i) pricing, (ii) CFS threshold and, (iii) inventory play important roles in the quickly-growing online retailing industry. We note from Advertising.com’s survey [1] and Yao [31] that, in practice, many online retailers have been implementing a two-stage decision process. In the first stage of this process, they first determine their pricing and CFS thresholds and announce their decisions to the market before a promotion takes place. Then, at the second stage, they make the stocking decision to satisfy consumers’ online orders during the promotion period. For example, Amazon.com announced its 2007 Christmas pricing decisions for most toy gifts and its free-shipping promotions for all orders over $25 several months before the Christmas promotion period.In this paper we develop a two-stage sequential decision model for an online retailer who first makes optimal decisions on the retail price and the CFS cutoff level, and then makes the inventory decision. We assume that the online retailer sells multiple products in a single category; this is a common case in practice. For example, Barnesandnoble.com mainly sells books and CDs online, and Ashford.com mainly sells watches, sunglasses and fragrances. From Anderson et al. [4] and Blattberg and Neslin [8] who have shown that in practice the profit margins of different products in the same category are identical, we learn that making the pricing decision is equivalent to determining a single profit margin for all products in a single category. Our goal is to find the optimal profit margin, CFS threshold and inventory that maximize the retailer’s expected profit during a promotion period.We note that the online retailer’s expected profit function for the two-stage decision problem is too complicated to be optimized analytically. The complexity of the problem stems from the fact that it involves optimizing three decisions that jointly determine profits both at the individual and aggregate level. Therefore, we use simulation to find the optimal pricing, CFS and inventory decisions for the retailer. In order to obtain realistic results based on real data, we simulate the online retailing system using the empirical statistics reported by Lewis et al. [27]. These include percentages of small, medium and large orders and conversion rates (i.e., probability that an arriving visitor places an online order and thus becomes a customer of the retailer) for different free-shipping and pricing policies. For our simulation, we first find the decision-dependent distributions that best fit the purchase distributions given in [27]. We then determine the best-fitting random purchase amount distribution and conversion rate function, and use these specifications to simulate the operations of the online retailer and to compute optimal two-stage decisions.We use Arena, a primary simulation software, to efficiently simulate the retailing system, and then use OptQuest, an optimization add-on for Arena, to search for the optimal decisions that maximize the retailer’s profit. Arena and OptQuest have been widely used in practice to simulate a variety of real systems; but, very few academic publications in the business and economics fields used this simulation technique. Academic publications concerning simulation with Arena and optimization with OptQuest include Aras et al. [5] and Askin and Chen [6].Additionally, we perform several sensitivity analyses to investigate the impact of the ratio of the inventory cost parameter to the unit shipping cost on the retailer’s optimal decisions and maximum profit. The sensitivity analyses are conducted because: (i) these parameters were estimated for the particular firm in the empirical study [27], so they may not be general and (ii) from the sensitivity analysis we are able to draw some important managerial insights.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review major relevant publications to show the originality of our paper. In Section 3 we develop our two-stage decision model for an online retailer. In Section 4 we find the best-fitting distribution function for the purchase amount and the best-fitting conversion rate function, and use these best-fitting functions to simulate the retailing system. In Section 5 we find the optimal decisions and conduct a sensitivity analysis. This paper ends with a summary of our contributions in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
