@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic pricing with uncertain production cost: An alternating-move approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper considers the game between two competing firms.External factors are considered including production cost that is random in nature.Based on the model setting, an alternating-move approach is used to solve this problem.A closed-form solution is provided for special casesA comprehensive numerical study is provided to illustrate the results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic pricing,Alternating-move game,Cost uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article studies a two-firm dynamic pricing model with random production costs. The firms produce the same perishable products over an infinite time horizon when production (or operation) costs are random. In each period, each firm determines its price and production levels based on its current production cost and its opponent’s previous price level. We use an alternating-move game to model this problem and show that there exists a unique subgame perfect Nash equilibrium in production and pricing decisions. We provide a closed-form solution for the firm’s pricing policy. Finally, we study the game in the case of incomplete information, when both or one of the firms do not have access to the current prices charged by their opponents.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A considerable number of papers in the operations literature study the problem of using innovative pricing and inventory control in order to maximize expected profit. Different approaches such as dynamic pricing, revenue management, inventory control, joint inventory and pricing control, and joint production and pricing control have been used to achieve this goal (see for example Gallego & van Ryzin (1994, 1997), Chatwin (2000), Feng & Xiao (2000), Lin (2004), Zhao & Zheng (2000), Hall, Kopalle, & Pyke (2008), Fleischmann, Hall, & Pyke (2006), Lin & Sibdari (2009), Sibdari & Pyke (2010)).Most of these studies consider a single retailer who enjoys monopoly power. An important assumption of these models is that the demand (or the distribution of the random demand) depends only on the price (or inventory level in the case of inventory control) set by the monopolist. This assumption is not quite realistic since customers typically can compare price and quality of substitutable products and choose the most appropriate one (note that some products such steel, oil, and airline seats do not differ appreciably in quality).One approach to the multiple-firm problem is to employ game theory. Recently, quite a few papers have appeared in the supply chain and revenue management literatures that use game theory to tackle incentive-related problems with multiple agents. The game theory literature in general may be categorized by simultaneous-move and alternating-move games. In simultaneous-move games, the players make decisions at the same time without observing each other’s decisions, while in alternating-move games, the players take turns with their decisions and observe the last action taken by other players. To best of our knowledge, most of the related papers in supply chain and revenue management literature use simultaneous-move games. The majority of these papers, furthermore, use stationary policies in which the outcome of a single-stage game is applied for the entire time horizon.A major assumption of simultaneous-move games is that the parameters of the model, such as production costs, are deterministic and remain constant. In reality, however, different internal parameters such as production or labor costs (e.g. pension plan cost) may not be constant. Variable production costs may lead firms to adjust their price levels even if the opponents’ price levels are constant. These unexpected changes in price levels force other firms to react and adjust their prices accordingly, even if their production costs remain the same. As a result, in such environments, the firms do not make decisions at the same time, nor can they ignore actions taken by their opponents in previous periods. Addressing this observation is the motivation of our study.We consider a two-firm alternating-move dynamic game over an infinite time horizon. We make some simplifying assumptions for purposes of tractability. Nevertheless, we derive generalizable insights, and we anticipate that this research will stimulate further work that will relax some of the assumptions. Specifically, we assume that the firms produce similar products that can instantly be produced with no production limits. The production cost of each firm over the time horizon is random and is only realized at the time of production. The firms take turns making pricing and production moves (or equivalently, decisions). When a firm (say firm 1) moves in a period (say odd periods), the other firm (firm 2) moves in the next period (even periods). Furthermore, neither firm updates its own strategy in the periods in which the other firm moves. A firm determines its price and production levels based on its own production cost and the price charged by the other firm in the previous period in order to maximize its discounted expected profit. We show the existence of a unique Nash equilibrium and provide a procedure to calculate the equilibrium price and production levels.The assumption that firms engage in alternating moves might raise the question of why firms follow this restriction rather than moving simultaneously. In some cases, of course, reality exactly mirrors an alternating-move game. The Coke–Pepsi example shown in Fig. 1, for instance, captures data from a particular market and supermarket chain and clearly illustrates an alternating move scenario (Kopalle, 2007). New product introductions may also create alternating pricing moves. For instance, recent competitive responses to the iPhone were priced roughly at existing iPhone prices. However, the subsequent introduction the iPhone 3G S led Apple to price previous models as low as $99, creating a difficult pricing problem for Apple’s competitors. We anticipate a similar competition between Amazon’s Kindle and related products. In these cases, competition may spawn prices suggestive of an alternating move game.Note that if the firms choose prices simultaneously, an adverse price shock might actually increase the equilibrium price levels, thereby decreasing aggregate demand. This outcome can arise in a simultaneous move game since each firm has an incentive to deviate based on the other firm’s behavior. To illustrate this argument, in Section 4, we provide a numerical study to show how a firm can lower its profit by ignoring the last action taken by the other firm. Specifically, we use a numerical study with two firms when firm 2 considers the last action taken by firm 1, while firm 1 behaves as if both firms use a simultaneous move game. Maskin and Tirole (1988a, 1988b) also argue that the nature of a game may differ with respect to the timing patterns. They provide a timing game by the firms and show a more elaborate class of models where firms move at any time they choose. The details of this timing game are beyond the scope of our research and we refer interested readers to these references.Many industries exhibit other characteristics of our model. For instance, in the airline industry, fuel cost is uncertain, and pricing decisions of airlines not only depend on competition and market demand, but also on fuel cost. A change in fuel cost faced by one airline may force that airline to change its ticket prices accordingly. In response, other airlines, which might face different costs, set new price levels. In the past 10months (at this writing), the cost of a barrel of crude oil rose to $140, then fell to $42, only to rebound to around $70. Some airlines hedged fuel costs and thus were relatively insulated from these changes, while other airlines’ costs fluctuated wildly.The deep recession of course had an impact on market demand, further complicating the picture. Ticket prices varied accordingly, with US coast-to-coast fares falling at one point as low as $99. An interesting observation is that even Southwest Airlines, which is renowned for its hedging policies and industry-leading low prices, was forced to respond to competitors’ low prices when fuel prices plummeted. Production cost for airlines of course includes capacity, along with the costs of fuel, labor, and other components. Some of these costs, such as capacity and labor, are sunk in the near term. However, even capacity may change when fuel prices change. A sharp increase in fuel price will induce an airline to make changes to routes, capacity, and airplanes (and therefore number of available seats). Furthermore, airlines that hedge do not always hedge their total fuel consumption. There have been times in recent history that Southwest was significantly hedged on fuel cost, but even then it may have only been hedged to about 60% of its consumption. Therefore, all airlines face short term fluctuations in fuel price. They have had mixed ability to pass through these costs to the consumer. On international routes, airlines often can pass through 100% of a fuel price increase, but not on shorter haul domestic routes. So ticket prices, for a given airline, will change depending on the route, the amount of hedging they have employed, and of course, competition. For a detailed analysis see Carter, Rogers, and Simkins (2007) and Ubhi (1996).In other industries, such as high technology and consumer electronics, firms source critical components from low cost countries. In recent months, as the RMB has strengthened against the dollar, and wage rates in China have increased dramatically, the cost of sourcing components from China has risen, implying that competitors who source from, say, Mexico now enjoy lower relative costs. The latter firm may adjust prices, forcing the former firm to respond.In all these cases, we observe alternating-move scenarios and/or uncertain costs, where our alternating-move, random cost model is more suitable than the existing simultaneous-move models. Furthermore, each of these examples shares fundamental characteristics of our model. For instance, a major assumption of our paper is that the products are perishable and that firms do not carry them across periods, and thus inventory levels do not have an impact on firms’ pricing decisions. This assumption is valid in the airline industry example. Airlines, on the other hand, do not have infinite capacity. High tech products, consumer electronics, and soft drinks manufacturers have much more control over capacity, but inventory is less perishable than airline seats. Our goal is to further the literature on the intersection of pricing and operations with tractable models, specifically assuming infinite capacity and products that are perishable. Relaxing the assumptions of infinite capacity and of perishable products would be valueble extensions for our paper. In the rest of this paper, in order to be consistent with the literature, we use the term production cost instead of operation cost.A number of recent papers in service and production management have employed game theoretic tools to address incentive related problems in presence of multiple players. Often models in economics and management science use price, production, or inventory level as the strategic decision factor. Examples of research papers considering price as a decision variable include Bernstein and Federguen (2003, 2004) and Kirman and Sobel (1974), and Lin and Sibdari (2009). For a detailed survey on this topic see Cachon and Netessine (2004). Research papers that address competition between retailers in the context of supply chain management often assume that firms choose both price and inventory levels. Recent papers addressing this problem include Cachon and Zipkin (1999), Hopp et al. (2003), Lippman and McCardle (1997), Mahajan and van Ryzin (2001), Netessine and Rudi (2003), and the references therein.The alternating-move game is well studied in the economics literature. In alternating-move games, Markov Perfect equilibria (MPE) are widely used to describe the strategy profiles of the players. In MPE, players are restricted to choose strategies with payoff-relevant state variables. Maskin and Tirole (1988a, 1988b) study Markov equilibria in a repeated game context using a variety of oligopolistic competition models. In these two companion papers, they consider models in which each firm sets capacity (or price) given the fixed capacity (or price) of the other firms. They show that a game with players that alternate in taking their actions in an asynchronous manner results in Markov equilibria outcomes. They compare the outcome of synchronous and asynchronous games and show that the outcome of asynchronous games, under certain conditions, might be significantly higher than that in the synchronous game. Lau (1997) provides a general framework for a two-player alternating game using the results of Maskin and Tirole (1988a, 1988b). Other research papers in alternating-move games include Cyert and DeGroot (1970), Lagunoff and Matsui (1997), Yoon, 2001, and Haller et al. (2006); Haller and Lagunoff (2000).The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our model. Section 3 analyzes the game between two firms employing an alternating-move approach. Section 4 studies special cases such as deterministic cost, the case of ignoring the alternating-move game, and the case of incomplete information. In Section 5 we use a computational study to illustrate our results and provide further managerial insight. Section 6 summarizes the conclusions.We consider a competitive duopoly over an infinite time horizon. The time periods are discrete and indexed byt=1,2,…. Firms take turns in making pricing and production decisions. While one firm makes its production and pricing decisions at the beginning of a period, the other firm uses its production and pricing decisions from the previous period. Without loss of generality, we assume that firm 1 moves at the beginning of odd periods and firm 2 moves at the beginning of even periods.Firmi,i=1,2, can produce an unlimited number of items at the beginning of each period with production costcit, and we definect={c1t,c2t}to be the vector of production costs. The firms do not have complete information about future production costs, and at time t, we denote future production costs byθjt, which are exogenous random variables with known distributions. In other words, at the beginning of period t, right before producing the items, firm i realizes its own production cost,cit, while the opponent’s production cost,cjtand its own future production costs,θitare unknown, fori,j=1,2andj≠i. Both firms produce in every period, but since they take turns in making decisions, their price and production levels remain the same for two consecutive periods. The products are perishable with disposal cost ofh+, if not used after one period. Note that the disposal cost could represent the cost of having empty seats on a flight. While it is not possible to use the seat on the next flight, they still pose some operational cost to the airline (e.g., catering, cleaning and so on). We assume that unmet demand is backlogged with cost ofh-for each backlogged unit per period.We let the demand for product i beDi(p), fori=1,2, which is a nonnegative continuous random variable, wherep=(p1,p2)andpi∈[pmin,pmax],i=1,2. In addition, we assume that demand functions have a multiplicative form, i.e.,Dit(p)=di(p)εitwhereεitare continuous independent and identically distributed (iid) random variables andGi(.)andgi(.)are their CDF and PDF functions, respectively andE(εit)=1for all i and t. The above multiplicative model implies that the coefficient of variation of the one-period demand is constant, exogenous and independent of inherent qualities, and expected sales.1In inventory control models, constant coefficient of variation also implies an important form of economy of scale of pooling efficiency that is due to less than proportional growth in safety stock. Multiplicative demand functions are robust whenever the potential number of customers is “large enough.” When the market size is large (e.g. the Pepsi–Coke market or the airline industry), the proportion of customers who plan to purchase a product is a good indicator to monitor the dynamic of the available inventory. This might not be true for small markets such as fine art or custom-made vehicles, in which case additive functions better explain product demand.1However, in our model, since we have not considered inventory control, this is not an important factor. Other research papers that use multiplicative demand modeling include Bernstein and Federguen (2003) and Mieghem and Dada (1999).We assume that demands in successive periods are independent and that the products offered by the firms are imperfect substitutes. Therefore, we make the following basic monotonicity assumptions:∂di(p)∂pi⩽0and∂di(p)∂pj⩾0,and∂di(p)∂pi>∂di(p)∂pj,fori≠j.The expected demandd1(p1,p2)is non-increasing inp1and non-decreasing inp2(similarly ford2(p)), and also the demand of a firm is more sensitive to changes in its own price compared to changes in the competitor’s price. Unlike most of game theoretic papers in the operations literature that require demand functions to have increasing differences properties, we do not make this assumption. However, we assume that demand is continuous and differentiable with respect to prices.We assume that customers demand only one unit at a time and, in addition, that they act myopically, which means they do not adjust their purchase time by anticipating inventory and price changes of the firms. These are common assumptions in the pricing and production literatures. The order of events in our model is summarized as follows.1.At the beginning of an arbitrary odd period, t, firm 1 observes its current production cost and the price that was charged by firm 2 in periodt-1. Based on this information, firm 1 determines its optimal production and price levels that are going to be active in periods t andt+1.In period t firm 2 still uses the same production and pricing policy that it used in periodt-1. This means that although firm 2 does not make any decision about price and production in period t, it produces at the same level as it produced in periodt-1and charges the same price it set in periodt-1.After demand is realized, firms fulfill their demands if possible. Unmet demand costsh-per item, and since firms do not carry inventory, unsold items costsh+per item to dispose.At the beginning of periodt+1, the firms switch roles and follow steps 1–3.Using the above setting, the problem of determining production and price levels for a firm is a Markov decision problem with its own production cost and its opponent’s previous price as the states of the system. Letπitp,yit,citrepresent the single-period expected profit of firm i in period t given that the price vector isp, the inventory level after production of firm i isyit, and firm i’s current production cost iscit. Following classical newsvendor models, the single-period profit function of firm 1 is (we drop the time index for simplicity):(1)π1(p,y1,c1)=(p1-c1)d1(p)-h+E[max{y1-D1(p),0}]+h-E[max{D1(p)-y1,0}]=(p1-c1)d1(p)-h-d1(p)+h-y1-(h-+h+)E[max{y1-D1(p),0}]=(p1-c1-h-)d1(p)+h-y1-(h-+h+)E[max{y1-D1(p),0}]Bernstein and Federguen (2003) prove the following lemma.Lemma 2.1π1(p,y1,c1)is strictly concave iny1, the inventory level after production (or equivalently the production level) of firm 1 before the demand is realized.Based on lemma (2.1), and using the first order condition, the optimal inventory level after production is:(2)y1(p)=d1(p)G1-1h-h-+h+.Therefore the profit function (1) can be written as follows.(3)π1(p,c1)=(p1-ω̃1(c1))d1(p)whereω̃1(c1)=c1-h--h-G1-1h-h-+h++(h-+h+)E[ε1]which is independent of prices. Since using Eq. (2), the production level can be calculated using the price levels, for the rest of paper, we useπi(p,ci)as the profit function of firm i. The following lemma provides some insights about the characteristics of the profit function.Lemma 2.2π1(p,c1)is log-supermodular in(p1,p2), andπ1(p,c1)is supermodular in(p1,c1).To show thatπ1(p,c1)is log-supermodular in(p1,p2), we need to showlogd1(p)has the increasing differences properties (Milgrom & Roberts (1990b)) or equivalently,d1(p)∂2d1(p)∂p1∂p2-∂d1(p)∂p1∂d1(p)∂p2⩾0which is true for most of the demand functions in industrial economics including the Linear, the Logit, the Cobb–Douglas, and the CES demand functions.Based on Milgrom and Roberts (1990b), to show thatπ1(p,c1)is supermodular in(p1,c1), it suffices to show thatπ1(p,c1)has the property of∂2π1(p)∂p1∂c1⩾0. This is true because∂2d1(p)∂p1∂c1=-∂ω̃1(c1)∂c1∂d1(p)∂p1⩾0, since∂ω̃1(c1)∂c1⩾0and∂d1(p)∂p1⩽0. Similar proof is valid forπ2(p,c2)□This implies that a firm’s marginal profit is nondecreasing in the other firm’s price level. We next introduce two lemmas to illustrate the increasing difference properties of the profit function.2A functionF:S×A→R has increasing difference property ifF(s′,a′)-F(s,a′)⩾F(s,a′)-F(s,a)for alla′>aands′>s.2Lemma 2.3Iflogdi(p)has the increasing difference property in(pi,p-i), thenlogπ1(p,c1)has increasing difference properties in(pi,p-i).Sincelog(p1-ω̃1)is a function of onlypi, it clearly has the increasing differences in(pi,p-i). Topkis (1998) shows that summation preserves the increasing difference property and therefore,logπ1(p,c1)has increasing difference properties in(pi,p-i). Thus the largest and smallest equilibrium pricespiare nondecreasing functions ofp-i. □The condition oflogdi(p)having the increasing difference property in(pi,p-i)is not very restrictive since many of regular demand functions, including the linear, the MNL, and the CES, have this property.Lemma 2.4The profit functionπi(p,c1)is strongly quasi-concave inpi, for=1,2.Taking the first derivative ofπi(p,c1)with respect topiyields(4)h(p)=∂πi(p,c1)∂pi=di(p)+(pi-ω̃1(c1))∂di(p)∂piIfh(p)≠0for all values ofpi, then sinceh(p)is continuous andlimpi→∞h(pi)=-∞, it follows thath(pi)<0for all values ofpi. Therefore, in this case,h(p)is strongly quasi-concave. If there exist apˆsuch thath(pˆ,p-i)=0, then the second derivative atpˆis:∂2πi(p,c1)∂pi2pi=piˆ=∂πi(p,c1)∂pipi=piˆ+(pi-ω̃1(c1))∂2di(p)∂pi2pi=piˆ=0+-di(p)∂di(p)/∂pi∂2di(p)∂pi2pi=piˆ<0This is true since we assume thatdi2(p)∂pi2pi=piˆ<0. This inequality shows thatpˆis a local maximum ofπi(p,c1)and also there does not exist a local minimum forpi∈[0,∞). It follows thatπi(p,c1)increases forpi∈[0,piˆ]and decreases inpi∈[pˆ,∞). Therefore,πi(p,c1)is strictly quasi-concave inpi.□Assume that firms discount future profit with discount factorδ(0<δ<1). Then the intertemporal profit of firm i at time s is(5)∑t=s∞δ(t-s)πitp,cit.wherecitis the production cost of firm i in period t, andπitis continuous and twice differentiable, fori=1,2.Firms move alternatively and, without loss of generality, we assume that in odd-numbered periods firm 1 chooses its price and production levels, while firm 2 uses its price and production level chosen in the previous period. In the next period, an even period, the price and production levels of firm 1 remain unchanged and firm 2 chooses its new price and production levels. Therefore,p1t=p1t+1andy1t=y1t+1if t is odd, andp2t=p2t+1andy2t=y2t+1if t is even. In our model, the payoff-relevant state variables are the current production cost and the opponents’ most recent price. Hence, firms i’s strategy is a dynamic reaction function that we define byqit=Riqjt-1,cit, wherei=1,2andj≠i. Note that we useqjas the dynamic reaction function for price throughout the rest of the paper. These dynamic reaction functions depend only on the payoff relevant states of the system and can be called Markov strategies (Maskin & Tirole (1988a, 1988b)).A pair of dynamic reaction functions(R1,R2)is a Markov perfect equilibrium (MPE) ifq1t=R1q2t-1,citmaximizes firm 1 profit in period t (an odd period), and similarly for firm 2 in periodt+1. Since reaction functions in an MPE are time-invariant, we useR1q2-1,citto generalize the reaction function whenqj-1is the action used by firm j in the previous period.Now, we solve the problem by applying a dynamic game technique. We first define two value functions for each player; one at the beginning of periods when firm 1 chooses its actions and one for the periods when firm 2 chooses its actions. LetV1tp2t-1,c1tdenote the expected profit of firm 1 at the beginning of an odd period when the exogenous production cost isc1tand firm 2 has realizedp2t-1in the previous period. In addition, at the beginning of an even period, when firm 2 moves, we defineW1tp1t-1,c1tas the expected profit of firm 1 when the production costs isc1t, and firm 1 has chosenp1t-1in the previous period. Note that since firm 1 does not update the price in even periods, it uses its most recent price,p1t-1. Similarly, we defineV2tp1t-1,c2tandW2tp2t-1,c2tfor firm 2. The value functions satisfy the following equations:(6)V1t(p2t-1,c1t)=Etmaxq[π1t(q,p2t-1,c1t)+δW1t+1(q,θ1)]=Et{π1t(R1(p2t-1,c1t),p2t-1,c1t)+δW1t+1(R1(p2t-1,c1t),θ1)}=π1t(R1(p2t-1,c1t),p2t-1,c1t)+δE{W1t+1(R1(p2t-1,c1t),θ1)}and(7)W1t(p1t-1,c1t)=Etπ1t(p1t-1,R2(p1t-1,c2t),c1t)+δV1t+1(R2(p1t-1,c2t),θ1)=π1t(p1t-1,R2(p1t-1,c2t),c1t)+δEV1t+1R2(p1t-1,c2t),θ1whereEtrepresents the expected value of a variable conditioned on the information set at time t. To learn more about the value functions we have the following lemma.Lemma 3.1For given values ofc, the value functionV1t(p2t-1,c)is nondecreasing inp2t-1.Consider two prices of p andpˆwherep<pˆ. Now letp̃=R1t(p,cit), then we have:V1t(p,c)=π1t(p̃,p,cit)+δWit+1(p̃,θ1)⩽π1t(p̃,pˆ,cit)+δWit+1(p̃,θ1)⩽V1t(pˆ,c),where the first inequality follows from the fact thatπ1t(p̃,p,cit)is nonincreasing in the opponent’s price and the second inequality follows from the fact thatpˆis a feasible reaction top̃. Note thatV1t(p,c)maximizes the value function with respect to the opponent’s price andp̃is a feasible price. □Let us defineqit=Rit(pjt-1,cit)forj≠i, as the optimal choice of player i in period t as a function of its opponent’s price in periodt-1and its own cost in period t.Lemma 3.2For given values ofc, the reaction functionR1t(p2t-1,c1)is non-increasing inc1.Consider c andcˆas two production costs, wherec<cˆ, and whereq=R1(p2,c)andqˆ=R1(p2,cˆ). By definition ofR1, for a givenp2,p1is the best response to production cost c and for anyp1ˆ>p1:π1t(p1,p2,c1)+δW1t+1(p1,θ1)⩾π1t(pˆ1,p2,c1)+δWit+1(pˆ1,θ1)and sinceπ(p,ci)is supermodular in(pi,ci), we have:π1t(pˆ1,p2,cˆ1)+δW1t+1(pˆ1,θ1)⩾π1t(p1,p2,cˆ1)+δWit+1(p1,θ1)Summing up the above two inequalities, we obtain(8)π1t(p1,p2,c1)-π1t(pˆ1,p2,c1)-π1t(p1,p2,cˆ1)+π1t(pˆ1,p2,cˆ1)⩾0Sinceπ1t(p1,p2,c1)is non-incresing inc1(the proof is straightforward), we have thatπ1t(p1,p2,c1)-π1t(p1,p2,cˆ1)⩾0andπ1t(pˆ1,p2,cˆ1)-π1t(pˆ1,p2,c1)⩽0. Now, if contrary to our assertion,p1<pˆ1, then using Lemma 2.2, we haveπ1t(p1,p2,c1)-π1t(p1,p2,cˆ1)<π1t(pˆ1,p2,cˆ1)-π1t(pˆ1,p2,c1)that contradicts with Eq. (8). Therefore,p>pˆ. □As Firm 1 (or similarly Firm 2) faces higher production cost in the current period, its immediate profit decreases. Although the firm’s demand function is price sensitive, the firm prefers to increase the price to partially offset the profit loss. This price increase, in turn, is followed by Firm 2’s price increase in the following period. One can see this effect with the airlines in certain cases. An increase in fuel cost for one airline, because they are less hedged than a competitor, may be passed through in a ticket price increase. The competitor will then be able to increase price the following period. As noted in the introduction, there are many dynamics that complicate this scenario, but the basic strategic pricing moves are evident. For a manager setting prices, it may be difficult to determine whether a competitor’s price increase is due to market forces or production cost. The more one knows about the competitor’s supply chain and operational dynamics, the more strategic one can be with reacting to such pricing changes. If the price increase indeed is the result of an increase in production (or supply chain) cost, the more likely your own reactive price increase will hold over time.In an infinite horizon setting, if firm 1 choosesp12kin period2kand if both firms choose their optimal policies, then, given the information set, we have:(9)W12k+1(p12k,c12k+1)=E2k+1π12k+1(p12k,R2(p12k,c22k+1),c12k+1)+δπ12k+2(R1(R2(p12k,c22k+1),c12k+2),(R2(p12k,c22k+1),c12k+2))+δ2W12k+3(R1(R2(p12k,c22k+1),c12k+2),c12k+3)At the beginning of period2k+1,c12k+2,c12k+3, andc22k+1are unknown for firm 1 and thus we replace them with random variablesθ1,θ1, andθ2, respectively. Now, differentiating (9) with respect top12k, we have the following formula.(10)W1′(q2k,c12k+1)=E2k+1π1(1)(q2k,q2k+1,c12k+1)+π1(2)(q2k,q2k+1,c12k+1)R2′(q2k,θ2)+δπ1(1)(q2k+2,q2k+1,θ1)R1′(q2k+1,θ1)R2′(q2k,θ2)+δπ1(2)(q2k+2,q2k+1,θ1)R2′(q2k,θ2)+δ2W1′(q2k+2,θ1)R1′(q2k+1,θ1)R2′(q2k,θ2)whereπi(i)andπi(ij)are the first and second derivatives ofπiwith respect top1andp2. The first order condition of (6) yields.(11)π1(1)(q2k,q2k-1,c12k)+δW1′(q2k,c12k+1)=0Substituting (10) into (11) yields.(12)π1(1)(q2k,q2k-1,c12k)+E2k{δπ1(1)(q2k,q2k+1,θ1)}+E2k{δπ1(2)(q2k,q2k+1,θ1)R2′(q2k,θ2)}+E2k{δ2π1(2)(q2k+2,q2k+1,θ1)R2′(q2k,θ2)}=0The first term in the left-hand side of Eq. (12) represents the effect of player 1’s choice ofp2kon its profit in period2k. The second term represents the direct discounted impact of player 1’s choice on its profit in period2k+1. The third term shows its indirect discounted impact in period2k+1by considering the strategic effect of player 1’s price change on player 2’s reaction. Finally, the last term models the strategic effect of player 1 in response to player 2’s price change in periodt+1, discounted for period t. In equilibrium, the summation of these effects is equal to zero. Similarly, we present the first order condition of player 2 at the beginning of periodt+1as follows.(13)π2(2)(q2k,q2k+1,c22k+1)+E2k+1{δπ2(2)(q2k+2,q2k+1,θ2)}+E2k+1{δπ2(1)(q2k+2,q2k+1,θ2)R1′(q2k+1,θ1)}+E2k+1{δ2π2(1)(q2k+2,q2k+3,θ2)R1′(q2k+1,θ1)}=0Next, we use a simple numerical analysis to illustrate our results.In the previous sections, we developed our model under a few assumptions. First, we assumed that production costs are stochastic. Second, we assumed that firms have complete information in the sense that they know the prices charged by the other firm in previous periods. And third, we assumed that the firms are symmetric. Relaxing the first assumption provides a benchmark to address the efficiency of the alternating-move game. Although the second assumption is theoretically appealing in calculating the equilibrium prices, in practice, however, it may be very expensive to derive the opponents’ prices through market transactions. Finally considering firms with asymmetric information provides insights into the value of information in our model.In this section, we provide different special cases of our model to further illustrate our results. First, as a special case we assume that firms’ production costs are deterministic. In Section 4.2, using the results of the deterministic case, we provide further justification for employing an alternating-move game. This scenario approaches an asymmetric information case in that one firm acts as if it does not have the ability to react in alternate periods. Then, in Section 4.3, we extend our discussions to a market with incomplete information where neither firm has access to the other’s real-time prices.In this section, we study the situation where the production costs are deterministic, both firms know each other’s production costs, and the firms are symmetric. When the production cost is deterministic, the outcome of the alternating-move game is the same as that of a simultanous-move game. In such a case, one can imagine that the alternating strategy of the firms converges to the tâtonnement process, which is studied in the literature to calculate a Nash equilibrium. The tâtonnement process can be viewed as a hierarchical process consisting of two optimization steps. In each step, using a pre-determined best response function, the optimal strategy of a player is calculated using the most recent action taken by its opponent. This process continues until no player benefits, in which case the Nash equilibrium has been achieved. With a constant production cost, the profit function in (3) becomes:(14)π1(p,θ1)=(p1-c̃1(c1))d1(p)wherec̃1(c1)=c1-h-+h+G1-1h-h-+h+-(h-+h+)EG1-1h-h-+h+-ε1.Next, we show that, with deterministic production costs, the equilibrium behavior of our game in an infinite horizon can be characterized by a single-stage game. The proof has been adapted from Heyman and Sobel (1984).Proposition 4.1Suppose that demands,Dit(p), are i.i.d. random variables. Then, assuming that the initial inventory levels are zero, the stationary pricing policy such that(p1t,p2t)=(p1∗,p2∗), for allt=1,2,…, is a pure strategy Nash equilibrium in the infinite-horizon game.The proof follows from Heyman and Sobel (1984), Chapter 9. The sequential policy(p1t,p2t)=(p1∗,p2∗)=p∗maximizes each players’ profit function. We need to show the feasibility of the stationary policy. To show feasibility, note that the firms do not carry inventory, we define(x1t,x2t)as the stock level at the end of each period. Therefore, we need to show that the production level of(y1(p∗),y2(p∗)), fort=1,2,⋯is feasible and that(x1t,x2t)⩽(y1(p∗),y2(p∗)), fort=1,2,⋯. By the proposition assumption, we have(x11,x21)=0and thus(x11,x21)<(y1(p∗),y2(p∗)). Then, by induction, we have(x1t+1,x2t+1)=(y1t,y2t)-(D1t,D2t)=(y1(p∗),y2(p∗))-(D1t,D2t)⩽(y1(p∗),y2(p∗)), fort=1,2,⋯, sinceDit⩾0. □Assuming linear demand functionsdi(p)=ri0-ri′pi+ri″pjfori,j=1,2, andj≠i, it can be shown that the profit function (14) is concave inpi. Using the first order condition, it is straightforward to show that the Nash equilibrium of the simultaneous-move game is given by:(15)p1∗=2r2″r10+r1″r20-2r1′r2′c1̃(c1)-r1″r2″c2̃(c2)4r1′r2′-r1″r2″p2∗=2r1′r20+r2″r10-2r1′r2″c2̃(c2)-r1′r2″c1̃(c1)4r1′r2′-r1″r2″Therefore, the equilibrium prices of both firms are calculated using Eq. (15), which is independent from the other firms’ price level and only depends on the demand and cost parameters. At time t, after observing the price of the other firm as given, each firm chooses its price to maximize its expected profit.Using the results of Section 4.1 for the case of deterministic demand, we now provide further justification for the alternating move game. We discuss the choice of alternating-move games to model agents’ interactions in stochastic environments. In the introduction, we highlighted the fact that alternating move games mirror reality in certain situations. To add to these comments, we note that in the literature, simultaneous repeated games require a synchronizing mechanism and also a symmetric game environment (Roth, Balcan, Kalai, & Mansour (2010)). Without a synchronizing mechanism, and with knowledge of the past, the interactions of the agents can be better modeled by an alternating move mechanism. In our infinite horizon model, the firms compete in an uncertain environment where the operational costs are exogenous and uncertain. As a significant change in operational cost is uncertain, there is no synchronized mechanism for the timing of the significant cost changes. To model this unsynchronized environment, without loss of generality, we assumed that firm 1 observes changes in odd periods and firm 2 observes changes in even periods. From firm 1’s point of view, in those periods when firm 2 observes its new operational cost, there is incentive to synchronize and announce the price at the same time. This is because firm 1 can make better decisions based on information about firm 2’s reaction to its recent cost change. Due to the non-synchronized nature of the exogenous parameter changes, the alternating-move game better models the interactions between the firms.In this section, to further motivate the necessity of an alternating-move game, we provide an extension to our model for purposes of numerical tests. We address the consequence if one firm ignores the alternation and acts as if both players were using a simultaneous-move approach. Let’s consider the pricing problem from firm 1’s point of view, and develop a heuristic policy that requires only the expected value of firm 2’s production cost. We assume that although the cost distributions and real-time price levels of both firms are public information, firm 1 acts as if both firms use a simultaneous-move game, while firm 2 takes firm 1’s last action into account and uses an alternating-move strategy. We name this heuristic policy, the ignoring heuristic, since firm one ignores the alternation between the two firms.In the ignoring heuristic, at the beginning of period t, firm 1 usesE(θ2)and Eq. (13), to estimate the price charged by firm 2 in periodt-1as follows.p̃2∗=2r1′r20+r2″r10-2r1′r2″c2̃(E(θ2))-r1′r2″c1̃(c1)4r1′r2′-r1″r2″After estimatingp2∗, firm 1 uses the following equation to maximize its own expected profit.(16)V1t(p̃2∗,c1t)=Et{maxq[π1t(q,p̃2∗,c1t)+δW1t+1(q,θ1)]}=Et{π1t(R1(p̃2∗,c1t),p̃2∗,c1t)+δW1t+1(R1(p̃2∗,c1t),θ1)}=π1t(R1(p̃2∗,c1t),p̃2∗,c1t)+δE{W1t+1(R1(p̃2∗,c1t),θ1)}On the other hand, firm 2, which knows the real-time level ofp1t, uses the alternating move strategy as follows:(17)V2t+1(p1t,c2t+1)=Et+1{maxq[π2t+1(q,p1t,c2t+1)+δW2t+2(q,θ2)]}=Et{π2t+1(R2(p1t,c2t+1),p1t,c2t+1)+δW2t+2(R2(p1t,c2t+1)),θ2}=π2t+1(R2(p1t,c2t+1),p1t,c2t+1)+δEt{W2t+2(R2(p1t,c2t+1),θ2)}BothW1t(p1t-1,c1t)andW2t+2(p2t+1,c2t+2)can be calculated using Eq. (7).We now test the impact of ignoring the alternative-move game. Table 1shows the percentages of expected profits for both firms if firm 1 uses the simultaneous-move strategy and firm 2 uses the alternating-move strategy. In this table, we letd1(p)=d2(p)=140-6p1+2p2, andθ2∈(3,5), and we report the percentages of expected profit for different values ofθ1. For the first example in the table, we letθ1∈(3,5), and we see that firm 1 receives 77.34 percent of the expected profit that it would have obtained if both firms would have used the alternating-move game.As seen in Table 1, by ignoring the alternating-move game, firm 1’s expected profit decreases significantly, while firm 2’s profit increases. Note that firm 1 can generate higher expected profits when its expected production cost increases. This counter intuitive result is due to the fact that when the expected cost of firm 1 increases, it can post higher prices that will stick because firm 2 posts higher prices. Hence the loss due to ignoring the competition decreases. Firm 2, however, gains in all scenarios because it is following the optimal alternating-move strategy. In the next section, we use a numerical study to illustrate our results and compare different pricing policies.In previous sections, we assumed that a firm determines its price level based on the price level that its opponent used in the previous period. We explicitly made the assumption that real-time price levels of both firms are public information and available to both firms. Now, we consider a market where such pricing information is either not public or very costly to obtain. With incomplete information, the alternating move game studied in Section 3 cannot be used to determine price levels. To study this situation, in this section, we assume that both firms have no access to real-time information about price levels, but similar to our initial model, we assume that the production costs are stochastic. We denote this model the Two-sided incomplete information case and its associated pricing policy a two-sided heuristic, since neither firm has access to real-time prices.The rationale of this pricing policy relies on the fact that when firms do not know each other’s real-time prices, they use a simultaneous-move approach to estimate price levels. At the beginning of period t, an odd period when firm 1 moves, firm 1 observes its own production cost, and uses the expected value of firm 2’s production cost, and Eq. (15), to estimate the price charged by firm 2 in periodt-1as follows.p̃2∗=2r1′r20+r2″r10-2r1′r2″c2̃(E(θ2))-r1′r2″c1̃(c1)4r1′r2′-r1″r2″After estimatingp̃2∗, firm 1 uses the following equation to maximize its own expected profit.(18)V1t(p̃2∗,c1t)=Et{maxq[π1t(q,p̃2∗,c1t)+δW1t+1(q,θ1)]}=Et{π1t(R1(p̃2∗,c1t),p̃2∗,c1t)+δW1t+1(R1(p̃2∗,c1t),θ1)}=π1t(R1(p̃2∗,c1t),p̃2∗,c1t)+δE{W1t+1(R1(p̃2∗,c1t),θ1)}Also, at the beginning of even periods, when firm 2 moves, we defineW1t(p1t-1,c1t)as the expected profit of firm 1 when firm 1 usedp1t-1in the previous period and its production cost isc1t. Then, the expected profit of firm 1 in even periods can be calculated using Eq. (7). Similarly, firm 2 calculates its optimal prices using the assumption that the recent price charged by firm 1 is not public information. At the beginning of periodt+1, firm 2 observes its own production cost, and uses the expected value of firm 1’s production cost, and Eq. (15), to estimate the price charged by firm 1 in period t as follows.p̃1∗=2r2″r10+r1″r20-2r1′r2′c1̃(E(c1))-r1″r2″c2̃(c2)4r1′r2′-r1″r2″After estimatingp1∗, firm 2 uses the following equation to maximize its own expected profit.(19)V2t+1(p̃1∗,c2t+1)=Et{maxq[π2t+1(q,p̃1∗,c2t+1)+δW2t+2(q,θ2)]}=Et{π2t+1(R2(p̃1∗,c2t+1),p̃1∗,c1t+1)+δW2t+2(R2(p̃1∗,c2t+1),θ2)}=π2t(R2(p̃1∗,c2t+1),p̃1∗,c2t+1)+δE{W2t+2(R2(p̃1∗,c2t+1),θ2)}In Section 5, we use numerical studies to provide more insights about the above equations and to address the impact of price information on the equilibrium price levels and expected profits.In this section, we design a computational experiment to quantify the impact of different parameters of the model on the best response functions. We first show that for linear demand functions a closed form solution can be provided for the reaction functionRi(pjt-1,cit). Next, we examine the impact of model parameters such as the demand parameters and the distribution of the random cost on the reaction function and consequently on the expected price charged by the firm over time.In profit function (3),πi(p1,p2,cit)=(pi-ω̃i(cit))di(p), fori,j=1,2, andj≠i, we consider:(20)di(p)=ri0-ri′pi+ri″pj,and(21)qit=Ri(pjt-1,cit)=αi+βipjt-1+γicit.The first and second derivatives ofπiandRi(pt-1,cit)with respect top1andp2areπi(1)=ri0-2ri′pi+ri″pj+ri′ω̃1(cit),πi(2)=ri″pi-ri″ω̃1(cit),πi(11)=-2ri′,πi(12)=ri″,∂Ri∂pjt-1=Ri′(pjt-1,cit)=βi.Now, from (21), we can calculate the expected values given the information in period2kasE2k(q12k+1)=q12k,E2k(q22k+1)=α2+β2q12k+γ2E(θ2), andE2k(q12k+2)=α1+β1(α2+β2q12k+γ2E(θ2))+γ1E(θ1). Similarly, for firm 2, we haveE2k+1(q22k+2)=q22k+1,E2k+1(q12k+2)=α1+β1q22k+1+γ1E(θ1), andE2k+1(q12k+3)=α2+β2(α1+β1q22k+1+γ1E(θ1))+γ2E(θ2). Now, substituting these derivatives and expected values in (12) and (21) yields:A1q12k=A2+ri″q12k-1+ri′ω̃1(c12k)B1q22k+1=B2+ri″q22k+ri′ω̃2(c22k+1)whereA1=2ri′+2δri′-2δri″β2-δ2β22β1,A2=(1+δ)ri0+δ2β2ri″(α1+β1α2)+(ri′-δ(1+δ)ri″β2)ω̃1(E(θ1))+δ2β2ri″c1E(θ1)+δri″c2(1+δβ2β1)E(θ2),B1=2ri′+2δri′-2δri″β1-δ2β12b2, andB2=(1+δ)ri0+δ2β1ri″(α2+β2α1)+(ri′-δ(1+δ)ri″β1)ω̃2(E(θ2))+δ2β1ri″c2E(θ2)+δri″c1(1+δβ2β1)E(θ1)Substituting these values into (21) yields:(22)A1α1=A2,A1β1=ri″,A1γ1=ri′andB1α2=B2,B1β2=ri″,B1γ2=ri′Therefore the use of linear demand allows us to establish a procedure by which we can calculate closed-form reaction functions.In Section 5.1, we developed a procedure to calculate a closed-form solution for the response functions. Using those procedures, in this section we provide a numerical analysis to illustrate our results. To highlight the impact of different parameters, we use five cases with characteristics described in Table 2. Unless we mention otherwise, we use the same parameters and distributions throughout this section. We assume that the production costs are uniformly distributed where notationX∼U(m,n)denotes that X is uniformly distributed with minimum value of m and maximum value of n. In addition, the demand functions are linear as defined in Eq. (20). We also fixδat 0.05.Table 2 illustrates the impact of cost and demand parameters on the best response function. Case 1 uses the same parameters for both firms in order to provide a benchmark. In case 2, we study the impact on the best response functions of a firm having higher average cost. We use the same demand functions for both firms, but different distributions for cost functions with a higher mean forθ2(E(θ2)=5, whileE(θ1)=3). A higher mean for firm 2’s production cost leads both firms to charge higher prices, with firm 2 charging a significantly higher average price. Firm 2 charges a higher price to compensate for its higher production cost, while firm 1 responds to this high price by charging higher prices in order to generate more profit. Another implication of this result is that a lower cost firm benefits in two ways from its lower cost structure. Even if it does not raise prices, it earns more profit; and yet the presence of a higher cost competitor allows it to raise prices and earn additional profit. We observed this situation with a manufacturer of tools for circuit board assembly. Improvements in production planning reduced their cost structure, while industry consolidation and changes in competition led to an increase in prices. The end result was a remarkably higher valuation of the firm, and substantial financial benefits for the owners. It is worthwhile to note that the previous owners of this firm, and the owners of many firms in the industry, were focused on manufacturing and market share. They did not consider pricing in their strategic decision making. The new owner brought the type of pricing thinking captured in our modeling framework, and it was hugely successful.In Table 2 (case 3) we study the impact of the y-intercept of the linear demand function (ri0,i=1,2) on best response functions. By decreasingr10from 140 to 120,α1significantly declines to 18.98 whileα2slightly decreases. The interpretation of these numbers is as follows. The lower demand for firm 1’s product leads it to reduce its price, and in turn firm 2 reduces its price as well. Note that firm 2’s demand function and cost structure have not changed. Yet, the presence of competition with firm 1, which faces decreased demand, induces firm 2 to reduce prices.In next two cases of Table 2, we examine the impact of price sensitivity of demand (ri′andri″fori=1,2) on the best response functions. In case 4, we use the same demand function for firm 2, but changer1′from 6 to 4. As can be seen from Table 2, firm 1 charges a significantly higher price (an average of 43.44 compared to 35.15 from case 1 a 23.6% increase in price) while firm 2 decreases its price (4.8%) to induce more demand.α1andβ1jump to 26.43 and 0.25, respectively, whileα2decreases from 20.58 to 17.54. The interpretation is that if firm 1’s demand is less sensitive to its own price, then it has an incentive to increase its price to gain more revenue, while firm 2 must lower its price to attract more customers. Elasticities can be difficult to estimate, although progress is being made with new software and analytical tools. As noted in the introduction, airlines’ international routes tend to allow more complete pass through of fuel cost increases than domestic routes, implying that customer demand elasticities differ significantly depending on routes. Our results reveal dramatic changes in optimal prices when elasticities change, which suggests that the payoff from estimating elasticities may well be worth the effort.In case 5, we changer1″, the price elasticity ofd1with respect top2, from 2 to 1. As seen in the table,β1decreases from 0.16 to 0.08 andα1andα2both slightly increase. When firm 1’s demand is less sensitive to firm 2’s price, then the impact of firm 2’s price on firm 1’s best response function will be reduced. This result is intuitive. Note, however, that the price changes in case 5 compared to case 1 are less magnified than the price changes comparing case 4 to case 1. Recall that case 4 studies changes in price elasticity within a firm. In other words, elasticity changes within firm are more influential on optimal pricing than elasticity changes at competitive firms. This is good news in the sense that, as difficult as it is to measure demand elasticity, it is much easier to do so in one’s own firm than at a competitor. Furthermore, as market conditions change, demand elasticities often change as well. Firms would be wise to regularly update their estimates of these elasticities, and then adjust prices accordingly.In this section, we employ a simulation model to compare the performance of the alternating-move game versus a simultaneous-move game, under the different information settings described in Section 4. We ran the simulation model for enough repetitions (more than 5000) to keep standard deviation below 0.05. The results are summarized in Tables 3 and 4.Table 3 presents numerical results whenθ2∈U(3,5). We letd1(p)=d2(p)=140-6p1+2p2, and vary the production cost parameters (θ1) for firm 1. The third and fourth columns present the expected profit in the alternating-move equilibrium defined in Section 3. The rest of table reports the performance of the deterministic-cost case and the incomplete-information heuristic described in Sections 4.1 and 4.3, respectively. These results are reported as the percent of the expected profit of the alternating-move equilibrium. Table 4 repeats Table 3 for different values for firms 1’s demand parameters.There are many results in these two brief tables, some of which are intuitive and some are not at all. Begin by looking at the “Equilibrium” columns of cases 1 and 2 of Table 3, which report the expected profits when both firms use the alternating-move game. Both cases have a mean production cost,θ1, of 4, but case 2 has higher variability. In the latter case, as expected, firm 1’s profit declines, while firm 2’s profit increases. What is surprising is how small the changes are. One would expect a more substantial decrease/increase with an increase in firm 1’s production cost variance. In this alternating-move scenario, however, the firms can react optimally to changing costs and prices, and hence dampen the variance effect.In a similar vein, the deterministic scenario for cases 1 and 2 in Table 3 reveals a counterintuitive result. Recall that in the deterministic scenario, both firms’ production costs are known and certain. In these cases, profits for both firms are actually lower when costs are deterministic. Firm 1’s profit decreases to 98.01% and 98.33% of the alternating-move profit, while firm 2’s profit decreases to 97.78% and 97.70%, for cases 1 and 2, respectively. This is due to the fact that with stochastic production costs, when both firms use the alternating-move strategy, they have more opportunities to correct their prices by responding to their own production costs and to recent prices posted by their competition. These results amplify our comments about a strategic pricing mindset. Smart pricing decisions, which account for competition and varying production cost, seemingly can largely offset the negative effects of variability of production cost. These comments are directly relevant to the airline example noted in the introduction, but also to any firms that operate in competitive, dynamic pricing markets.Now when firm 1’s average production cost increases by 25 to 50% (cases 3, 4, and 5 of Table 3), its profit in the “Equilibrium” scenario decreases dramatically, from around 720 in case 1 to 521 in case 5. Firm 2’s profit increases, although not as markedly. This result is intuitive: higher costs lead firm 1 to charge a higher price, which lowers its demand and profit. In this competitive environment, firm 2 can take advantage of firm 1’s cost structure and pricing decisions to extract additional profit.Now consider the “Two-sided” columns of Table 3, which report the percentage of the alternating-move equilibrium profit for the scenario when both firms do not have visibility to their opponent’s prices. The results for cases 1 and 2 in Table 3 are essentially the same for this scenario as for the deterministic scenario. Recall that both the deterministic scenario and the two-sided scenario rely on a simultaneous move solution. The results indicate that, although the underlying scenarios are quite different, the simultaneous move solutions are quite similar relative to the alternating-move equilibrium. Neither firm can respond to their opponent’s price changes, whereas they can in the alternating-move equilibrium. In the latter case, the firms can offset the costs of uncertainty and lack of visibility.Note that in cases 3 to 5 in Table 3, for the deterministic and two-sided scenarios, firm 2’s profit is lower than in the stochastic alternating-move scenario. This is consistent with the comments about cases 1 and 2 above. However, firm 1’s profit is higher. The reason is that firm 1’s production cost is so high that it can “level the playing field” to some extent by scenarios in which both firms have known and deterministic costs, or neither firm has visibility to the others prices. The alternating-move strategy is not powerful enough to overcome the competitive disadvantage of higher production costs. Finally from Table 3, it is instructive to note that our two-sided heuristic works quite well. When the firms do not have visibility to their competitor’s prices, the degradation (or increase) in profit relative to the alternating-move solution is really quite minor.Moving onto Table 4, recall that this table repeats Table 3, varying the values for firm 1’s demand parameters. Compare cases 1 and 2 in Table 4. In case 2, the intercept has been reduced from 140 to 120, signifying a reduction in base-level demand. Note from the “Equilibrium” columns that firm 1’s profit decreases sharply by 35%, while firm 2’s profit increases marginally. This result is intuitive; lower demand for firm 1 causes it to decrease price and hence its profit decreases. Firm 2 has higher demand, but the lower price by firm 1 precludes firm 2 from extracting additional profit.Case 3 in Table 4 is interesting. In this case the price sensitivity of firm 1’s demand with respect its own price significantly increases the equilibrium profit of both firm 1 and firm 2. As noted above, the reduced elasticity allows firm 1 to increase prices, which in turn allows firm 2 to increase prices. A similar example was given in Case4 of Table 2, where we saw firm 1’s price increase more dramatically than in any other example. Both firms’ profits increase as well. Our comments above about the value of estimating price elasticities are directly relevant to this example.Decreasing the price sensitivity of firm 1’s demand with respect to firm 2’s price, (Case No. 4 in Table 4) decreases the equilibrium profit of both firms. The impact of the price changes in the alternating-move scenario is reduced when firm 1’s demand is less sensitive to firm 2’s price. This is intuitive. Firm 1 simply does not have the ability to influence demand in response to firm 2’s price changes, and its profit deceases substantially. Firm 2’s profit also decreases, but only slightly. Firm 1 must reduce price, and firm 2 must respond, but because firm 1 has limited influence on firm 2’s demand, firm 2 needs to respond with marginal prices reductions.In this case it is instructive to note that firm 1 stands to gain a significant amount of profit from a reduction in uncertainty, or a level playing field in which neither firm has visibility to the other’s prices. These numbers are captured in the “Deterministic cost” and Two-sided” columns in Table 4. Note that firm 1’s profit would increase more than 32% in each scenario, relative to the alternating-move equilibrium. Firm 2, on the other hand, is not hampered by the reduced elasticity, and hence still gains (slightly) from the stochastic, full visibility, alternating-move scenario.In case 5 of Table 4, the underlying demand level (intercept) for firm 1 increases from 140 to 160. This not only improves firm 1’s equilibrium profit but also improves that of firm 2 by a significant margin of 37%. Having more demand allows firm 1 to charge higher prices, which in turns increases firm 2’s demand and its ability to increase prices. This of course leads to higher expected profit for both firms.Finally, we note that, as in Table 3, in some cases the firms benefit from the alternating-move scenario, while in others they stand to gain from a deterministic-cost scenario or a scenario without visibility to the other’s prices. In each table, one can see that higher profit cases favor the alternating-move scenario, and its ability to dynamically adjust prices. When underlying conditions reduce profit – due to higher cost, lower demand, or lower price sensitivity to the other firm’s price – the firms benefit from the other scenarios.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper studied the production and pricing decisions faced by two firms in a duopoly. In particular, we examined the impact of fluctuations of external factors, such as production costs, on the firms’ decision process. We allow the distribution of the firms’ random production costs to be different (e.g. different airlines having different hedge programs against their fuel cost fluctuations). Consequently, if one firm faces an unexpected change in its production cost, and accordingly changes its price, the other firm responds even if its production cost remains the same. We analyzed this situation using an alternating-move game and produced closed-form solutions for the best response functions, which could be used by firms to make their production and pricing decisions.From our numerical results, we noted how managers should employ a strategic pricing mindset, and yet this pricing perspective must be supplemented by a deep understanding of their own, and their competitors’, operational and supply chain costs. In addition to the basic model, we discussed two other scenarios to show how a firm can benefit by taking into account the randomness of the production cost and the impact of the other firms’ decisions on its profit. We considered a case in which production costs are deterministic and we showed that the outcome of the game converges to that of single-period game. Finally, we used numerical studies to illustrate our results and show that the findings of this paper provide managerial insights into dynamic price competition in an uncertain environment.