@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design for the environment: Impact of regulatory policies on product development

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We address an automaker’s product quality choice problem under different regulatory constraints.We propose an alternate regulatory mechanism based on traditional and environmental quality.We discuss the role of economies of scale and synergies on the quality levels provided by the automaker.We find that composite regulation can provide higher triple bottom line performance.We also analyze the triple bottom line performance of automaker under different market settings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in environment and climate change,New Product Development (NPD),Environmental regulations,Synergies,Economies of scale,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Globally automakers are facing pressure from their stakeholders to follow sustainable business practices and produce products that are less harmful to the environment. The introduction of gas guzzling automobiles in the US market despite the increasingly stringent emission norms highlights the widening gap between the goals of the regulators and the automakers, demanding a fresh outlook at the regulatory framework. In this paper, we therefore propose a composite regulatory standard that not only allows the regulators to control various environmental standards, but also provides automakers with an opportunity to exploit scale economies and synergies in product development. Our results show that under composite regulations, sufficiently high economies of scale will ensure higher traditional and environmental qualities as well as higher profits for the automaker while operating in two markets as opposed to a single market. We also find under the composite regulations that, when more demanding norms are in place, despite positive synergies between traditional and environmental quality attributes, higher environmental quality is not guaranteed unless the scale economies are sufficiently high. Our work has implications for regulatory authorities in evaluating alternative policy design under heterogeneous market characteristics and technological synergies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The US automobile emission norms have become progressively stricter over the last decade, yet it is unclear whether they resulted in providing “a cleaner, healthier environment for the American people” (DiPeso, 2007; Hassett & Metcalf, 2008). The implementation of CAFE standards11CAFE standards are fuel efficiency norms imposed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for automobiles at the fleet level.a few years ago has resulted in improvement of adjusted average fuel economy and CO2 emissions. However, the introduction of a considerable number of gas guzzlers in the market over the past few decades22CAFE has separate standards for “passenger cars” and “light trucks”, despite the majority of “light trucks” actually being used as passenger cars. As a result, the market share of “light trucks” grew steadily from 9.7 percent in 1979 to 47 percent in 2001 and remained in 50 percent numbers up to 2011. “CAFE 2011 Summary of Fuel Economy Performance”. NHTSA. http://theenergycollective.com/jemillerep/104841/can-new-cafe-standards-deliver-promised-benefits Last accessed 27.05.14.has caused setbacks, as automakers made the most of the loopholes in the gas guzzler tax scheme33The gas guzzler tax is imposed on new passenger cars (not trucks, minivans, and sport utility vehicles) that do not meet the required fuel economy standards. http://www.epa.gov/fueleconomy/guzzler/ Last accessed 18.06.14., leading to higher consumption of gasoline and subsequent increase in air pollution.44According to an estimate by an NGO, Friends of the Earth, the savings in the amount of gasoline consumed would have been an astounding 490 million gallons, if the gas guzzler tax was applied to light trucks and SUVs. Last accessed on 06.06.14. http://www.electrifyingtimes.com/gasguzzlerloophole.html.One of the fundamental reasons for this widening gap between the goals of regulators and the automakers is the significant costs involved in developing technologies that can meet the progressively stringent norms. Given this conflict between environmental sustainability (for the regulators) and economic sustainability (for the automakers), a fresh outlook towards the regulatory framework is needed.For economic sustainability, automakers need to take cognizance of the needs of consumers in various markets. While most developed market customers focus on speed, power, comfort and safety related features in an automobile, fuel economy is one of the most important driving factors in emerging markets. In fact, the ever increasing volatility in oil prices coupled with global recession have begun to drive consumer preferences in the developed markets also towards more fuel efficient vehicles, bringing in some convergence in customer preferences between developed and developing worlds. Despite the convergence in consumer interest, the differences in regulatory norms of different countries make it difficult for automakers to provide the same products in all the markets they operate in. Ford Fiesta ECOnetic Diesel, for example, regarded amongst the most fuel efficient (85 miles per gallon) and lowest CO2 emitting (at 87 grams per kilometer) cars55http://www.ford.co.uk/Hidden/FordECOneticTechnology/tabid=tab2 Last accessed 18.10.14., was not introduced in United States owing to comparatively stricter emission norms for diesel operated vehicles in the US (Spital & Wesley, 2010).While stricter emission standards are desirable from the environmental point of view, to ensure long-term sustainability of the industry and cooperation from the automakers, an effective regulation would have to allow firms to operate profitably along with ensuring lower carbon footprint (through lower consumption of fuel) and lesser emissions. A well designed set of environmental regulations can result in a better triple bottom-line performance, that is, better economic, social, and environmental performance for the firm (Elkington, 1998).In this paper we propose a composite regulatory constraint, wherein the automaker at the least has to meet a weighted sum of fuel efficiency and emission related quality levels. Such a composite standard is akin to energy star ratings in consumer durable industries such as refrigerators and washing machines. We first model a multinational automaker’s choice of traditional and environmental qualities under composite and conventional regulatory regimes. We next study the impact of (i) synergies66We use the concept of synergy to model the relationship between traditional and environmental quality.between traditional and environmental qualities, (ii) production scale economies and (iii) heterogeneity in consumer valuations, on traditional and environmental quality levels provided by the automakers in different markets. In particular we look at automakers operating in both developed and emerging markets. The contrast between the two markets is that in the developed market there is consumer willingness to pay as well as stricter regulatory standards for environmental attributes compared to emerging markets. We evaluate the merits and demerits of composite regulation compared to the existing individual regulations in the presence of diverse market and regulatory conditions.Our results show that under a composite regulation, even though the emerging market consumers may not value environmental quality, sufficiently high economies of scale will ensure higher traditional and environmental qualities, as well as higher profits for the automaker while operating in two markets as opposed to a single market. If the developed country consumers have sufficiently high valuation for the environmental quality, we find that the level of environmental quality that the automaker provides increases with the economies of scale. Our results also indicate that under a composite regulation with stringent norms, higher environmental quality is not guaranteed despite synergies, unless the scale economies are sufficiently high. We believe that this paper is highly relevant to the automakers operating in both the developed and emerging markets as well as to the regulatory authorities, as it provides a fresh perspective on the way automobile emission regulations can be framed to benefit all the three stakeholders namely the customer, the environment, and the automaker.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we review the relevant literature. We develop the model in Section 3 and discuss the results in Section 4 and conclude in Section 5 by providing some important managerial implications. All proofs and derivations of various expressions are presented in the Appendix. We provide the results, intuition behind the results and discuss the implications in the main body.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
