@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Financial ratios and corporate governance indicators in bankruptcy prediction: A comprehensive study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Combining corporate government indicators (CGIs) and financial ratios (FRs) are examined for bankruptcy prediction.In particular, seven and five different categories of FRs and CGIs are studied.Solvency and profitability in FRs and board structures and ownership structures in CGIs are the most important features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bankruptcy prediction,Financial ratios,Corporate governance indicators,Feature selection,Data mining,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Effective bankruptcy prediction is critical for financial institutions to make appropriate lending decisions. In general, the input variables (or features), such as financial ratios, and prediction techniques, such as statistical and machine learning techniques, are the two most important factors affecting the prediction performance. While many related works have proposed novel prediction techniques, very few have analyzed the discriminatory power of the features related to bankruptcy prediction. In the literature, in addition to financial ratios (FRs), corporate governance indicators (CGIs) have been found to be another important type of input variable. However, the prediction performance obtained by combining CGIs and FRs has not been fully examined. Only some selected CGIs and FRs have been used in related studies and the chosen features may differ from study to study. Therefore, the aim of this paper is to assess the prediction performance obtained by combining seven different categories of FRs and five different categories of CGIs. The experimental results, based on a real-world dataset from Taiwan, show that the FR categories of solvency and profitability and the CGI categories of board structure and ownership structure are the most important features in bankruptcy prediction. Specifically, the best prediction model performance is obtained with a combination in terms of prediction accuracy, Type I/II errors, ROC curve, and misclassification cost. However, these findings may not be applicable in some markets where the definition of distressed companies is unclear and the characteristics of corporate governance indicators are not obvious, such as in the Chinese market.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bankruptcy or business failure can have a negative impact both on the enterprise itself and the global economy. Business practitioners, investors, governments, and academic researchers have long studied ways to identify the potential risk of business failure in order to reduce the economic loss caused by bankruptcy (Balleisen, 2001; Zywicki, 2008).In short, bankruptcy prediction is a very important task for many related financial institutions. In general, the aim is to predict the likelihood that a firm may go bankrupt. Financial institutions are in need of effective prediction models in order to make appropriate lending decisions.In the literature, many techniques have been employed to develop bankruptcy prediction models, including statistical and machine learning techniques (Balcaen & Ooghe, 2006; Kumar & Ravi, 2007; Lin, Hu, & Tsai, 2012; Verikas, Kalsyte, Bacauskiene, & Gelzinis, 2010) with machine learning techniques shown to outperform statistical techniques.Although many studies have aimed at proposing novel machine learning techniques which will enhance the models’ prediction performances, there have been very few which have focused on the effect of the input variables (or features) on prediction performance. In general, financial ratios (FRs), recognized as one of the most important factors affecting bankruptcy prediction, are used to develop prediction models (Altman, 1968; Beaver, 1966; Ohlson, 1980). FRs can be classified into seven categories: solvency, profitability, cash flow ratios, capital structure ratios, turnover ratios, growth, and others.On the other hand, though, several recent studies have found that corporate governance indicators (CGIs) also play a key role in predicting bankruptcy (Bredart, 2014; Chen, 2014; Lee & Yeh, 2004; Lin, Liang, & Chu, 2010; Wu, 2007). Generally, CGIs can be classified into five categories: board structure (Collier & Esteban, 1999; Liang, Xu, & Jiraporn, 2013; Yeh & Woidtke, 2005), ownership structure (Berkman, Cole, & Fu, 2009; Cheung, Chung, Tan, & Wang, 2013; Jian & Wong, 2010; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, & Shleifer, 1999), cash flow rights (Claessens, Djankov, & Xu, 2000; La Porta et al., 1999), key person retained (Albring, Robinson, & Robinson, 2014; Dan, 2010), and others. However, only some of the CGIs have been considered in these works to prove that model performance improvement can be obtained with them.To fill this gap, the aim of this current work is to fully examine the discriminatory power of CGIs combined with FRs for bankruptcy prediction. Specifically, the model performances obtained using different categories of CGIs combined with FRs are assessed to see whether combining CGIs with FRs can enhance the model performance. In addition, since the combined features contain very high dimensionality, feature selection (Guyon & Elisseeff, 2003) is also performed over the combined features for dimensionality reduction. Consequently, this study allows us to identify the best combination of FRs and CGIs for bankruptcy prediction and assists the relevant financial institutions to make better lending decisions. Moreover, the optimal performance of the prediction model developed based on the identified features can be used as the baseline prediction model for future studies.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews literature related to CGIs. Sections 3 and 4 present the research methodology and experimental results respectively. Finally, in Section 5 some conclusions are offered.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
