@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Affine model of inflation-indexed derivatives and inflation risk premium

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose affine model capturing inflation premium, nominal and real interest rates.Pricing of zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaps.Pricing of year-on-year inflation-indexed swaps.Pricing of inflation-indexed swaptions.Pricing of inflation-indexed caps and floors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inflation-indexed derivatives,Inflation risk premium,Affine models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an affine-based approach which jointly captures the nominal interest rate, the real interest rate, and the inflation risk premium to price inflation-indexed derivatives, including zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaps, year-on-year inflation-indexed swaps, inflation-indexed swaptions, and inflation-indexed caps and floors. We provide an example and explain how to use traded zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap rates to estimate inflation risk premiums.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Inflation modeling is of great interest in financial research. The volatile oil and commodity prices before the financial crisis in 2008 led to a wave of inflation investing. After the crisis, expanding monetary policies have brought the global economy into another financial turmoil and are expected to push inflation uncertainties to a higher level. For example, Warren Buffet, the CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, worried on May 2, 2010, about the prospect for ”significant inflation” in the United States and elsewhere.Many financial innovations that were created have been linked to inflation. For example, a futures contract linked to CPI index started trading at the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) in 2004. High borrowing needs combined with the desire to improve liquidity has resulted in a surge in the issuance of Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS) in 1997. In addition, the increasing volatility of inflation rates has introduced inflation as the newest class of assets.1About the detail introduction of inflation derivatives, please refer to Deacon, Derry, and Mirfendereski (2004).1In the over-the-counter (OTC) market, there are a variety of inflation-linked derivatives issued. Among these products, the inflation-indexed swap is one of the most popular instruments for financial institutions to hedge the inflation risk in their portfolios. The benefits of the inflation-indexed swap are the exemption of liquidity premium due to its high trading volume and that it is only linked to inflation risk. TIPS, on the other hand, are related to both inflation risk and real interest rate risk.2Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig (in press) provides a replicating portfolio which is composed of inflation swaps and Nominal Treasury Bonds to replicate the payoffs of TIPS. They confirms that the illiquidity of TIPS market causes a significant extra issuing cost compared with the replicating portfolio.2From these perspectives, the inflation-indexed swap is not only a good choice for hedging inflation risk, but also a good instrument for estimating real interest rate and inflation risk premium.The investor’s perception about inflation risk can be gauged from traded inflation-linked assets. To properly estimate the real interest rate and market-based inflation risk premium, a valuation model considering the inflation risk premium is necessary. Therefore, the main purpose of this paper is to propose an affine model which jointly captures the nominal interest rate, the real interest rate, the inflation expectation, and the inflation risk premium to price inflation-indexed derivatives, including zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaps, year-on-year inflation-indexed swaps, zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaptions, year-on-year inflation-indexed swaptions, and inflation-indexed caps and floors. We also take zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaps as an example that shows how to use the market prices of inflation derivatives to estimate both the real interest rate and inflation risk premiums. In this exercise, we perform two different estimations: one model-free and the other a model-based Kalman Filter, to retrieve the model-implied real interest rate and inflation risk premiums.To estimate inflation rates, the relations between the term structure of nominal interest rates, real interest rates, and inflation rates need to be specified correctly.3Boero and Torricelli (1996) provide a comparative evaluation of alternative models of the term structure of interest rates. Schmidt (2011) surveys approaches to modeling the term structure of interest rates.3However, due to the latent property of real interest rates, correctly estimating them is challenging for both macroeconomists and financial economists. In addition, conventional Fisher’s hypothesis assumes that the difference between the real and nominal interest rate is only the expected inflation rate, ignoring the uncertainties about future inflation rates. More and more empirical evidences from previous researches show that the Fisher’s hypothesis may not be valid, asserting the difference between the real and nominal interest rate is composed of the expected inflation rate and inflation risk premium. Furthermore, the independence of real interest rate and inflation rate is not supported by empirical evidences. Therefore, a correct specification coping with these two features is essential to construct pricing models for inflation-linked products.In literature, there are a few studies addressing pricing inflation-linked derivatives. Jarrow and Yildirim (2003) introduce the foreign-currency analogy and model nominal interest rates and real interest rates as domestic and foreign assets respectively, using a three-factor HJM model to price TIPS and inflation-indexed options. Mercurio (2005) applies the LIBOR market model to study the inflation-indexed swaps, inflation-indexed caps and floors pricing. In addition, Mercurio and Moreni (2006) further derive closed-form formulas of inflation-indexed caplets and floorlets under the assumption of stochastic volatility. Recently, Hinnerich (2008) proposes an extended HJM framework, allowing for both jumps and stochastic volatility for a market consisting of a money market account, zero-coupon bonds and indexed zero-coupon bonds that are based on a non-traded index. However, none of these models consider the inflation risk premium into modeling; they ignore the inflation risk premium by assuming that Fisher’s equation holds.4The literature review about estimating inflation risk premium is given in the Internet Appendix. In this paper, we focus on pricing inflation derivatives and its applications.4Therefore, to the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first one to provide a valuation framework which considers inflation risk premium in pricing inflation-linked derivatives. This paper also uses zero-coupon inflation swap rates and provides an example by using a model-free approach and a model-based Kalman-Filter estimation to estimate real interest rate and inflation risk premium.We organize the remainder of this paper as follows: In Section 2, we introduce the affine model proposed by D’Amico, Kim, and Wei (2009) and extend this model to Section 3 where we derive pricing formulas for inflation-indexed derivatives. In Section 4, we demonstrate how to implement our proposed model by taking a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap as an example and use a simple model-free approach and a Kalman-Filter estimation approach to estimate the real interest rate and inflation risk premium. We conclude the paper in Section 5.Affine models have been widely used in fixed income modeling due to their flexibility in capturing the time-varying risk premium (see Eraker (2008)). Previous researches also use an affine model to estimate the real bond yield and inflation risk premium, e.g.: Campbell and Viceira (2001), D’Amico et al. (2009). In this paper, we adopt D’Amico et al. (2009)’s model, which is based on the specification of Dai and Singleton (2000) and Duffie, Pan, and Singleton (2000), and assumes that the economic system is driven by a Gaussian vector of latent state variables such that the nominal bond yield, real bond yield, and expected inflation are all affine functions of the latent state vector. By specifying the dynamics of latent state vector, we can explicitly model the time-varying risk premium as well as the correlation between the real bond yield, nominal bond yield, and expected inflation. In this section we first state the affine model for the nominal interest rate, the inflation level, and the real interest rate respectively. We then use this model as the basis to derive the valuation formulas for inflation-linked derivatives. In the following subsections, we introduce the definition of inflation risk premium and its relation to Fisher’s Equation. Later, we introduce the affine model used in valuation and model estimation.In Fisher’s hypothesis, the relation between the nominal yield and the real yield can be represented as(1)yt,TMN=yt,TMR+it,TMewhereyt,TMNis the nominal yield duringt,TM, andyt,TMRis the real yield duringt,TM.it,TMeis the expected inflation between[t,TM], equivalent to1/(TM-t)EtPNlogITM/It, andEtPN·is the expectation under nominal physical measurePNgiven information at time t. Based on Fisher’s equation, the difference betweenyt,TMNandyt,TMRis known as breakeven inflation and is the benchmark for a Central Bank to control inflation. However, the breakeven inflation is not only composed of expected inflation, but also the inflation risk premium required by investors. We can derive the relation betweenyt,TMNandyt,TMRbased on the stochastic discount factor approach by defining a nominal pricing kernel at timet,MtN, and a real pricing kernel at timet,MtR, whereMtN=MtR/It. In this framework, the price of aTM-maturity nominal zero-coupon bond and the real zero-coupon bond at time t can be expressed respectively as:PN(t,TM)=EtPNMTMNMtNPR(t,TM)=EtPNMTMRMtRWith these assumptions, the relation between the nominal yield and the real yield can be expressed as5Similar argument was introduced and proved in D’Amico et al. (2009).5:(2)yt,TMN=yt,TMR+it,TMe+ϕt,TMIwhereϕt,TMIis the inflation risk premium which is composed of covariance effect,ct,TM, and Jensen’s effect,Jt,TM. These two effects can be expressed asct,TM≡-1TM-tlog1+covtMTMRMtR,ItITMEtPNMTMRMtREtPNItITMJt,TM≡-1TM-tlogEtPNItITM-EtPNlogItITMThe covariance effect captures the covariance between the real pricing kernel and the inflation between[t,TM]since the real pricing kernel and the inflation are all stochastic. Jensen’s effect reflects the concavity of logarithmic function. The difference between Eqs. (1) and (2) lies in the modeling of inflation risk premium. Fisher’s equation assumes that investors do not require a premium to compensate for inflation risk. However, inflation dynamics are stochastic and investors would require an inflation risk premium to compensate when the market is in equilibrium.We adopt the model of D’Amico et al. (2009) as our vehicle, and assume that the nominal pricing kernel,MtN, the price level,It, and the n-dimensional latent state vector processes,xt, are specified as follows:(3)dMtNMtN=-rN(xt)dt-λN(xt)′dWt(4)dlnIt=π(xt)dt+σq′dWt+σq⊥′dWt⊥(5)dxt=K(μ-xt)dt+ΣdWtwherext,σq,σq⊥,μaren×1vectors,K,σaren×nconstant matrices,dWtanddWt⊥are n-dimensional mutually orthogonal Brownian motions under nominal physical measure, and every element inWtorWt⊥is independent. Thus, the variance–covariance matrices forWtorWt⊥are diagonal matrices.λN(xt)denotes the nominal market price of risk,6The market price of risk represents the degree of aggregate risk aversion.6which is driven by the stochastic state vector processxt;rN(xt)is stochastic nominal interest rate and is also driven byxt. We follow Duffee (2002), assuming thatxtfollows vector Vasicek process, implying the latent state variable vector is mean-reverting with constant volatility. In Eq. (3), the nominal market price of risk,λN(xt), is a function ofxt, implying that the nominal market price of risk is time-varying. Eq. (4) shows the dynamics of inflation. The inflation dynamics can be decomposed into three parts: a stochastic mean growth rate captured byπ(xt), a homogeneous common shockσq′dWt, and a exogenous homogeneous shockσq⊥dWt⊥. The homogenous common shock of inflation shares the same uncertainties as the nominal pricing kernel and the latent state vector, while volatility remains constant.7This assumption rules out the possibility of time-varying volatility. One may argue that values of swaps, swaptions, caps, and floors can critically depends on volatility dynamics. However, the incorporation of time-varying volatility in our model may drastically complicate the derivation of pricing formulae for inflation-indexed derivatives. Alternatively, Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2009) have relaxed this assumption and assume that the inflation’s conditional volatility is heteroskedastic following Engle (1982).7Similarly, the exogenous homogeneous shock represents the homogeneous shock outside the affine economic system in order to capture the unexpected impact on inflation. This affine system assumes the stochastic interest rate, market price of risk, and mean growth rate of inflation. These features are essential in modeling inflation linked products and especially important in estimating inflation risk premium by using prices of these products.Following the specifications of Dai and Singleton (2000), Duffee (2002), D’Amico et al. (2009), the affine systems forrN(xt),π(xt), andλN(xt)can be assumed as follows(6)rN(xt)=ρ0N+ρ1N′xt(7)π(xt)=ρ0π+ρ1π′xt(8)λN(xt)=λ0N+ΛNxtwhereρ0N,ρ0πare scalers.ρ1N,ρ1π,λ0Naren×1vectors.ΛNis an×nmatrix.Similarly, the real pricing kernel, which is defined asMtN=MtR/It, can be derived as:dMtRMtR=-rRxtdt-λR(xt)′dWt-σq⊥dWt⊥and the real interest rate and real market price of risk can be shown as:(9)rR(xt)=ρ0R+ρ1R′xt(10)λRxt=λ0R+ΛRxtwhereρ0R=ρ0N-ρ0π-12σq′σq+σq⊥2+λ0N′σqρ1R=ρ1N-ρ1π+ΛN′σqλ0R=λ0N-σqΛR=ΛNWe assume that the nominal yield, real yield and inflation expectation at time t with time periodτto maturity follow affine functions of latent state variablesxt, which can be expressed as:(11)yt,τN=aτN+bτN′xt(12)yt,τR=aτR+bτR′xt(13)iτe=aτI+bτI′xtwhereyt,τNis the nominal yield,yt,τRis the real yield, andiτeis the inflation expectation.aτj=-Aτj/τ;bτj=-Ψτj/τ, for j=N,R.Aτj,Ψτjcan be solved by following equations(14)dAτjdτ=-ρ0j+Ψτj′Kμ-Σλ0j+12Ψτj′ΣΣτ′Ψτj(15)dΨτjdτ=-ρ1j-K+ΣΛjτ′Ψτjwith the initial conditionsA0j=0andΨ0j=0, forj={N,R}. The factorsaτIandbτIcan be shown as:aτI=ρ0π+1τρ1π′∫0τdsI-e-KsμbτI=1τ∫0τe-K′sρ1πdsIn Eq. (14),Aτjis influenced by market price of risk throughλ0j; in (15),Ψτjis influenced by market price of risk throughΛj.Λjbrings the stochastic feature ofxtinto the market price of risk process; hence, it also differentiates this model from other models with constant market price of risk. With the model implied real yield (12) and inflation expectation (13), the inflation risk premium can be obtained by (2).Based on Eqs. (11) and (12), the real zero coupon bond from t toTMand its nominal counterpart can be expressed as:(16)PR(t,TM)=exp-(a(TM-t)R+b(TM-t)R′xt)(TM-t)(17)PN(t,TM)=exp-a(TM-t)N+b(TM-t)N′xt(TM-t)wherePRt,TMis the real zero-coupon bond from t toTM,PN(t,TM)is the nominal counterpart,8Similar affine model also has been applied to price Treasury bonds, and TIPS in D’Amico et al. (2009).8andTM-tis the time period from time t to timeTM. Eqs. (16) and (17) together show that zero-coupon bond price is an exponential affine function of state variables. The expression of nominal and real zero-coupon bonds distinguish our paper from others in that the bond prices are exponential affine functions of latent factors. This setting is easier to formulate in empirical study as suggested by Duffie et al. (2000).Inflation-linked swaps are swap contracts whose payoffs are linked to a specific inflation index.9HICPxT in European market; Retail Price Index (RPI) in UK; CPI-Urban in US.9The purpose of these instruments is for an inflation risk exposed investor to hedge against or exchange the inflation risk undertaken. Inflation-indexed swap contracts widely used in practice include zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaps and year-on-year inflation-indexed swaps. Among these derivatives, zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaps are the most actively traded instruments and their quotations have been proven to provide additional information on inflation expectation (see Kerkhof (2005), Hurd & Rellen (2006)).10The participants in inflation swap market include some big players. As reports in p39, Risk, Aug 2011, “Not only are central banks and real-money clients buying Tips, but they are also increasingly active in swaps, say dealers. Hedge funds continue to trade inflation swaps and Tips as well”.10Year-on-year inflation-indexed swaps provide the advantage of hedging the year-by-year inflation risk in one contract, which matches the cash-flow schedule of interest rate swaps. However, because year-on-year inflation-indexed swaps still have a debate on it convexity adjustment in long-term maturity contracts, the market of year-on-year inflation-indexed swaps is still in low liquidity.11See the special report of Societe Generale in Risk, September 2007.11In this subsection, we introduce zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaps and year-on-year inflation-indexed swaps and explain how to extract inflation risk premium directly from zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap rates.A zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap contract is an bilateral agreement that enables an investor or a hedger to secure an inflation-protected return with respect to an inflation index. The inflation receiver pays a predetermined fixed rate, and receives from the inflation seller inflation-linked payments. In the zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap starting at timeT0with final timeTM, and nominal amount N, the fixed-leg payer pays another partyN(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0-1when the contract matures, whereasKZCIISis the contract fixed rate and also the quotation in the swap market. On the other hand, the floating-leg payer pays another partyN[ITM/IT0-1], whereas I is the price index. In the US, the price index applied to the inflation-indexed swap contract is the non-seasonally adjusted US. City Average All Items Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) lagged by two months. This indexation causes two errors which need to be corrected when pricing the contract. First, due to the 2month lag, the CPI-U does not reflect the true price level at that moment. Second, the CPI-U index is non-seasonally adjusted such that the indexation will be affected by the seasonal variation.12If the inflation derivatives pays on an annual basis, the seasonal effects do not take effect in initial pricing. However, the seasonal effects influence the mark-to-market valuation of the inflation securities positions.12With the zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap, the inflation payer can exchange inflation sensitive cash flows for constant cash flows. For example, a real estate lessor may engage in a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap contract to exchange his/her inflation-linked cash flow (lease payments) for constant cash flows. In a pension scheme which is linked to inflation, the pension fund manager may engage in a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap contract to hedge the inflation risk in pension liabilities.LetZCIIS(t,TM,IT0)denote the time t value of a payer zero-coupon inflation-indexedswap contract that starts at timeT0with payment dateTMand has a swap rateKZCIIS. Without loss of generality, we normalize the nominal amount of the contract to be 1. Following Mercurio (2005), the time t value of the inflation leg of zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap contract can be expressed as:(18)ItIT0PR(t,TM)-PN(t,TM)wherePRt,TMis the real zero-coupon bond from t toTMandPNt,TMis the nominal counterpart. From this equation, we know that the term structure of real interest rates can be derived if we know the price index value and the term structure of nominal interest rates. From this perspective, we gauge that zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaps provide a handy instrument to carry out the information of real interest rates. Whent=TM,(19)ZCIIS(TM,TM,IT0)=ITMIT0-1-(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0-1=ITMIT0-(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0Whent=T0, the reference date of starting price index equals to initiation date of the inflation swap contract,(20)ZCIIS(T0,TM,IT0)=[PR(T0,TM)-PN(T0,TM)]-PN(T0,TM)(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0-1=PR(T0,TM)-PN(T0,TM)(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0As suggested by Mercurio (2005), Eqs. (18)–(20) yield model-free values of real zero-coupon bonds at different time points since they are not based on any specific assumption of the interest rate model, but simply follow the no-arbitrage condition.LetKZCIIS(TM)denote the swap rate atT0of a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap contract with maturityTM. By no-arbitrage condition, the fair value of a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap contract at timeT0must be zero, implyingPR(T0,TM)-PN(T0,TM)=PN(T0,TM)1+KZCIIS(TM)TM-T0-1,and the real zero-coupon bond price in terms of the fixed-leg quotation can be shown as:(21)PR(T0,TM)=PN(T0,TM)(1+KZCIIS(TM))TM-T0Given this affine model, we can rewrite Eq. (21) and obtain the fair rate of a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap at timeT0under the no arbitrage condition:(22)KZCIIS(TM)=PRT0,TMPN(T0,TM)1TM-T0-1=e[a(TM-T0)N-a(TM-T0)R]+[b(TM-T0)N′-b(TM-T0)R′]xT0-1.From Eq. (22), we find that zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap rates are determined by nominal zero-coupon bond prices and real zero-coupon bond prices. The real or nominal zero-coupon bond prices are determined by the affine specification of state variables system. With different affined specification structure,aτN,aτR,bτN,bτRfor determining zero-coupon bond prices change accordingly. Eq. (22) provides a formula for estimating the parameters in the specified affine model by using zero-coupon inflation swap rates. One example is Haubrich, Pennacchi, and Ritchken (2011), in which they use Treasury bond data and inflation-indexed swap rates to jointly estimate inflation risk premium. Our model provides an alternative structure to achieve a similar purpose.A year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract is a swap which exchanges the cash flows linked to a number of accrued periods for a series of constant cash flows. Suppose that a year-on-year inflation-indexed swap starts at timeTmwith payment datesTm+1,Tm+2,…,TM. For each periodTi-1,Ti,i=m+1,…,M, the fixed-leg payer pays another partyNφiKYYIIS, whereas N is the nominal amount of the swap contract,φiis the contract fixed-leg year fraction for the interval[Ti-1,Ti], andKYYIISis the contract fixed rate, while the floating-leg payer pays another partyNφiITi/ITi-1-1at the end of that specific year. Note that the payments of a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap are based on the cumulative inflation from the contract starting date to the coupon date. In contrast, the payments of a year-on-year inflation-indexed swap are based on the inflation over a number of accrual periods. The benefit of year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract is its match with the interest rate swap contract in the payment schedule. Combining nominal interest rate swaps and year-on-year nominal inflation-indexed swaps, the contract of real interest rate swap is readily available.The year-on-year inflation-indexed swap rate can also be derived based on our affine model. In this contract, the fixed-leg payer pays another partyNφiKYYIIS, whereasφiis the contract fixed-leg year fraction for the intervalTi-1,Ti, andt<Ti-1, while float-leg payer pays another partyNφi[ITi/ITi-1-1]at the end of the specific year. Without loss of generality, we normalize the nominal amount of the contract, N, to be 1. Following Mercurio (2005), the value at time t of this year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract of the inflation leg duringTi-1,Tican be expressed as:(23)YYIISt,Ti-1,Ti,φi=φiEtQNe-∫tTi-1rNxsdsPRTi-1,Ti-φi(1+KYYIIS)PNt,TiwhereEtQN·is the conditional expectation under nominal risk-neutral measureQN.rNxsis the nominal interest rate. In Eq. (23), the only term needing to be solved is the conditional expectation, and it can be further reduced by the technique of forward measure. Thus, we have following proposition13All proofs are provided in the Internet Appendix of this paper.13:Proposition 1Under the affine system defined by(6)–(8), the value of a year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract during[Ti-1,Ti]can be expressed asYYIIS(t,[Ti-1,Ti],φi)=φiPN(t,Ti-1)C(Ti-1,Ti)D(Ti-1,Ti)-φi(1+K)PN(t,Ti)whereC(Ti-1,Ti)=e-a(Ti-Ti-1)R(Ti-Ti-1)D(Ti-1,Ti)=EtQN,Ti-1e-b(Ti-Ti-1)R′xTi-1(Ti-Ti-1)=e-b(Ti-Ti-1)R′μtQN,Ti-1(xTi-1)(Ti-Ti-1)+12b(Ti-Ti-1)R′ΣtQN,Ti-1(xTi-1)b(Ti-Ti-1)R(Ti-Ti-1)2In Proposition 1,CTi-1,TiDTi-1,Tiis equal toEtQN,Ti-1PRTi-1,Ti, which is the conditional expectation of forward real zero-coupon bond under nominal forward measure. This formula provides a basis for the following analyses.Suppose there is a year-on-year inflation swap contract which swaps a series of inflation-linked cash flows. LetΓ=Tm,Tm+1,…,TMdenote the set of the starting date and the payments dates of the year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract andΨ=φm+1,φm+2,…,φMdenote the set of the corresponding year fractions. LetYYIISt,Γ,Ψdenotes the value at time t of a payer year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract. Then,(24)YYIIS(t,Γ,Ψ)=∑i=m+1MYYIIS(t,[Ti-1,Ti],φi)=∑i=m+1MφiPN(t,Ti-1)C(Ti-1,Ti)D(Ti-1,Ti)-∑i=m+1Mφi(1+KYYIIS)PN(t,Ti)Following Hinnerich (2008), we define the forward swap rate of a year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract to be the one at which the value of the swap is zero. We denote the forward swap rate of this year-on-year inflation-indexed swap at time t asRt,m,M. From Eq. (24), we can obtain that(25)R(t,m,M)=∑i=m+1MφiPN(t,Ti-1)C(Ti-1,Ti)D(Ti-1,Ti)-∑i=m+1MφiPN(t,Ti)∑i=m+1MφiPN(t,Ti)Particularly, whent=Tm, i.e. the swap contract initiation date equals to the beginning of first swap period, the forward swap rateRTm,m,Mwill equal to the fair swap rate. In Eq. (25), the year-to-year inflation-indexed swap rate is composed of functions ofxTi-1. Through these components, different affine specifications aboutxTi-1will lead to different inflation-indexed swap rates. Based on our affine model and the closed-form solution of inflation-indexed swap rate, we can estimate the parameters by Kalman-Filter Method, which is widely used in estimating affine model.14For example, Chen, Liu, and Cheng (2005), Jacobs and Li (2008), Bikov and Chernov (2009), D’Amico et al. (2009), Date and Wang (2009), and Haubrich et al. (2011).14Similar results are provided in Hinnerich (2008) (Eqs. (23) and (24), P.2301). We note that Hinnerich (2008) adopts a different approach from ours in estimating real interest rate parameters. As suggested by Hinnerich (2008), she achieves the estimation of real zero-coupon bonds by using the fact that the price of a real zero-coupon bond at time t is equal to the ratio of the price of a inflation-protected zero-coupon bond to the inflation level at time t. Since a real zero-coupon bond price can be expressed in terms of an inflation-protected zero-coupon bond price and the inflation level at the same time point t, the value of a year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract and the forward swap rate can be expressed as functions of nominal bond prices, inflation-protected bond prices, and inflation levels, which do not contain any real interest rate parameters. In contrast, from Eqs. (24) and (25) we observe that the real interest rate parameters appear inC(Ti-1,Ti)andD(Ti-1,Ti). If the affine models for the nominal interest rate, the inflation level, and the real rate are specified, we can estimate real interest rate parameters by using year-on-year inflation-indexed swap rates and compute the inflation risk premium with those estimated parameters, which cannot be achieved using Hinnerich (2008)’s framework. The inclusion of inflation risk premium into our model makes YYIIS to be another source of estimating inflation risk premium.A swaption is an option on a swap with the fixed rate on the swap given by the strike. A payer swaption gives the holder of the swaption the right to enter into a swap in which the holder pays the fixed leg and receives the floating leg, while a receiver swaption gives the holder of the swaption the right to enter into a swap where the holder receives the fixed leg, and pays the floating leg. Accordingly, an inflation swaption is an option to enter into a inflation-indexed swap (e.g.: zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap, year-on-year inflation-indexed swap, etc.), at a pre-specified date and a pre-determined rate in the future. As vanilla options on equities, the holder of an inflation swaption will decide to enter into the underlying inflation-indexed swap if the option is in the money at maturity. The two main types of inflation swaptions are call and put inflation swaptions, which give the holder the right to receive or pay inflation in exchange for a certain fixed nominal rate. Inflation swaptions are important financial instruments for pension fund managers due to the vital roles they play when implementing inflation hedging strategies (see Kerkhof (2005)). In addition, the implied volatilities derived from inflation swaptions are real-time estimates for the volatilities of forward inflation par swap rates. The derived volatilities provide another dimension in estimating affine term-structure models, especially in fitting the second moment of the underlying asset.Recall that we denoteZCIIS(t,TM,IT0)as the value at time t of a payer zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap contract that starts at timeT0with payment dateTMand has a swap rateKZCIIS. We have thatZCIIS(T0,TM,IT0)=PR(T0,TM)-PN(T0,TM)(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0As defined in Hinnerich (2008), a payer zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaption is an option to enter into a payer zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap contract for a given pre-specified swap rate,KZCIIS, at a pre-specified date. LetZCIISOt,TM,KZCIISdenotes the value at time t of the corresponding swaption. Then,(26)ZCIISO(T0,TM,KZCIIS)=max{ZCIIS(T0,TM,IT0),0}=maxPR(T0,TM)-PN(T0,TM)(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0,0=PN(T0,TM)maxPR(T0,TM)PN(T0,TM)-(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0,0=PN(T0,TM)max{Φ(T0,TM)-G,0}whereΦT0,TM=PRT0,TM/PNT0,TMandG=(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0. Thus, we have following proposition:Proposition 2Under the affine system defined by(6)–(8), the value of the payer zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaption at time t can be expressed as(27)ZCIISO(t,TM,KZCIIS)=PN(t,TM)eμlnΦ+12σlnΦ2N[-(y0-σlnΦ)]-GN[-y0]whereN·is the p.d.f. of a standard normal distribution, andΦ(T0,TM)=PRT0,TM/PN(T0,TM)G=(1+KZCIIS)TM-T0μlnΦ=(TM-T0)α(T0,TM)-β′(T0,TM)μtQN,TM(xT0)σlnΦ2=(TM-T0)2β′(T0,TM)σtQN,TM(xT0)β(T0,TM)α(T0,TM)=a(TM-T0)N-a(TM-T0)Rβ′(T0,TM)=b(TM-T0)N′-b(TM-T0)R′y0=(lnG-μlnΦ)/σlnΦμtQN,TM(xT0)=e-(K+ΣΛN)(T0-t)xt+(K+ΣΛN)-1In-e-(K+ΣΛN)(T0-t)Kμ-Σλ0N-ΣΣ′bTM-tNσtQN,TM(xT0)=e-(K+ΣΛN)(T0-t)σ∫tT0e[(K+ΣΛN)+(K+ΣΛN)′]sdsσ′e-(K+ΣΛN)′(T0-t)It appears that Eq. (27) is similar to, but more complicated than, the formula in Eq. (34) of Hinnerich (2008). The difference, however, lies in the derivations and intuitions of our results for the value of a payer zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaption. Hinnerich (2008) assumes standard HJM models without jumps for nominal interest rates and real interest rates while suggesting thatΦT0,TM(corresponding to our notations) is lognormally distributed. Specifically, Hinnerich (2008) derives first the dynamic oflnΦT0,TM, given the specifications of nominal interest rates and real interest rates, and shows thatlnΦT0,TMis normally distributed under the measureQN,TM. Using straight forward calculations, she finds a pricing formula for the value of a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaption, which is a analogy with the Black–Scholes formula. In contrast, in our modelΦT0,TMcan be expressed as an exponential function ofxT0. Once the dynamic ofxT0is specified, we can obtain the mean and the variance–covariance matrix ofxT0under the measureQN,TMand subsequently the distribution oflnΦT0,TM. We do not have to derive the dynamic oflnΦT0,TMto obtain its distribution under the measureQN,TM. In Hinnerich (2008)’s formula, when pricing a zero-coupon inflation-indexed swaption, one has to estimate real zero-coupon bonds by the relation between real bond prices, inflation-protected bond prices and inflation levels. The availability of the data for comparable inflation-protected zero-coupon bonds may raise additional difficulties.Recall thatYYIISt,Γ,Ψdenotes the value at time t of a payer year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract, andKYCIISis the year-on-year inflation-indexed swap rate. Then,YYIIS(t,Γ,Ψ)=∑i=m+1MYYIIS(t,[Ti-1,Ti],φi)=∑i=m+1MφiPN(t,Ti-1)C(Ti-1,Ti)D(Ti-1,Ti)-∑i=m+1Mφi(1+KYCIIS)PN(t,Ti)whereC(Ti-1,Ti)=exp-a(Ti-Ti-1)R(Ti-Ti-1)D(Ti-1,Ti)=EtQN,Ti-1exp-b(Ti-Ti-1)R′xTi-1Ti-Ti-1=e-b(Ti-Ti-1)R′μtQN,Ti-1(xTi-1)(Ti-Ti-1)+12b(Ti-Ti-1)R′ΣtQN,Ti-1(xTi-1)b(Ti-Ti-1)R(Ti-Ti-1)2Furthermore, we denote the forward swap rate at time t byR(t,m,M),(28)R(t,m,M)=∑i=m+1MφiPN(t,Ti-1)C(Ti-1,Ti)D(Ti-1,Ti)-S(t,m,M)S(t,m,M)whereSt,m,M=∑i=m+1MφiPNt,Ti, which is the so-called present value of basis point (PVBP). Hence, the value of a payer year-on-year inflation-index swap contract at time t is:YYIIS(t,Γ,Ψ)=S(t,m,M)[R(t,m,M)-KYCIIS].As defined in Hinnerich (2008), a payer year-on-year inflation-indexed swaption is an option to enter into a payer year-on-year inflation-indexed swap contract for a given pre-determined swap rate at a pre-determined date. LetYYIISO(t,m,M,K)denote the value at time t of the year-on-year inflation-indexed swaption. Then,YYIISO(Tm,m,M,KYCIIS)=maxYYIISt,Γ,Ψ,0=S(t,m,M)max{R(t,m,M)-KYCIIS,0}Based on this formula, it requires the assumption for the distribution ofRt,m,Mto derive the closed form solution. SinceRt,m,Mis defined as a ratio withSt,m,M, to be its numenaire, Eq. (28) is a martingale underQmMmeasure which is a measure withSt,m,Mto be the numenaire. In previous research, strong assumptions are imposed onSt,m,Mand assumeSt,m,Meither to be lognormal distribution or normal distribution underQmM. Following these assumptions, the closed-form solution of YYIISO under our affine structure reduce to the one in Hinnerich (2008).An inflation-indexed caplet is a call option on the inflation rate implied by the CPI index. Similarly, an inflation-indexed floorlet is a put option on the same inflation rate. Inflation-indexed caplets and floorlets provide a good instrument for hedging inflation risk, especially when the direction of future inflation is not clear.15As reported in p38, Risk, August 2008, “In 2010, market participants fretted about two distinct but equally worrying scenarios – deflation on one hand, and runaway inflation on the other. Among other things, those fears sparked massive interest in zero-coupon inflation caps and floors, including several large trades between California-based asset manager Pimco and Toronto-based insurer Fairfax Financial”.15In another perspective, the implied volatilities derived from inflation-indexed caplets and floorlets provide another sources to estimate the volatilities of inflation rates. This information helps for identifying the second moment of inflation rate dynamics in model estimation.The payoff of an inflation-indexed caplet/floorlet at timeTiis equal to(29)φiωITiITi-1-1-κ+,whereφiis the year fraction of time period[Ti-1,Ti],κis the strike price of the inflation-indexed caplet/floorlet, andω=1for an inflation-indexed caplet andω=-1for an inflation-indexed floorlet.[X]+=max(X,0).For brevity, we assumeξi=ITi/ITi-1andθ=1+κ. LetIICFlet(t,[Ti-1,Ti],φi,θ,ω)denote the time t value (t⩽Ti-1) of the payoff of an inflation-indexed caplet/floorlet at timeTi. Then we have following proposition:Proposition 3The time t value (t⩽Ti-1) of the payoff of an inflation-indexed caplet/floorlet at timeTican be expressed as(30)IICFlet(t,[Ti-1,Ti],φi,θ,ω)=φiPN(t,Ti)EtQN,Ti{[ω(ξi-θ)]+}=φiPN(t,Ti)ω{μξiN[ωξi0]-θ[ω(ξi0-σlnξi)]},whereξi=ITiITi-1ξi0=lnμξiK+12σlnξi2σlnξiμξi=PN(t,Ti-1)PN(t,Ti)C(Ti-1,Ti)D(Ti-1,Ti)σlnξi2=(Ti-Ti-1)σq′σq+σq⊥′σq⊥+VartQN,TiVI2+CovtQN,Ti(VI2,VI3)C(Ti-1,Ti)=e-a(Ti-Ti-1)R(Ti-Ti-1)D(Ti-1,Ti)=EtQN,Ti-1e-b(Ti-Ti-1)R′xTi-1(Ti-Ti-1)η′=ρ1π′-σq′+σq⊥′ΛNH=K+ΣΛNVartQN,Ti(VI2)=η′e-H(Ti-t)ΣΣ2,1σ′[e-H(Ti-t)]′ηCovtQN,Ti(VI2,VI3)=η′e-H(Ti-t)ΣH-1eHTi(Ti-Ti-1)-H-1eHTi-eHTi-1σqAn inflation-indexed cap (floor) is a stream of inflation-indexed caplets (floorlets). The total payoff of an inflation-indexed cap (floor) is equal to the sum of the payoffs of inflation-indexed caplets (floorlets) over all payment dates.Specifically, L etΓ={Tm,Tm+1,…,TM}denote the set of payments dates of an inflation-indexed cap (floor) that starts at timeTm, andΨ={φm+1,φm+2,…,φM}denote the set of the corresponding year fractions. Fori=m+1,m+2,…,M, the payoff of inflation-indexed caplets (floorlets) is equal toφiωITiITi-1-1-κ+=φi[ω(ξi-θ)]+.Then the value of an inflation-indexed cap (floor) at timet=Tmcan be expressed as:IICFTm,Γ,Ψ,E,ω=∑i=m+1MφiETmQNe-∫TmTirN(xs)ds[ω(ξi-θ)]+=∑i=m+1MφiPN(Tm,Ti)ETmQN,Ti[ω(ξi-θ)]+=ω∑i=m+1MφiPN(Tm,Ti)μξiN[ωξi0]-θ[ω(ξi0-σlnξi)]

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
