@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Trajectories of efficiency measurement: A bibliometric analysis of DEA and SFA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A citation-based literature survey compares DEA and SFA research jointly.We identify seminal papers that spur innovation of DEA and SFA research.We quantitatively cluster DEA and SFA research streams.We prove DEA/SFA as a standard technique in Operations Research/Economics.An adoption rate of knowledge indicates the continuing progress of DEA/SFA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis,Stochastic Frontier Analysis,Literature survey,Citation analysis,Document co-citation analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study surveys the increasing research field of performance measurement by making use of a bibliometric literature analysis. We concentrate on two approaches, namely Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) and Stochastic Frontier Analysis (SFA) as the most important methods to evaluate the efficiency of individual and organizational performance. It is the first literature survey that analyses DEA and SFA publications jointly, covering contributions published in journals, indexed by the Web of Science database from 1978 to 2012. Our aim is to identify seminal papers, playing a major role in DEA and SFA development and to determine areas of adoption. We recognized a constant growth of publications during the years identifying DEA as a standard technique in Operations Research, whereas SFA is mainly adopted in Economic research fields. Making use of document co-citation analysis we identify Airports and Supplier Selection (DEA) as well as Banking and Agriculture (SFA) as most influential application areas. Furthermore, Sensitivity and Fuzzy Set Theory (DEA) as well as Bayesian Analysis and Heterogeneity (SFA) are found to be most influential research areas and seem to be methodological trends. By developing an adoption rate of knowledge we identify that research, in terms of citations, is more focusing on relatively old and recent research at the expenses of middle-aged contributions, which is a typical phenomenon of a fast developing discipline.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For more than three decades there is a growing interdisciplinary interest in performance in all its manifestations. Individual, group and organizational performance and its improvement are considered as highly important. Management by performance gains relevance to best utilize restricted resources and to sustain e.g. competitiveness in the private sector or to increase value for money, making government and policy more result-oriented. A competitive globalized world with interlaced finance markets and linked crises and shockwaves puts pressure on organizations of all kinds, demanding more resilience and more performance awareness especially concerning measurement, monitoring and hence the detection of its inefficiencies.The growth in managerial interest in performance has been mirrored in the development of actual performance management practices and academic devotion. To conduct benchmarking between different organizations, “Decision Making Units” (DMUs) are commonly defined to measure relative efficiency, with a diverse species of approaches at hand.By defining an efficient frontier, the inefficiency of a DMU is determined by measuring its distant to that hull, indicating its potential of an efficiency increase. On the one hand the frontier shows the maximum of diverse outputs with different input combinations; and on the other hand the minimal combination of necessary inputs for diverse outputs is viewed. DMUs below the frontier are understood as inefficient and DMUs on the frontier are regarded as efficient (Constantin, Martin, de Rivera, & Rivera, 2009). Beyond that, there are also methods that allow for both inputs and outputs to be simultaneously adjusted to move the DMU to the frontier.To enable a more precise view on the method of efficiency measurement two important approaches for its measurement are analyzed in the following in a more detailed way: Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) (Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978) and Stochastic Frontier Analysis (SFA) (Aigner, Lovell, & Schmidt, 1977; Meeusen & van den Broeck, 1977). Table 1states the most important differences between DEA and SFA. SFA is a stochastic model and therefore is able to differentiate between inefficiency and noise. On the other hand DEA is a non-parametric model and thus a function need not be defined. Therefore the effects of the form might not get mixed with those of inefficiency (Fried, Lovell, & Schmidt, 2008).Diverse state of the art articles in recent years indicate the relevance of that research field (e.g. Athanassopoulos, 1995a, 1995b; Seiford, 1990, 1996, 1997). First, bibliometric analyses demonstrate a wide adoption and diffusion of those techniques (Liu, Lu, Lu, & Lin, 2013a, 2013b; Sarafoglou, 1998). For the following reasons, our research goes beyond earlier analyses. To our knowledge we are the first analyzing not only DEA but also SFA, both pertinent performance measurement techniques. Our investigation focuses specifically on the following issues. We first analyzed the development of DEA and SFA research over time, clustering into different scientific disciplines. We see that performance measurement research relying on DEA and SFA in diverse industries and sectors can be characterized as being heterogeneous, fragmented and still evolving regarding its structure and sub-research fields. This study takes these variances into consideration. Therefore, we secondly quantitatively cluster real world and methodological contributions by document co-citation analysis to identify valid areas of research and their impact on the whole scientific field. Although the aim of several studies is to structure DEA research and further identify core research areas, these qualitative studies are based on the authors’ personal experiences and judgments. So instead we utilize a bibliometric approach to combine the judgment of a huge number of experts in a field to identify and analyze different groups of closely connected articles mapping out major research areas of DEA and SFA science. We thirdly identify seminal papers according to two different approaches and display their persistence over time to derive their importance distinguishing between nominal and real seminals. Finally, to measure and compare how much progress in terms of methodological advance or practical expansion to other fields has taken place, we explicate and define an adoption rate. This measurement is applied to DEA and SFA research to analyze its substantial progress and its knowledge adoption over time.The current paper is organized as follows. In the next section we describe the data and state the publication profile. Section 3 explains and conducts a document co-citation to quantitatively map out major research areas of DEA and SFA research. Section 4 concentrates on trajectories of DEA and SFA research. First, we make use of a rather simple numeric method, stating seminal articles and the change of ranking by counting citations (nominal seminals) in two different ways. Second, the progress of efficiency research is analyzed to identify seminal articles due to citation peaks (real seminals). Third, the adoption rate is defined and further analyzed to detect the resonance in literature. The final section concludes.We adopted Thomson Reuters Web of Science (WOS) as the data source of this study. WOS, covering over 10,000 high impact journals, as well as over 120,000 international conference proceedings is the world’s leading citation database.Papers on DEA and SFA were searched for and retrieved from this database with great care. This assignment started with a query of properly defined keywords. To only include key-articles of the two research fields in this study the keywords were set to “Data Envelopment Analysis” and “Stochastic Frontier Analysis”. Papers containing these keywords in title, abstract, author keywords or Keywords Plus were retrieved for further examination.The data were retrieved in March 2012 including a time span from 1987 to 2011. Overall 4782 publications were included in the dataset, 761 for SFA and 4021 for DEA. Among them, 4355 are articles (3687 DEA/668 SFA), 198 are proceedings papers (198 DEA/66 SFA), 48 are editorial materials (42 DEA/6 SFA), 115 are other document types (94 DEA/21 SFA); 4693 are English articles (3945 DEA/748 SFA), and 89 are in other languages (76 DEA/13 SFA).Fig. 1shows the increasing publication of articles over time of each method corresponding to their publication year. This illustration shows that DEA and SFA are popular instruments of managerial and economic research, especially in the last decade. Discontinuities are observed and accounted for, indicating special issues of journals (see Table 2for a connection of a certain method and a journal) resulting in temporary increases of publication. Furthermore, the fact that special issues exist in this field of research indicates its increasing importance.Table 2 shows the journals which present most of SFA/DEA research. Hence the top ten journals according to their DEA and SFA publications are stated. As there are differences in the top journals for DEA and SFA publications, respectively, they are further analyzed.DEA seems to be mostly applied in “Operational Research” (OR) areas whereas SFA is a more widely used instrument in “Economics”. WOS itself defines research categories for each article included in the database confirming this finding. 39.27% of DEA publications are allocated to “Operations Research Management Science” and 51.77% of SFA publications are categorized as “Economics” confirming the above finding. In summary, DEA is an approved permanent feature of OR and SFA for Economics research.In the following section we identify a detailed set of several research clusters that, when combined, represent the structure of DEA and SFA research. We differentiate the clusters according to sectoral and methodological segmentation. We first explain the method used, further visualize the results and state findings.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
