@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal design of the auto parts supply chain for JIT operations: Sequential bifurcation factor screening and multi-response surface methodology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Address a multi-response optimization problem to design an auto parts supply chain.Propose a solution framework based on sequential bifurcation and response surface methodology.Identify efficient operating settings that maximize the logistics performance.Adapt the Derringer–Suich’s desirability function.Develop insights into system dynamics and to optimize the operating condition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Auto parts,Cross-docking,Milk-run,Supply chain simulation,Sequential bifurcation,Response surface methodology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This research proposes a solution framework based on discrete-event simulation, sequential bifurcation (SB) and response surface methodology (RSM) to address a multi-response optimization problem inherent in an auto parts supply chain. The objective is to identify the most efficient operating setting that would maximize the logistics performance after the expansion of the assembly plant’s capacity due to market growth. In the proposed framework, we first construct a comprehensive simulation as a platform to model the physical flow of the auto parts operations. We then apply the SB to identify the most important factors that influence system performance. To determine the optimal levels of these key factors, we employ RSM to develop metamodels that best describe the relationship between key decision variables and the multiple system responses. We adapt the Derringer–Suich’s desirability function to find the optimal solution of the metamodels. Computational study shows that our method enables the greatest improvement on system performance. The proposed method helps the case firm develop insights into system dynamics and to optimize the operating condition. It realizes the performance objective of the auto parts supply chain without the need for additional fiscal investment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The financial crisis has reduced global economic resilience. To address internal and external needs and to adjust economic structure and further stimulate domestic growth, the Chinese government has proposed a “Ten Industrial Development Plan.” Among the many industries, the automobile sector is recognized as the most important manufacturing and logistics industry, and it is the only sector of the manufacturing industry in the Ten Plan that also involves the tertiary (service) industry. Many car manufacturers in China nowadays have established their own third-party logistics providers (3PL) business unit, which serves only its own car manufacturers and practices JIT logistics in parts delivery. The 3PL parts logistics implement milk-run pickup and cross-docking distribution (abbreviated as 3PL-MRCD). When receiving pick-up orders, 3PL will collect parts from milk-run suppliers and transfer them to a regional cross-docking distribution center (CDDC), where parts are consolidated and loaded onto large trucks for truckload (TL) delivery.Commensurate with the economic boom, China’s automobile market is expected to grow at a rate of 10–15% over the next decade (Feng, Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2011). Many car manufacturers are planning to expand and open new facilities to meet demand. For example, the joint venture of Dongfeng Honda and Peugeot is currently constructing a new assembly plant in Wuhan, central China. The demand for auto parts will understandably increase, causing parts logistics to change dramatically. Existing capacity of the 3PL is inadequate to fulfill the needs. How to respond to the change and effectively manage the parts logistics becomes a leading concern among car manufacturers.To understand the impact of a plant’s capacity expansion on logistics needs and to identify the best operating settings, we first develop a generic 3PL-MRCD simulation model to serve as an experimental platform to evaluate this complex system. In the model, we simulate the trucks available for deployment in each milk-run pickup and the queuing discipline and experiment with the milk-run routes, total number of parts suppliers, number of receiving and shipping doors and queuing priorities, conveyor length, and dispatching rules for forklifts and trailers, among others. The simulation model evaluates the logistics performance following the expansion of the assembly plants. Through sequential bifurcation (Kleijnen, 2009), Multi-response Optimization approach (Montgomery, 2007) and simulation, the 3PL can identify the optimal parts supply chain design to achieve the manufacturer’s operational goals: minimizing the cycle time and maximizing the throughput.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
