@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supply chain analysis under a price-discount incentive scheme for electric vehicles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze an electric vehicle (EV) supply chain under a price-discount scheme.The price-discount scheme involves a discount rate and a subsidy ceiling.Sales are increasing in the rate but may be decreasing in the ceiling.We derive the condition for the most effective scheme maximizing the sales.We obtain a scheme improving the manufacturer’s incentive for EV production.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electric vehicle,Supply chain,Price discount,Incentive scheme,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We investigate an automobile supply chain where a manufacturer and a retailer serve heterogeneous consumers with electric vehicles (EVs) under a government’s price-discount incentive scheme that involves a price discount rate and a subsidy ceiling. We show that the subsidy ceiling is more effective in influencing the optimal wholesale pricing decision of the manufacturer with a higher unit production cost. However, the discount rate is more effective for the manufacturer with a lower unit production cost. Moreover, the expected sales are increasing in the discount rate but may be decreasing in the subsidy ceiling. Analytic results indicate that an effective incentive scheme should include both a discount rate and a subsidy ceiling. We also derive the necessary condition for the most effective discount rate and subsidy ceiling that maximize the expected sales of EVs, and obtain a unique discount rate and subsidy ceiling that most effectively improve the manufacturer’s incentive for EV production.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid development of the automobile industry in the past five decades has not only resulted in significant convenience to consumers but has also generated an increasingly serious air pollution problem. The environmental impact has pressured a number of governments to implement price-discount incentive schemes to promote the electric vehicle (EV). Under such schemes, each EV consumer can enjoy a price discount—calculated as a price discount rate times the retail price charged to the consumer—but limited to a subsidy ceiling. For example, the Spanish government provides a price discount equal to 25% of the purchase price, with a cap of €6000, to each consumer who purchases a new electric car. Similar price-discount schemes have been implemented in other countries, such as the United Kingdom and Romania. For more details, see online Appendix A.Motivated by the above practices, we consider a price-discount incentive scheme that includes a price discount rate and a subsidy ceiling. We investigate an EV supply chain that involves a manufacturer and a retailer under such a scheme. In practice, the retail price of an automobile may differ among consumers because of the fact that the price for each consumer is not set by the retailer but is determined as a result of the negotiation between the consumer and the retailer. We use cooperative game theory to compute the negotiated retail price for each consumer and derive the expected sales function. To our knowledge, no government has implemented a price-discount scheme or a similar concept for any other market that involves price negotiation between the consumer and retailer. Thus, the bargaining analysis—which is our key modeling approach—and its results are only applicable to the sale of vehicles. We then develop the manufacturer’s expected profit function and maximize it to obtain a unique optimal wholesale price for the manufacturer. Using these results, we investigate the effect of both the price discount rate and subsidy ceiling on the manufacturer’s optimal wholesale price, the expected sales, and the manufacturer’s maximum expected profit.In this paper, we use the stimulated EV sales to measure the reduction in air pollution, because of the following fact: Stimulating the EV sales would induce more consumers to use EVs instead of fuel vehicles. As roughly calculated by Cuenca, Gaines, and Vyas (2000) and MacKay (2009), the use of an EV can help reduce carbon emissions by approximately 30 tons compared with the use of a fuel vehicle. Therefore, stimulating EV sales can be used as a surrogate measure for the reduction in air pollution. Accordingly, we examine the impact of the incentive scheme on the expected sales of EVs.Very few EV-related publications exist in the operations management area. Chocteau, Drake, Kleindorfer, Orsato, and Roset (2011) developed a cooperative game model to investigate the effect of the collaboration among commercial fleets on the adoption of Avci, Girotra, and Netessine (2012) examined the adoption and environmental impact of EVs with battery swapping, and Mak, Rong, and Shen (2013) constructed robust optimization models for the planning of battery swapping infrastructures. Sioshansi (2012) investigated the incentives of consumers making charging decisions with different electricity tariffs.Our paper is closely related to the recent publication by Huang, Leng, Liang, and Liu (2013) who examined a government subsidy scheme for EVs in a duopoly setting in which a fuel automobile supply chain and an electric-and-fuel automobile supply chain compete for consumers. The incentive scheme in Huang et al. (2013) only includes a fixed subsidy, whereas the price-discount scheme in our paper involves the retail price-dependent subsidy that cannot exceed a ceiling value. Moreover, Huang et al. (2013) drew most of their managerial insights from numerical experiments; in our paper we analytically investigate an EV supply chain under a price-discount scheme and examine the effectiveness of the scheme in stimulating EV sales. Since both fixed-subsidy and price-discount schemes exist in practice, our paper and Huang et al. (2013) complement each other in terms of research methodologies, contributions to literature, and findings for practitioners.Unlike in Huang et al. (2013), we do not consider any fuel vehicle (FV) but only focus on an EV supply chain. This is reasonable because of the following two facts. First, in the automobile industry, there are a number of EV supply chains where the electric vehicles mainly include REVAi, Buddy, Citroën C1 eV’ie, Fisker Automotive, Tesla Roadster, Smart ED, Wheego Whip LiFe, and so on. Therefore, the EV supply chain in our model exists in practice. Second, the sales of all EVs account for only a tiny share of the current automobile market. For example, in the United States, the share of EV sales was only 0.53% during the first six months of 2013 (see hybridcars.com). Thus, any issue in the EV market is unlikely to significantly affect the FV market.Price discount is a commonly-used promotion strategy and has been widely investigated in marketing and operations management fields. For publications regarding price-discount schemes applicable to supply chain members, see Bernstein, Chen, and Federgruen (2006), Klastorin, Moinzadeh, and Son (2002), and Wang (2005); for publications concerning price-discount schemes applicable to end consumers, see Gerstner and Hess (1995), Huchzermeier, Iyer, and Freheit (2002), Kurata and Liu (2007), and Sheu (2011). In the abovementioned publications, price-discount schemes are implemented by a manufacturer or retailer to increase sales or coordinate a supply chain. In addition, a few publications (e.g., Jørgensen & Zaccour, 1999; Ma, Zhao, & Ke, 2013) analyzed a government’s subsidy. We examine the government’s price-discount scheme for EVs that aims to reduce air pollution. Moreover, we consider the negotiation of retail price for each consumer, unlike in the abovementioned publications where retail price is determined by the firm.Under the government’s price-discount incentive scheme, the government provides subsidy to the consumer who purchases an EV from a retailer. This subsidy is the minimum of the price discount (the discount rate α times the original retail price charged to the consumer) and subsidy ceiling A. To simplify our statement, we hereafter denote such a price-discount scheme by(α,A). In most practices in today’s automobile market, the retail price for each consumer results from the negotiation between the consumer and the retailer. Accordingly, we apply the theory of cooperative game to determine the negotiated retail price for a consumer who is assumed to have valuation (consumption gain) θ on the EV.A common solution to two-player games in cooperative game theory is “Nash bargaining scheme” (Nash, 1953). The consumer pays retail price p, enjoys the consumption gain θ, and obtains the subsidy amounting tomin(αp,A)from the government when he or she trades with the retailer. Thus, the consumer’s net gain is calculated asuc≡θ-p+min(αp,A). The retailer orders the EV from the manufacturer at wholesale price w; thus, the retailer’s profit resulting from the trade with the consumer is computed asur≡p-w. Noting that neither the consumer nor the retailer will obtain any gain or profit if they cannot reach an agreement in their transaction, we construct a Nash bargaining model as follows:(1)maxpΛ=[θ-p+min(αp,A)](p-w)s.t.θ-p+min(αp,A)⩾0andp-w⩾0.Therefore, if the manufacturer’s wholesale price w is sufficiently high such thatw⩾A/α, thenp⩾A/αbecausep⩾w; thus,min(αp,A)=A. This condition means that whenw⩾A/α, the consumer should obtain subsidy ceiling A from the government, and the discount rate α does not take effect in the incentive scheme. Ifw<A/α, then the consumer obtains either price discountαpor subsidy ceiling A, depending on negotiated retail price p.Theorem 1Given the manufacturer’s wholesale price w, we find that under the incentive scheme(α,A), the retail price for the consumer with the valuation θ, resulting from the negotiation between the consumer and the retailer, can be obtained as follows:1.Whenw⩽A/α, the consumer does not buy from the retailer ifθ<θ̲≡(1-α)w; however, ifθ⩾θ̲, then the consumer trades with the retailer at negotiated pricep∗as given below.(2)p∗=p1∗≡[w+θ/(1-α)]/2,ifθ̲⩽θ⩽θˆ≡2(1-α)A/α-(1-α)w;p2∗≡A/α,ifθˆ⩽θ≤2A/α-A-w;p3∗≡(θ+A+w)/2,ifθ⩾2A/α-A-w.If the consumer’s valuation θ is in the range[θ̲,θˆ], then the amount of the subsidy awarded to the consumer is smaller than A; otherwise, ifθ⩾θˆ, then the consumer obtains a subsidy in amount of A.Whenw⩾A/α, the consumer may or may not buy from the retailer, depending on the consumer’s valuation θ. Specifically, ifθ<w-A, then the consumer and the retailer would not reach an agreement on the retail price; however, ifθ⩾w-A, then the consumer and the retailer trade at the negotiated pricep∗=p3∗; the consumer can obtain subsidy A from the government.For the proof of this theorem and those for all subsequent theorems, see online Appendix B. □In the above theorem,θ̲denotes the after-discount payment made by consumers who buy from the retailer at wholesale price w. Since the wholesale price is the lowest retail price,θ̲can be viewed as the smallest purchase cost for consumers. That is, if the discount for any purchase at the wholesale price does not exceed the subsidy ceiling, then a consumer’s buying decision depends on whether his or her valuation is greater than the smallest purchase cost. If the consumer’s valuation is less than the smallest purchase cost, then he or she cannot enjoy any positive net gain from buying an EV. Otherwise, the consumer should be willing to make a purchase. In Theorem 1, the thresholdθˆrepresents the minimum valuation of consumers who obtain the maximum subsidy A. When a consumer’s valuation is less than the minimum value, the consumer will receive subsidyαp, which is lower than subsidy ceiling A; otherwise, the consumer will receive the maximum subsidy.We reasonably assume that θ is a random variable with p.d.f.f(θ)and c.d.f.F(θ)given that consumers’ valuations differ in practice. Using Theorem 1, we find that the probability for a successful transaction can be calculated as1-F(w-min(αw,A)). Assuming that Bpotential consumers exist in the market, we can express the expected sales as(3)D(w)=B[1-F(w-min(αw,A))]=D1(w)≡B[1-F((1-α)w)],ifw⩽A/α,D2(w)≡B[1-F(w-A)],ifw⩾A/α.The manufacturer incurs production cost c and obtains sales revenue w from the retailer for each EV unit. Therefore, the manufacturer’s expected profit can be constructed as(4)ΠM(w)=ΠM1(w)≡B(w-c)[1-F((1-α)w)],ifw⩽A/α,ΠM2(w)≡B(w-c)[1-F(w-A)],ifw⩾A/α.The manufacturer maximizes its profitΠM(w)in (4) to determine the optimal wholesale pricew∗. To solve the maximization problem, we need to (i) solve the maximization problemsmaxw⩽A/αΠM1(w)andmaxw⩾A/αΠM2(w)to obtain the corresponding optimal wholesale pricesw1∗andw2∗, respectively, and (ii) compareΠM1(w1∗)andΠM2(w2∗)to attain the global optimal solutionw∗.Lemma 1If p.d.f.f(θ)is continuously differentiable and log-concave, then when we maximizeΠM1(w)in(4)subject tow⩽A/αand when we maximizeΠM2(w)in(4)subject tow⩾A/α, the corresponding optimal wholesale prices can be determined asw1∗=min(wˆ1(α),A/α)andw2∗=max(wˆ2(A),A/α), respectively, wherewˆ1(α)andwˆ2(A)can be uniquely obtained by solving(5)wˆ1(α)=c+1-F((1-α)wˆ1(α))(1-α)×f((1-α)wˆ1(α))andwˆ2(A)=c+1-F(wˆ2(A)-A)f(wˆ2(A)-A),respectively. Bothwˆ1(α)andwˆ2(A)are increasing in c. Moreover, ifwˆ2(A)⩾A/α, thenwˆ1(α)⩾wˆ2(A). That is, ifw2∗=wˆ2(A), thenw1∗=A/α; otherwise, ifw2∗=A/α, thenw1∗may be equal towˆ1(α)orA/α.For the proof of this lemma and those for all subsequent lemmas, see online Appendix C.□The above lemma indicates that the uniqueness of solutionswˆ1(α)andwˆ2(A)requires the continuous differentiability and log-concavity of p.d.f.f(θ). Bagnoli and Bergstrom (2005) noted that a probability density function is log-concave if its logarithm is concave. The log-concavity possesses an important property: a log-concave p.d.f. can result in the quasi-concavity of objective functions in the operations management area. In this paper, the log-concavity of p.d.f.f(θ)implies that consumers do not have multiple separate most-likely valuations on the EV and that very few consumers have extremely low or high valuations. Many commonly-used probability distributions—such as uniform, normal, exponential, logistic, Laplace, Weibull, and Gamma—are continuously differentiable and log-concave. Thus, we reasonably assume thatf(θ)is continuously differentiable and log-concave.Lemma 1 indicates thatwˆ1(α)is only dependent on the price discount rate whereaswˆ2(A)is only dependent on the subsidy ceiling. We investigate the effects of α and A onwˆ1(α)andwˆ2(A), respectively, as shown in the following lemma.Lemma 2We find that0<∂wˆ1(α)/∂α<wˆ1(α)/(1-α)—that is,wˆ1(α)is increasing in the price discount rate α—and that bothD1(wˆ1(α))andΠM1(wˆ1(α))are increasing in α. In addition,0<∂wˆ2(A)/∂A<1, that is,wˆ2(A)is increasing in subsidy ceilingA;D2(wˆ2(A))andΠM2(wˆ2(A))are both increasing in A.The above lemma indicates thatwˆ1(α)is increasing inα. When the value of A is fixed,A/αis decreasing in α. Hence, a unique valueα0exists such thatwˆ1(α0)=A/α0. We then find thatwˆ1(α)>A/αifα>α0andwˆ1(α)<A/αifα<α0. Given thatwˆ1(α)uniquely satisfies an equation in (5), we replacewˆ1(α0)withA/α0and find thatα0can be uniquely obtained by solving the equation below.(6)1-F((1-α0)A/α0)-(A/α0-c)(1-α0)f((1-α0)A/α0)=0,which implies thatα0is a function of A. Therefore, given subsidy ceiling A, the optimal wholesale price for the maximization problemmaxw⩽A/αΠM1(w)isA/α0if the price discount rate isα0.Given a value of α, as A increases,wˆ2(A)also increases at slope∂wˆ2(A)/∂A, which is smaller than one, andA/αincreases at slope1/α, which is greater than one. Sincewˆ2(A)>0andA/α=0whenA=0, a unique subsidy ceilingA0exists such thatwˆ2(A0)=A0/α. IfA<A0, thenwˆ2(A)>A/α; ifA>A0, thenwˆ2(A)<A/α. Similar to our above discussion onα0, we find thatA0is a function of α and uniquely satisfies the following equation:(7)1-F(A0/α-A0)-(A0/α-c)f(A0/α-A0)=0.Hence, given price discount rate α, the optimal wholesale price for the maximization problemmaxw⩾A/αΠM2(w)isA0/αif the subsidy ceiling isA0.Lemma 3We find that for a given subsidy ceiling A,A/α0⩾wˆ2(A)andΠM1(wˆ1(α0))<ΠM2(wˆ2(A)); for a given discount rate α,A0/α⩽wˆ1(α)andΠM1(wˆ1(α))>ΠM2(wˆ2(A0)).Using the above lemma, we can determine the manufacturer’s globally-optimal wholesale pricew∗that maximizesΠM(w)in (4), as provided in the following theorem.Theorem 2Given the price-discount incentive scheme(α,A), we find that the manufacturer’s optimal wholesale pricew∗can be uniquely determined as,(8)w∗=wˆ1(α),if0<α⩽α0,or,A⩾A1≡αwˆ1(α);A/α,ifα0⩽α⩽α1≡A/wˆ2(A),or,A0⩽A⩽A1;wˆ2(A),ifα1⩽α<1,or,0<A⩽A0.Two alternative inequalities exist for each condition (stated after “if”) in the theorem above. As indicated by Theorem 2, if the government adopts a discount rate α that is smaller thanα0, then subsidy ceiling A will not affect the manufacturer’s optimal wholesale pricing decision, expected salesD1(wˆ1(α)), and the manufacturer’s expected profitΠM1(wˆ1(α)). The valueα0can thus be explained as the minimum price discount rate for the effectiveness of a given subsidy ceiling. Theorem 2 also indicates that if the discount rate α is greater thanα1(i.e.,α>α1) or, subsidy ceiling A is less thanA0(i.e.,A<A0), then the manufacturer’s optimal wholesale price will be dependent on A but independent ofα. Therefore,A0is the minimum subsidy ceiling for the effectiveness of a given price discount rate. Similar to our discussion for the case whereα<α0, we find that whenα>α1, only the subsidy ceiling in the government’s incentive scheme affects the expected sales and the manufacturer’s expected profit.Remark 1In (8),α1andA1represent the maximum effective price-discount rate and subsidy ceiling, respectively. That is, the effective price discount rate α should be smaller than or equal toα1. A discount rate α larger thanα1cannot influence EV sales, and should not be involved into the government incentive scheme, which should only include a subsidy ceiling. Similarly, the effectiveness of subsidy ceiling A requires that A be smaller than or equal toA1.Moreover, if the manufacturer incurs a high unit production cost c, then the values ofα0andα1will be reduced, because of the following:α0is a unique value that satisfieswˆ1(α0)=A/α0. As the value of c increases,wˆ1(α0)>A/α0because wholesale pricewˆ1(α)is increasing in c, as indicated by Lemma 1; there must exist a unique valueα0′such thatα0′<α0andwˆ1(α0′)=A/α0′. Similarly, we can show that if the value of c increases, thenα1will decrease. We then find from (8) that because the value of c is high, the range(0,α0)—in which only discount rate α takes effect—is small; however, the range(α1,1)—in which only subsidy ceiling A takes effect—is large.Remark 2The result above implies that if the manufacturer incurs a higher unit production cost, then subsidy ceiling A is more effective in influencing the optimal wholesale pricing decision and the expected sales. In today’s automobile market, the production cost for EVs is high, mainly because the EV battery is costly. Similarly, we conclude that a lower unit production cost will result in a higher effectiveness of discount rate α in the wholesale pricing decision and the expected sales.We investigate the effect of price discount rate α and subsidy ceiling A on expected salesD(w∗)and the manufacturer’s expected profitΠM(w∗).The analysis of expected sales is very important in our paper. Using Theorem 2 and Lemma 2, we obtain the following results.1.If discount rate α is in the range(0,α0)or equivalently, subsidy ceiling A is greater thanA1, then both the optimal wholesale pricew∗=wˆ1(α)and resulting expected salesD(w∗)are increasing in α but are independent of A.Ifα∈[α0,α1]orA∈[A0,A1], thenw∗=A/α, which is decreasing in α but is increasing in A. As a result, expected salesD(A/α)are increasing in α but are decreasing in A.Ifα∈(α1,1)orA∈(0,A0), then wholesale pricew∗=wˆ2(A)is independent of α and thus, expected salesD(wˆ2(A))do not depend on α. However, the wholesale price and expected sales are both increasing in A.Following the discussion above, we find that expected salesD(w∗)reaches its maximum value whenα⩾α1=A/wˆ2(A). Noting that the incentive scheme mainly aims to stimulate EV sales for the reduction of air pollution, we find that the price discount rate should be set toα⩾α1to effectively increase the expected sales of the EV. However, as indicated in Remark 1, the effectiveness of the price discount rate α requires thatα⩽α1. Therefore, to maximize the EV sales, the government should set the discount rate toα=α1. Similarly, to maximizeD(w∗), the government should set the subsidy ceiling toA=A0.The above remark indicates that for a given subsidy ceiling A, the most effective price discount rate should beα=α1=A/wˆ2(A); for a given discount rate α, the most effective subsidy ceiling should beA=A0. The most effective price discount rate and subsidy ceiling (denoted byα∗andA∗, respectively) should satisfy the conditionsα∗=A∗/wˆ2(A∗)andA∗=A0(α∗), which can be obtained by solving (7) where α is replaced withα∗. According to (5) and (7), we find that the conditionα∗=A∗/wˆ2(A∗)is equivalent to the conditionA∗=A0(α∗). Thus, the most effective incentive scheme(α∗,A∗)—that maximizes the expected EV sales—should satisfy the condition1-F(A∗/α∗-A∗)-(A∗/α∗-c)f(A∗/α∗-A∗)=0, which is a necessary condition for the most effective scheme. Therefore, the government may need to include both a price discount rate and a subsidy ceiling in its incentive scheme to effectively stimulate EV sales.The incentive scheme should entice the manufacturer to invest in EV production. The high purchasing price of EVs, which is the main factor that discourages consumers from purchasing EVs, is partly ascribed to manufacturers’ very low production volumes. Thus, we should also investigate whether the manufacturer can benefit from the incentive scheme by achieving a high expected profit and will thus have a motivation to promote EV sales for the reduction of air pollution.Similar to our discussion on the impact of the incentive scheme on sales, we use Theorem 2 and Lemma 2 and find that (i) ifα∈(0,α0)orA>A1, then the manufacturer’s expected profitΠM(w∗)=ΠM(wˆ1(α))is increasing in the discount rate α but is independent of subsidy ceiling A; and (ii) ifα∈(α1,1)orA∈(0,A0), then the manufacturer’s expected profitΠM(w∗)=ΠM(wˆ2(A))is independent of α but is increasing in A. However, we cannot immediately determine the effect ofα∈[α0,α1]andA∈[A0,A1]on the manufacturer’s expected profit. Theorem 2 indicates that, ifα∈[α0,α1]orA∈[A0,A1], then the manufacturer’s expected profit isΠM(w∗)=ΠM(A/α).Theorem 3Ifα∈[α0,α1]orA∈[A0,A1], then the manufacturer’s expected profitΠM(A/α)is increasing in both discount rate α and subsidy ceiling A.According to the discussion above, we can draw managerial insights as indicated in the following remark.Remark 4The government should select a price discount rate α that is not smaller thanα1to maximize the manufacturer’s expected profitΠM(w∗)and effectively improve the manufacturer’s incentive for EV production. Remark 1 also indicates that α should not be larger thanα1, as a result of assuring the effectiveness of the discount rate. Therefore, the government should set its discount rate toα=α1=A/wˆ2(A)to maximizeΠM(w∗)for the improvement of the EV manufacturer’s production incentive. Similarly, to maximizeΠM(w∗), the government should set its subsidy ceiling toA=A1=αwˆ1(α).The above remark reveals that the most effective price discount rate and subsidy ceiling for the improvement of the EV manufacturer’s production incentive (denoted byα̃∗andA∼∗, respectively) should satisfy the following conditions:(9)α̃∗=A∼∗/wˆ2(A∼∗)andA∼∗=α̃∗wˆ1(α̃∗).Hence, the most effective incentive scheme(α̃∗,A∼∗)—that maximizes the manufacturer’s expected profitΠM(w∗)—can be uniquely obtained by solving the two equations in (9).If the government adopts the unique most effective scheme(α̃∗,A∼∗)for improving the EV manufacturer’s production incentive, thenα0=α1=α̃∗andA0=A1=A∼∗, whereα0andA0uniquely satisfy (6) and (7), respectively. Therefore, we conclude that, to most effectively improve the incentive of the EV manufacturer, the government may need to include both a price discount rate and a subsidy ceiling in its incentive scheme.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We investigated an automobile supply chain under the government’s price-discount scheme that is implemented to stimulate the sales of electric vehicles. A number of analytic managerial insights were drawn. We showed that the negotiated retail price for each consumer is increasing in the wholesale price and the consumer’s valuation. The retail price for the consumer with a low valuation is mainly dependent on the price discount rate, whereas the retail price for the consumer with a high valuation is mainly dependent on the subsidy ceiling. Moreover, the subsidy ceiling is more effective in influencing the optimal wholesale pricing decision of the manufacturer with a higher unit production cost, whereas the discount rate is more effective for the manufacturer with a lower unit production cost.We also showed that for a given subsidy ceiling, only a discount rate that is smaller than the maximum effective price-discount rate can affect the EV sales; for a given discount rate, only a subsidy ceiling that is smaller than the maximum effective subsidy ceiling can affect sales. The incentive scheme may need to include both a price discount rate and a subsidy ceiling to effectively increase EV sales. Moreover, we derived a necessary condition for the most effective discount rate and subsidy ceiling that maximize the expected EV sales. We also obtained a unique discount rate and subsidy ceiling that maximize the manufacturer’s expected profit and most effectively improve the manufacturer’s incentive for EV production.We investigated an EV supply chain in which only EV is produced and sold. This may not be consistent with most scenarios in the automobile industry. As Huang et al. (2013) mentioned, an analysis for a supply chain that involves EVs and fuel vehicles should be more realistic. In the future, we plan to analyze the effect of price-discount schemes on a supply chain that produces both automobile types.