@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Locating a single facility and a high-speed line

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study a highway and facility location problem.We give a characterization of the optimal solution.Type of solution depends on the highway’s speed.We provideO(n3)algorithms that work in both cases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Facility location,Highway location,Geometric optimization,Transportation,Time distance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we study a facility location problem in the plane in which a single point (facility) and a rapid transit line (highway) are simultaneously located in order to minimize the total travel time from the clients to the facility, using theL1or Manhattan metric. The rapid transit line is given by a segment with any length and orientation, and is an alternative transportation line that can be used by the clients to reduce their travel time to the facility. We study the variant of the problem in which clients can enter and exit the highway at any point. We provide anO(n3)-time algorithm that solves this variant, where n is the number of clients. We also present a detailed characterization of the solutions, which depends on the speed given along the highway.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Suppose we are given a set of clients represented as a set of points in the plane, and a service facility represented as a point to which all clients have to move. Every client can reach the facility directly, or use an alternative rapid transit line called highway in order to reduce the travel time. The highway is a straight line segment of arbitrary orientation and length. If a client moves directly to the facility, it moves at unit speed and the distance traveled is the Manhattan orL1distance to the facility. In the case where a client uses the highway, it travels theL1distance at unit speed to one point of the highway, traverses with a speedv>1the Euclidean distance to another highway point, and finally travels theL1distance from that point to the facility at unit speed. All clients traverse the highway at the same speed. The highway is used by a client point whenever it saves time to reach the facility. Given the set of points representing the clients, the facility location problem consists in determining at the same time the facility point and the highway in order to minimize the total weighted travel time from the clients to the facility. The weighted travel time of a client is its travel time multiplied by a weight representing the intensity of its demand.Geometric problems related to transportation networks have been recently considered, and simplified mathematical models have been widely studied in order to investigate basic geometric properties of urban transportation systems. Abellanas et al. (2003) introduced the time metric model: Given an underlying metric, the user can travel at speedν(h)when moving along a highway h or unit speed elsewhere. The particular case in which the underlying metric is theL1metric and all highways are axis-parallel segments of the same speed, is called the city metric (Aichholzer, Aurenhammer, & Palop, 2002; Görke, Shin, & Wolff, 2008). The optimal positioning of transportation systems that minimize the maximum travel time among a set of points has been investigated in detail in recent papers (Ahn et al., 2007; Aloupis et al., 2010; Cardinal, Collette, Hurtado, Langerman, & Palop, 2008; Cardinal, Labbé, Langerman, & Palop, 2009). Other similar and more general models are studied by Bae, Korman, and Tokuyama (2009) and Korman and Tokuyama (2008).A similar problem of simultaneously locating a service facility point and a highway of fixed length was recently studied by Espejo and Rodríguez-Chía (2011, 2012) and Díaz-Báñez, Korman, Pérez-Lantero, and Ventura (2013). The authors considered locating a turnpike (Bae et al., 2009), that is, a highway in which clients can enter and exit the highway only at the endpoints. A first solution running inO(n3logn)time, where n denotes the number of clients, was introduced by Espejo and Rodríguez-Chía (2011, 2012), and anO(n3)-time improved one was given by Díaz-Báñez, Korman, Pérez-Lantero, and Ventura (2012b). The problem aims to minimize the total weighted travel time from the demand points to the facility service. Díaz-Báñez, Korman, Pérez-Lantero, and Ventura (2012a) continued the study of this variant by considering the min–max optimization criterion. They minimize the maximum time distance from the clients to the facility point.The following notation is introduced in order to formulate the problem. Let S be the set of n demand points, f be the service facility point, h be the highway, andv>1be the speed in which demand points move along h. Given a demand pointp,wp>0denotes the weight of p. The travel time between a demand point p and the service facility f is denoted by(1)dh(p,f)≔min‖p-f‖1,minq1,q2∈h‖p-q1‖1+‖q1-q2‖2v+‖q2-f‖1The problem can be formulated as follows:Given a set S of n demand points, the weightwp>0of each point p of S, and fixed speedv>1, locate the facility point f and the highway h that minimizes the function(2)Φ(f,h)≔∑p∈Swp·dh(p,f).We consider the case in which a highway is a straight object (that is, a segment or a line). Note that we have complete liberty on where to locate f, whereas the location of S (and the value of v) is fixed by the problem instance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
