@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal wholesale facilities location within the fruit and vegetables supply chain with bimodal transportation options: An LP-MIP heuristic approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) and a heuristic solution for regional food access through optimal hub locations.If the food mile becomes overly restrictive to ensure local food sourcing, some regions in the network will not be able to provide local food through land transportation.Bounded upper cap of the hubs in some cases will operate with excess capacity because insufficient quantities of food will be available.There is always a trade-off between transportation costs and fixed costs of building hub capacity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal hub location,Bimodal transportation,Operation research,Supply chain,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Population growth creates a challenge to food availability and access. To balance supply with growing demand, more food has to move from production to consumption sites. Moreover, demand for locally-grown food is increasing and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) seeks to develop and strengthen regional and local food systems. This article examines wholesale facility (hub) locations in food supply chain systems on a national scale to facilitate the efficient transfer of food from production regions to consumption locations. It designs an optimal national wholesale or hub location network to serve food consumption markets through efficient connections with production sites. The mathematical formulation is a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) problem that minimizes total network costs which include costs of transporting goods and locating facilities. A scenario study is used to examine the model's sensitivity to parameter changes, including travel distance, hub capacity, transportation cost, etc. An application is made to the U.S. fruit and vegetable industry. We demonstrate how parameter changes affect the optimal locations and number of wholesale facilities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As the population grows, food production must expand to meet growing demand and food has to move efficiently from producing to consuming regions. Concurrently, demand for locally-produced food in the United States has also increased sharply, and the USDA has implemented a Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food educational program designed to promote local and regional agriculture. Attention to locally-produced food is believed to address in part the twin problems of “food deserts” and high obesity rates. At the same time, wholesalers, shippers, and processors face perishability and freshness challenges because of the limited shelf life of their products. Serving each individual production–consumption node in an efficient and timely manner could reduce waste, transportation and inventory costs as well as final product prices while raising profits. To reduce costs and provide food to consumption sites efficiently, we employ the concept of hubs and model their optimal locations within a logistical network.Working with farmers, wholesalers, shippers, processors and retailers, USDA seeks to develop and strengthen regional and local food systems (Martinez et al., 2010).  Small and mid-sized farmers often struggle with access to trucks, warehouse/storage and distribution infrastructures to deliver their products to retailers and consumers quickly and efficiently. To make it easier especially for small and midsize farmers to deliver their products to market more quickly, USDA has proposed the establishment of so-called regional “food hub” services. USDA's working definition of a food hub is “a centrally located facility with a business management structure facilitating the aggregation, storage, processing, distribution, and/or marketing of locally/ regionally produced food products.”11http://blogs.usda.gov/2010/12/14/getting-to-scale-with-regional-food-hubs/.Food hubs need active coordination and business management to provide wide access to retail markets for small to mid-sized farmers. In this way, consumer access to fresh and healthy food may potentially increase. Moreover, by relying on intermediate regional food hubs rather than only direct retail markets, more places including underserved areas and food deserts could potentially be covered. Hubs serve as consolidation centers to aggregate flows from several origins, and then allow them to be shipped to several destinations. Hubs allow the direct links between each origin destination pair to be replaced with fewer indirect connections between them. A hub in a food supply chain system is defined as an intermediate node that connects with more than one production location and more than one consumption location to consolidate product flows.To assess the implications of significantly increasing the role of locally produced foods in satisfying existing consumer demand, we design an optimal logistic location network that eases access through efficient connections between production and consumption sites while satisfying overall demand in the network. To consider the role of local/regional sourcing of products, we introduce shipping constraints, examine tradeoffs from a bimodal transportation system, and carry out numerous sensitivity analyses. The model is mathematically formulated as a mixed integer programming problem and it minimizes total network costs which include costs of transporting goods and constructing hub facilities. The mathematical program considers several constraints such as maximum travel distance to assure that local food products are used when available, hub capital cost and capacity, road condition, and other transportation cost factors.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a short background on the hub location problem. Section 3 provides a problem definition and formulation. Section 4 discusses the solution methodologies. Section 5 shows the experimental results and analysis and Section 6 presents our conclusion and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
