@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Aggregation heuristic for the open-pit block scheduling problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present innovative aggregation and disaggregation heuristics.We obtain near-optimal solutions, improving best-known results in the literature.The procedure is fully scalable, and a promising tool for large-size problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mine planning,Block aggregation,Open-pit block scheduling,Integer programming,Heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to establish a production plan, an open-pit mine is partitioned into a three-dimensional array of blocks. The order in which blocks are extracted and processed has a dramatic impact on the economic value of the exploitation. Since realistic models have millions of blocks and constraints, the combinatorial optimization problem of finding the extraction sequence that maximizes the profit is computationally intractable. In this work, we present a procedure, based on innovative aggregation and disaggregation heuristics, that allows us to get feasible and nearly optimal solutions. The method was tested on the public reference library MineLib and improved the best known results in the literature in 9 of the 11 instances of the library. Moreover, the overall procedure is very scalable, which makes it a promising tool for large size problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The mining industry is a very relevant economic sector. In Chile, where this research has been carried out, copper exports account for about 62.5 percent of the total exports and represent a 12 percent of the GDP (Cochilco, 2013).Mines can be either open-pit or underground, the actual decision depending on different economic and technical considerations. In this paper we focus on open-pit mines, in which mineral is extracted by digging from the surface. Open-pit mines are preferred to underground mines because they can reach higher production levels, and have smaller operational costs. However, most of the time, it is necessary to remove material with poor or none ore content (waste) in order to have access to economically profitable material.The actual value of a mine strongly depends on the order in which the material is extracted and processed. In order to define what portions of the terrain must be mined at different moments during the life-time of the mine, the planning horizon is discretized into time-periods (or time-slots). In turn, the terrain is divided into regular blocks, which are arranged in a 3-dimensional array. For each block, estimations on the ore content, density and other relevant attributes are constructed by using geostatistical methods. A block model, namely, the set of all blocks and their attributes, is the main input to the mine planning process. Using this information, it is possible to build a block scheduling, which specifies an extraction time-period for each block. The final value of a mine is therefore determined by the block model and the block scheduling.The feasibility of a block scheduling for the open-pit method depends on accessibility and extraction constraints. First, before extracting one block, all the blocks above it must have been extracted. Moreover, stability of the walls must be ensured. This is expressed in terms of slope angles that must be satisfied at each moment. All these constraints are translated into precedences between blocks. On the other hand, there are certain capacity constraints, as well as other limitations, that are inherent to the process. The amount of material to be transported and processed at each period is subject to upper bounds given by transportation and plant capacity, respectively, which are usually expressed either in tons or hours. Further on, processed material must satisfy some blending constraints as well. The efficiency (or even feasibility) of the plant process depends on the attributes of the combination of blocks that are processed at a given period. For example, it may not be feasible to process alone a block with a high content of a certain pollutant (say arsenic), even it has a very high ore grade. Mixing it with another block (even a low ore-grade one) and processing them simultaneously may be possible because the blending provides an acceptable amount of the pollutant. Blending constraints can be either upper or lower bounds and apply to certain attributes of the blocks to be processed. Finally, the decision of how to process a block may depend on different parameters. Indeed, it is quite common for a mine to have more than one processing possibility (considering a block as waste and sending it to a waste pile is already one possibility). Depending on the final process or destination of the block, the net profit perceived by the mine is different, as are the blending constraints that apply to the process and the resource required to achieve this processing (different plant capacities, for example).In this work, we propose and test a new numerical method to determine the block scheduling that maximizes the net present value for the exploitation of an open-pit mine. Our proposal is based on a combination of two approaches, that allow us to reduce the size of the problem and make it computationally tractable. The procedure aggregates blocks, uses integer programming techniques to solve incrementally the aggregated problem and produces solutions for the original instance in an innovative fashion. Using this methodology, we are able to provide nearly optimal solutions for some realistic-size problems that are otherwise numerically inaccessible.The procedure was proved on the instances of the public reference library named MineLib (Espinoza, Goycoolea, Moreno, & Newman, 2013), which has three different types of open-pit mine planning problems for which good feasible solutions have been reported: the ultimate pit limit problem and two variants of open-pit production scheduling problems, for fictional cases, but also for real-life mine (for example, the instances KD, P4HD, W23 and McLaughlin correspond to actual copper and gold mines located in North America). We focus on the Constrained Pit Limit Problem (CPIT), which consists of the maximization of the net present value (NPV) of the exploitation over the time horizon, subject to precedence and operational constraints. The results obtained by our procedure improve nine out of the eleven instances available in the MineLib library. Moreover, the remaining two cases are within a gap of 0.2 percent of the optimum solution.The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we provide a brief summary of the most relevant (and best-known) approaches found in the literature. Section 3 contains all the details concerning the modeling, notation and problem statement. The description of our methodological proposal, as well as the different heuristics involved, are presented in Section 4. All the implementation details, and the numerical results obtained are given and commented in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 contains some concluding remarks and perspectives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
