@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reassessing the scope of OR practice: The Influences of Problem Structuring Methods and the Analytics Movement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Results of a global survey of OR practice are presented.The scope of OR practice has been extended via Problem Structuring Methods (Soft OR) and Business Analytics.The gap between academic research and practice continues and is damaging.Despite PSMs’ success, some critical issues need to be resolved.Business Analytics and OR overlap, presenting challenges and opportunities that must be addressed by OR societies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Analytics,Problem structuring,OR practice,Barriers to OR,OR skills,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper argues that if OR is to prosper it needs to more closely reflect the needs of organisations and its practitioners. Past research has highlighted a gap between theoretical research developments, applications and the methods most frequently used in organisations. The scope of OR applications has also been contested with arguments as to the expanding boundaries of OR. But despite this, anecdotal evidence suggests that OR has become marginalised in many contexts. In order to understand these changes, IFORS (International Federation of OR Societies) in 2009 sponsored a survey of global OR practice. The aim was to provide current evidence on the usage of OR tools, areas of application, and the barriers to OR's uptake, as well as the educational background of OR practitioners. Results presented here show practitioners falling into three segments, which can be loosely characterised as those practicing ‘traditional’ OR, those adopting a range of softer techniques including Problem Structuring Methods (PSMs), and a Business Analytics cluster. When combined with other recent survey evidence, the use of PSMs and Business Analytics is apparently extending the scope of OR practice. In particular, the paper considers whether the Business Analytics movement, with an overlapping skill set to traditional OR but with a fast growing organisational base, offers a route to diminishing the gap between academic research and practice. The paper concludes with an exploration of whether this represents not just an opportunity for OR but also a serious challenge to its established practices.“In theory, theory and practice are the same. In practice, they are not.” Multiple attributions including Einstein and Yogi BerraThis paper is stimulated by a survey of global OR practice sponsored by IFORS. In placing the new results in the context of other practice surveys it has become clear that the gap between academic research and practice – the ‘natural drift’ for professions identified by Corbett and Van Wassenhove (1993) – still exists and that changes in the organisational environment make the need to address the gap more urgent. Further, although the scope of OR practice continues to extend and evolve, particularly arising from Problem Structuring Methods (PSMs) sometimes referred to as Soft OR, a new and distinct movement, ‘Business Analytics’ has recently emerged, capitalizing on the ‘Big Data revolution’. These developments present both a threat to and an opportunity for the OR community. This paper reviews these developments from an OR practice perspective and suggests how the OR community should respond in order to ensure long term survival.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
What's the point of studying OR practice? The practice of OR was fundamental to its early development in the USA and the UK (see Kirby, 2000, 2003; McCloskey, 1987). Early academic research to support practice was quick to find a post-war foothold in the USA though, in the UK, university based OR developed more slowly. OR as a separate discipline was established still more slowly elsewhere in the world, for example, in Germany there was a long history of research in industrial engineering but a coherent professional society was not established until late in the 1960s (Hamacher, 2011). The interchange between the practices of OR workers in government and industry and academic researchers has always been regarded as important for the health of the discipline (Sodhi & Tang, 2010) although even from the earliest exchanges, some perceived a developing division between the two. In fact, a number of studies have lamented any gap as potentially dangerous, even going so far as to suggest it might lead to the demise of the discipline (e.g. Abbott, 1988). Building on Abbot's analysis, Corbett and Van Wassenhove (1993) saw a polarisation between the development of novel OR tools on the one hand and management practice on the other, leaving the middle ground of ‘management engineering’ to contract. The early link between practice and tool development had become broken. Certainly the declining emphasis on OR in general management publications such as the Harvard Business Review (Corbett & Van Wassenhove, 1993), in MBA programmes (Sodhi & Tang, 2010), evidence supported by the survey in Fildes, Ranyard, and Crymble (1999) reflect an apparent decline in OR's organisational importance. In turn, this has damaged the standing of OR in universities (Sodhi & Tang, 2010) with the implicit threat of falling numbers of both expert staff and graduates and the rise of competing disciplines, contesting the territory once the preserve of OR. In many organisations, Business Analytics, with a tool set that overlaps that of OR, is fast becoming acknowledged as a critical skill set offering strategic advantage (Davenport & Harris, 2013).Nevertheless, occasional papers at EURO, INFORMS and the UK OR Society conferences, surveys of practice, case analyses and, in addition, scholarly papers such as Ormerod (2002) or Ulrich (2012) continue to examine OR practice and generate interest. But these academic engagements with OR practice are limited and infrequent despite those such as Ormerod (2002) who reaffirm the claim that “OR is defined as its practice” and not by “the maintenance of its body of knowledge”. However, a cursory examination of the journals and most conferences show the dominance of mathematical OR disassociated from practice, even though critical voices continue to be raised, such as Ryan's in a plenary address to the IFORS (International Federation of OR Societies) conference in 1999 (Ryan, 1999). More formal analysis confirms this abstract mathematical dominance where tools or models are developed without practical grounding (Ormerod, 2002; Ormerod & Kiossis, 1997; Reisman & Kirschnick, 1994). With such limited academic engagement with practice why is understanding the state of OR practice important to organisations such as IFORS and EURO whose role is to sustain and develop OR?Many OR societies certainly recognise the need to strengthen the links between theoretical research and practice with attempts made to stimulate journal and conference papers focussing on applications. For example, INFORMS and the UK OR Society have jointly promoted a ‘Science of Better’ initiative aimed at publicising the achievements of OR practice to potential client organisations. INFORMS runs a separate practitioner-oriented conference (now branded Business Analytics and OR) and the OR society now runs a practitioner-oriented day, ‘Making an Impact’ within its national conference. Awards such as the Edelman (sponsored by INFORMS), the EURO award for Excellence in Practice and the UK Society's President's Medal are attempts to publicise the organisational benefits and innovation arising from the link. To draw out this link more explicitly, the member societies of IFORS prosper from the size of their membership, attendance at conferences, and crucially the job market for OR expertise which is much broader and more dynamic than merely academic posts but also depends on the organisational culture in which OR is perceived valuable. Many of the member societies have faced challenges on all three dimensions: experiencing falling membership (as in the US to 2011 and UK to 2012), criticism of their conferences with practitioners finding little on offer of relevance, and a job market: This looks for skills quite distinct from those emphasised in much academic research (Sodhi & Son, 2008,2010). As a response to these concerns and, acknowledging the limited knowledge of how OR is practiced in many of its 49 member countries, in 2009 IFORS, through its administrative committee, commissioned a survey of OR practice. The sponsor's survey objectives, the widest in scope for many years, were to gain a better understanding of the usage of quantitative tools, techniques and approaches and their impact on decision-making in organisations and also the background of the OR analysts involved. It should, be “a potential tool…[to]…: identify training needs; stimulate appropriate courses of action such as identifying the need/source of specific research expertise and computer software and stimulating communities of practice for sharing common interests… potentially one step towards a more positive and fruitful collaboration between academics and practitioners”. At around the same time as the IFORS survey, INFORMS was investigating the growth of the ‘Business Analytics’ movement, which in part is based on the analysis of large datasets (Big Data) that are increasingly available in large organisations. Their analysis uses many techniques available to OR practitioners. With so little known of the developing practice of OR (and analytics) and its changing scope, this paper considers recent survey evidence to identify these changes and, in particular, whether the polarisation between tool development and practice is being at least in part reversed by these new developments.In Section 2 of the paper we summarise discussions of OR, in particular the scope of OR, based on the understanding gained from previous surveys of OR practice. We see two strands of analysis with the potential to extend OR from its traditional base: Problem Structuring Methods (sometimes referred to as Soft OR), which use various facilitation approaches designed to address ‘messy’ problems involving multiple stakeholders and conflicting objectives and the rapidly expanding area of Business Analytics (whose definition and emergence we discuss fully in Section 4.1). Section 3 presents the current survey evidence, while in Section 4 we discuss these diverse strands of OR, and their potential for bridging at least part of the gap observed between the activities of practitioners and academics. Section 5 reflects on these developments from the perspective of OR practice as its scope changes, as revealed by the analysis of survey and case data. This lays out the argument in support of the conclusions, presented in the final section, as to the opportunities and threats facing OR and OR societiesThe overall goal of the paper is to promote a more self-aware OR profession, able to deal successfully with the undoubted challenges it is facing but also take advantage of the increased opportunities offered by the sudden emergence of the Business Analytics movement.Discussions of OR practice have formed part of OR's self-reflection on its contribution since the early publications and conferences: criticisms were made even in the 1950s that OR was becoming too abstract and mathematical. However, in those early days, conferences and publication were heavily influenced by practitioners where approximately 50 percent of published articles considered applications and over 50 percent of contributors to the first two IFORS conferences (1957 and 1960) were practitioners (Fildes & Ranyard, 1997). Without attempting to examine the debate in full (see Fildes and Ranyard's discussion of the scope of OR, pp. 340–343 and, more recently, Ulrich, 2012), these issues were brought to a head by Ackoff in his 1977 UK OR Society conference presentation (Ackoff, 1979). Here he blamed the mathematisation of OR (as recorded in OR journals), and misuse of OR techniques (in some practitioner groups) as a core reason for it being pigeon holed into studying relatively unimportant problems and not wicked messes, in particular the problems that much strategy development and planning entails. Ackoff's criticisms were controversial (Kirby, 2003). In the UK, many practitioners regarded them as outdated, since internal OR groups had become increasingly client-oriented, focussing less on the mathematical formulation (Ranyard, 1995, 2000). In the US, Ackoff's criticisms had little influence (Kirby, 2007), and this can be confirmed by his lack of citations in the core US journals. But the result of the argument as to OR's organisational role was, however, a stand-off with some holding that OR's contribution was primarily tactical and well-below board level (e.g. Eilon, 1980) while others provided evidence that major strategic contributions were being made (e.g. Ormerod, 1996; Ranyard, 1995). More recently, various contributions authored by Bell (Bell, 1998; Bell & Anderson, 2002; Bell, Anderson, & Kaiser, 2003), in particular Bell and Anderson's discussion of the Edelman award entries provided further evidence of OR's successful strategic innovations. Elsewhere, the UK OR Society's President's Medal and the EURO Excellence in Practice competition add more weight. However most of those engaged in the debate on practice accepted that new approaches were needed if OR was to be more effective at the strategic level and on issues of social planning, which often involves multiple stakeholders with conflicting goals and differing perspectives. Even in those cases where the tactical ‘smart bits’, Ormerod's (1997) term for the core of traditional OR, mathematical and algorithmic modelling, are of such importance as to instigate strategic change, process issues may arise in their implementation; these may require a commitment to effective process-change approaches, which require effective facilitation, rather than just a reliance on analytical approaches. These Ormerod describes as ‘helpful ways’ in his characterisation of distinct strands of practice.As we have argued, the scope of OR was contested from its earliest days; for example, the 1964 conference on OR and the Social Sciences (Lawrence, 1966) was aimed at broadening the scope of OR interventions by either the “inclusion of social scientists” in mixed OR project teams or partnerships with social scientists. Even then several speakers noted that mixed discipline OR teams were already a thing of the past, although they had been regarded as one of the strengths of early OR. Few at the anniversary conference 25 years later saw much evidence that this interdisciplinary goal had been achieved, although some OR groups did recruit social scientists, including in the UK's National Coal Board, where effective client management strategies were developed, labelled by Boothroyd as ‘articulate intervention’ (Boothroyd, 1978; Ormerod, 2010), a precursor of Ormerod's ‘helpful ways’. However, the recognition that successful implementation should itself be a part of OR, and an important topic of research in itself was not widely embraced. The CONDOR report of 1987 (Committee On the Next Decade in Operations, 1988) on what the next decade held for OR made no reference to these issues, an omission noted by Wagner, Rothkopf, Clayton, and Miser (1989) in a commentary. The UK Commission report on the future practice of OR of about the same time (Rosenhead & Mitchell, 1986) had a quite different tone with issues of practice a core theme but again with no acknowledgement that it was a proper and necessary area of study.Despite the failure of these reports to acknowledge the process of OR as practiced as a valuable subject of study, early research on process (through strategic choice) had been developed in the 1960s through the Institute for Operational Research (Friend, Norris, & Stringer, 1988). The Institute itself had been set up with the explicit objective of “extend[ing] the scope of OR, in terms of both applications and methods”. This initiative was followed by the development of other Problem Structuring Methods (PSMs), again aimed at extending the scope of OR, in particular the soft systems methodology (SSM) of Checkland and cognitive mapping/Strategic Options Development and Analysis (SODA) by Eden (see Rosenhead & Mingers, 2001, for an overview; Mingers, 2011, most recently, Ormerod, 2014). These methods can be seen as complementing and clarifying the role of OR in organisational problem solving. Fildes and Ranyard (1997) argued that such OR interventions could all be seen through the perspective of consultancy, with Ormerod (1997, 2002) going a step further in clarifying the core consultancy competencies of OR, as ‘smart bits’ and ‘helpful ways’, supplemented by context competence.11PSMs extend the scope of OR through a range of novel tools focussed on a reinterpretation of problem types. More generally, ‘helpful ways’ aim to increase the effectiveness of traditional (hard) OR as well as extending the scope through its focus on process. Context competence is concerned with both internal organizational understanding and the appropriate boundaries to draw in defining the problem's scope.A potential hazard from an extension of the scope of OR into process consultancy is that the change could weaken its organisational identity and its understanding by potential clients, a long-standing problem for OR in gaining organisational acceptance (Fildes & Ranyard, 1997). Conventional (hard) OR had gained acceptance worldwide because at the time (1950s and 1960s) there were few, if any, direct competitors offering similar services (exceptions include niche alternatives such as statisticians examining quality). This has not been the case for process consultancy. Rather than becoming one of the badged OR skills, Ormerod (1997) predicted that process consultancy would become the preserve of large external consultancies but distinct from OR, or, alternatively, reside within small niche consultancies. Thus, it is not surprising that such an elevation of the scope of OR to problems focussed on the processes of problem structuring have seen limited acceptance worldwide. This has been notable particularly in academia with the premier US journals of Management Science and Operations Research taking quite a rejectionist line (Mingers, 2011).We have so far argued that the extended scope of OR offered by PSMs has gained only limited and contested acceptance. This conclusion can be examined further by searching for relevant terms (using the key phrases, “strategy tools”, “problem structuring”, “Soft OR” or “soft methods”) in the Web of Science. Within the premier US (INFORMS) journals no articles (from over 1000 from 2010 to end 2014) included any of these terms! Interfaces, the practitioner journal fared no better although a longer time span uncovers some discussion of these. Looking at articles published from 2010 to end 2014 in the non-US journals, EJOR, JORS and Omega, some 1 percent of articles (58 of 4296) in these three journals included one of these key phrases. Thus Problem Structuring Methods (PSMs) have gained some partial acceptance, but with a limited number of articles published in the area (though this interest has been somewhat consolidated by strong conference streams). This demonstrates both the established geographical division in the field and the priorities of the academy. What it does not demonstrate is whether such a division is important in influencing practice, merely reflective of current practice or even is irrelevant to OR as practiced. Here we must rely on general surveys of practice.The most complete survey of OR practice was carried out for the UK OR Society in 1994/1995 by Fildes and Ranyard and reported on in Fildes and Ranyard (1997) and Fildes, Ranyard, and Crymble (1999). The focus of the study was to gain an understanding of OR's organisational presence and the factors that were inducing change. We refer to this as the Success and Survival of OR groups (SSOR) study. It was stimulated by the closure of some high profile OR groups in the UK in the early nineties and built on earlier work in the UK (Rosenhead & Mitchell, 1986), which had stimulated a small number of surveys of practice elsewhere in the world – in Finland (Kivijarvi, Kuula, & Wallenius, 1995), Hungary (Harnos, Komlosi, Rapcsak, & Szantai, 1995), Iceland (Olafsson, 1995), South Africa (Stewart, 1995) and UAR (Kemp & Yousef, 1995). These surveys have not been updated but a more recent survey was carried out in Taiwan in 2002 (Chen & Wei, 2002). Perhaps particularly curious is the omission of any work updating that of Abdel-Malek, Wolf, Johnson, and Spencer (1999) in the USA. While these surveys have had slightly differing foci they typically discuss the same topics:•Industry where OR activity is locatedOrganisational name and context for delivering the OR service (e.g. internal centralised consultancy versus external general consultants versus specialist consultancy services)Characteristics of OR staff including education and trainingThe management of the OR group including the skills valuedThe types of application areas where OR has flourished, e.g. logisticsThe OR techniques and software used to support ORThe perceived barriers to the wider use of OR.A full summary of these results would not be particularly informative since the material is dated. However, some findings are common and are supported by the more recent study of Chen and Wei (2002).i.The industries where OR is typically applied are broadly spread apart from the services (Taiwan excepted where considerable activity in services was found). These specialisations change over time and geography of course, as demonstrated in Section 3.The branding of OR is poor: its name remains controversial and commands no common agreement.OR is delivered less and less through in-house consultancy.The education level of OR workers is at least at graduate level but more often at master's level with specialisms in mathematically related subjects including (of course) OR.The techniques most often used beyond basic spreadsheet skills and statistics are simulation and forecasting.Different organisational location and history in different countries probably influence the techniques most frequently used, so project management, for example, figures highly in Taiwan. O'Brien (2011) offers a recent summary of usage of different techniques, primarily in the UK and focussed, in part, on ‘Soft OR methods’ to support strategy.Some surveys have also explored the barriers to using OR, an issue particularly important for practitioners, OR academics and the national societies. Fildes and Ranyard (1997), following on from Kathawala (1988), summarised the barriers identified in previous research as ‘management untrained in their use [of OR tools]’, ‘benefits not clearly understood’ and management's ‘lack of knowledge of the techniques’. Recent Taiwanese evidence (Chen & Wei, 2002) is more positive as to gaining top management support while data problems and problem structuring were seen as presenting greater difficulties. The issue of data availability is seen as particularly important in implementing a modelling approach (e.g. in Fildes & Hastings’ 1994, discussion of forecasting). We can conclude from these past surveys that different application areas face different problems in gaining organisational traction, though senior managers’ understanding and attitudes to OR's potential benefits are a critical problem and these are culturally dependent.In addition, various case studies of particular OR groups have added detail to our knowledge (e.g.Benoist, Gardi, & Jeanjean, 2012; Fortuin & Zijlstra, 2000; Olavson & Cargille, 2008; Ranyard, Fildes, & Crymble, 1997). These again point to the diversity in organisational practice. For example, Fortuin and Zijlstra (2000) described OR in Philips (a very large electrical appliance manufacturer) and the independent consultancy which subsequently developed from the internal Philips OR group, as more focussed on logistics; the group had moved away from production models over the 15 years being analysed from 1981. Stochastic models (including inventory) remained popular throughout the period. This longitudinal examination of OR group performance allowed Corbett, Overmeer, and van Wassenhove (1995) and Overmeer, Corbett, and Van Wassenhove (1998) to develop hypotheses as to how groups develop, prosper and wither, a theme also taken up by Ranyard et al. (1997) who focussed on lessons that can be learnt for the successful (and unsuccessful) management of internal OR consultancies. The key skills that these case studies identify is the management of a portfolio of OR projects, whilst ensuring a good balance of clients, so that economies of scale and context knowledge are capitalised on.To a certain extent, our knowledge of OR practice has been supplemented more recently by surveys of particular areas of application, whether it be a class of OR techniques (such as forecasting, simulation or problem structuring) or a problem area (e.g. services or strategy). For example, forecasting has been well served in the USA with regular surveys by Mentzer and his colleagues with McCarthy, Davis, Golicic, and Mentzer (2006) providing a recent update and summary. Simulation has also been well covered (Jahangirian, Eldabi, Naseer, Stergioulas, & Young, 2010; Greasley, 2008). However, the area of optimisation has proved too broad for any general survey of applications. In addition to these surveys focussed on techniques, sometimes application areas have been joined with techniques to give more detailed insight e.g. Kirchhof and Meseth (2012) on simulation in German health care.The use of Problem Structuring Methods is of particular interest in relation to the scope of OR. O'Brien (2011) offers a recent view of the use of strategic planning tools by UK OR practitioners, in particular PSMs, though her literature review covers other groups of respondents and a wider range of techniques. Her overall conclusion is that while various strategic planning tools such as SWOT and Balanced Scorecard have been widely adopted, the methods developed within the OR community such as SSM or SODA have not been so successful. A follow up paper (O'Brien, 2015), in which she interviewed four experienced OR practitioners who were involved in supporting strategy in their organisations, concludes (unsurprisingly) that ‘hard’ OR methods e.g. simulation, statistics, spreadsheets and modelling, are being used to support strategy. However, that there was little direct involvement in the process of strategy ‘formulation’. An argument favouring the use of PSMs is given by Li and Zhu (2014) who claim that China's development path requires a move away from reliance on hard OR to embrace the multiple stakeholder perspectives in order to help solve the wicked problems that China faces. But while several new soft methods have been developed, uptake remains limited. In seeking an explanation for this, Ackermann (2012) critically examined the development of Soft OR/PSMs. Clear benefits have been established from their use: they enable the management of complexity; accommodate multiple perspectives; integrate process and content; and many successful case studies have been reported. However, their limitations include the unhelpful label (problem ‘structuring’ rather than the more managerial ‘solving’), the lack of rigour and variability in application with no unique ‘right’ answer, and the difficulties in training potential users. This last point is, at least in part, because the use of PSMs requires a ‘facilitation’ approach, rather than an ‘analytical’ approach which is the core of OR master's courses. Whilst some master's courses introduce students to PSMs, only limited further training is available e.g. some short courses run by the UK OR Society. Ormerod (2013) details the additional skills and competences required and the difficulties to be faced in acquiring them. To this we would add that alternative approaches for structuring messy problems originating from outside the OR community are not considered or compared. The current evidence then on the use of PSMs to extend OR's scope is limited and somewhat negative, at least as far as diffusion is concerned.Further insight into practice has come about through the occasional discussions of the gap between theory and practice, a recurrent if intermittent theme throughout OR's history (e.g. Ackoff, 1979; Corbett & Van Wassenhove, 1993). A root cause that these discussions identify is the requirement for academics to publish in high quality journals (Sodhi & Tang, 2008). The scope of the established journals is limited primarily to innovative ‘smart bits’ but in addition, the journals have been dominated by theoretical modelling unattached to OR practice, that is to say models and their solution which are not embedded in any problem observed in practice (Ormerod, Delibassi, & Morris, 2000; Ormerod & Kiossis, 1997; Reisman & Kirschnick, 1994, 1995) though Guide and Van Wassenhove (2007) take a more optimistic view.Practitioners can make only a limited contribution to bridging the gap between the world of academic OR and the world of OR practice. In contrast to the publishing demands of academics, practitioners are expected to carry out successful projects and satisfy clients but have a limited incentive to present their work externally. Confidentiality too remains an issue. In an attempt to rectify this, in addition to the various practice prizes already mentioned, the gap is an occasional topic for discussion at OR conferences. For example, Overmeer, Corbett, and Salomon (1997) condemned OR teaching for concentrating too much on theory, suggested that universities should only hire staff with experience of OR practice and that OR practice itself should be researched. In recent years, the UK OR Society's annual conference has included a session devoted to networking between academics and practitioners, in an attempt to identify jointly beneficial areas for collaboration. Strong practice communities exist in the US (via the Roundtable) and the UK (via the Heads of OR Forum) and probably elsewhere, though not apparently in such a distinctive form.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
