@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A dynamic benchmarking system for assessing the recovery of inpatients: Evidence from the neurorehabilitation process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We construct a dynamic benchmarking system to evaluate the recovery status of neurorehabilitation patients.The dynamic DEA model utilizes multiple assessment criteria including FIM™ Instrument, BBS and MoCA©/MMSE.The model allows the user to update the benchmarking criteria and expand the data set.The calculation results of the model are validated by actual patients in hospital.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health care,Rehabilitation,Inpatient discharge,Benchmarking,Data envelopment analysis (DEA),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The shortage of medical resources (mainly beds) is a critical and increasingly prevalent problem affecting hospitals. Of the factors that contribute to these shortages, the ambiguity and insufficiency of the criteria used to identify whether an inpatient should be discharged are among the most detrimental. To address this issue, this study applies data envelopment analysis (DEA) on existing inpatient data from the Neurorehabilitation Center at Toronto’s Bridgepoint Hospital to create a dynamic benchmarking system to evaluate the health stage of an inpatient ready to be discharged. Unlike the more traditional parametric techniques, DEA provides non-subjective benchmarking that does not require any prior specification of the production function making it a more desirable choice for this application. The dynamic model categorizes the inpatient’s discharge status as rejected, under observation, or approved. This new approach not only allows managers to gain insight into the potential causes of medical resource shortages, but also allows clinicians to treat inpatients more effectively based on their discharge categories. For validation, the results of the dynamic model were compared with actual inpatient discharge assessments provided by the Bridgepoint Hospital.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The shortage of beds, staffing and medical resources has become an increasingly common problem in hospitals worldwide. Occasionally, these shortages have resulted in hospitals failing to admit patients in acute need of care, leading to several unfortunate cases where more severe consequences were suffered. For instance, in 2008, a pregnant Japanese woman died after being refused by eight hospitals because none of them had a vacant bed (Coco Masters, 2009). Furthermore, research conducted by Robert, Reignier, and Tournoux (2012) showed that patients whose admissions to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) were delayed due to the lack of vacancy were subject to a much higher risk of mortality.Despite the efforts in several countries to abate resource insufficiencies through policy reforms, the demand for medical resources continues to rise dramatically (Liberatore & Nydick, 2008; Smith, Cowan, Sensenig, & Catlin, 2005; Valdmanis, Bernet, & Moises, 2010). Consequently, there has been a significant research effort focused on resolving the mismatch between patient numbers and availability of resources. The majority of these studies attempted to rectify shortages by focusing on one of the following external causes: (1) rescheduling and adjusting the allocation of medical resources including nurses and wards (Blake & Carter, 2002; Geng & Xie, 2012; Kusters & Groot, 1996; Ridge, Jones, Nielsen, & Shahani, 1998; Siferd, 1994; Valouxis, Gogos, Goulas, Alefragis, & Housos, 2012; Verheyen, 1992; Vissers, 1998; Worthington, 1988; Zonderland & Timmer, 2012), (2) reducing patient waiting times (Chien, Tseng, & Chen, 2008; Griffiths, Williams, & Wood, 2013; Iversen, 2000; Saghafian, Hopp, Oyen, Desmond, & Kronick, 2012; Shimshak, Damico, & Burden, 1981; Vuyst, Bruneel, & Fiems, 2014), (3) adopting new patient admission criteria to lighten the load on hospitals (Vissers, Adan, & Dellaert, 2007), and (4) employing new managerial policies (Li & Benton, 2003; Oliveira & Bevan, 2008). The methodologies employed in the above references are able to temporarily alleviate the effects of insufficient medical resources; however, alone they cannot completely eliminate the problem.In order to more fully address the problem, focus should be brought to an important internal cause of the shortages, namely that inpatients that have completed treatment may not be willing to be discharged from hospital. Generally, this can be attributed to one of the following two reasons: (1) Different clinicians use different scales and criteria to assess the health and condition of inpatients. This variability leads to uncertainty in the discharge decision making process. (2) Patients that do not need to pay for their medical treatments, e.g., those covered by health insurance, have less incentive to be discharged sooner. These reasons are significant contributing factors to the increased demand for medical services and the rising medical shortages, and thus should be considered in more detail. Therefore, this research aims to alleviate resource shortages through the construction of a benchmarking system by DEA that evaluates the discharge of inpatients undergoing neurorehabilitation.Of the small number of professional medical journal papers that have focused on the topic of inpatient discharge criteria (e.g., Berk & Moinzadeh, 1998; Burns, Yee, Flett, Guy, & Cournoyea, 2013; Ead, 2006; Marshall & Chung, 1999; Turner-Stokes, 1999), the majority adopt parametric modeling techniques. Taking the research of Clark and Huckman as an example (2012), they tried to capture the quality performance of hospitals using a regression model, where the parameters were unknown and decided by the statistical distribution of the data. Although parametric methodologies are widely used and offer desirable characteristics, they possess some inherent limitations which render them unsuitable for the topic examined herein. First and foremost, parametric methods require prior parameter specification. These fixed values are derived from statistical distributions or through empirical methods, and are generally a poor representation of reality, even after considering unavoidable error and noise. Our study uses several measures to evaluate a patient’s recovery, including, but not limited to the Functional Independence Measure (FIM™), the Berg Balance Scale (BBS), and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA©). While all are useful, the impact of each measure on the patient’s final functional status was not known, and thus fixing parameters was not a sensible option. Fortunately, non-parametric methodologies do not require any pre-specifications and assign all the weights automatically by the method itself. They also offer the opportunity to explore the relationships that exists between each variable and patient recovery. Hence, one of the leading non-parametric linear programming techniques, DEA, is employed in this study.DEA is a powerful non-parametric approach that is used to evaluate and compare the relative efficiencies of peer units, also known as Decision Making Units (DMUs). The methodology was first introduced in 1978 by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), who extended Farrell’s (1957) concepts of technical and allocative efficiency to create the CCR model, which created the foundations of DEA theory. In the past couple of decades, DEA has been attracting worldwide research interest as it is applicable to a wide variety of fields, including management, finance, agriculture, and non-profit organizations (Emrouznejad, Parker, & Tavares, 2008; Liu, Lu, Lu, & Lin, 2013; Paradi & Zhu, 2013; Yang & Morita, 2013). Additionally, it has been applied to medical institutions to evaluate the performance of individual hospitals or wards through the consideration of specific inputs and outputs (Ancarani, Mauro, & Giammanco, 2009; Brailsford & Vissers, 2011; Chen, Hwang, & Shao, 2005; Ippoliti & Falavigna, 2012). There has yet to be a publication on the application of DEA to evaluate inpatient progress through the admit-treat-discharge process.In our study, we focus on applying DEA to inpatients. Each inpatient undergoing neurorehabilitation is treated as a DMU and is evaluated on their overall recovery which is based on their basic functional abilities, balance ability and cognitive performance. These recovery indicators are measured through three individual scores, namely the FIM™ Instrument, BBS and MoCA©, as well as a Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) score. Given this data, we use the resultant DEA score to classify a patient into one of three discharge categories: discharge rejected, discharge possible after further observation and discharge approved. This system could help improve the clinicians’ decision making process and rectify the ambiguity associated with the patient discharge process, thus allowing for more efficient patient treatment along with easing resource shortages.The remainder of this article is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces DEA and discusses the methodologies used to build the dynamic inpatient recovery benchmarking system. Section 3 provides a detailed description of how the proposed dynamic model was applied to inpatients undergoing neurorehabilitation in a Canadian medical institution. And to conclude, Section 4 summarizes the research and provides additional prospective applications of the proposed model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The current research focuses on constructing a dynamic benchmarking system to evaluate the recovery status of neurorehabilitation patients through the consideration of multiple assessment criteria including the FIM™ Instrument, BBS and MoCA©/MMSE. In order to improve the complex and subjective assessment process performed by clinicians to determine whether or not to discharge a patient, a dynamic non-parametric benchmarking system constructed using DEA is proposed in this paper. This model was able to produce encouraging results. Moreover, a dynamic modeling approach was taken to allow the user to update the benchmarking criteria and expand the data set when further data is available. Over time, the model should get better at identifying which patients should be discharged or put into further treatment.As this was preliminary research into the feasibility of creating a dynamic benchmarking system for the health care sector, a few key points should be made: (1) due to the lack of available medical records, the number of DMUs used in this study was insufficient for a more comprehensive assessment of the model. As the number of DMUs increases with time, the benchmarking criteria will become more correct; (2) the percentiles for the three classes of patients (i.e. discharge rejected, under observation, discharge approved) are flexible and may vary between hospitals and wards. Moreover, the general benchmarking criteria chosen for any hospital require professional opinions from clinicians and management; and (3) although this research was conducted for a neurorehabilitation hospital, the methodology can easily be applied to other related fields.Neurologic injuries can affect the body in a number of ways, thus requiring a wide range of treatments and treatment durations. In the future, it would be beneficial to incorporate more specific information on patient injuries, which may include stroke, disabilities, neurological disorders, traumatic/non-traumatic brain injuries, and traumatic/non-traumatic spinal cord injuries, into the model to provide more refined and meaningful discharge classifications and treatment suggestions. For patients discharged from hospital, especially those discharged because of no measurable functional gains, further rehabilitation training as shown in Appendix A is suggested.Realistically, the proposed benchmarking system could be implemented in a hospital ward by setting up a real time scoring system containing all criteria including FIM™ Instrument, BBS and MoCA©/MMSE, and these would be displayed while clinicians could input patient assessments. The average efficiency scores would then be calculated by the system using the benchmarking approach shown here to provide the clinician with instant recovery and discharge statuses. In closing, we think that this initial research in setting up a benchmarking system for implementation in the field of medicine will be insightful and informative for future researchers.