@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Heuristic algorithms for a vehicle routing problem with simultaneous delivery and pickup and time windows in home health care

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A problem of home health care logistics encountered in France is considered.It concerns material pickup and delivery among pharmacy, patients, hospital and lab.A genetic algorithm with permutation chromosome and local search is proposed.A tabu search with route assignment attributes and route re-optimization is designed.Efficiency of approaches is tested on instances derived from relevant benchmarks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Home health care logistics,Vehicle routing,Pickup and delivery,Time windows,Metaheuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses a vehicle scheduling problem encountered in home health care logistics. It concerns the delivery of drugs and medical devices from the home care company’s pharmacy to patients’ homes, delivery of special drugs from a hospital to patients, pickup of bio samples and unused drugs and medical devices from patients. The problem can be considered as a special vehicle routing problem with simultaneous delivery and pickup and time windows, with four types of demands: delivery from depot to patient, delivery from a hospital to patient, pickup from a patient to depot and pickup from a patient to a medical lab. Each patient is visited by one vehicle and each vehicle visits each node at most once. Patients are associated with time windows and vehicles with capacity. Two mixed-integer programming models are proposed. We then propose a Genetic Algorithm (GA) and a Tabu Search (TS) method. The GA is based on a permutation chromosome, a split procedure and local search. The TS is based on route assignment attributes of patients, an augmented cost function, route re-optimization, and attribute-based aspiration levels. These approaches are tested on test instances derived from existing VRPTW benchmarks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper considers a special vehicle routing problem with simultaneous delivery and pickup and time windows in home health care. Home hospitalization organizations have been created for patients requiring long and regular health cares in order to provide quality health service at their home while reducing the bed requirements at hospitals. Home hospitalization initially focused on nursing cares and has been extended to complex and technical cares such as chronic cares, rehabilitation, end-of-life palliative cares, and home chemotherapy. Home health care services are provided in France by Home Health Care (HHC) companies. Each day, a HHC company has various logistic activities including delivering drugs and medical devices from its pharmacy (also called depot in this paper) to patients at their home. It also takes some special drugs, such as chemotherapy drugs and blood products, from hospitals to patients. On the other hand, the HHC also needs to pick up materials from patients and deliver to different locations. Blood samples of the patients are collected and delivered to a medical lab. Medical wastes, unused drugs and medical devices are collected and brought back to the HHC or the depot. As HHC companies are usually small but serve rather large number of patients with dispersed locations, it is crucial to carefully design the routes of the HHC vehicles in order to reduce its operating cost while improving the service quality to patients.Since an HHC patient may be a delivery and a pickup client simultaneously and have both pickup and delivery demands, the design of HHC vehicle routes is related to the vehicle routing problem with simultaneous pickup and delivery and time windows (VRPSDPTW) introduced by Hokey (1989). The VRPSDPTW is a hard and challenging problem in the field of vehicle routing problem (VRP). It considers clients that require simultaneous pickup and delivery service. Some common constraints must be satisfied in both HHC’s vehicle scheduling problem and the VRPSDPTW. For example, each client must be visited and served in a given time window; the load on a vehicle must always be below the vehicle capacity. However, the problem faced by the HHC company is more complex than the classical VRPSDPTW. The first reason is the complexity of its logistic operations with different types of pickup and delivery demands of patients. According to the origins and destinations, both pickup and delivery demands can be divided into two subclasses. The pickup demands include: (i) picking up the material from patients’ homes and deliver to a lab, e.g., biological samples and (ii) picking up some materials from the patients’ homes and bring back to the depot, e.g., medical waste. Similarly, there are two subclasses of delivery demands required by the patients: (i) delivering the products from the company’s depot to patients and (ii) delivering some materials from a hospital to patients’ homes, e.g., special drugs for cancer treatment. In the classical VRPSDPTW all delivery goods are loaded at the depot and all pickup goods have to be transported to the depot. In our HHC vehicle scheduling problem besides the depot, goods can be transported from a hospital to patients and from the patients to a lab. Clearly, the composition of vehicles’ loads in our case is more complex than VRPSDPTW. Furthermore, different from the classical VRPSDPTW, each route of our problem must satisfy some precedence constraints, e.g., for a patient who needs drugs provided by the hospital, the vehicle visiting the patient has to visit the hospital first. Such special constraints are similar to the pairing and precedence constraints in classical pickup and delivery problem (PDP), in which each customer request is defined by an origin location and a destination, the origin must visited before the destination by the same vehicle. However, the PDP is less complicated than our problem, since the origins as well as the destinations of transportation requests in the PDP are locations other than the depot, and a customer in the PDP only has either pickup or delivery request. Thus, in this paper the HHC vehicle scheduling problem is rather a special VRPSDPTW variant which has never been studied before. Since both the VRPSDPTW and PDP are NP-hard problems, our problem is more complex than these problems and is also NP-hard. To the best of our knowledge, we have not found any existing work dealing this special simultaneous pickup and delivery problem in HHC industry.In this paper, we first perform a literature review, propose two mathematical formulations of our problem, and then develop two heuristic algorithms for this special vehicle scheduling problem. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the relevant literature. Our problem is formally defined and two mathematical models are given in Section 3. Section 4 proposes a Genetic algorithm (GA) for our problem. Section 5 proposes a Tabu Search (TS) algorithm for solving the problem. Computational experiments are described in Section 6. Section 7 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
