@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Recent developments on Reactivity: Theoretical conceptualization and empirical verification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Reactivity is a new managerial paradigm that allows to investigate performances when unexpected demand occurs.We develop some indicators of performance for studying global and partial Reactivity.An empirical analysis identifies the most relevant practices to be implemented to perform Reactivity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reactivity,Performance,Managerial practice,Unexpected demand,Empirical analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper seeks to enrich the literature of operations and supply chain management through the development of the concept of Reactivity and the introduction of related performance indicators. Reactivity explains the capability to perform operationally and economically under unexpected conditions. A qualitative investigation has aimed to identify useful managerial practices to be adopted to properly perform Reactivity, while an empirical analysis has tested the relevance of each practice as well as the economic benefits that Reactivity provides. The findings suggest that managers and practitioners should develop a Reactivity orientation because it benefits firms’ economic performance when an unexpected event occurs; in addition, several recommended managerial practices should be undertaken to ensure its correct implementation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent theoretical research has developed specific firm orientations such as Agile, Lean, and Leagile (Faisal, Banwet, & Shankar, 2006), and their operationalization has introduced novelties in the operations and supply chain management literature that open up new and appealing research directions. Nevertheless, these concepts do not deal with an important issue in business: unexpected demand. Unexpected demand refers to a specific kind of demand that is not anticipatable or predictable and for which the application of all forecasting methods is totally ineffective (Naish, 1993). The existing concepts address volatile demand, which includes a predictable variance; in contrast, unexpected demand incorporates an abnormal variance due to completely unknown events (e.g., the terror attacks of September 11, 2001). In this regard, organizations frequently overlook a managerial orientation that facilitates performing under unexpected events and properly addressing such events. We develop the concept of Reactivity, whose main novelty consists of contemplating the unexpected demand.The preliminary review of the literature revealed that, beyond unexpectedness, the issue of performance has also received little attention in the recent developments on Agile, Lean, and Leagile orientations. When applying those concepts, firms cannot define the boundaries of their orientations. For example, an Agile firm cannot measure its agility because the literature is missing a specific performance indicator. Thus, we developed the Reactivity index, an indicator of operational performance that allows for identifying how reactive a firm is, the sources of low Reactivity, the managerial practices to be adopted to perform with Reactivity, and the relationships between firms’ Reactivity and their economic performance. Because unexpected demand is not at all anticipatable, firms are not prepared to face it. Several inefficiencies emerge in terms of cost, time, and quality because satisfying an unexpected demand can be operationally ineffective and time consuming, while quality cannot be guaranteed. In this sense, the Reactivity index along with other performance indicators is a useful tool enabling firms to monitor their operational performance when an unexpected demand materializes.Although the economic and operational benefits obtainable through the adoption of Agile, Lean, and Leagile orientations are clearly stated in the literature (Faisal et al., 2006), empirical analysis confirming these theoretical statements and relationships is lacking. Similarly, the literature identifies the managerial practices that must be implemented to reach a specific firm’s orientation (Christopher, 2000), but scant empirical research provides robust proof of the relationships. Therefore, we conducted an empirical analysis including both a qualitative and a quantitative investigation to identify the managerial practices to be implemented to promote a reactive orientation, the implications in terms of cost, time, and quality performance, and the economic gains that result from firms’ Reactivity. The empirical analysis supported our construct operationalization.The current research is organized as follows. First, we explore the existing literature on Reactivity. Then, we theoretically compare Reactivity with Agile, Lean, and Leagile to explain their differences and to highlight our main theoretical contributions. A global indicator of Reactivity (i.e., the Reactivity index) and three partial indicators allow for measuring firms’ Reactivity. In addition, an empirical analysis explores the managerial practices that a firm must adopt to perform with Reactivity as well as the economic benefits obtainable through its implementation. Finally, conclusions are drawn from the findings.The term Reactivity has been used with different meanings in several, heterogeneous contexts. Cannon (1932) introduced Reactivity as an individual “fight-or-flight” capacity response to stress: After facing a situation, an individual reacts by attacking (fight) or by escaping (flight). Fraser, Sumar, and Sumar (2000), writing about negative reactions in consuming food, explained human reactions as physical nuisances and malaises that require reactive care.Applied to the operations and supply chain management fields, Reactivity is a firm’s capability to operate in an unstable environment (Kiefer, 2000). Huang, Trappey, and Yao (2006) associated Reactivity with the agent’s intelligence. After perceiving its environment, the agent reacts in a timely and appropriate manner. Nakhla (1995) linked Reactivity to the rapidity of decision making: A wide range of products and high demand instability require reactive scheduling; postponement is an appropriate strategy for reaching this target. Cigolini, Cozzi, and Perona (2004) incorporated Reactivity into the context of networking redesign by presenting 3M’s case. The firm is reactive in reallocating its production capacity within different geographic contexts, from Europe to Asia and from North America to Latin America.Reactivity requires collaborative practices and partnerships in the logistics channel (Bonet & Paché, 2005). Paché (1998) did not introduce the definition of Reactivity or its measurements; instead, he presented Reactivity as a necessary attribute for third-party logistics in grocery distribution to provide reliability and quality service. Hardaker and Ahmed (1995) studied similarities and differences between European and Japanese approaches in computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM), indicating that Japanese firms are proactive whereas Europeans are reactive. Feraud, 1998 linked Reactivity to the competitive advantage obtainable from the integration between logistics management and information systems because both departments perform at 100% service levels. Andraski (1994) highlighted the cost and time benefits that a continuous replenishment program offers, as information sharing drives success. Nevertheless, firms and supply chains should only provide what the customer believes is important, thus reacting efficiently and in a timely manner. This calls for strong integration between logistics and information systems to adopt a customer-oriented attitude.Based on analysis of previous studies, the characteristics and meaning of Reactivity can be summarized as–Appropriateness, immediateness, and opportunity to respond to a change.Time compression.Capacity to face the environment’s volatility and instability as well as address internal disturbance.Development, production, and distribution of products where and when customers need them.Based on the literature review and the emerged features, we have attempted to develop the concept of Reactivity, which will take a position in the literature among the Agile, Lean, and Leagile orientations.The key point in differentiating Reactivity from other constructs in the literature is demand unexpectedness. Christopher (2000) linked volatility with the variance of demand experienced; however, unexpectedness is more than that. Unexpectedness derives from abnormal variance associated with an event that is not at all predictable (Caron & Higgins, 1974). When an abnormal variance materializes, the demand is unexpected. Confounding anticipated and unexpected shocks generate serious mistakes. It is the difference between unpredictability and unexpectability that makes Agile and Reactivity different constructs.From a theoretical point of view, Reactivity is the natural evolution of agility. Schonberger and Knod (1997) and Naylor, Naim, and Berry (1999) introduced agility as the use of market knowledge and virtual corporations to exploit profitable opportunities in a volatile marketplace. Dowlatshahi and Cao (2006) defined an Agile manufacturing system as a manufacturing paradigm that focuses on smaller scale, modular production facilities; meanwhile, Agile operations can deal with turbulent and changing environments. In contrast, Reactivity allows for high performance in the context of demand unexpectedness linked to completely unknown events. Deadly and destructive events, such as the September 11, 2001, terror attacks, the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and the earthquake in Haiti in 2010, have a drastic impact on customer demand, resulting in an abnormal variance that cannot be managed through firms’ agility and/or Leanness. Reactivity elevates the capability to perform under unexpected demand. Therefore, reactive firms can deal with unknown circumstances, abnormal sales variances, and completely unknown events. In this sense, Reactivity can also be considered a useful managerial practice in specific business situations (e.g., a competitor introduces a new, radical innovation, starts a heavy promotional campaign, or produces a completely non-conforming batch of products).The constructs reported in the literature are not consistent with the characteristics of Reactivity. Christopher and Towill (2001) compared the Agile and Lean concepts, both of which focus on customer responsiveness. However, the Lean concept emphasizes efficiency by removing all waste in the operational process (Van Hoek, Harrison, & Christopher, 2001) and resolving any trade-offs based on physical assets, labor, capital, and land; the agility concept instead highlights a fast response to changing customer demand and provides proper solutions to any trade-offs based on time, information, and knowledge (Van der Vorst, ban Dijk, & Beulens, 2001, Yusuf, Gunasekaran, Adeleye, & Sivayoganathan, 2004). These two definitions were used to develop the concept of Leagile (Faisal et al., 2006), which combines the cost advantages of Lean and the time compression benefits of Agile, thereby enabling cost-effectiveness in the upstream chain and high service levels in a volatile marketplace in the downstream chain (Faisal et al., 2006).Although this stream in the literature appears to be rich in concepts, it lacks an orientation that deals with unexpectedness. Any organization develops its own ability to sense, perceive, and anticipate changes in the business environment. However, Naish (1993) clearly proved that the last statement is only valid when demand shocks can be anticipated and predicted. If not, the demand is unexpected; consequently, any forecasting tool is useless or, at least, inadequate. Unexpected events change the management of business, imposing rapid and effective changes that Agile, Lean, and Leagile firms cannot make.In this regard, we have proposed development of the concept of Reactivity, which will overcome the limitations of previous concepts and fill a hole in the literature. Reactivity represents the ability to satisfy customers and perform in terms of cost, time, and quality when an unexpected event occurs.The current research seeks to provide theoretical development of the notion of Reactivity as well as specific performance indicators related to the satisfaction of unexpected demand. This aim derives from limitations that emerged from the literature. As mentioned earlier, although several articles have clearly introduced the concepts of Agile, Lean, and Leagile, to our knowledge no research has proposed specific performance indicators to measure a firm’s capability. For example, if a firm wishes to measure how Agile it is, the literature does not offer a specific performance indicator for doing so. Therefore, together with theoretical developments, we seek to introduce a global indicator of Reactivity – the Reactivity index – as well as partial indicators linked to cost, quality, and time (i.e., Reactivity on cost, Reactivity on quality, Reactivity on time). By simultaneously employing global and partial indicators of Reactivity, a firm can be reactive and succeed in satisfying unexpected demand. This introduces novelties in the literature because of the lack of ad hoc indicators to measure how successfully a firm can perform such a specific capability. An interesting evidence is given by Gong (2008), who stressed this idea and proposed an indicator of economic performance to measure supply chain flexibility. That indicator comprises labor flexibility, machine flexibility, routing flexibility, and information technology supporting the decision-making process.First, partial Reactivity involves a performance of cost. The satisfaction of an unexpected order is not always economically convenient. However, firms must activate atypical processes such as rescheduling, searching for supplementary suppliers and employees, and providing alternative logistical service and auxiliary controls (Ho & Carter, 1994). Those processes may make the satisfaction of an unexpected demand really inefficient. Therefore, we state that:“A reactive firm produces at the standard production cost even when unexpected demand occurs.”In Fig. 1, we characterize the indicator Reactivity on cost (ROC) to measure firms’ capabilities in producing under unexpected conditions at a cost equal to the standard production cost. Thus, this index measures the gap between the standard production cost and the production cost under unexpected events: When the latter is higher, the costs to satisfy unexpected demand are higher than standard costs, thereby making production inefficient under unexpected situations. As displayed in Fig. 1, the cost for unexpected demand should be at least equal to the standard cost. Consequently, the best value for Reactivity on cost is 100%, which means that a firm works at standard cost for both forecasted and unexpected demands.Reactivity also accounts for performance with respect to time in an unexpected setting. When an unexpected order comes in, delays may occur in procurement, production, and distribution. Therefore, we state that:“A reactive firm produces and supplies on time even when unexpected demand occurs.”We have used the indicator Reactivity on time (ROT) to measure the capacity to satisfy unexpected demand on time. As reported in Fig. 1, ROT is given by the ratio between the unexpected demand satisfied on time and the total unexpected demand. Its best value is 100%, which means that unexpected demand is entirely satisfied on time and thus the system works reactively with respect to time.Finally, Reactivity encompasses performance with respect to quality. Firms must produce high-quality products independently of demand expectedness. Quality is always required regardless of the nature of the product, the market served, the existing competition, or the nature of the supply chain relationships (De Giovanni, 2011). Nevertheless, unexpected events may imply that quality standards are not always met and quality controls are somehow skipped. Thus, we state that:“A reactive firm produces goods with standard quality even when unexpected demand occurs.”To investigate quality in an unexpected setting, we have developed Reactivity on quality (ROQ). Its best value is 100%, which is reached whenever the unexpected demand met on time lacks defects and/or nonconformities (Fig. 1).Using the previous statements of partial Reactivity, we proposed the following definition of global Reactivity: A reactive firm satisfies unexpected demand by performing in unanticipated circumstances as consistently in terms of cost, time, and quality as it does in standard circumstances.To measure the firm’s global Reactivity, we developed the Reactivity index, which summarizes the capacity of a firm to work under unexpected demand with the same performance in cost, time, and quality as with expected demand. In addition, it represents a useful measure for comparing firms’ performance. As displayed in Fig. 1, the Reactivity index is the combination of ROC, ROQ, and ROT. Its best value is 100%, which signifies that a firm is able to entirely satisfy unexpected demand and that it operationally performs in terms of cost, time, and quality just as it does under standard conditions. Global and partial indicators of Reactivity allow for investigation of the trade-offs that an unexpected demand entails. Under unexpected conditions, a change in demand may easily lead to increasing production costs because the consequences of a given event are not included in the production schedule. A high demand for goods negatively affects quality controls, which can be escaped to save resources even though quality control standards must always be met. Alterations in the quality system increase production costs (e.g., higher number of trials) and lengthen lead times. Reducing lead times is possible when escaping some quality controls; doing this may reduce production costs, but it will eventually create indirect costs (e.g., unsatisfied customers). In this regard, companies should actively react to resolve any trade-off and aim to satisfy customers (Andraski, 1994). The structure of the Reactivity index and the partial indicators allow for the identification of sources, causes, and trade-offs resolution.The Reactivity index is a heterogeneous indicator formed by one economic and two noneconomic indicators. When it carries values lower than 100%, the decomposition displayed in Fig. 1 allows for the identification of any non-Reactivity source.Because the literature does not contain a list of features that a company should possess to be reactive, we conducted a qualitative analysis through structured interviews to investigate (a) the main pillars of Reactivity, (b) managers’ perceptions and willingness to adopt this new managerial practice, and (c) the impact of Reactivity on competitive advantage and customer satisfaction. The qualitative analysis helped to model the construct and precisely identify its differences with respect to existing concepts.Three structured interviews were administrated to the managing directors of three companies belonging to the sectors of cosmetics and beauty, elevators, and information and communication technology (ICT). The analysis investigated the real perceptions of Reactivity, the foundations of unexpected demand, as well as the related performance, exploring additionally its drivers. Appendix A reports the results of the interviews.The qualitative analysis revealed that Reactivity is not well assessed or understood within organizations. When organizing their business, firms do not think about their Reactivity. Moreover, its conceptualization is close to performance with respect to time. Any firm must satisfy the demand on time to boost customer satisfaction and loyalty as well as competitive advantage. Thus, the interview investigated two novelties for Reactivity: unexpected demand and related performance.When discussing performance, the managers voiced doubts about their ability to adequately perform under unexpected conditions. Although high standards of cost, quality, and time with unexpected demand are difficult to achieve, reactive firms achieve all of them simultaneously. The interviewer proposed the definition of Reactivity as the capacity to satisfy unexpected demand by performing to cost, quality, and time standards simultaneously. All agreed with this theoretical definition. It emerged as an “ambitious” target since unexpected demand generates innumerable difficulties and unpredictable changes. To date, firms have emphasized the performance time when considering unexpected demand. Cost and quality do not appear to be directly linked to assumptions and feelings about Reactivity. Nevertheless, when introducing the performance of cost and quality, interviewees recognized their importance in defining Reactivity. They cannot be disregarded in its operationalization. The wish to satisfy customers is always the driving motivation. If it is true that the customer is the main driver, firms obtain higher competitive advantage only by adopting a broad perspective that embraces customer satisfaction as well as firms’ performance under unexpected demand.Finally, the qualitative analysis revealed the managerial practices to be adopted to enhance Reactivity. The interviewer proposed a list of possible operational practices as the most suitable to explain Reactivity, including the following:SCs explain the practice of using standard and interchangeable parts and components. They are modules, platforms, and interfaces, which are extremely important for characterizing a reactive orientation (Gunasekarana & Ngai, 2009). The higher the use of standard components, the higher the firms’ Reactivity.This factor highlights the critical role of logistics for promoting a reactive orientation: Optimal materials, parts, final products, and services management need an adequate network for logistics implementation (Nyhuis & Vogel, 2006). LG is vital for firms due to its direct impact on product value and performance. Despite these key motivations, logistics is often managed via outsourcing, which could result in a suboptimal practice for satisfying unexpected demand. Thus, we hypothesized that centralized logistics has a larger impact on Reactivity than outsourcing.Integrated information systems allow for managing interconnections among companies, consenting data and information transfers, data generation and processing time, database integration, accurate and timelier information flow, and responsiveness (Gunasekarana & Ngai, 2004). Through the implementation of integrated information systems, firms reduce the negative impact of the bullwhip effect, lowering the risks and increasing performance (Yu, Yan, & Cheng, 2001). Because of the high initial investment of time and costs and the characteristic of irreversibility, implementation of integrated information systems is critical. Thus, we hypothesized that higher IS results in higher firm Reactivity.This managerial practice emphasizes the presence of available capacity necessary to satisfy unexpected demand. If a firm possesses unexploited capacity, the possibility of satisfying unexpected demand increases. Nevertheless, the presence of unsaturated capacity implies an over-production structure, which is not exploited entirely and requires higher initial investments. More frequently, firms outsource a part of their production commitments when their own capacity is not sufficient. Therefore, we hypothesized that the higher the available production capacity, the higher the firms’ Reactivity.The availability of workers explains the capacity to rapidly organize additional shifts and temporarily impose challenging working standards. This capacity is crucial to properly satisfy unexpected demand because the typical availability of workers is not always sufficient. Management must spread the culture of unexpectedness among employees so that workers will be available to work more if unexpected orders materialize. Therefore, we hypothesized that the more workers are available, the higher the firms’ Reactivity.This factor indicates the stability of relationships among supply chain members. If supplier turnover is high, firms need to rapidly look for available new suppliers by activating new atypical processes whenever an unexpected demand occurs. Therefore, stable relationships with suppliers would significantly contribute to performance in terms of time, cost, and quality. Thus, we hypothesized that the higher the suppliers’ turnover, the lower the firms’ Reactivity.A firm’s localization is extremely important for realizing coordination among suppliers to successfully and suitably serve the market (Torre & Gilly, 2000). Indeed, the right localization increases the final customers’ value (Rahman, 2006) and becomes particularly relevant in providing a multitude of services (Hoek, 2000). When firms are strategically located with respect to their suppliers and customers, the chances of satisfying unexpected demand increase. Therefore, we hypothesized that the more closely located a firm is to suppliers and customers, the higher its Reactivity is.This factor quantifies customers’ contribution to firms’ success. Customers are not all equal in generating value, revenues, and profits. Differences may emerge regarding the quantity purchased, the status of new or old customers, and the potential future economic benefits obtainable. Firms may adopt this managerial practice to identify and classify their customers. Whenever the customer is important to a firm, high motivations drive that customer’s satisfaction, regardless of the nature (expected or unexpected) of the demand. Consequently, we hypothesized that the more important a customer is to the firm’s business, the higher the Reactivity.Innovations could represent a serious barrier to adequately satisfying any unexpected order and to successful performance of Reactivity. When a product is new, processes and activities are not definitely established and demand is completely unpredictable, while parameters of cost, time, and quality are totally unstable. Thus, we hypothesized that the higher the product innovation, the lower the firms’ Reactivity.The findings of the qualitative analysis formed the basis for developing a questionnaire (Appendix B) and carrying out an empirical verification in which two sets of hypotheses were tested. First, we focused on the relationships between managerial practices and Reactivity to determine which practices a firm has to adopt to become reactive. Thus, the following hypotheses were tested:H1The use of standard components positively influences Reactivity.The implementation of a centralized logistics system positively influences Reactivity.The implementation of an integrated information system positively influences Reactivity.A large production capacity positively influences Reactivity.Workers’ availability positively influences Reactivity.A high supplier turnover negatively influences Reactivity.A short distance between customers and suppliers positively influences Reactivity.A higher customer impact positively influences Reactivity.Product innovations negatively influence Reactivity.Furthermore, to provide a comprehensive analysis, we tested H1–H9 using the partial indicators of Reactivity as dependent variables. Further, we tested the impact of Reactivity on economic performance to check the relevance of this managerial practice in real economic terms. Therefore, we hypothesized that:H10Reactivity positively influences sales.Reactivity positively influences return on investments.Reactivity positively influences return on assets.Finally, we also tested the impact of each partial indicator of Reactivity on economic performance.To support our theoretical developments with more practical and managerial insights, we developed an empirical analysis to identify the best practices that contribute to a Reactivity orientation as well as the economic benefits that Reactivity provides through its global and partial effects. A questionnaire was administered to 1400 firms’ representatives, who were contacted by telephone and invited to participate in the study. Companies were selected according to annual gross sales that for the year 2008 ranged from €1 million to €1 billion, with average annual sales of €98 million. A total of 135 representatives agreed to participate, yielding a final 9.5% response rate, which is common in this stream of research (De Giovanni & Vinzi, 2012). Responses from the various sectors were distributed as housing (15%), paper and pulp (15%), wood and wood products (20%), ceramic (5%), metal (10%), food (16%), textile (5%), electronic products (10%), and other (4%). The vast majority answered directly by telephone; others preferred to answer via mail or fax. The data collection was completed in 2010 and information about phone numbers, addresses, fax numbers, and financial indicators was taken from the AIDA (Analisi Informatizzata delle Aziende) database. This database is managed by the Bureau van Dijk Electronic Publishing (www.bvd.co.uk) and combines high-quality information with innovative software for searching and manipulating data.The respondent sample comprised purchasing managers (35%), sales managers (25%), production managers (20%), and material managers (15%), as well as other positions (5%).1Five personal interviews were conducted before starting the survey; the questionnaire was modified by clarifying unfamiliar words and eliminating those that were redundant or ambiguous. These pre-tests helped in checking the content of the questionnaire, as well as judging its validity and conformity for the study.1As seen in Fig. 1, REA is a new performance indicator whose operationalization needs to be validated empirically. Therefore, we ran a statistical analysis to verify the construct dimensionality, validity, and reliability. We ran a factor analysis to reduce the dimensions of Reactivity and in particular to check whether ROC, ROT, and ROQ belong to a specific underlying factor, that is, REA. We conducted a principal component analysis using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) 17.0 and extrapolated three components (Table 1). This resulted in only the first component having an initial eigenvalue higher than 1, while it explained 75.079% of the total variance. Therefore, we concluded that ROC, ROT, and ROQ belong to a unique dimension.Then, we used the component values to verify construct reliability and validity. The reliability analysis included the Cronbach’s alpha, which is generally used to establish the consistency and reliability of each factor. This index investigates the internal consistency of the scale’s reliability, its unidimensionality, and the correlation between the items. As reported in Table 2, the alpha shows good results, being higher than the 0.7 threshold generally considered to be satisfactory. In addition, the “alpha if the item is deleted” identifies the reliability changes when one factor is removed. It shows that no elimination can improve the construct reliability.The validity of a construct can be assessed through the average variance extracted (AVE), which explains the squared sum of factor loadings and the sum of measurement errors. According to Fornell and Larcker (1981), values lower than 0.9 represent suitable construct validity. The results linked to our analysis show satisfactory values (Table 2).Finally, construct reliability can also be assessed through composite reliability, used to check the adequacy of indicators as appropriate representatives. The composite reliability ranges between 0 and 1, and in our analysis the index exceeded the proposed level of 0.70 (Hair et al., 2006).To summarize, AVE and composite reliability, together with Cronbach’s alpha, support the proposed construct.We developed a regression model to identify the managerial practices that contribute to forming a reactive orientation. The dependent variable is the Reactivity index (REA), while the independent measures consist of best practices identified in the literature and reinforced by personal interview, as discussed herein.Table 3shows low correlation among independent variables.The general specification of the multiple regression model can be expressed as follows:Reactivity=β0+β1SC+β2LG+β3IS+β4AC+β5WA-β6ST+β7LC+β8IC+PIβ9+εwhere βi, with i=1⋯9, represents the coefficients of each independent variable to be estimated and ε is the error. Starting from this model, we investigated the impact of those managerial practices on firms’ Reactivity.The regression analysis employed three models. In particular, Model 1 included all the explanatory variables (managerial practices). However, a more precise consideration should be made according to their (short- and long-term) nature. On one hand, some managerial practices are more difficult, costly, and risky to undertake because a firm must deal with those decisions for long-term periods (e.g., localization). On the other hand, some managerial practices influence the firms’ Reactivity in the short run, and their adoption is not disruptive. Thus, Model 2 and Model 3 focus on reversible and irreversible decisions, respectively, whose differentiation has been described by Malik, Routhbaum, and Smith (2010). In this study, irreversible decisions refer to the implementation of a managerial practice that implies high initial investments and whose decisions affect the company in the long run, while stepping back from its implementation is quite costly and complex. For each model, Table 4reports the estimated coefficients, the standard errors, as well as the tolerance and variance inflation factor (VIF). These last two indexes were proposed with the intent to study the multicollinearity among independent variables. The tolerance is 1−R2 for the regression of one independent variable on all other independents, ignoring the dependent. For each independent variable, tolerance is unique, and optimal values should be higher than 0.3 to indicate the absence of correlation between independent variables. Tolerance provides information on standard errors: The higher the multicollinearity, the lower the tolerance, the higher the standard error. The VIF is the reciprocal of tolerance. It shows how much the variance of each coefficient estimate is being inflated by multicollinearity: The higher it is, the higher the multicollinearity. High values of VIF and low values of tolerance reveal severe multicollinearity effects. Table 4 reports the White’s heteroskedasticity test, F-statistic, and Jarque–Bera test. White’s test is a test of the null hypothesis of no heteroskedasticity against heteroskedasticity of some unknown general form (White, 1980). It is a general test for model misspecification because the null hypothesis assumes that the errors are both homoskedastic and independent of the regressors and that the model specification is correct. A non-significant test statistic implies that none of the three conditions is violated. The F-statistic shows the significance of each regression model. The Jarque–Bera test is used for testing whether the residuals are normally distributed. This analysis uses E-views 5 and SPSS 17.0.All the explanatory variables (managerial practices) included in Model 1 except for importance of customer are significant and the VIF and tolerance yield suitable results. The model significance, the absence of heteroskedasticity, the satisfactory results of the normality residuals test, and the high R2 show a good model fit. It is possible to identify two groups of practices. The first group is composed of standardized components, centralized logistics, integrated information systems, and availability of workers, each of which provides high contributions to the implementation of a reactive orientation. The second group is composed of localization, product innovation, supplier turnover, and available capacity, which provide a moderate contribution to firms’ Reactivity because their coefficients (average beta=6.781) are weaker than the first group practice coefficients (average beta=18.901).Reactivity increases when the practice of standard components is in use: Standardization, interfaces, components changeability, and modular products increase firms’ Reactivity. Although several firms externalize some activities that do not belong to their core business, the empirical verification indicates that centralized logistics should be pursued to implement a reactive orientation. Centralized logistics leads to increased Reactivity; therefore, firms should not outsource this managerial practice if they aim to properly satisfy unexpected demand.Although the implementation of integrated information systems requires a huge investment of cost and time, it substantially improves firms’ Reactivity. Firms need to evaluate different trade-offs. Integrated information systems are essential for satisfying unexpected demand, even though unexpected events materialize only sporadically. Because the failure to satisfy unexpected demand may imply indirect negative effects (e.g., lower brand image), firms should opt for the implementation of integrated information systems even though it is expensive. The empirical analysis also highlights the positive contribution that availability of workers supplies to Reactivity. Thus, Reactivity can be implemented successfully when the culture of performing Reactivity is spread over the organization and people are aware of its existence. Thus, a reactive orientation can be successfully implemented when deep consensus exists among employees.The second group of managerial practices has a lower but still positive impact on the global Reactivity. Available capacity belongs to this group; it provides a positive contribution to the global Reactivity. When a firm establishes its production capacity, it should also evaluate the negative, indirect effects due to failure to satisfy an unexpected demand. Installing higher capacity to satisfy a sporadic unexpected demand is risky and costly; therefore, firms prefer outsourcing as part of their production when their capacity is not sufficient. In addition, a trade-off exists regardless of whether satisfying the unexpected demand is economically more convenient than installing addition production capacity. A similar discussion is valid for firms’ localization. A localization that puts a company close to its suppliers and customers promotes global Reactivity. Nevertheless, this decision affects firms’ business over the long term; therefore, managers should carefully evaluate its adoption. Finally, innovative product and supplier turnover have a significant and negative impact on Reactivity. In particular, the negative sign of product innovation shows that the higher the product innovation, the lower the Reactivity. Consequently, firms cannot properly perform with Reactivity when a product is new. This seems quite obvious since firms do not exploit any economies of scale and the market is unpredictable in itself. Similarly, high supplier turnover is a sign of unstable relationships with suppliers that lead to low Reactivity. Firms can properly satisfy an unexpected demand and perform with Reactivity only when supplier relationships are well established.In contrast to Model 1, Model 2 involves irreversible decisions related to standard components, information system, and localization. Similarly, reversible decisions refer to all managerial practices that imply flexible options, medium-sized financial investments, and decisions that affect the company’s management for short-/medium-term periods, while stepping back from its implementation is not too costly or complex. Model 3 comprises all reversible decisions related to centralized logistics, available capacity, worker availability, importance of customers, innovative product, and supplier turnover. Model 3 accounts for all the explanatory variables that can change over time and hence influence and modify firm Reactivity in the short run.For Model 3 all the explanatory variables are significant except one, importance of customer. Nevertheless, the model is quite good, with a high R2 and acceptable multicollinearity. Comparing Model 2 to Model 3, it appears that the influence of reversible managerial practices on Reactivity is higher than that for irreversible practices. Model 2 only explains 38% of the total variance, while Model 3 explains 49.1%.In summary, managers can easily implement a reactive orientation through the centralization of their logistics network, looking for outsourcing options to increase their production capacity, promoting Reactivity as an orientation to be undertaken from the bottom to the top of the organization’s hierarchy, implementing a few product innovations, and establishing strong relationships with suppliers.Note 1The same empirical results obtained for Models 1–3 were achieved when we used the partial indicators of Reactivity as dependent variables. This is appropriate because the Reactivity index consists of a combination of the partial indicators, ROC, ROT, and ROQ. The results of the regression analysis for the partial indicators of Reactivity are displayed in Table 3. We concluded that standardized components, centralized logistics, integrated information systems, and availability of workers have a high and significant impact on both the global and partial indicators of Reactivity; available capacity, localization, product innovation, and supplier turnover have a significant but low impact on both the global and the partial indicators of Reactivity. Importance of customers has no significant impact on partial Reactivity indicators. Finally, reversible managerial practices have a higher significant impact on partial indicators of Reactivity than irreversible practices; thus, they allow for effective and efficient satisfaction of unexpected demand in terms of cost, time, and quality (see Table 5).The Reactivity index is a measure of operational performance that shows how well firms perform with respect to indicators of cost, quality, and time under unexpected demand. Nevertheless, firms are always concerned with economic performance (De Giovanni, 2012). The Reactivity index only reflects how firms work and perform operatively when an unexpected order arrives, while firms pay (even more) attention to economic performance.To test the effect of Reactivity on economic performance, we conducted a further empirical analysis investigating whether performing with Reactivity leads to higher economic performance. This analysis introduced another novelty in this stream of literature. Although several contributions propose that the Agile, Lean, and Leagile constructs are appropriate means for improving economic performance, empirical research that supports these statements is still lacking. The current empirical investigation tested the relationships between Reactivity and economic performance to illustrate the economic benefits that a reactive orientation supplies.Using the same sample described earlier, a regression model explored the influence of global Reactivity on a firm’s performance. The Reactivity index was used as the independent variable, while returns on investment, sales, and assets – namely, ROI, ROS, and ROA, respectively – were the dependent variables. Consequently, the empirical analysis consisted of the following model (Model 4):Performance=β0+β1Reactivityindex+εTable 6reports the results of the empirical analysis. We ran three regression analyses in which the dependent variable performance assumes the values of ROI, ROS, and ROA, respectively.The empirical analysis reported in Table 6 clearly illustrates the economic benefits derived from Reactivity, which significantly explains the performance of ROI, ROA, and ROS; therefore, it represents a valid orientation in practical terms. For all models, the adjusted R2 is quite satisfactory, showing values always higher than 0.6. To reinforce the statement in Note 1, Table 6 also displays the impact of partial indicators of Reactivity on economic performance (Model 5). Consequently, the empirical analysis consisted of the following additional model:Performance=β0+β1ROQ+β2ROC+β3ROT+εOur results indicate that each partial indicator has a significant coefficient, and the R2 performed is really close to the one obtained when using the Reactivity index as an independent variable. Thus, these empirical results reinforce the statement earlier presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
