@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A linear model for surface mining haul truck allocation incorporating shovel idle probabilities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tractable linear integer allocation model in oil sands mining industry using query theory.Capturing the nonlinear relationship between throughput and number of trucks.Model is based on shovel productivity, which is derived from the shovel’s idle probability.Linearization of idle probabilities leads to an accurate, simple allocation model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Queueing,OR in natural resources,Integer programming,Truck allocation,Oil sand mining,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present models of trucks and shovels in oil sand surface mines. The models are formulated to minimize the number of trucks for a given set of shovels, subject to throughput and ore grade constraints. We quantify and validate the nonlinear relation between a shovel’s idle probability (which determines the shovel’s productivity) and the number of trucks assigned to the shovel via a simple approximation, based on the theory of finite source queues. We use linearization to incorporate this expression into linear integer programs. We assume in our integer programs that each shovel is assigned a single truck size but we outline how one could account for multiple truck sizes per shovel in an approximate fashion. The linearization of shovel idle probabilities allows us to formulate more accurate truck allocation models that are easily solvable for realistic-sized problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The province of Alberta, Canada, contains large oil sand deposits. Its proven bitumen reserve, which ranks third after Saudi Arabia and Venezuela, is estimated to be 169.3billion barrels of crude oil (Government of Alberta, 2012). The production cost of synthetic crude oil is considerably higher, however, than that of conventional oil and, therefore, the economic viability of oil sand mining is highly dependent on both the market price of oil and the cost of production. Recent high oil prices and reductions in production cost have led many large oil companies to open mines and oil sand processing plants in the oil sands around Fort McMurray, Alberta (Atkins & MacFadyen, 2008).An oil sand mining operation is a complex process that produces synthetic crude oil from the processing of bitumen in ore. Fig. 1illustrates how the ore is mined and subsequently transported by truck to a hopper from which the ore is crushed and stored in a surge pile, which feeds a downstream processing plant, wherein bitumen is extracted from the crushed ore and finally the bitumen is upgraded to synthetic crude oil. Mining is the most expensive part of the overall process. Oil sand can be mined using a variety of methods, but we focus on surface mines, in which shovels load ore onto trucks, which transport the ore to a processing system. Oil sand companies that use this mining method face the challenge of maintaining efficient truck utilization. The main objective is generally to maintain stable ore throughput at a target level with a required blended ore grade (the concentration of the material being mined in the ore) at the least possible cost. Although we focus on truck allocation in oil sand mines, the principles and the methodology that we discuss could be relevant in other industries that require efficient truck allocation, such as civic waste collection, earth-moving in the construction industry, and material handling in mining (Carmichael, 1987, Bhat, 1996; Eisenstein & Iyer, 1997; Nuortio, Kytöjoki, Niska, & Bräysy, 2006).The surge pile in Fig. 1 consists of crushed ore and it acts as a buffer between the discrete mining process and the continuous extraction process. Smaller surge piles have lower capital and operating costs but they also increase the risk that truck and shovel breakdowns will affect ore throughput to the extraction plant. Frequent fluctuations in ore throughput can adversely affect ore recovery in the extraction process.To mitigate the risks of not meeting ore demand due to operational uncertainties, mine operators often allocate more trucks to transport ore than necessary. This risk-averse approach can lead to inefficient truck usage, resulting in long truck queues at dump locations, at shovels, or both. Allocating more trucks to transport ore leaves fewer trucks for other tasks, such as transporting overburden (waste material), which is sometimes critical. Managers often resolve short-term truck shortages by truck rentals, but this resolution is costly.Truck allocation and truck dispatching are two separate processes. We focus on truck allocation, which typically takes place at the beginning of a shift. Truck dispatching continually adjusts the initial allocation based on adherence to production targets, the number of waiting trucks at shovels and dumps, and possibly other factors. A good initial allocation greatly aids the effectiveness of truck dispatching. Truck allocation models are also useful to managers, to determine or justify an adequate budget for truck resources, given the required ore throughput.Typically, truck dispatchers allocate trucks at the beginning of 12-hour shifts, based on past data and user experience. Efficiency of truck allocation relies on dispatchers’ experience, which varies between shifts. Ensuring that dispatchers have the skills required for efficient truck allocation requires thorough truck-dispatching training, but such training does not guarantee consistent or optimal truck allocation.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 surveys related literature. Section 3 outlines our contributions and their significance. Section 4 develops a basic truck allocation model, in which we linearize the expression for the average shovel throughput, resulting in a linear integer program. Section 5 demonstrates how to extend the basic model to handle multiple truck sizes. Section 6 presents computational results. Section 7 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We developed and validated an approximate expression (3) to quantify the probability that a shovel is idle, as a function of the number of trucks allocated to the shovel. We incorporated this expression into a linear integer program for minimizing the number of trucks needed to obtain a given throughput rate, while maintaining an ore grade in a specified range. The integer program is based on an assumption that a single truck size is allocated to each shovel but we outlined an approximate approach for relaxing this assumption, by using hypothetical truck types, representing different mixes of real truck types, and solving a set of auxiliary subproblems for shovels that are allocated a hypothetical truck type. We demonstrated that the integer program is easily solvable for mines that are larger than any real mine. Delasay, Kolfal, and Ingolfsson (2012) estimate the capital and operating cost per truck to be $1.6million per year for typical oil sand mines. Therefore, even small reductions in the total number of allocated trucks can translate into substantial savings.The general principle that variability reduces efficiency holds true for surface mining operations. The shovel idle probability approximation (3) that we have introduced reveals that variability in truck loading times is far more important than variability in back-cycle times. Approximation (3) and our linear integer program make it possible to quantify the impact of reducing variability in loading times. Assuming deterministic loading times (as mining engineers do implicitly when using match factor calculations) is too optimistic. Assuming exponentially distributed loading times for tractability is too pessimistic; real surface mines have loading times that are less variable than implied by an exponential distribution. Approximation (3) provides a simple and effective way to interpolate between these two extremes. If greater accuracy is needed, then one can use simulation instead of approximation (3) without making the integer program more difficult to solve. We found the idle probabilities computed using (3) to be off by at most 3%, however, when compared with a simulation model that incorporates realistic loading and back-cycle time distributions.Another general principle is that flexibility can increase efficiency. In the context of surface mining, having multiple truck sizes provides flexibility that can be exploited in order to reduce the total number of trucks and to better match the mine’s total throughput rate to the target throughput rate, enabling smoother downstream material flow. Our approximate approach for allocating a mix of different truck sizes to some or all shovels can be used to realize the benefits of truck-size flexibility.The intended uses for our truck allocation model are (1) to provide a good initial allocation of trucks to shovels for the beginning of a shift and (2) to generate target production rates for each shovel, for use by real-time dispatching algorithms. Additional research is needed to investigate how to integrate our truck allocation model with previously proposed (or new) real-time dispatching algorithms.MF=(Numberoftrucks)(Loadercycletime)(Numberofloaders)(Truckcycletime).In our notation, the loader cycle time is 1/μ and the truck cycle time is 1/μ+1/λ. Setting the number of loaders (shovels) and MF equal to one and solving for the number of trucks, we obtainy=Numberoftrucks=TruckcycletimeLoadercycletime=1/μ+1/λ1/μ=1+μ/λ=1+1/r,which is the number of trucks at which the shovel idle probability reaches zero (that is, the shovel is fully utilized) for a D/D/1/-/y system, as shown in expression (2).