@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A spatial optimisation model for multi-period landscape level fuel management to mitigate wildfire impacts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an integer programming model for multi-period fuel treatment planning.The model schedules treatments to generate fire-resistant spatial fuel patterns.The model provides a flexible framework for managing heterogeneous landscapes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in natural resources,Spatial optimization,Wildfire,Wildland fire,Fuel management,Integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Elevated fuel loads are contributing to an increase in the occurrence of, and area burned by, severe wildfires in many regions across the globe. In an attempt to reverse this trend, fire and land management agencies are investing in extensive fuel management programs. However, the planning of fuel treatment activities poses complicated decision-making problems with spatial and temporal dimensions. Here, we present a mixed integer programming model for spatially explicit multi-period scheduling of fuel treatments. The model provides a flexible framework that allows for landscape heterogeneity and a range of ecological and operational considerations and constraints. The model’s functionality is demonstrated on a series of hypothetical test landscapes and a number of implementation issues are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we consider the scheduling of fuel treatment activities to reduce the destructive potential of wildfires. In practice, these scheduling problems are usually solved subjectively by managers, but the fact that fuel treatments and fires can interact with each other across both time and space render them particularly difficult to solve manually. As an alternate solution approach, we present a mixed integer programming model for selecting fuel treatment locations in a multi-period setting. In this model, fuel treatments are scheduled to produce a fragmented landscape fuel complex with a view to inhibiting fire spread. We also present model extensions to account for various ecological and operational considerations. The major contribution of this paper is that it takes a complicated management problem of societal importance and formulates it into a coherent and solvable model. A number of similarly structured problems, involving dynamic natural systems with spatially explicit management objectives, appear in the forestry operations research literature (Bjørndal, Herrero, Newman, Romero, & Weintraub, 2012; Martell, Gunn, & Weintraub, 1998; Weintraub, Church, Murray, & Guignard, 2000; Weintraub & Romero, 2006). While our model employs some concepts that feature in this earlier work (i.e., adjacency, connectivity and inter-temporality), on the whole, fuel management problems tend to differ significantly from other well-studied forestry problems such as harvest scheduling. For example a key point of difference arising from our application, is that our model’s objective is to generate and maintain ‘disconnected’ landscape patterns.Fire is a natural component of many terrestrial ecosystems. However, uncontrolled wildfires can cause loss of human life and destruction of property and natural resources (King, Bradstock, Cary, Chapman, & Marsden-Smedley, 2008). This is of special concern in localities such as southern Australia, California and Mediterranean Europe where major cities are situated in close proximity to highly flammable vegetation (Bradstock et al., 2012). Wildfire incidence requires the co-occurrence in time and space of three factors: fire-conducive weather, an ignition source and fuel (i.e., flammable vegetation). In recent decades an increase in wildfire extent and severity has been observed in many countries including the USA, Canada, Australia and southern Europe (Boer, Sadler, Wittkuhn, McCaw, & Grierson, 2009; McCaw, 2013). This is due in part to uncharacteristically high fuel loads (i.e., large amounts of combustible vegetation per unit area) arising from suppression-focussed 20th century fire management practices (Hessburg, Reynolds, Keane, James, & Salter, 2007; Loehle, 2004; Reinhardt, Keane, Calkin, & Cohen, 2008; Schmidt, Taylor, & Skinner, 2008).In an attempt to reduce the risk posed by wildfires, land management agencies in Australia and the USA have implemented extensive fuel management programs (Ager, Vaillant, & Finney, 2010; Boer et al., 2009; Collins, Stephens, Moghaddas, & Battles, 2010; McCaw, 2013). Fuel management is defined as the process of altering the amount and structure of fuels through the application of treatments such as prescribed fire or mechanical thinning (Finney, 2001; King et al., 2008). Fuel management programs typically aim to reduce risk in two ways: (1) by forming fuel-breaks adjacent to communities to facilitate the establishment of fire-lines by suppression forces such as fire crews or air tankers, or (2) by altering fuels in the surrounding landscape to modify fire behaviour and lessen the potential for severe fires (Bevers, Omi, & Hof, 2004). Large destructive wildfires typically occur in hot, dry and windy weather conditions and tend to be resistant to suppression efforts due to their rapid growth, sheer size, and crown fire and spotting behaviours. The term “crown fire” refers to fires that spread through the crown or canopy of trees. Crown fires are typically high in intensity and can spread incredibly quickly. “Spotting” refers to the process by which intense fires sometimes emit burning firebrands (e.g., pieces of burning bark) that are lofted into the air by the convection column above the fire and carried by the wind to land some distance ahead of the main fire front where they ignite new “spot fires” that contribute to fire spread. Under such conditions a program of the second type that manages fuel in the wider landscape is thought to offer the best possible means for resisting fire growth (Finney, 2007; Reinhardt et al., 2008).Large wildfires cover an area greater than a treated forest stand, meaning a single large fire could encounter several fuel treatment sites before extinguishment. Hence, a landscape-level fuel management strategy that considers the layout of all fuel treatments in relation to one another is likely to be more effective than a ‘greedy’ selection of treatment locations (Rytwinski & Crowe, 2010). The potential benefits of landscape-level fuel treatment has been recognised in wilderness areas of the western United States where free-burning fires have generated mosaics of differing fuel ages and such historic burn patterns have been seen to inhibit the growth and therefore effect the shape and size of large fires in subsequent years (Finney, 2007). This type of landscape-level effect was observed in a study of two large Arizona wildfires, where the fires circumvented treated areas resulting in unburned areas referred to as fire-shadows on the lee-side of fuel treatments, and an overall reduction in fire severity (Finney, McHugh, & Grenfell, 2005). In the eucalypt forests of south-western Australia, prescribed burning has been practiced at large spatial scales over the past five decades. Analysis of historic data in this region has revealed that the connectedness of ‘old’ untreated fuel patches is the strongest contributing variable to wildfire extent, highlighting the need to consider spatial arrangement of fuels when planning fuel treatment regimes (Boer et al., 2009). This finding is consistent with observations made in the USA’s Sierra Nevada forests that indicate spatial fragmentation of fuels can modify wildfire size and behaviour (Parsons & van Wagtendonk, 1996; van Wagtendonk, 1995).Despite this small but growing body of field evidence, current understanding of fire behaviour responses to landscape-level fuel treatment is largely based upon simulation studies. Probabilistic models based on percolation theory and cellular automata have demonstrated the importance of fuel connectivity for landscape-level fire spread dynamics (Miller & Urban, 2000), with fragmentation of the fuel complex by treatment resulting in a reduction in average fire size (Loehle, 2004). Simulation studies indicate that fire spread is affected by the amount of fuel treatments as a proportion of the landscape and their spatial configuration (Gonzalez, Palahi, & Pukkala, 2005; King et al., 2008; Parisien, Junor, & Kafka, 2007; Schmidt et al., 2008). Nonlinear relationships have been identified between area treated and fire behaviour outputs (Ager et al., 2010), including ‘threshold’ effects where – if fuel treatment exceeds some critical level – a marked reduction in fire propagation is realised (King et al., 2008). Geometrically derived fuel treatment patterns have been shown to reduce fire spread rate and fire-line intensity (Finney, 2001). However, real-life application of such patterns is complicated by the heterogeneity of landscapes with respect to fuels, weather and topography (Finney, 2007).While findings from empirical and simulation studies can inform strategies for spatial fuel treatment configurations, in practice the performance of such strategies can be significantly degraded by operational constraints that restrict treatment extent and location (Ager et al., 2010). These restrictions arise due to factors such as: land ownership, funding limitations, inadequate road access, habitat preservation regulations and prescribed burning weather requirements (Collins et al., 2010; Fernandes & Botelho, 2003; Finney, 2001; McCaw, 2013). Such constraints make fuel management a problem amenable to optimisation methods (Finney, 2007) and accordingly a number of models for spatial allocation of treatment effort have been proposed. Hof, Omi, Bevers, and Laven (2000) formulated a linear programming model to delay a defined target fire’s spread to nominated “protection areas”. Finney (2007) developed an iterative procedure incorporating the minimum travel time algorithm for locating fuel treatments in major fire flow paths using. Palma, Cui, Martell, Robak, and Weintraub (2007) proposed a heuristic approach using shortest path methods to select individual harvest blocks to disrupt critical paths between potential ignition points and values at risk. Wei, Rideout, and Kirsch (2008) formulated a mixed integer programming model for locating fuel treatments that reduce fire intensity so as to minimize the expected loss incurred on a flammable landscape. Rytwinski and Crowe (2010) used an iterative procedure that paired a fire spread simulator with a metaheuristic scatter-search algorithm to select fuel break location. Wei (2012) developed a mixed integer programming model to locate fuel treatments to serve as potential control locations for future fires. Minas, Hearne, and Martell (in press) presented a mixed integer programming model for locating fuel treatments and suppression resources in an integrated manner to maximise initial attack coverage.A limitation of the models described above is that they handle spatial allocation of fuel treatments as a single period problem. However, in practice treatment effects are transient because most vegetation eventually recovers and begins to re-grow after it has been treated. This means that the generation and maintenance of desirable landscape-level fuel configurations requires a multi-period schedule that takes longevity of individual treatments into account (Finney, 2001; Reinhardt et al., 2008). Spatially explicit multi-period fuel treatment scheduling is a complicated problem and most of the modelling efforts to date have either employed heuristic approaches or considered very small landscapes.Gonzalez et al. (2005) used a heuristic procedure to schedule harvesting activities to optimise a number of landscape metrics and combinations thereof. Konoshima, Montgomery, Albers, and Arthur (2008) and Konoshima, Albers, Montgomery, and Arthur (2010) formulated a stochastic dynamic programming model to explore optimal fuel treatment and timber harvesting spatial patterns across a small hypothetical landscape. Kim, Bettinger, and Finney (2009) explored the use of a heuristic for multi-period scheduling of fuel management activities across a large landscape in north-eastern Oregon. Their model was used to generate both dispersed and clustered fuel treatment patterns in an attempt to mitigate the effects of wildfires whilst maintaining evenly distributed annual harvest volumes. A follow-up paper examined the effects of these spatial fuel treatment patterns on simulated, human-caused fires in the same study area in north-eastern Oregon (Kim & Bettinger 2008). Acuna, Palma, Cui, Martell, and Weintraub (2010) incorporated Palma et al.’s (2007) heuristic for identifying critical fire paths into a multi-period model that can used to determine what forest stands to harvest to both provide industrial fibre and reduce the flammability of the residual landscape. González-Olabarria and Pukkala (2011) developed an iterative procedure that used a simulated annealing algorithm and a fire spread simulator to generate fuel treatment schedules with a view to stabilising fire risk over time. Longer term fuel management planning often involves the consideration of a number of ecological considerations (Ager et al., 2010). These can include burn frequency constraints based on vital attributes of ecosystems and species and requirements to maintain post-fire seral stage heterogeneity to support biodiversity (Burrows, 2008). Calkin, Hummel, and Agee (2005) used a simulated annealing algorithm to solve a goal programming model for reducing wildfire threat while maintaining late seral forest for faunal habitat. Lehmkuhl et al. (2007) used fire spread models and an evolutionary algorithm to simultaneously minimize potential fire behaviour and loss of faunal habitat.In this paper we present a spatially explicit mixed integer programming model for fuel treatment scheduling. The model accounts for the transient nature of fuel by keeping track of the age of both treated and untreated patches of fuel or vegetation. It is, we believe, the first multi-period landscape-level fuel treatment model to be formulated and solved using exact optimisation methods. The model provides a flexible framework that allows for incorporation of landscape heterogeneity, as well as a range of ecological and operational constraints. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The mathematical formulation of the model is presented and explained. The model’s functionality is then demonstrated on a series of hypothetical test landscapes. This is followed by some computational testing and discussion of implementation issues.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Scheduling fuel treatment activities to maintain the landscape in a fire resistant state is a difficult problem with important societal implications. In this paper, we have presented a spatially explicit optimisation model for multi-period scheduling of fuel treatments. The model tracks treatment decisions and fuel age over time and thus is able to capture the transience of treatment effect due to vegetation regrowth. The mixed integer programming formulation allows for heterogeneity of landscape features such as: fuel type, topography and prevalent wind direction. The model also allows for the incorporation of ecological considerations such as: tolerable fire intervals and seral stage landscape composition required to support biodiversity. A number of mechanisms for adapting the model to specific features of a given implementation environment have been presented. These include the use of zones to accommodate spatially variable land uses and management aims, as well as the use of weights to prioritise treatment of high leverage locations. Some of these model’s features were demonstrated in the previous section and computational testing suggests that the model is able to handle problem sizes of practical interest.It is important to note that though we have formulated this problem deterministically there are in fact a number of stochastic elements, the most important of these being area burned due to wildfire. While wildfires can have undesirable destructive effects in the immediate term, they also result in additional ‘unscheduled’ fuel reduction that can be beneficial in future periods. So in the advent of a significant wildfire it would be necessary to re-run the model to take the resultant fuel reduction effect into account when scheduling treatments for subsequent years. Indeed even scheduled fuel treatment is stochastic since more or less than the planned amount may be achieved in a given year due to weather and various operational issues. Thus in a practical setting, fuel treatment scheduling would be treated as a rolling horizon problem with the model re-run annually with updated information on the current state of the landscape. More problematic is the effect that ‘unplanned’ wildfire can have on the proportion of late seral stage vegetation in the landscape. A straightforward way to deal with this is to strengthen the late seral stage constraint by adjusting the right hand side based on predicted or historic burn fractions (Savage, Martell, & Wotton, 2011).It has been noted that scientists and managers often overlook the need to translate complex science into practical fire management prescriptions and that this can result in a gap between the state of knowledge and current management practices (Burrows, 2008). In this research we have applied integer programming methods to the combinatorially complex problem of fuel treatment scheduling. Our hope is that the modelling approach developed here can assist in closing this knowledge-practice gap.