@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Joint optimization of spare parts ordering and maintenance policies for multiple identical items subject to silent failures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The joint maintenance and spares ordering policy for identical items is studied.The items suffer two types of silent failures: minor and major.Both periodic and continuous review inventory policies are studied.Properties for the decision variables are provided to facilitate optimization.Sensitivity analysis shows that the models are robust to parameters misestimation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Spare parts,Maintenance,Replacement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper the joint maintenance and spare parts ordering problem for more than one identical operating items is studied. The operating items may suffer two types of silent failures: a minor failure, which results in item malfunctioning, and a major failure, which renders the item completely out-of-function. Inspections are periodically held to detect any failures and the inspected items are preventively maintained, repaired or replaced according to their condition. Two ordering policies are investigated to supply the necessary spare parts: a periodic review and a continuous review policy. The expected total maintenance and inventory cost per time unit is derived and the proposed models are optimized for real case data. In addition, the sensitivity of the proposed models is studied through numerical examples and the effect of some key problem characteristics on the optimal decisions is discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Maintenance policies for stochastically failing systems have received great attention from researchers during the last decades. In most of the proposed maintenance models it is generally assumed that spares are always available when needed for replacement, which is not usually the case in practice. In fact, since the procurement leadtime is generally non-negligible, any replacement policy should be combined with an appropriate ordering policy for timely supply of spare parts. In such cases, spare parts demand is governed by the failure mechanism of the operating units as well as by the applied preventive maintenance or replacement policy, if any. Thus, spare parts demand is usually more peculiar than that of regular products but, at the same time, manageable to some extent since preventive maintenance times are rather easily adaptable. In addition, shortage costs of spare parts are generally considerably higher than those of regular products since shortage of spares upon need may result in excessive production downtimes. Thus, typical inventory control models are generally not appropriate for spare parts management and ad hoc ordering policies have been proposed for such cases.In practice, the problem of managing spare parts appears in several variations depending on the deterioration mechanism of the operating system, the number of operating parts, the type of the applied maintenance policy, the severity and detectability of failures and the limitations and special characteristics of ordering policies themselves. Therefore, the research on this field may take several directions to keep up with industry requirements. A thorough review on joint maintenance and inventory optimization models has been recently published by Van Horenbeek, Bure, Cattrysse, Pintelon, and Vansteenwegen (2013).The study in the current paper was motivated by the spare parts inventory control and maintenance problem observed for steam traps in an oil-refinery. Steam traps are subject to non-observable failures which result in excessive losses of live steam. Thus, all traps are periodically inspected using a specialized monitoring device, which detects steam leaks through temperature and ultrasonic measurements analysis. According to the inspection outcome, traps may be preventively maintained, repaired or replaced by new ones. Clearly, the length of the inspection interval directly affects the cost incurred due to steam losses as well as the number of spares needed at every inspection instance. Considering that there are more than 3000 traps in the steam network of the company, it is clear that the decisions on the inspection frequency as well as on the ordering policy of spares are of major importance to the company. Therefore a joint maintenance and spare parts ordering policy is proposed and the economically optimal inspection interval, spare parts ordering time and quantity are derived.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section the relevant literature is reviewed and briefly discussed. In Section 3 the problem setting as well as the proposed maintenance and ordering policies are described in detail. In Section 4 two models, differing in the type of the proposed ordering policy, are developed, while in Section 5 an extension of the proposed models is discussed. In Section 6 the proposed models are optimized for real case data, their economic performance against simpler approaches is investigated and a sensitivity analysis is performed. Section 7 summarizes the paper and presents topics for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
