@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Use of queue modelling in the analysis of elective patient treatment governed by a maximum waiting time policy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Maximum waiting time guarantee policies can harm hospital performance.The guarantee reduces resource utilization levels, especially in small specialties.Patient booking, rescheduling and withdrawals are crucial to system performance.Combines Continuous-Time Markov Chain and Discrete Event Simulation approaches.benefits of the combined use of the two approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Queueing,Simulation,Waiting lists,Waiting time guarantee,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many public healthcare systems struggle with excessive waiting lists for elective patient treatment. Different countries address this problem in different ways, and one interesting method entails a maximum waiting time guarantee. Introduced in Denmark in 2002, it entitles patients to treatment at a private hospital in Denmark or at a hospital abroad if the public healthcare system is unable to provide treatment within the stated maximum waiting time guarantee. Although clearly very attractive in some respects, many stakeholders have been very concerned about the negative consequences of the policy on the utilization of public hospital resources. This paper illustrates the use of a queue modelling approach in the analysis of elective patient treatment governed by the maximum waiting time policy. Drawing upon the combined strengths of analytic and simulation approaches we develop both Continuous-Time Markov Chain and Discrete Event Simulation models, to provide an insightful analysis of the public hospital performance under the policy rules. The aim of this paper is to support the enhancement of the quality of elective patient care, to be brought about by better understanding of the policy implications by hospital planners and strategic decision makers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Identifying methods for ameliorating excessive waiting lists for elective patient treatment have been high on the agenda for many countries with public healthcare systems. As shorter waiting times usually result in higher degrees of patient and citizen satisfaction, considerable funds have been invested in their reduction over the years. Different countries have tried to address this problem in various ways, and one interesting method entails a Maximum Waiting Time Guarantee (MWTG). A number of papers reporting the implementation of the policy in different countries and providing general descriptions of its content are available in the literature (Ashton, 2009; Hanning, 1996; Hanning and Spångberg, 2000; Johannesson, Johansson, and Söderqvist, 1998; Karlberg and Brinkmo, 2009; Siciliani and Hurst, 2005; Vrangbæk, Østergren, Birk, and Winblad, 2007; Wiley, 2005).Introduced in Denmark in 2002, this guarantee entitles patients to treatment at a private hospital in Denmark, or at a hospital abroad, if the local public healthcare system is unable to provide treatment within the stated maximum waiting time guarantee. In such cases, the Danish region where the patient resides (and which is responsible for providing the local public hospital care), now has to cover the cost of treatment either in private for-profit hospitals in Denmark or in hospitals in neighbouring countries (Madsen, 2010). As noted by Pedersen, Christiansen, and Bech (2005), the position of the patient has been significantly strengthened through the implementation of the policy. Patients are no longer simply a passive party waiting for capacity to become available; they have now more options to choose from, and hence some decision power, which should lead to a reduction in waiting lists and waiting times.After the introduction of a two-month maximum waiting time guarantee for the entire course of treatment (i.e. examination and treatment) in 2002, it was decreased to one month in 2007. Although clearly very attractive in some respects, many stakeholders have been concerned about the possible negative consequences of such policies, if taken too far, on the performance of public hospitals. In particular, there are claims that a one month guarantee would cause increased overflows of patients to the private sector, with a consequent inefficient use of public hospital resources. As a result, the Danish government has recently extended the maximum waiting time guarantee into one month for examination procedures and two months for the treatment.Clearly, there exists a trade-off between short waiting times and high resource utilization in public hospitals. A maximum waiting time guarantee should limit waiting times of elective patients by offering the possibility of faster treatment in the private sector when the queues in public system are too long. However, given that the whole system is stochastic, very short queues for examination and treatment can result in some inefficiencies as shown in Worthington (1987). Specifically, resources can become under-utilised more often, because there will be a higher chance of having no patients available to fill empty timeslots in a schedule. The negative impact of the policy would be magnified if all patients use the possibility of private treatment.However, there are other potential sources of inefficiency which can result from short waiting lists. The first one relates to a mismatch between available patients and examination or treatment session lengths. Specifically, the policy rules state that patients should be scheduled for examination and operation based on the FCFS rule. Moreover, they should receive an appointment for a particular day in the future in advance, so the hospital planner has to reserve the capacity required for the procedure based on his best knowledge about its expected process time. As overbooking is typically not allowed, this can result in sessions that are not fully booked, and hence underused capacity. It is simply difficult to match the process times of upcoming patients in a way that they cover 100 percent of available time. An example of a patient case-mix scheduled for a given day with use of this policy is presented in Fig. 1. To increase the utilization of resources exemptions from the FCFS rule may occur when the expected process time of an upcoming patient fits into an empty gap in the schedule left by the preceding patients (e.g. patients 4 and 7). Hence, the longer the queue gets the better is the chance of a good fit, as there are simply more patients to choose from. The goodness of fit is likewise affected by the patient case-mix, for example it is easier to fit short procedures into a schedule than long ones.Another way in which utilization may be lost is due to patients withdrawing from the system or rescheduling their appointments. The first event relates to the patients who have made an appointment but leave the system before the due date, not requiring examination or treatment any more. The latter event describes the situation in which the patients change their previous appointments (due to medical or personal reasons) but still need to be examined or treated on another day. In both cases, the potential loss of utilization is due to the difficulty of finding a replacement for the cancelled appointment. In practice the replacement can be found amongst newly arriving patients or patients that are already placed on a waiting list. The earlier a patient gives notice about the cancellation, the greater is the chance of finding an arriving patient to take his place. If this is not possible, the hospital planners typically contact other patients on the waiting list offering them an earlier examination or treatment. Clearly, the longer the waiting list is the higher is the chance of finding a replacement. However, if a patient gives very short notice or does not inform the hospital at all, it may be impossible to find a replacement and the capacity will not be utilized.Given these sources of utilization losses it is easy to see that short queues can lead to inefficiencies. However, increasing the size of queues that are already long increases patients’ waiting times for ever decreasing improvements in utilization. (In fact, in practice longer waiting lists can sometimes reduce utilization due to greater no-shows or other problems associated with managing long waiting lists.) It is therefore important to investigate and compare the trade-offs between waiting times and utilization levels prior to making any changes in the policy.Not surprisingly, waiting list management and hospital admissions have been given some attention in the literature. Whilst economists perceive waiting lists as a rationing mechanism in the absence of price rationing (Lindsay and Feigenbaum, 1984), operations researchers tend to see the waiting time as a result of stochastic demand for health services. Consequently, the latter often use stochastic modelling techniques to tackle waiting list problems. For example, Worthington (1987) investigated the implications of certain waiting list and demand management strategies using a single station queueing model. Vissers, Adan, and Dellaert (2007) used simulation to examine different admission policies in a simplified hospital setting and proposed a platform for comparing alternative hospital admission systems. VanBerkel and Blake (2007) also used a simulation to analyze the waiting list for surgery procedures and to aid capacity planning decisions at a surgical department. Goddard and Tavakoli (2008) evaluated economic aspects of managed public sector waiting lists using a single station queueing model with a simple withdrawal mechanism. They evaluated a guaranteed maximum duration of wait, pointing out that it may not always serve a welfare maximizing policy. Bekker and Koeleman (2011) combined Quadratic Programing with a time-dependent queueing model to determine hospital admissions quota for scheduled admissions that results in a stable bed demand. Knight, Williams, and Reynolds (2012) developed a simulation tool for modelling patient choice in healthcare systems where individual patient’s decision to join a waiting list at a given hospital is made upon observation of the entire system (e.g. travel distance and length of waiting list). This work is extended in Knight and Harper (2013) who used a game theoretical approach where the choice of public hospitals by individual patients is interpreted as a routing game. Griffiths, Williams, and Wood (2013) constructed a queuing model of a neurological rehabilitation unit which incorporated balking to model the dissuading effect that long waiting lists may have on arrival rates. Queueing theory approach was also used by Stanford, Lee, Chandok, and McAlister (2014) to address waiting time inconsistency in solid organ transplantation.The process of elective treatment usually involves a specialist consultation at an outpatient clinic for which patients will normally have to wait a period of time. Some of these patients will require treatment as inpatients, for which they will again usually join a waiting list before receiving treatment. Consequently, a more detailed queueing representation of this process is likely to involve two stations. Analysis of tandem configurations consisting of service facilities with finite queues linked in series has a long history in the literature. Blocking caused by finite capacities makes exact analytical analysis of open queueing networks intractable, except for very small networks, and hence approximation approaches have been developed for these systems (see e.g. Altiok, 1982; 1989; Bierbooms, Adan, and van Vuuren, 2013; Jun and Perros, 1990; Perros, 1986). Other authors have provided useful performance bounds for such systems (e.g. So and Chin, 1992; Van Dijk and Lamond, 1988). Unfortunately, none of these models includes the waiting list mechanisms needed for the MWTG problem, such as the various sources of efficiency losses, and the waiting time guarantee which refers to total waiting time in both queues.The primary aim of this paper is to tackle and offer insights into the MWTG problem using an innovative combination of Continuous-Time Markov Chain (CTMC) and Discrete Event Simulation (DES) modelling approaches. The combined use of the two approaches allows us to incorporate all the important waiting list mechanisms in a tandem queue formulation. In particular, we develop a CTMC in which the additional sources of inefficiency are introduced into the queue formulation through state-dependent processing rates. In addition, we have built an associated DES model to help investigate features such as patient booking in more detail. Simulation results are used to calibrate state-dependent processing rates in the CTMC model so that it can serve as a good approximation for some more complex scenarios. The resulting tandem queue formulation can be used to model elective patient treatment under various MWTG policies. The secondary aim of this paper is to reflect upon the combined use of these methods and to highlight some of the perceived benefits of this approach.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a comprehensive CTMC formulation of the MWTG system, including terms representing losses of utilization due to sessions not being fully booked, rescheduling and withdrawals. Calibration of the CTMC model using the DES model is presented in Section 3, along with some key results from the CTMC model that provide insights into the likely performance of the MWTG policy under a range of scenarios. Next, in Section 4 we reflect on the combined strengths of analytic and simulation approaches. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the findings and concludes.The process of elective treatment, seen from the perspective of a single public hospital can be visualised as a tandem queueing network, with the first service process representing the outpatient examination and the second service representing the operation. This two-node queuing system is depicted in Fig. 2.Population members seek medical treatment of a particular type at rate λ. Patients can only enter the system by being added to the waiting list for examination. Once they have been examined patients are found to need an operation with probability γ. Existence of a sufficiently long queue will reduce the demand for health treatment in the public sector in favour of the private one. Patients choosing to go to the private sector are represented by a balking mechanism, in which the probability of balking pb(n1, n2), depends on their expected total waiting time for treatment, and thus on the number of patients currently present at both service points, say n1 and n2. The expected total waiting time is estimated as(1)W(n1,n2)=W1(n1)+W2(n2)≈∑i=121μi′ni,whereμi′is the average service rate at service point i in patients/day. This requirement means that the state of the system needs to include both n1 and n2.Service ratesμi′to be used in the model are obtained by dividing the weekly clinic or theatre durations by the average examination or operation durations. For example, if there is only one surgery session per week lasting for 8 hours with an average operation time of 1 hour, the scaled service rate would be 8 patients per week, i.e. the operations have a mean duration of 1/8 week. We also assume clinics and theatre sessions are single-server, with any multiple-server sessions represented as longer duration single-server sessions.As waiting lists in the private hospital sector are usually much shorter than those in the public sector, we assume that patients’ willingness to accept the opportunity of treatment in the private sector increases with the degree of extra waiting, given by W(n1, n2) − Wmax, where Wmax is the waiting time guarantee. Consequently, the effective arrival rate to the public hospital, denoted as λeff, can be represented as a decreasing function of n1, and n2 on a finite range, i.e.(2)λeff(n1,n2)=λ(1−pb(n1,n2)),such that(3)pb(n1,n2)→1,λeff(n1,n2)→0asn1,n2→∞.If we assume that all patients would choose to use private treatment whenever offered by the state, we would have(4)pb(n1,n2)={1ifW(n1,n2)>Wmax,0ifW(n1,n2)≤Wmax.Because this assumption magnifies the impact of the MWTG, it is used in the remainder of the paper to indicate the nature of system behaviour under MWTG policies.If we assume the arrival process is random and that service times are exponential the system will have the Markov property and we can represent it as a Continuous-Time Markov Chain (CTMC) whose states form a finite set {(n1, n2): 0 ≤ n1 ≤ M1(n2), 0 ≤ n2 ≤ M2}, whereM1(n2)=maximumnumberofpatientsatexaminationstationatanytime|n2atoperationstation;M2=maximumnumberofpatientsatoperationstationatanytime.To represent the loss of throughput that clinics experience when waiting lists are short, the model also incorporates:•losses of utilization due to mismatches between available patients and session lengths,a chance that patients refuse the appointment they are offered, and that ease of finding a replacement at short notice also depends on n1 and n2.Losses of utilization due to mismatches between patients and sessions are introduced into the model using state-dependent session efficiency factors 0 ≤ ξ1(n1), ξ2(n2) ≤ 1, for examination and operation sessions respectively. These factors reflect the extent to which the sessions are booked and can be estimated using a simulation model. The factors are used to scale the respective, average service rates to obtain their state-dependent counterparts(5)μi(ni)=μi′ξi(ni)fori=1,2.To represent the potential loss of throughput caused by patients refusing appointments and replacements not being found, we note that in practice patients will be offered appointment by letter or by phone, with phone being used if waiting lists are short or replacement patients need to be found at short notice. We therefore give patients:•probabilities αrand αwof rescheduling or withdrawing from their examination appointments (and probabilities βrand βwof rescheduling or withdrawing from their operation appointments),with probabilities ERLand EWL(ORLand OWL) of being too late to look for a replacement for the above instances respectively.Consequently, we defineαt=1−αr−αw=prob(patientturnsupforexamination),βt=1−βr−βw=prob(patientturnsupforoperation).If the rescheduling or withdrawal is not too late, we assume that the search for replacement is by phone, with each person on the waiting list having a chance ε (or ω) of being able to accept. This leads to the following expressions:δ(n1)=prob(examinationreschedulereplacementisfound|n1insystem)={1−[ERL+(1−ERL)(1−ϵ)n1−2]ifn1≥20otherwiseη(n1)=prob(examinationwithdrawalreplacementisfound|n1insystem)={1−[EWL+(1−EWL)(1−ϵ)n1−2]ifn1≥20otherwiseProbabilities of finding replacement at operation station ϕ(n2) and ψ(n2) in case of rescheduling or withdrawal respectively, can be expressed similarly, see Appendix A.1.Given the above rates and probabilities we are now in position to define all the events occurring in the system, and their consequences.Arrival event:•Arrivals occur at rate λeff(n1, n2) (depending on the maximum waiting time rule): system moves to state (n1 + 1, n2).Examination events:Patient turns up for examination and operation is required: system moves to state (n1 − 1, n2 + 1);–Rate = μ1(n1)αtγPatient turns up for examination and operation is not required: system moves to state (n1 − 1, n2);–Rate = μ1(n1)αt(1 − γ)Patient reschedules examination, and replacement is found, and patient requires operation: system moves to state (n1 − 1, n2 + 1);–Rate = μ1(n1)αrδ(n1)γPatient reschedules examination, and replacement is found, and patient does not require operation: system moves to state (n1 − 1, n2);–Rate = μ1(n1)αrδ(n1)(1 − γ)Patient reschedules examination, and replacement is not found: system stays in state (n1, n2);–Rate = μ1(n1)αr(1 − δ(n1))Patient withdraws from examination, and replacement is found, and patient requires operation: system moves to state (n1 − 2, n2 + 1);–Rate = μ1(n1)αwη(n1)γPatient withdraws from examination, and replacement is found, and patient does not require operation: system moves to state (n1 − 2, n2);–Rate = μ1(n1)αwη(n1)(1 − γ)Patient withdraws from examination, and replacement is not found: system moves to state (n1 − 1, n2);–Rate = μ1(n1)αw(1 − η(n1))Operation events:•The operation events follow a very similar pattern and can be expressed in the same fashion, see Appendix A.2;Gathering together these flow rates, the flow-balance equations for this finite CTMC take the form:For(0≤n1≤M1(n2),0≤n2≤M2):[a(n1,n2)+b(n1,n2)+c(n1,n2)+d(n1,n2)+e(n1,n2)+f(n1,n2)+g(n1,n2)]pn1,n2=a(n1−1,n2)pn1−1,n2+b(n1+1,n2)pn1+1,n2+⋯+c(n1+2,n2)pn1+2,n2+d(n1+2,n2−1)pn1+2,n2−1+⋯+e(n1+1,n2−1)pn1+1,n2−1+f(n1,n2+1)pn1,n2+1+⋯+g(n1,n2+2)pn1,n2+2,wherea(n1,n2)={λeff(n1,n2)n1,n2≥0,0otherwiseb(n1,n2)={μ1(n1)[αt(1−γ)+αrδ(n1)(1−γ)+αw(1−η(n1))]1≤n1≤M1(n2),0otherwisec(n1,n2)={μ1(n1)αwη(n1)(1−γ)2≤n1≤M1(n2),0otherwised(n1,n2)={μ1(n1)αwη(n1)γ2≤n1≤M1(n2),0otherwisee(n1,n2)={μ1(n1)[αtγ+αrδ(n1)γ]1≤n1≤M1(n2),0otherwisef(n1,n2)={μ2(n2)[βt+βrϕ(n2)+βw(1−ψ(n2))]1≤n1≤M1(n2)∧n2≤M2,0otherwiseg(n1,n2)={μ2(n2)βwψ(n2)1≤n1≤M1(n2)∧n2≤M2,0otherwiseAfter bringing terms to the left-hand side, the flow balance equations and the boundary condition take the form(6)pQ=0,pe=1,wherepis the steady-state probability vector,Qdenotes the infinitesimal generator andeis a column vector whose elements are all equal to 1 (for more details see Chapter 1 in Gross, Shortle, Thompson, and Harris, 2008).These simultaneous equations can be solved by numerical techniques (see e.g. Stewart, 2009). Because in our model we are dealing with a very large sparse matrixQ, computer memory consumption has to be reduced when storing it, using a special storage scheme for the non-zero coefficients. For this reason,Qwas formulated using the high-level Eigen C + + library of template headers which allows for an easy definition and manipulation of sparse matrices together with methods for solving linear systems characterized by sparse matrices. In this case the equations were solved using a general purpose mathematical library for the direct solution of large sparse systems of linear equations, called SuperLU. As implied by its name, the system is solved through LU decomposition—a variation of Gaussian elimination (for more details see Li, 2005). Solutions to the steady-state probability vectorpcan then be used to calculate steady state performance measures, such as resources utilization, waiting times and numbers of patients in both queues.This section first describes the calibration of the CTMC model using the DES model, and then goes on to present some key results from the CTMC model that shed light on the likely performance of the MWTG policy under a range of scenarios. Because our investigations showed that the performance of the system under the MWTG policy is significantly affected by the system size, we present results using two examples of specialities (or sub-specialties) which differ in terms of capacity. In particular, we first consider a large specialty serving patients for 3 and 8 hours on each weekday for examination and treatment procedures, respectively. In this case we assume that patients arrive to the system with rate λ = 4.8 patients a day and average service rates for the two stations areμ1′=4.43andμ2′=4.11patients per day.Next, we investigate a small specialty (equivalently a low-demand special treatment with a separate waiting list) that offers single examination and operation sessions per week, lasting for 3 and 8 hours respectively. Because service is offered 5 times less often compared to the large system, the patient arrival rate is scaled by the same factor, i.e. λ = 0.96 patients per day. The resulting service rates are nowμ1′=0.89andμ2′=0.82patients per day.In each example we consider four following scenarios:(a)All patients need an operation (γ = 1), no reschedules or withdrawals (αr= βr= αw= βw= 0),95 percent of patients need an operation (γ = 0.95), no reschedules or withdrawals (αr= βr= αw= βw= 0),95 percent of patients need an operation (γ = 0.95), 5 percent of patients reschedule and 5 percent withdraw (αr= βr= αw= βw= 0.05), 5 percent of patients are able to serve as replacement (ε = ω = 0.05),95 percent of patients need an operation (γ = 0.95), 10 percent of patients reschedule and 10 percent withdraw (αr= βr= αw= βw= 0.1), 5 percent of patients are able to serve as replacement (ε = ω = 0.05).These parameters are based on interviews with hospital planners, and the scenarios are designed to demonstrate the effects of the various causes of throughput capacity losses described in Section 1. Specifically, scenario (a) represents a baseline system in which the only losses of throughput are due to difficulties in matching available patients to session lengths, or (very rarely) the waiting list being empty. Scenario (b) has the same two causes of losses of throughput, and shows how the balance of the system changes when 5 percent of the patients leave the system after being examined (γ = 0.95). Scenarios (c) and (d) are designed to show the extent to which different degrees of further losses of throughput, due to rescheduling and withdrawing, affect the system behaviour.To investigate the impact of changes in the maximum waiting time guarantee, each of the above cases is analysed for Wmax = 30 and 60 days.Before continuing, an account of available patients not matching sessions has to be included, using the session efficiency factors ξ1(n1), ξ2(n2). These efficiency factors can be estimated in a number of ways e.g., by an analysis of historical hospital booking data (if sufficient data is available) or a series of Monte Carlo experiments. Here we use a DES model with fixed examination and operation sessions, see Kozlowski (2014) for details. This exact representation as a two node system allows the patient booking procedures to be handled individually, and hence allow calculation of session usage. The utilization of each session is then compared to the number of patients at the station just before the session starts, and utilizations are averaged over a large number of observations for each value of n1 or n2.The resulting estimates of efficiency factors for our two example cases are presented in Fig. 4. Clearly, the longer the queue gets the better is the chance of a good fit into a schedule as there are simply more patients to choose from. Hence, we can expect that E[ξi(ni)] ≤ E[ξi(ni+ 1)] for i = 1, 2. We note in passing that in general efficiency factors depend not only on queue size, but also on mean and standard deviation of procedure duration in comparison to session length. It is this combination of factors that makes the operation queue have greater efficiency for the selected case.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents an analysis of the maximum waiting time guarantee policy using a two-node continuous Markov chain model consisting of examination and operation stations. The main goal was to understand the mechanisms governing the behaviour of the system representing this policy. The trade-off between utilization of public hospital resources and patients’ waiting time is of a particular interest as one of the rising concerns of many policy stakeholders.It has been shown in this paper that patient booking, rescheduling and withdrawing mechanisms affect the system behaviour significantly. Increased probabilities of patients refusing their appointments reduce the utilization of hospital resources, and this loss is worse for smaller waiting lists. Hence whilst reductions in the maximum waiting time guarantee will reduce waiting times, they will also reduce resource utilization levels, and to a greater extent in small specialties. In particular in overloaded systems, halving the MWTG will typically half the waiting times of patients, but at a cost in terms of loss in resource utilization which is much bigger for small specialties than for big specialties. Therefore, the trade-off between waiting times and resource utilization is case specific and will also depend on the patients’ disutility from waiting and cost of the utilization losses in the public sector. These cost factors will clearly also differ depending on the type of disease and patients’ individual characteristics.Finally, we note that not all patients use the opportunity of the private treatment, especially when it comes to minor medical cases. In circumstances where a proportion of patients do not mind waiting longer than the waiting time guarantee, the effect would tend to increase waiting times and reduce the losses of utilization. Such scenarios could be easily introduced into the CTMC model using state-dependent arrival rates to the system.In addition to analysing the MWTG policy, this paper has also highlighted some of the benefits of the complementary use of the two queue modelling approaches: CTMC and DES. It has been shown how a DES model can be used to calibrate the state-dependent process rates of an analytical queueing model. Thus, even if a direct representation of some complex processes in terms of CTMC is impossible, these processes may still be well represented in the CTMC model using state-dependent process rates to be calibrated using simulation results. Other benefits of using the two modelling approaches alongside each other include ease of access to the steady-state and time-dependent performance measures, analysis of the non-exponential case, as well as enhanced model verification and fuller understanding of the underlying processes.The appendix provides equations for the probabilities of finding replacements at the operation station in the case rescheduling or withdrawal (A.1), and then defines the resulting operations events and their associated rates (A.2).ϕ(n2)=prob(operationreschedulereplacementisfound|n2insystem)={1−[ORL+(1−ORL)(1−ω)n2−2]ifn2≥20otherwiseψ(n2)=prob(operationwithdrawalreplacementisfound|n2insystem)={1−[OWL+(1−OWL)(1−ω)n2−2]ifn2≥20otherwiseOperation events:Patient turns up for operation: system moves to state (n1, n2 − 1);–Rate = μ2(n2)βtPatient reschedules operation, and replacement is found: system moves to state (n1, n2 − 1);–Rate = μ2(n2)βrϕ(n2)Patient reschedules operation, and replacement is not found: system stays in state (n1, n2);–Rate = μ2(n2)βr(1 − ϕ(n2))Patient withdraws from operation, and replacement is found: system moves to state(n1, n2 − 2);–Rate = μ2(n2)βwψ(n2)Patient withdraws from operation, and replacement is not found: system moves to state (n1, n2 − 1);(a)Rate = μ2(n2)βw(1 − ψ(n2))