@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A dynamic

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A dynamic stochastic frontier model to evaluate regional financial efficiency.Dynamic model considers the impact of environmental variables on financial efficiency.An empirical test of the dynamic stochastic frontier model.There exists a gradient difference in the regional financial efficiency of China.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in banking,Regional finance,Financial efficiency,Dynamic stochastic frontier model,China,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Studies have widely used stochastic frontier models to assess financial efficiency; however, traditional static approaches do not take dynamic characteristics of financial systems into account. This article develops a dynamic stochastic frontier model to evaluate regional financial efficiency and provides an empirical test of the model by using panel data of 62 Chinese counties during the 2001–2010 period. The model measures the dynamic impact of the input–output variables and environmental variables on financial efficiency, and allows for the separation of technical change from the change in technical efficiency. The results show that the dynamic model provides a better fit to the data than the static model. In addition, a gradient difference emerges in the regional financial efficiency among the six major regions of China. The results offer practical implications for the development of regional financial services in China, as well as other developing countries and emerging economies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In 2011, a financial crisis broke out in Wenzhou, one of the wealthiest cities in China, from underground banking activities (Martin, 2012). An unofficial media report revealed that gray lending activities involved approximately 80 percent of households in Wenzhou (Business Spectator, 2011). The crisis hit the press when a dozen of business leaders in Wenzhou fled overseas to hide from high-interest loans (Naughton, 2012). This crisis shows that financial resources are not being efficiently managed in some regions of China and that regional financial efficiency needs to be improved. Thus, it is critical to effectively allocate regional financial resources and strengthen the operation of the entire economy system in China.In general, prior research on financial efficiency has used two types of samples, namely, country-level data and bank-level data. On the one hand, several studies have used country-level data to compare financial efficiencies among different countries (Andries, 2011; Borovicka, 2007; Pastor, Pérez, &#38; Quesada, 1997; Ruthenberg &#38; Elias, 1996; Weill, 2003). However, these studies are restricted by sample size (i.e., the number of countries) and exchange rate issues (Hasan, Koetter, &#38; Wedow, 2009). On the other hand, research has used samples of banks and branches to analyze financial efficiency (Berger, Hasan, &#38; Zhou, 2009; Chen, Skully, &#38; Brown, 2005; Heffernana &#38; Fu, 2010). However, their results are susceptible to the influence of the characteristics of various banks and branches, which may not prefectly reflect financial efficiency.Therefore, in this study, we aim to use the intermediate level data (i.e., county-level panel data) to explore the regional financial efficiency of China. Specifically, first, county is a fundamental administrative unit in China, and thus can be considered as a representative region. In total, there are 2070 counties in China (including county-level cities), covering over 95 percentof the national territory. County-level finance is the basis of the macro-level state finance, as well as the integration of the financial activities of micro-level banks and branches in China. Second, China is the largest developing country in the world, which is currently faced with industrial transition and upgrade, and is in great need for financial resources. The successful practice and experience of China in regional finance will be of significant value to other developing countries or emerging economies which share many characteristics in common with China.Choosing appropriate evaluation methodsis critical in the assessment of regional financial efficiency. According to Berger and Humphrey (1997), two major types of methods can be used to evaluate financial efficiency: non-parametric frontier approaches and parametric frontier approaches. Non-parametric frontier approaches cannot perform statistical inferences to analyze financial efficiency and its determinants, while parametric frontier approaches can resolve this issue, but they cannot separate technical change from the change in technical efficiency. For example, traditional stochastic frontier approaches are appropriate for the evaluation of static financial efficiency (i.e., the performance of financial institutions at single points in time). However, they cannot evaluate financial efficiency dynamically (e.g., financial institutions may adjust their financial strategies over time). In addition, a relationship between inputs and outputs of financial efficiency exists in certain financial ecological environments. Thus, to accurately evaluate financial efficiency, environmental variables must also be taken into account, which is useful to identify frontiers (Dietsch &#38; Lozano-Vivas, 2000).As an improvement of traditional stochastic frontier approaches, Desli, Ray, and Kumbhakar (2003) develop a dynamic stochastic frontier model, which can address all these issues above. However, they neither provide an estimation method for the dynamic stochastic frontier model, nor conduct an empirical test of the model. Therefore, the contribution of this research is twofold. First, on the basis of Desli et al. (2003), we propose a dynamic stochastic frontier model for the evaluation of regional financial efficiency, and provide an estimation method and an empirical test of the model. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of Desli et al. (2003)’s dynamic stochastic frontier model to evaluate regional financial efficiency, which makes a contribution to the literature of financial efficiency. Second, the findings yield insights into how developing countries and emerging economies can improve regional financial efficiency.The rest of this article proceeds as follows: In the next section, we provide a review of the related literature. Then, we present a dynamic stochastic frontier model to evaluate regional financial efficiency. Next, we present the data and corresponding statistical tests and provide a detailed discussion of the empirical results. In the final section, we discuss the theoretical and managerial implications of our results, provide the limitations of the study, and offer directions for further research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This article develops a dynamic stochastic frontier model to evaluate regional financial efficiency in China by using panel data of 62 counties. By first applying a dynamic stochastic frontier model to an empirical evaluation of regional financial efficiency, this article contributes to the literature on financial efficiency in the following three ways. First, the previous research in financial efficiency focuses on the macro-level financial industry and its interaction with economic growth, or the micro-level financial institutions. In addition, few papers study financial efficiency through a dynamic stochastic frontier model, except Tsionas (2006). In this study, on the basis of Desli et al. (2003)’s dynamic stochastic frontier model, we propose a theoretical framework to evaluate the intermediate level regional financial efficiency, which enriches the literature on the evaluation of financial efficiency.Second, our results show that the dynamic stochastic frontier model can better reflect the actual changes in financial efficiency than the traditional static model. Though the parameters of the two models share consistent economic implications, there is a certain difference in parameter estimations between them. This is because the production function adopted in the static stochastic frontier analysis method may not match the real one well, for example, in the static method, efficiency in one period is not allowed to be affected by that from the past (Desli et al., 2003). By contrast, the dynamic stochastic frontier analysis method allows an inefficient firm to correct its inefficiency from the past (Desli et al., 2003). In addition, the dynamic stochastic frontier model not only involves the non-market factors, but also considers the delay effect of the time variable. Thus, the dynamic stochastic frontier model can provide a better evaluation of regional financial efficiency. In this study, we employ both the dynamic and static stochastic frontier models to evaluate the regional financial efficiency in China. Though the majority of the parameters are shown to be statistically significant in the static model, the coefficient of a key variable (i.e., labor) is not significant. In contrast, the dynamic stochastic frontier model can yield a better estimation of the production function by separating technical change from the change in technical efficiency.Third, our results make a contribution to the evaluation of financial efficiency in emerging economies. Financial efficiency is influenced by both the internal and external environmental factors of a financial system. Different from the financial industries in the mature market of developed countries, emerging economies such as China, face an immature market. For emerging economies, there exist non-market factors in the market, e.g., the government gets involved in the financial market, borrowers are organized (Stiglitz, 1989; Stiglitz &#38; Weiss, 1981). It is difficult for the financial efficiency in emerging economies to reach the Pareto optimum completely through the immature market. Therefore, to better assess financial efficiency in emerging economies, this study considers a number of environmental variables, such as the number of financial institutions, the regional GDP, foreign investment, the difference between the deposit and loan interest rates, etc. By incorporating those “Chinese elements” into the model, our results suggest that there is a gradient difference in regional financial efficiency of China. The financial efficiency level is relatively high in the Pearl River Delta area, Yangtze River Delta area and the area surrounding Bo Sea, and relatively low in the Northeast area, Central area and Western area.Our results offer several practical implications for the development and innovation of regional financial services in China, other developing countries, and emerging economies. First, as the largest developing country in the world, China is in the middle of industrial transition and upgrade, and needs strong support from financial institutions. The results of regional financial efficiency in this study are conducive to the understanding of the current status of financial activities among different regions and the future growth of financial industry in China. In addition, this research provides directions to the authorities of China for the reform of financial industry. Second, the model incorporates the impact of various environmental variables on financial efficiency, which yields insights into how the authorities can improve the financial environment. For example, we find that the difference between the deposit and loan interest rates is positively associated with regional financial efficiency. This suggests that the authorities of China can stimulate the initiative of regional financial institutions and improve the regional financial efficiency by appropriately increasing the difference between the deposit and loan interest rates. Third, our results offer managerial implications to potential foreign investors, especially foreign financial institutions that plan to launch in China. For example, by taking the results of this study into account, they may be able to make better decisions in terms of branch locations.This study has several limitations. First, we use a sample of 62 counties in China for the empirical study. The sample size is relatively small considering the total number of counties in China, though the sample is representative insofar as it is in line with the principle of statistical sampling. Second, in this study, regional financial efficiency mainly focuses on technical efficiency and does not take into account economy of scale. Further research could evaluate regional financial efficiency by considering both technical efficiency and scale efficiency.