@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigating work-related ill health effects in optimizing the performance of manufacturing systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Working environment affects operators’ health condition and the system performance.However, OR studies rarely consider working environment effects in system performance.Work-related ill health (WIH) risk factors are considered to model health states of the operators.Heath states are modeled using a 2-state Markov chain in the system optimization model.We found that between 0.52 percent and 8 percent increase in the total cost as WIH risk levels change.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Operations research,Optimization,Serial assembly line,Workplace risk factors,Work-related health problems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Working environment affects human health condition and performance. Human Factors (HF) scholars aim to elaborate this effect. However, HF studies mostly focus on employee occupational health and safety elements and their consequences on employee health conditions. They do not take into account Work-related Ill Health (WIH) risk factor effects at the system level. In contrast, operations research studies usually assume that operators involved in a system have identical performances and rarely consider WIH risk factor effects in optimizing system performance. This paper proposes a 2-state Markov chain model to quantify WIH risk factor effects and thereby estimate their economic impacts in optimizing a serial assembly line’s performance. Results of this research demonstrate between 0.52 percent and 8 percent increase for the total cost of the system as WIH risk levels change. This paper opens a new window to understand economic consequences of WIH effects, and to enhance systems performance by investigating working conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related Ill Health (WIH) risk factors have been shown to have negative consequences for employees health (e.g., Punnett and Wegman, 2004; Rijn et al., 2010). They subsequently interrupt the balance of the working environment and reduce employees overall work performance. This interruption creates a substantial economic burden on organizations (Goggins et al., 2008). For instance, the annual Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) costs were estimated to be $77,181 million in private industries of the US (e.g., Leigh et al., 2004). Furthermore, the economic costs for work-related ill health have been estimated by some European nations between 2.6 percent and 3.8 percent of gross national product (EUOSHA, 2001). Human Resource and Skill Development Canada (HRSDC) have reported that occupational injuries cost over $19 billion annually (HRSDC, 2010).Due to health and safety consequences of WIH risk factor effects, 4.4 million non-fatal injuries were reported in the US annually (Schulte, 2005). With different categories of occupational health problems, Musculoskeletal Disorders (MSD) are among the most common lost-time, and on job productivity loss injuries (e.g., WSIB, 2010).Practitioners addressed the importance of Human Factors (HF) in operations systems. Operations management text books also contain sections on human issues. However, the health-related performance variations of employees have been infrequently considered in Operations Research (OR) studies (e.g., Neumann and Dul, 2010). OR models deal with complex decision making and optimization problems in many areas of manufacturing systems, including capacity planning (e.g., Huang and Ahmed, 2010; Christiansen et al., 2011), production strategy and throughput analysis (e.g., Matsubayashi et al., 2009), resource assignment (e.g., Bravo and Gonzalez, 2009) and scheduling problems (e.g., Winandsa et al., 2011). A review of OR studies shows that they have usually focused on technological aspects such as machine breakdown (e.g., Xia et al., 2012) and system characteristics such as demand uncertainty (e.g., Cao et al., 2012). They have rarely considered causes and effects of work-related employee health-states. OR studies usually assign a fixed value to employee performance and do not investigate WIH risk factors and their effects on the employee capabilities that influence the performance of systems, in optimization models (e.g., Al-e hashem et al., 2013; Brahimi et al., 2006). Therefore, it is essential to consider WIH risk factor effects in system performance evaluation.In contrast, HF studies have mostly focused on occupational health and safety aspects and their subsequent effects on employee health-states (Neumann and Dul, 2010). HF, used interchangeably with ergonomics here, is defined as being concerned with the understanding of the interactions among humans and the other system elements, in order to optimize human well-being and overall system performance (IEACouncil, 2000). HF studies seldom have accounted for WIH risk factor effects for a system level optimization. They usually have focused on employee health conditions and limited to performance measures at individual and workstation levels (e.g., Neumann and Dul, 2010).Epidemiology and ergo-economic studies are two major groups in HF research considered in this paper. Studies in the first group include epidemiological investigations, analyzing working environments and determining WIH risk factors affecting human health and, subsequently, their operational characteristics (e.g., Kerr et al., 2001). A WIH risk factor is a variable that is associated with an increased chance of occupational health problems. Epidemiology studies show that the most common WIH risk factors can be categorized into two main groups:1.Physical risk factors. Some examples include repetitiveness of tasks, handling heavy loads, spine compression, peak spinal loads, peak lumbar shear, extreme hand and arm postures, and task invariability (e.g., Driessen et al., 2010; Kerr et al., 2001).Psychosocial risk factors. Some examples include decision making latitude, job control, temporal pressure, work demands, and job stress (e.g., Bongers et al., 2002; Vandergrift et al., 2012).The second group of HF studies, have tried to justify ergonomic interventions in terms of economic and financial indicators. They have shown that direct compensation costs, associated with work-related health problems, only contribute to a small percentage of the total expenses related to poor HF working environments. A major portion of the expenses comes from hidden or indirect costs, including employee replacement, administration, and productivity loss charges. These indirect costs are estimated to be between 1 and 10 times of direct costs (Leigh, 2011). Unlike OR models, the both categorized groups of HF studies do not usually account for common system characteristics such as buffer capacities, demand and the dynamically changing condition of operation systems (Rose et al., 2013). Thus, it is essential to integrate HF effects into OR models.In this paper, we propose an optimization model for a serial system, including physical and psychosocial WIH risk factor effects. The aim of this model is to make a connection between OR and HF research streams by considering causes and consequences of employee work-related health and productivity variation, for minimizing the total cost of the assembly system. A modeling approach is developed that, first, determines the relationship between known WIH risk factor measures and their subsequent effects on employee health conditions. Then, these health conditions are modeled using a 2-state Markov chain and are integrated into an optimization model, while accounting for WIH risk factor effects. Other features of the system such as customer demand, inventory capacity, and production costs are also included. The developed model is numerically tested to evaluate the effect of different work-related MSD on the performance of the operation system.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the assembly system and their operational elements. It also describes major steps in the modeling approach in order to integrate WIH risk factor effects into the optimization of the assembly system performance. In Section 3, the proposed model is numerically tested by considering work-related low back and shoulder pain WIH risk factors. The developed model is examined with different scenarios to comprehensively evaluate WIH risk factors and their impacts on optimized financial and operational elements of the system. In Section 4, the advantages of investigating WIH effects are discussed from managerial perspective. Section 5 concludes the paper.This section introduces an optimization model integrating WIH risk factor effects. From different manufacturing structures, let us consider a serial assembly with limited capacity buffers between workstations. This structure is widely used in OR literature as well as manufacturing environment (e.g., Iwasea and Ohnob, 2011). For this paper, we assume that this sample assembly line includes four serial workstations and there is an operator for each of them to accomplish assigned assembly tasks, as shown in Fig. 1. Product assembly starts from the first station. The operator of this station carries out initial assembly tasks. Then, the incomplete product will be transferred to a buffer between first and second stations. This process continues until the product assembly is completed in all four stations. The final product will be transferred from the fourth station into the inventory to fulfill demand. Production is during regular and over-time hours. Backlog is not allowed and if the throughput of the assembly line cannot fully satisfy customer demand, it is assumed that subcontractors will fulfill the unmet demand during each given time period. WIH risk factors affecting the operators’ performance, and machine failure vary the performance of the assembly line. However, our goal in this paper is focused on the effect of WIH risk factors when the performance of the assembly line is optimized. Therefore, it is assumed that machines used in the assembly line work perfectly, and the production rate of workstations depends on the performance of the operators. Operators who are working in the assembly line have a probability of having work-related MSD for a given time period due to the negative effects of WIH risk factors (e.g., Punnett and Wegman, 2004). These effects change the operators’ health status. In order to replicate the health condition changes, happened in a real working environment, the authors categorize the operators’ health states taking into account work-related health evolutions, resulted from previous epidemiology and HF studies (e.g., Kerr et al., 2001). Epidemiological studies use different measurement tools to evaluate the effect of WIH risk factors in developing MSD symptoms in different human body area (e.g., Dawson et al., 2009). They usually divide their case studies into people with and without work-related pain (e.g., Sim et al., 2006). Furthermore, recent HF studies have considered the contribution of the work-related pain in developing productivity loss for human (e.g., Campo and Darragh, 2012). Therefore, for this paper, the health condition of the operators is categorized in two states. They would be healthy without having any MSD or may have pain due to musculoskeletal problems. These work-related health states are characterized as 0 and 1, where 0 indicates the “healthy” state and 1 indicates the “pain” state with productivity loss.It is assumed that an operator is 100 percent productive in the healthy state. However, the operator in the pain state has a lower production rate because of (a) the on-job productivity loss, when he/she has pain or injury and stay at work (presenteeism) or; (b) the replacement of a new worker, who has less competence and skills than the injured absent operator during the given time periods. The health-state changes can take place because of physical and psychosocial risk factors. As risk levels increase, the probability of the health-state change increases for affected operators.According to the defined health-states, a 2-state Markov chain is generated for each operator to calculate the steady-state probability of being in the health-states. Then, the total cost model of the assembly line is minimized by considering the effect of the operators’ health-states and corresponding WIH physical and psychosocial risk factors. The total cost function includes the expected production cost of all workstations with respect to the operators’ health-states, Occupational Heath and Safety (OHS) costs, inventory cost, and subcontracting cost. It is minimized over a year, 12 consecutive months. Demand is assumed to be known in each month, but it varies from one month to another.For numerical analysis, the health-related information extracted from previous HF studies (Kerr, 1997; Sim et al., 2006). The information is adjusted taking into account the epidemiology research and statistical reports of workers’ compensation boards of Canada (HRSDC, 2010; WSIB, 2010). Different scenarios are evaluated to examine the effect of work-related MSD in the developed optimization model. In the following, notations, parameters and decision variables are introduced.Index:jworkstations involved in production j = 1, 2, 3, 4healthy stateregular time workingnumber of work-related risk factors k = 1, 2, …, ntime-periods t = 1, 2, …, 12pain state with productivity lossover-time workingmarginal probability of the pain stateauto-correlation used in the Markov chainsteady-state probability of the healthy statesteady-state probability of the pain stateconstant coefficient in the Logistic regression modelcorrelation coefficient of the nth WIH risk factorunit production cost during regular timeunit production cost during over-timeunit inventory costupper bound capacity of the bufferexternal demand in time t periodtransition probability from the healthy to the pain statetransition probability from the pain to the healthy stateunit subcontracting cost of outsourcing productionthe average production rate of an operator in the healthy statethe average production rate of an operator in the pain statethe average of daily medical treatment and compensation expensesnumber of hours in regular work-shift per daynumber of hours in over-time work-shift per daythe average of the operator’s payment rate per hournumber of working days during time t period for an operator in station jpercentage of the demand allowed to be provided from subcontractorsthe exposure measure of the nth WIH risk factorannual insurable salary of an operator working in station jtotal insurance premium costtotal indirect OHS costsnumber of products produced in regular time t in the healthy statenumber of products produced in regular time t in the pain statenumber of products produced in over-time t in the healthy statenumber of products produced in over-time t in the pain statenumber of products produced during time t by subcontractorsnumber of products stored in the bufferThere are two major steps to integrate WIH risk factor effects into the optimization model. In the first step, the model attempts to make a connection between the exposure level of WIH risk factors and the 2-state Markov chain elements. For this reason, Logistic regression, which is widely used in epidemiological analysis, is applied to examine the influence of various known WIH factors on the dichotomous outcome of an operator’s health-state. The output of the Logistic regression generates the associated probability occurrence of the operator’s health-states given values of risk factor measures (e.g., Kleinbaum and Klein, 2010). Consequently, these health-state change probabilities will be used to generate a 2-state transition probability matrix (e.g., Azzalini, 1994).In order to determine the probability of being in the given health-states in each station, Logistic regression and corresponding transition probability matrix are generated for the operators individually. Eq. (1) shows the formula used by the Logistic function to calculate the marginal probability of entering to the pain state, vjt, for an operator working in station j in time t. This probability is subjected to change, when the exposure level of the investigated risk factors changes. The output of Eq. (1) is employed to generate the corresponding transition probability matrix of the health-states.(1)vjt=e∑k=1k=n(βkjXkjt+α0j)1+e∑k=1k=n(βkjXkjt+α0j).Since WIH information are usually collected from annual base studies, the monthly base transition probability matrix for each operator is generated by raising the corresponding annual base transition probability matrix to the power of “112”, demonstrated in Eq. (2). Finally, the monthly base steady-state probabilities of being in health-states are calculated according to Eq. (3), let(2)[1−vjt(1−ujt)vjt(1−ujt)(1−vjt)(1−ujt)ujt+vjt(1−ujt)]112=[ρjt1−ρjtθjt1−θjt],(3)πjt=θjt1+θjt−ρjtandμjt=1−ρjt1+θjt−ρjt,whereμjt+πjt=1.In the second step, the total cost function of the assembly line is minimized with respect to the health-related probabilities. The developed optimization cost model is described as follows.(4)Min∑j=14∑t=112cjtrπjtPhjtr+∑j=14∑t=112cjtrμjtPpjtr+∑j=14∑t=112cjtoπjtPhjto+∑j=14∑t=112cjtoμjtPpjto+∑j=14∑t=112bjtBjt+∑t=112stSt+IN+IC+∑j=14∑t=112wljt(πjtPhjtr+πjtPhjtozhjt+μjtPpjtr+μjtPpjtozpjt)−∑j=14∑t=112wljt(πjtPhjtr+πjtPhjto+μjtPpjtr+μjtPpjtozhjt)subject to:(5)πjtPhjtr+μjtPpjtr+πjtPhjto+μjtPpjto−Bjt+1−πj+1tPhj+1tr−μj+1tPpj+1tr−πj+1tPhj+1to−μj+1tPpj+1to+Bjt≥0.(6)π4tPh4tr+μ4tPp4tr+π4tPh4to+μ4tPp4to+B4t+St−B4t+1≥dt.(7)Phjtr≤shjtrwjtzhjt.(8)Ppjtr≤shjtrwjtzpjt.(9)Phjto≤shjtowjtzhjt.(10)Ppjto≤shjtowjtzpjt.(11)St≤pcttdt.(12)0≤Bjt≤bmjt.Phjtr,Ppjtr,Phjto,Ppjto,St,andBjtareintegers.The objective function, Eq. (4), seeks to minimize total production, inventory, subcontracting, and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) costs. The production cost includes the expected production cost of all workstations, accumulated during 12 months. For each workstation, the expected production cost during period t is determined by multiplying the unit production cost with the expected production quantity produced by the corresponding operator in regular and over-times, according to his/her defined health-states. The inventory cost is incurred according to the value of buffer levels multiplied by the unit inventory cost of the product, accumulated over 12 months. The subcontracting cost is incurred whenever demand is not met by production during the given time periods. OHS costs are considered in terms of insurance premium cost, indirect costs and wage lost cost.Constraints (5) and (6) guarantee the flow of products through the serial assembly line. Constraints (7), (8), (9), and (10) are subject to the available time-duration of being in each health-state during the given time periods. It is assumed that there are 22 working days in each month. Production rate in the health related-states are determined according to the literature in OR and HF studies (e.g., Martimo et al., 2009).Constraints (11) and (12) limit subcontracting and buffer capacity levels. The model allows the company to outsource production up to 40 percent of demand in each time period. Maximum buffer capacity is 10 products per buffer.From the company’s point of view, insurance premium cost represents medical and compensation expenses spent due to work-related pain or injuries. For this paper, the OHS performance sensitive approach is used to determine insurance premium rate with respect to medical treatment and compensation expenses (e.g., Riel and Imbeau, 1998). Then, this rate is multiplied by the number of the employees to calculate the total insurance premium cost of the assembly system. Eq. (13) shows the insurance premium cost, IN, adjusted in a way to consider WIH effects.(13)IN=4AIN∑j=14inwj(∑j=14∑t=112metμjtwjt).The unit cost of insurance, AIN, is defined as per dollar of medical treatment and compensation expenses credited per dollar of insured salaries. inwjis the average of the annual insurable salary per worker. These parameters are estimated and adjusted according to Workplace Safety and Insurance Board (WSIB) of Ontario, Canada, Ontario Ministry of Labor and Canada’s statistics reports (e.g., HRSDC, 2010; WSIB, 2010).Indirect OHS costs include overheads such as personnel acquisition costs spent in the recruitment, hiring and administration of the replaced employees and training expenses spent to enhance injured and replaced employee skills, and to recover injured operators. There is, however, no specific method to calculate these indirect costs. Several studies have estimated these expenses comparing with medical care and benefit costs (e.g., Leigh, 2011). The results are varied between 1 and 10 times of medical and benefit costs. The developed optimization model uses the WSIB estimation, three times, in Eq. (14) to consider OHS indirect cost effects.(14)IC=3∑j=14∑t=112metμjtwjt.Wage lost which is determined by the last two terms in the objective function, is another important OHS cost considered in the developed model. As noted in Eq. (15), this cost reflects the amount of payments for working hours which are lost due to the operators’ health-related insufficient productivity during given the time periods.(15)Wagelost=∑j=14∑t=112wljtμjt(Ppjtr+Ppjtozpjt−Ppjtr+Ppjtozhjt)Simulating the real health, performance and financial effects of WIH risk factors needs an appropriate estimation of WIH information. For this reason, we examine the developed optimization model’s behavior according to WIH information, which were collected from manufacturing workers for the case of work-related low back pain and shoulder problem. These work-related MSD problems are including more than 30 percent of all compensated claims in Ontario, Canada. (e.g., WSIB, 2010). This approach supports our analysis to reproduce the work-related effects of WIH risk factors, taken place in a real working environment, for the sampled assembly system.For numerical analysis, let us assume c1tr=  $20 and c1to=  $25 per product. These costs are assumed to be increased linearly by $5 per product for each consecutive workstation. We also assume st=  $165 per outsourced product; met=  $74 per day per ill worker; inwj=  $40,000 as the annual insurable wage per operator; and wljt=  $20 per hour. We initialize dt= 2650 units (demand) for the first month, which is linearly increased by 25 units per month for the rest of the year. Furthermore, b1t=  $5 per stored products for the first buffer. This cost is also assumed to be linearly increased by $2 per products for each consecutive buffer. A healthy operator is assumed to work with 100 percent of his/her productivity level (zhjt= 12 parts per hour). However, when the operator is in the pain state, the productivity will be dropped to a lower level. To estimate an accurate result, the authors did extensive literature review to verify the productivity loss due to MSD, which were measured by previous HF studies. The results show that the productivity loss due to work-related health problems can vary from 3 percent to 34 percent (e.g., Allen et al., 2005; Meerding et al., 2005; Oxenburgh and Marlow, 2005; Lerner et al., 2009; Martimo et al., 2009). For this paper, it is cautiously estimated as 16.6 percent, determined based on the average of the reported productivity losses.Low Back Pain (LBP) is a common work-related health problem, and a frequent cause of disability claims (WSIB, 2010). In this section, the developed model is tested by evaluating WIH risk factors for LBP, measured from an automotive company in Ontario, Canada (Kerr, 1997). The healthy state is denoted by 0 while the low back pain state with productivity loss is denoted by 1.A sub set of seven physical and psychosocial WIH risk factors which were found to contribute to LBP include: (a) peak hand force (loading) is defined as the maximum average lifting pars weight over a designated interval of the time and usually is measured in kilogram scale; (b) peak shear force is defined the maximum average of shear forces acting on the L4/L5 lumbar spine; (c) cumulative compression loading can be understood as the integrated of instantaneous loads on the L4/L5 spine over a shift. It is scaled according to meganewtons seconds per full-time shift; (d) job control is defined as the perception of employees regarding their job requirements, tasks repetition involved in their jobs, and ability to make decisions on the way they work; (e) perceived physical exertion measures the perception of employees regarding physical demands of their jobs; (f) social environment is defined as operators’ perception of the social atmosphere at the workplace; and (g) over-educated level is about the perception of workers education level compared to that of their co-workers performing similar jobs.Physical risk factors are measured according to on-site workplace observation or posture simulation softwares in order analyze the body posture of employees at work. Psychosocial risk factors are usually measured with standard psychosocial measurement questionnaires designed with Likert-type scale (e.g., Vandergrift et al., 2012).From Eq. (1), based on LBP work-related risk factors, parameters of the Logistic regression were determined. Table 1presents their values.βkjis the correlation coefficient of a given WIH risk factor developing work-related low back pain. It is estimated with respect to odds ratio value, determined by Kerr (1997). An odds ratio is a relative measure of a given WIH risk factor. Epidemiological studies such as Kerr, Frank, Norman, Wells, and Neumann (2001) usually quantify the contribution of possible WIH risk factors with work-related health problems by comparing subjects who reported health problems, “the cases”, with workers who did not report but are otherwise similar, “the controls”. Hence, an odds ratio is interpreted as how much more likely it is that an employee is exposed to a risk factor will report pain by comparing “the cases” with “the controls” results (Kerr, 1997). Parameter akjdemonstrates the average difference of a given risk factor measured between “the cases” group who have reported low back pain and “the controls” (Kleinbaum and Klein, 2010).Due to the non-randomized selection of “the cases”, the constant coefficient, α′, of the Logistic regression formula must be adjusted, Eq. (16), in order to calculate the transition probability of being in the pain state (King and Zeng, 2002). The value of α′ is calibrated according to the combination of the population fraction of employees reporting low back pain, τ, and the prevalence rate of employees reporting low back pain in the Kerr (1997) study, y′.(16)α0j=α′−ln(1−ττ×y′1−y′)=−1.2−ln(1.5×0.766)=−1.339.By extracting WIH information from the automotive study and compromise them with the defined health-states, the steady-state probabilities of the healthy state and the low back pain state with productivity of loss are calculated for each operator by using Eqs. (2) and (3).In this step, the steady-state probabilities of being in the healthy and pain states are applied to the optimization model, and the model is solved by using IBM ILOG Cplex 12.1. In order to eliminate the effect of different risk factor levels of different workers in the sensitive analysis, we assume that all operators of the sample assembly line have the same risk factor levels so that we will be able to vary risk factor exposures within certain levels to investigate their effects at the system level optimization. Three different scenarios are developed to test the effects of low back pain WIH risk factors at the system level performance.This scenario aims to evaluate the impact of a WIH risk factor changes on the optimum total cost of the assembly system individually. For this reason, at each time, the risk factor is changed within a distance of ± 3 standard deviation (std) from its mean value for all operators, while the other LBP risk factors are set to their mean levels. Consequently, the steady-state probabilities of being in the health-states are calculated for the operators at the time and the total cost model is minimized with the new probability inputs. This procedure is repeated for all WIH risk factors.Figs. 2 and 3describe the behavior of the total cost versus the physical and psychosocial risk factor changes. They also compare values of the total cost, minimized with and without including WIH effects. In the model without WIH effects, the operators produce products at a fixed rate. We assume that they are 100 percent productive. Furthermore, the objective function of the optimization model does not include indirect OHS, and wage lost costs, since the model without including WIH effects cannot track the effect of WIH risk factors.In general, by increasing the negative effect of a given risk factor, there is a higher chance of being injured and entering to the pain state, for the operators working in the assembly line. Hence, due to a lower productivity level in the pain state, the expected production quantity of the assembly line decreases, and more products are supplied by subcontractors at a higher cost. Moreover, medical treatment expenses, insurance premium, and OHS costs increase, when there is a higher chance of being in the pain state. Consequently, the total cost of the assembly line is minimized at a higher amount.Fig. 2 a shows the behavior of the total cost by changing the peak load measure between 1.9 and 63.9 kilograms. The results demonstrate that when the operators use a higher hand-force to lift, push or pull heavier objects during working shifts, there is a higher probability for them to be injured and being in the pain state with the lower productivity level. This probability varies from 21.2 percent to 58.8 percent by increasing the weight of the objects from 1.9 to 63.9 kilograms. Hence, the production rate of the line decreases and more products are outsourced to compensate the operators’ health-related production loss. Furthermore, OHS costs increase due to a higher chance of being in the pain state and using medical treatments and compensation benefits.When the operators lift objects with the average of 1.9 kilograms, the major cost element arises from the expected production cost in regular time at the healthy state which is to $1,669,250. Furthermore, 509 products are outsourced which incurs the lowest possible of subcontracting cost, $83,985. By increasing the peak load level, operators start to produce more products in the pain state while more products are also supplied by subcontractors. Consequently, at the maximum peak load level, the major cost element arises from the expected regular time production cost when the operators are in the pain state, which is determined as $1,037,760. The subcontracting cost reaches its highest amount of $377,520. Since the model considers four operators, the insurance premium cost allocates the lowest portion of the total cost. It is equal to $3717 when the peak load is 1.9 kilograms. However, the negative effect of peak load causes this cost element to increase. Therefore, it becomes $4008 when the peak load level is set to 63.9 kilograms. Therefore, the total cost of the assembly line increases from $3,347,014 to $3,486,103 by increasing the peak load level. There is a similar trend for the total cost, when the model examines the effect of the other physical WIH risk factors, shown in Fig. 2 b and c.Fig. 3 a demonstrates the impact of the operators’ perceived exertion on the total cost of the assembly line. The analysis of this psychosocial risk factor effect shows that the total cost increases from $3,303,340 to $3,495,043 when the perceived exertion level is varied from 1.2 to 9.2. At the lowest level, operators perceive minimum intensity level regarding the physical demand of their jobs accomplished during working shifts. Hence, there is the lowest probability for them to be in the pain state, 2.7 percent, and work with a lower productivity level. However, by increasing the exposure level, the operators perceives a higher physical demand to accomplish their jobs with an associated increase in the chance of being in the pain state. At the highest exposure level, the probability of the pain state becomes 60.8 percent. Consequently: (a) the production rate of the line decreases; (b) more products are ordered to subcontractors; and (c) OHS costs increase.The behavior of the total cost versus psychosocial risk factor changes, shows the negative slope when the model evaluates the effect of job control and social environment. This negative slope is resulted due to measurement tools and scaling of the given psychosocial risk factors. For example, job control is scaled from 0 to 114.1. At the zero level, the operators perceive minimum control over their jobs and, subsequently, they have the highest probability of being in the pain state, and the total cost of the assembly line is equal to $3,447,057. By increasing the risk factor’s exposure level, they perceive a higher level of control over their jobs, while they do various tasks with a lower repetition level to assemble products. Consequently, the probability of being in the pain state decreases. The total cost becomes $3,322,800 when the exposure level of job control is 114.1.For more details, Table 2shows the results of the developed model for the examples of the physical and psychosocial low back pain WIH risk factors. The results were compared to the model without including WIH effects. The table includes the variations of steady-state probabilities of being in each health state, insurance premium, subcontracting expenses and the minimized total cost of the assembly line.In this case, we study the effect of simultaneous variation of two risk factors on the total cost. At each time, the two risk factors are changed within a distance of ± 3 standard deviation (std) from their mean values while the other LBP risk factors are set to their mean measures. Consequently, the steady-state probabilities of being in the health-states are calculated for all operators at the time and the total cost is minimized with the new probability inputs. Fig. 4shows the joint effect of the examples of physical and psychosocial LBP risk factor combinations on the total cost.Fig. 4 a demonstrates the behavior of the total cost versus joint effect of peak load and cumulative compression changes. The peak load is changed from 1.9 to 63.9 kilograms. At each exposure value assigned to the peak load level, the cumulative compression is also varied within a distance of ± 3 std from its mean measure. Compared with the result of scenario 1, in stead of a graph showing the effect of peak load changes on the total cost, there are six graphs demonstrating the behavior of total cost versus the joint effect of peak load and cumulative compression changes. The lowest and highest amount of the total cost at each peak load level is determined by setting the cumulative compression to its lowest and highest exposure measures. For example, at 14.3 kilograms peak load level, the total cost changes from $3,341,931 to $3,511,440 when the cumulative risk factor is increased from 5.55 to 38.8 mega newtons seconds/shift.By setting peak load and cumulative compression to their highest exposure levels, 63.9 kilograms and 38.8 mega newtons seconds/shift, the operators will have the highest chance of being injured and enter to the pain state. With 74.4 percent probability of being in the pain state, the production rate of the line decreases due to the lower productivity level of operators in the pain state, and subcontractors must provide 3188 products to satisfy annual demand. Moreover, OHS costs reach its highest amount. Finally, the minimized total cost is equal to $3,551,070. However, at the lowest peak load and cumulative compression exposure levels, 1.9 kilograms and 5.55 mega newtons seconds/shift, the total cost reduces to $3,327,080.The trend is similar for the other joint effect of the low back pain risk factors shown by Fig. 4 b and c. Compared with scenario 1, the results of analyses in scenario 2 also show the following relationship:TCx1x2≤TCx1+TCx2,where for any set of two low back pain risk factors, (x1, x2),TCx1x2is the total cost of the assembly line with their joint effect andTCx1andTCx2,are the values of total cost calculated in scenario 1 in order to evaluate x1, x2 effects individually.This scenario aims to investigate the effect of the strength’s variation of WIH risk factors in developing work-related low back pain on the total cost of the system. For this reason, the value of odds ratio shown in Table 1 is varied individually for all risk factors. An odds ratio indicates the strength of the association between a given risk factor exposure and work-related health problems. A higher odds ratio indicates a greater injury risk.Similar to scenario 1, each risk factor is changed within a distance of ± 3 std from its mean measure at a time while the other LBP risk factors are set at their mean measures for all operators. Then, with the given odds ratios, the steady-state probabilities of being in the health-states are calculated for all operators, and the total cost model is minimized with the new probability inputs. Figs. 5 and 6, show how the total cost behaves for different odds ratios.Fig. 5 a shows the effect of variation in the odds ratio of the cumulative compression while the risk factor’s level is changed from 5.55 to 38.8 mega newtons seconds/shift. Increasing the odds ratio raises the influence of the cumulative compression in developing low back pain. Hence, the probability of being in the pain state with productivity loss increases causing the total cost to be in a higher amount. For instance, at the 18.85 mega newtons seconds/shift exposure level, the total cost increases from $3,345,970 to $3,479,840 when the odds ratio is varied from 1.26 to 2.93. With the value of 1.26 for the odds ratio, the chance of being in the pain state is minimum and the production is higher. Hence, only 497 products are supplied by subcontractors in a year. The company also spends the least amount of money due to medical and compensation expenses and, subsequently, the cost of insurance premium is estimated as $3715. However, by increasing the value of the odds ratio to 2.93, the production rate of the line is seen to decrease due to the health-related productivity losses of the operators. Consequently, the number of products supplied by subcontractors have 343 percent increase and the insurance premium cost is estimated as $3995 due to the higher contribution of cumulative compression in developing low back pain.The same trend was found by varying the odds ratio of other LBP risk factors shown in Figs. 5 and 6.In this section, the effect of WIH aspects originated from work-related shoulder disorders are investigated in optimizing the performance of the serial assembly line. The primary WIH information are extracted from Sim et al. (2006). This study followed a cross-sectional methodology describing the relationship between work-related health problems such as shoulder pain with WIH risk factors. Sim et al. (2006) have investigated WIH risk factors via standard questionnaires while they have dichotomized their exposure levels with a binary measure: 1 (risk present) and 0 (risk absent), to calculate odds ratios. This is a common approach used in occupational epidemiology.The features of the assembly line are the same as the previous scenarios. We define 2 work-related health-states, the healthy state and the shoulder pain with productivity loss state are denoted by 0 and 1. Three physical and two psychosocial WIH risk factors that have the main contributions to shoulder pain are used in the developed model. They include (a) repeated lifting of heavy objects (RL); (b) prolonged bending of neck (PB); (c) working with one/both arms at shoulder height (AS) or above during the given working times; (d) low job control (JC) as defined in LBP scenarios; and (e) low supervisor support (SS), which is defined as the perception of operators regarding the received support and assistance from their supervisors and managers at work.Each operator of the sample assembly line has the same set of work-related shoulder pain risk factors with the dichotomous exposure value, 0 (not exposed) and 1 (exposed).In this analysis, different combinations of risk factors are investigated. That is, with a set of five binary physical and psychosocial risk factor measures (RL, PB, AS, JC, SS), there are 25 combinations started from (0, 0, 0, 0, 0) and to (1, 1, 1, 1, 1). All combinations are considered in the two major steps of integrating WIH effects into the optimization model.In this step, our model determines the Logistic regression’s output with respect to shoulder pain risk factor combinations. Then, the steady-state probabilities of being in the health-states are calculated. Table 3presents the parameters of the Logistic regression, given Eq. (1).βkjrefers to the correlation coefficient of a given WIH risk factor estimated with respect to the risk factor’s odds ratio. With binary values for the WIH risk factors in cross-sectional studies like Sim et al. (2006), parameter akjis equal to 1 (e.g., Kleinbaum and Klein, 2010). The α0jis a constant coefficient which is adjusted by Eq. (17) to employ the Logistic regression output of cross-sectional studies as the transition probability. α′ is the initial constant coefficient resulting from the Logistic regression calculation. τ is the population fraction of workers reporting shoulder pain and y′ is the prevalence rate of reporting shoulder problem in Sim et al. (2006) study.(17)α0j=α′−ln(1−ττ×y′1−y′)=−1.516−ln(1.577×0.464)=−1.191.By adjusting extracted HF information to the health-state definitions, the steady-state probabilities of healthy and shoulder pain states are calculated for each operator by using Eqs. (2) and (3).In this step, the steady-state probabilities of health-states are applied to the optimization model, and the total cost is minimized according to the WIH risk factor combinations. Finally, the behavior of the total cost resulting from the WIH risk factor effects is compared with the total cost generated without integrating WIH aspects, shown in Fig. 7. Like the low back pain case study , in the model without WIH effects, the operators produce products at a fixed rate. We assume that they are 100 percent productive. Furthermore, the objective function of the optimization model does not include indirect OHS, and wage lost costs. Furthermore, we assume that all operators of the sample assembly line have the same risk factor levels to eliminate the effect of different risk factor levels of different workers in the sensitive analysis and investigate risk factor effects at the system level optimization.The total cost changes from $3,317,184 to the maximum $3,357,859 according to different risk factor combinations. The results demonstrate that the maximum probability of being in the shoulder pain state is 24.9 percent, when the operators of the assembly line receive little support from their supervisors, have lower control over their job, work with arm above shoulder height, work with prolonged bending of their necks, and lift heavy objects frequently during working shifts in a year. Consequently, the production rate of the line reduces due to health-related productivity loss of the operators and subcontractors supply 634 products within a year to meet the demand. Furthermore, the maximum insurance premium cost is equal $3745 due to increased medical treatment and compensation expenses spent for operators because of work-related shoulder injury.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
