@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessing the business values of information technology and e-commerce independently and jointly

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We apply the generalized frontier approach to assess the values of IT and EC.The presence of IT may strengthen or weaken EC value, and vice versa.Evaluating the values of IT and EC separately may misstate the values of IT and EC.The evidence indicates that the values of IT and EC must be assessed jointly.The results have numerous obvious decision-making components.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Business values of IT and EC,Decision support systems,Econometrics,The one-equation time-varying SPF approach,The two-equation time-varying SPF approach,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this paper is to assess the business values of information technology (IT) and electronic commerce (EC) independently and simultaneously as measured by productive efficiency, in order to provide new insights into IT and EC investments and, consequently, lead to better decisions on IT and EC investments. The paper analyzes a panel data set at the country level based on the theory of production and its companions called the time-varying stochastic production frontier (SPF) approaches with the one-equation and two-equation models estimated by a two-step nonlinear maximum-likelihood method. The performance metric called productive efficiency is built in the research approaches. The empirical evidence strongly suggests that the presence of EC may strengthen or weaken IT value, and vice versa, which provide a good explanation for the disappearance or existence of the so-called productivity paradox, and that the paradox may exist in a country regardless of whether it is a developed or a developing country, inconsistent with conventional wisdom claiming that the paradox exists only in developing countries. The findings imply that it is imperative to carefully assess the values of IT and EC and, as such, prudent rather than blind IT and EC investing decisions are made, and that the values of IT and EC must be evaluated jointly rather than separately. The findings add significant contributions to the literature and serve as a catalytic agent in stimulating further comparative research in these important areas linking IT investments and EC developments when their business values are the major concern.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
On the one hand, information technology (IT) and e-commerce (EC)33IT and EC differ in concepts and properties as depicted by Fig. 1. The figure is self-explanatory and, as such, no further explanations are given to keep the length of the article under control.are an integrated part of production and operations management (POM)/information systems management (ISM) (Prasad & Babbar, 2000). By 1994, IT accounted for over 15.5 percent nonresidential fixed investments by the U.S. private sector; and from 1990 to 1994, IT investment increased at an annual rate of 7.4 percent, while the American economy grew at less than half that rate. On the other, the volume of EC for U.S. business transactions increased from $8 billion in 1996 to $327 billion by the year 2002 (Digital Planet-The Global Economy 2004); and the dollar amount spent on EC continues to increase rapidly through time. Especially, in recent years, we have witnessed that the activities of EC have gained their popularity. Accordingly, the business values of IT and EC should be a topic of burgeoning interest.The literatures, however, clearly indicate that the business values of IT and EC have been assessed independently and separately (Brynjolfsson & Hitt, 1996; Chen & Lin, 2009; Chou, Shao, & Lin, 2012; Dewan & Kraemer, 2000; Kao & Hwang, 2010; Lee, 2010; Lin, 2009, 2013, Chap. 3; Lin & Chiang, 2011; Lin & Chuang, 2013; Lin, Chuang, & Choi, 2010; Lin & Shao, 2000; Ramanathan, Ramanathan, & Hsia, 2012) rather than jointly and simultaneously, with the work by Zhu (2004) being an exception. But the study concerns only the positive interaction effect (the complementarity phenomenon) and undermines the possible negative interaction effect (the substitutability phenomenon) between IT infrastructure and EC capability. Thus, the study leaves a gap to be bridged; and the gap reveals a critically important research problem to be resolved, that is, the values of IT and EC should be evaluated simultaneously rather than separately. When IT and EC are invested simultaneously, the presence of IT may enhance (reduce) EC value, hence, complementarity (substitutability), and vice versa. We, therefore, argue that the joint presence of IT and EC may lead to both the complementarity and substitutability relationships between IT and EC in the value-generating process and that the values of IT and EC must be assessed jointly rather than independently.Here, precisely defined, the substitutability (complementarity) phenomenon means that a reduction (an enhancement) of IT value arises when IT investment produces smaller (greater) gains in the presence of EC than by itself, and vice versa. Thus, IT and EC, when invested simultaneously, may interact with each other, to reduce or enhance their business values and, consequently, assessing them separately may lead to over-estimating or under-estimating the values of IT and EC. Moreover, the substitutability and complementarity relationships between IT and EC may provide an explanation on the existence and disappearance of the productivity paradox. Virtually all previous research has neglected the potential of the substitutability and complementarity relationships between IT and EC in evaluating their business values when IT and EC are present jointly.On the basis of the theory of production (Bakos & Kemerer, 1992; Beattie & Taylor, 1985; Chen & Lin, 2009), the present study proposes to assess the business values of EC and IT independently and jointly, with evidence from country-level data. Our methodology of research is the traditional one-equation and generalized two-equation time-varying stochastic production frontier (SPF) approaches derived from the theory of production; and the performance measure is the so-called productive (technical) efficiency that is built in the time-varying SPF approaches. The method of research allows us to analyze our empirical results not only collectively based simply on the signs and statistical significance of the coefficient estimates, but also individually by undertaking a highly comprehensive comparison of individual firms or countries (as used in this study). Furthermore, the SPF methodology suggests that there are two sources of productive (technical) (in)efficiency, implying that there are two ways to treat IT capital in the value-creating or production process in two cases: IT capital is treated as an observed (actual) output-influencing variable along with EC (Case 1) and is treated as a production factor along with ordinary capital and ordinary labor impacting the maximum (desired) output (Case 2) (see Section 3.4 for more details).Especially, there are no country-level studies on IT and EC values that have ever applied the generalized (or two-equation) time-varying SPF incorporating the Box–Tidwell (BT) transformation (Box and Tidwell, 1962) as used in this research. Employing the SPF specified by BT, fitted into a panel data set, we are able to claim that when EC and IT are present simultaneously, they do not necessarily become more powerful in creating greater value than by themselves alone, hence, the notions of substitutability and complementarity.According to Lin (2009) and Melville, Kraemer, and Gurbarani (2004), there have been too much emphasis on the U.S. firms and lack of cross-country research on the values of IT and EC and, consequently, knowledge accumulation concerning IT value at the country level has been inhibited and poor. Thus, there are prominent reasons (Lin, 2009; Prasad & Babbar, 2000; Rosenzweig, 1994) for the need to undertake a country-level study such as this research.The study would provide the clues or answers to such open questions as: (i) As IT and EC are present jointly, does the presence of IT weaken (strengthen) EC value larger than what the presence of EC does to IT value? (ii) Based on the theory of production and the SPF approaches derived from the theory, is the classical regression analysis approach or the nonparametric DEA (e.g., Shao & Lin, 2002) used in previous research appropriate? (iii) Realizing the need to differentiate the collective analytical method from the individual analytical method, are the conclusions drawn based only on the former method convincing or misleading (Lin, 2009)? (iv) Is it true that the productivity paradox is absent from the group of (advanced and newly) developed countries but remains in the group of developing countries (Dewan & Kraemer, 2000)? (v) Does IT contribute to technical efficiency more than EC when IT and EC appear separately or jointly?The remainder of this paper is divided into six sections as follows. Section 2 is devoted to a literature review. Section 3 describes the production theory, the one-equation and generalized (two-equation) time-varying SPF approaches, the six research models, the performance metrics derived from the theory, seven research hypotheses, and the method of estimation, where, the two-step nonlinear maximum-likelihood (2SNML) method of estimation is explained. Section 4 defines the variables involved, describes the country-level panel data used, and reports the empirical results obtained, followed by Section 5 in which the likelihood ratio (LR), specification error, and nonparametric Wilcoxon signed-ranks tests are conducted; the empirical results are analyzed in great details; major findings are summarized; and the decision-making components are identified. Finally, Section 6 concludes with some remarks and proposals for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
