@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Maintenance scheduling in the electricity industry: A literature review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review the literature on maintenance scheduling in the electricity industry.We study regulated and deregulated power systems.We discuss on network considerations, fuel management and data uncertainty.We provide a multidimensional classification of references (problem, system, method).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance,OR in energy,Scheduling,Regulated and deregulated power systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The reliability of the power plants and transmission lines in the electricity industry is crucial for meeting demand. Consequently, timely maintenance plays a major role reducing breakdowns and avoiding expensive production shutdowns. By now, the literature contains a sound body of work focused on improving decision making in generating units and transmission lines maintenance scheduling. The purpose of this paper is to review that literature. We update previous surveys and provide a more global view of the problem: we study both regulated and deregulated power systems and explore some important features such as network considerations, fuel management, and data uncertainty.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The production of movement, heat, or light needs a common input: energy. Energy can be produced from fuel (e.g., oil, gasoline, uranium, gas, coal, wood) or natural forces (e.g., wind, water). The consumption of energy is growing with the development of countries and the increasing world population, and the production must meet this demand. Therefore, the reliability of power plants, and wind and solar farms is extremely important. In this context, equipment maintenance management is a major economic issue. Just to cite few examples, equipment maintenance management in electric power systems is concerned with decisions such as: when to stop a generating unit for maintenance, when to re-start it again, and how much resources (e.g., technicians) are to be assigned to the maintenance of a given unit during a given period. These decisions are taken under complex environments and constraints such as resource availability, demand satisfaction, and reliability thresholds.One of the most successful contributions of operations research to improve decision making in equipment maintenance management is the application of optimization techniques to solve maintenance planning and scheduling problems. In the particular case of electric power systems, these problems range from simple technician-equipment assignments to complex problems considering interactions between different stakeholders and uncertainty in the problem parameters. In this paper, we build on the work of Yamayee (1982), Kralj and Petrović (1988), Dahal (2004), Khalid and Ioannis (2012) to update the state-of-the-art and provide a global overview of the current stream of research in the field. To make the document easier to read, the various acronyms used in this paper are summarized in Table 1.The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents a brief description of the energy industry, Section 2 reviews maintenance scheduling problems rising in regulated and deregulated environments, Section 3 discusses existing solution methods for these problems, and Section 4 concludes the paper and outlines research perspectives.The energy industry carries out three activities: production, transmission, and distribution. Traditionally the industry is organized in a centralized, vertically integrated way (see Fig. 1): a single company has a monopoly of the entire system in its area of operation. However, the government regulates the situation directly or indirectly: the entity must not take advantage of the end consumer. Therefore, the term regulated monopoly utilities is also used. With the deregulation of the electricity industry from the end of the 1990s, competition has been replacing monopolies in most places.The deregulation (or liberalization) of the power industry has opened up the electricity market to competition. Several companies can now produce or distribute energy; it is, however, more difficult to introduce competition for the transmission management. Energy prices are no longer regulated by the government (hence the terms deregulation and liberalization) but are subject to market interactions. Regulations remain (sometimes the term restricted power system is used) but monopolies are no longer acceptable. Given the success of this system in the aeronautics, gas, and telephone industries, this reform is promoted as a benefit for the sector. It is intended to favor innovation, to lower prices, and to lead to better service. This new system introduces challenges such as the organization of the electricity market, the price-setting mechanism, and the coordination of the various actors.Indeed, the introduction of market players leads to the emergence of new actors or redefines the role or activities of existing actors. An independent system operator (ISO) is responsible for the reliability and security of the system. It dispatches all or part of the energy transactions and can decrease loads on the network to avoid congestion. The ISO is the leading entity in a power market, and it must be fair. It manages the interactions between three key entities: the generating companies (GENCOs), transmission companies (TRANSCOs), and distribution companies (DISCOs). When a single TRANSCO owns the entire transmission network, the ISO operates the transmission lines. The TRANSCO is then paid for the use of its lines and the maintenance of its network (Shahidehpour, Yamin, & Li, 2002). Retail energy service companies (RETAILCOs) act as intermediaries between GENCOs and consumers by buying energy from the former to sell to the latter. Other actors exist but their roles are relatively minor.Energy transactions of different natures can take place in this new market structure. In a power exchange model, GENCOs and RETAILCOs negotiate bilateral contracts defining prices and quantities independently of the ISO. However, the availability of the transmission lines must be checked with the system operator to maintain security. This decentralized approach is opposed to the centralized approach (pool-based model) where market participants share extensive information (e.g., energy offer, start-up costs, generation costs, ramp-rate for each generator) with the ISO, which is responsible for ensuring the social and economic welfare of the market while keeping the system safe. Two kinds of bids are submitted to the ISO: producers’ bids consist of energy blocks and their selling prices, and buyers’ bids consist of energy blocks and their buying prices. The power price is determined by the balance between supply and demand using a market clearing process. Several markets such as day-ahead, intra-day, real-time or a combination can be encountered. Although they are different, both pool-based and power exchange models can coexist. Moreover, a transmission market deals with the purchase and sale of transmission rights. For a more detailed explanation of all these specificities, the reader is referred to Shahidehpour et al. (2002). Fig. 2summarizes the various interactions between the actors. It is however difficult to define a typical organization because several structures are possible.Liberalization modifies and sometimes complicates power industry issues. GENCOs, TRANSCOs, and DISCOS mainly serve their own interests, which may call into question the stability of energy production and/or energy distribution. Regulations are therefore required.After this brief presentation of the electricity industry, we discuss, in the next section, optimization problems in maintenance scheduling of generating units and transmission lines rising in both regulated and deregulated power systems. We focus on network constraints, on data uncertainty, and on fuel consumption and supply management. To provide a global overview, Table A1 classifies the references according to the problem they solve, the power system they target and the features they deal with.Maintenance represents the actions required to ensure that a product provides reliable service. Maintenance can be split into two categories: corrective and preventive. Corrective maintenance is performed after a breakdown. Preventive maintenance is performed at predetermined intervals or according to prescribed criteria and intended to reduce the probability of failure. Maintenance in the electricity industry concerns generating units and transmission lines; the horizon can be long-term or short-term. In this paper, we do not discuss failure prediction or maintenance policies that will manage the risks of equipment failure in the most effective way. We refer the reader to Doyle (2004), Yssaad, Khiat, and Chaker (2014) for literature dealing with those problems. We consider defining time intervals for preventive maintenance for the equipment, given financial and reliability considerations.The maintenance scheduling of generating units has been widely studied. On its basic version, the maintenance scheduling problem consists in defining when to stop the generating units for preventive maintenance in order to maintain the system reliability and to reduce the general operational costs. We refer to it as the generator maintenance scheduling (GMS) problem. Additional constraints include, but are not limited to:•Maintenance tasks: maintenance window (possible time for maintenance), sequence, incompatibility, spacing, and overlapping of tasks.Generating units: highest/lowest production levels, ramp-rate11Output gap limitation between two successive periods for a generating unit..Manpower: availability for each period, requirements by maintenance tasks.Resources: availability for each period, requirements, consumption by maintenance tasks.Network: transmission-line capacity (see Section 2.2), voltage.Demand: fully satisfied or not, meeting of demand, energy-not-served (ENS) threshold.Reliability: minimum reserve required by period, risk levels, ENS.This optimization problem is generally NP-hard and may be nonlinear and nonconvex. Moreover, the power production is strongly impacted by maintenance decisions. To include load constraints, especially demand satisfaction, in the GMS problem, it can be necessary to simultaneously decide the production levels of the generating units and the maintenance scheduling. The solutions obtained can then be used as guidelines for unit commitment (UC) with a short time horizon. UC aims to schedule generating units level to meet forecasted load and reserve requirements.In the next two sections we discuss the GMS problem in regulated and deregulated power systems.Monopolies still operate in some regions. In a vertically integrated utility, the maintenance is scheduled in a centralized way, and all the information is available (costs, network, etc.). The various studies can be classified according to the nature of the considered objective function:•Reliability-basedReferences: (Baskar, Subbaraj, Rao, & Tamilselvi, 2003; Canto & Rubio-Romero, 2013; Chen & Toyoda, 1991; Dahal, Aldridge, & McDonald, 1999; Dahal & Chakpitak, 2007; Dahal & McDonald, 1997; Ekpenyong, Zhang, & Xia, 2012; El-Amin, Duffuaa, & Abbas, 2000; Fetanat & Shafipour, 2011; Foong, Simpson, Maier, & Stolp, 2007; Mohanta, Sadhu, & Chakrabarti, 2004, 2007; Reihani, Sarikhani, & Davodi, 2012; Schlünz & van Vuuren, 2013; Suresh & Kumarappan, 2013; Volkanovski & Mavko, 2008; Wang & Handschin, 2000; Yare & Venayagamoorthy, 2010).For reliability, the main optimization criterion is the leveling of the net reserves along the planning horizon. For a given period t, the net reserves correspond to the maximal power that can be produced by the available generating units not in maintenance at t minus the estimated demand during t. The most common approach is to minimize the sum of squares of the net reserves by period (Dahal et al., 1999; Dahal & Chakpitak, 2007; Dahal & McDonald, 1997; Ekpenyong et al., 2012; Foong et al., 2007; Mohanta et al., 2004, 2007; Reihani et al., 2012; Schlünz & van Vuuren, 2013; Yare & Venayagamoorthy, 2010). In contrast, Chen and Toyoda (1991) maximized the reserve margin when isolated power systems are tackled, whereas they leveled the reserve margin for each area when a multi-area system is considered. Suresh and Kumarappan (2013) and Wang and Handschin (2000) leveled the reserve margin by minimizing an objective function based on the deviation between a reserve rate and its average (i.e. the average reserve rate over the planning horizon). Suresh and Kumarappan (2013) defined the reserve rate as the ratio of the net reserve to the sum of the generation capacity plus the predicted maximum load while Wang & Handschin, 2000 defined the reserve rate as as the ratio of the difference between the sum of the generation capacity minus the maximum predicted load to the maximum predicted load. El-Amin et al. (2000) considered the deviation between the reserve by period and the average reserve along the horizon. Baskar et al. (2003) considered the square of this deviation and study the impact of a crew constraint (manpower availability at each period) on the results. Canto and Rubio-Romero (2013) maximized the sum by period of the ratio of the net power reserves to the gross power reserves. They introduced geographical, seasonal, and coordination constraints for a problem with wind farm turbines and thermal and hydroelectric power plants. Volkanovski and Mavko (2008) minimized the annual value of the loss of load expectation (LOLE)22Expected time during which the demand is greater than the available capacity of the power system.taking into account the forecasted outage rate of the generating units. Finally, Fetanat and Shafipour (2011) defined an objective function such as the generating units have to be maintained as promptly as possible to reduce the expenses related to damaged machines.Ekpenyong et al. (2012) and Suresh and Kumarappan (2013) gave outlines to schedule the power production. Ekpenyong et al. (2012) also considered ramp-rate constraints for the generating units. Other studies ensure for each period that the generating capacities that are not in maintenance are sufficient to cover the demand plus sometimes a reserve constraint.Cost-basedReferences: (Abirami, Ganesan, Subramanian, & Anandhakumar, 2014; Al-Khamis, Vemuri, Lemonidis, & Yellen, 1992; Anghinolfi, Gambardella, & Montemanni, 2012; Baskar et al., 2003; Brandt, Bauer, Völker, & Cardeneo, 2013; Buljubasic & Gavranovic, 2012; Burke & Smith, 2000; Canto, 2008; Charest & Ferland, 1993; Chattopadhyay, 1998; Digalakis & Margaritis, 2002; Ekpenyong et al., 2012; El-Amin et al., 2000; El-Sharkh, 2014; El-Sharkh, El-Keib, & Chen, 2003; Fattahi, Mahootchi, Mosadegh, & Fallahi, 2014; Fourcade, Johnson, Bara, & Cortey-Dumont, 1997; Frost & Dechter, 1998; Fu, Shahidehpour, & Li, 2007; Gardi & Nouioua, 2011; Godskesen, Jensen, Kjeldsen, & Larsen, 2013; Gorge, Lisser, & Zorgati, 2012; Jost & Savourey, 2013; Khemmoudj, Porcheron, & Bennaceur, 2006; Kovács, Erds, Viharos, & Monostori, 2011; Kralj & Petrovic, 1995; Leou, 2006; Lusby, Muller, & Petersen, 2013; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1998, 1999a, 2000a; Mollahassani-pour, Abdollahi, & Rashidinejad, 2014; Mytakidis & Vlachos, 2008; Rozenknop, Wolfler Calvo, Alfandari, Chemla, & Létocart, 2013; Saraiva, Pereira, Mendes, & Sousa, 2011; Satoh & Nara, 1991; Silva, 2000; Silva & Morozowski, 1995; Yellen & Al-Khamis, 1992).The other common objective is to minimize the general operational costs. These are production costs (e.g., fuel consumption), maintenance costs (e.g., loss of profit), and sometimes unit start-up costs (Canto, 2008). The production costs depend on the generators’ power output, so it is necessary to schedule their production level. An economic dispatch problem is usually solved with an objective of satisfying the demand at a minimum cost. The units with the lowest marginal costs are used to meet the system requirements; the other units produce only during the peak periods. Some studies address UC jointly to the GMS problem or/and take into account the transmission network (see Section 2.2). Other authors deal with a more specific problem including an accurate fuel management (Anghinolfi et al., 2012; Brandt et al., 2013; Buljubasic & Gavranovic, 2012; Fourcade et al., 1997; Gardi & Nouioua, 2011; Godskesen et al., 2013; Gorge et al., 2012; Jost & Savourey, 2013; Khemmoudj et al., 2006; Lusby et al., 2013; Rozenknop et al., 2013). We discuss this issue in more detail in Section 2.4.Reliability-and-cost-basedReferences: (Huang, 1997; Kralj & Petrovic, 1995; Muñoz-Moro & Ramos, 1999).The literature reports on some studies dealing with objective functions that are based on both reliability and cost. For instance, Huang (1997), Kralj and Petrovic (1995), Muñoz-Moro and Ramos (1999) proposed multiobjective approaches to try to find the best trade-off between these two conflicting objectives. Among these examples, Muñoz-Moro and Ramos (1999) proposed a two-stage approach that first considers the operational costs and then the reserve margins.Deregulation changes the maintenance scheduling problem. The GENCOs and TRANSCOs are now usually responsible for maintaining their equipment. The ISO ensures the smooth running of the system in terms of reliability and security. Risk is managed by guaranteeing sufficient reserves of energy for each period to meet uncertainties in, for example, the demand or the generator deterioration. The different actors may have conflicting interests: GENCOs and TRANSCOs want to maximize their profits, whereas the ISO is concerned with demand satisfaction and congestion avoidance. For example, GENCOs tend to perform maintenance when the energy price is at its lowest, which may make it difficult to meet the demand. Thus, in an iterative way (see Fig. 3), the GENCOs and TRANSCOs submit their preferred maintenance schedules to the ISO, which verifies the acceptable behavior of the system on the basis of all the market-player information. If the ISO is not satisfied, it will request modifications (e.g., the rescheduling of one or more maintenance tasks). The coordination procedure may vary from one system to another.Since the opening up to competition, the GMS problem in deregulated power systems has been widely studied (Badri & Niazi, 2012; Barot & Bhattacharya, 2008; Billinton & Abdulwhab, 2003; Bisanovic, Hajro, & Dlakic, 2011; Chattopadhyay, 2004a, 2004b; Conejo, Garcia-Bertrand, & Diaz-Salazar, 2005; Elyas, Akbari Foroud, & Chitsaz, 2013; Eshraghnia, Shanechi, & Mashhadi, 2006; Feng, Wang, & Li, 2009; Fu et al., 2007; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Han, Chung, & Kim, 2011; Kim, Park, Park, & Chun, 2005; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1999a, 1999b, 2000a, 2000b; Min, Kim, Park, & Yoon, 2013; Wu, Shahidehpour, & Li, 2008; Zhan, Guo, Wu, & Zhang, 2014). The problem has globally the same constraints as for the vertically integrated case. Bisanovic et al. (2011) introduced bilateral contracts (defined through prices and power quantities to supply) in their model. Chattopadhyay (2004b), Marwali and Shahidehpour (1999b), Marwali and Shahidehpour (2000a) considered fuel based constraints. Indeed, restrictions on the maximum fuel supplied each week, month, and year may arise due to contractual agreements with fuel suppliers. As noted for regulated power system, the output levels of the generating units may be computed for each period. It allows for the more accurate estimation of the revenues and operating costs and can be required, among others, by the introduction of network constraints. In some studies (Badri & Niazi, 2012; Fu et al., 2007; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1999a, 1999b, 2000a, 2000b), cost minimization is still the objective. These studies generally deal with a security-constrained GMS problem operating under a pool-based model or a regulated monopoly. However, profit maximization is a much more common objective (Barot & Bhattacharya, 2008; Bisanovic et al., 2011; Chattopadhyay, 2004a; 2004b; Conejo et al., 2005; Elyas et al., 2013; Eshraghnia et al., 2006; Feng et al., 2009; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Kim et al., 2005; Min et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2008; Zhan et al., 2014). Note that these two objectives are different because profits depend on both costs and revenues. A very recent study by Dahal, Al-Arfaj, and Paudyal (2015) explains how maintenance costs can be precisely modeled in deregulated markets considering, among others: failures, contractual compensations, rescheduling, and market opportunities. The authors demonstrated the importance and the impact of market related costs in maintenance schedules.Under deregulation, the GENCOs have limited information about the system. The coordination of the decisions and information exchange between the GENCOs and the ISO are important. The interactions between these two actors have received intensive interest (Barot & Bhattacharya, 2008; Conejo et al., 2005; Elyas et al., 2013; Eshraghnia et al., 2006; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Han et al., 2011; Min et al., 2013; Zhan et al., 2014). Reliability-based objectives are considered when the problem is solved from the point of view of the ISO: maximizing the reserve throughout the horizon Eshraghnia et al. (2006), maximizing the sum of the ratio of the net reserves to the gross reserves by period (Conejo et al., 2005), minimizing the standard deviation of this last ratio (Zhan et al., 2014), or minimizing a risk penalty factor related to an adequate level of reliability (Geetha & Swarup, 2009). Cost minimization is considered in Barot and Bhattacharya (2008). Barot and Bhattacharya (2008), Conejo et al. (2005), Eshraghnia et al. (2006), Geetha and Swarup (2009), Min et al. (2013) presented iterative coordination methods based on rescheduling signals. Eshraghnia et al. (2006) suggested a coordination procedure where at every iteration the ISO indicates permissible and impermissible maximum power for the maintenance of the generating units in each period. In the same way, Barot and Bhattacharya (2008) coordinated the decisions through corrective signals sent by the ISO to the GENCOs, indicating the maximal capacities that can be in maintenance during critical periods. These signals are calculated according to the responsibility of each GENCO for not supplying the load. These capacity-based signals can be replaced by penalties and/or incentive signals. Conejo et al. (2005), Geetha and Swarup (2009), Min et al. (2013) penalized periods of maintenance during peak periods or when the reliability of the system is uncertain. The objective function associated with the GENCO problem is modified at each iteration to represent the ISO’s recommendations. In Conejo et al. (2005), GENCOs that adjust their maintenance plans are paid to offset their losses compared to their initial plans; the cost is paid by the customers. Han et al. (2011) proposed an ISO coordination procedure to adjust the individual generator-maintenance schedules according to the preferences of each GENCO, while guaranteeing system reliability. Elyas et al. (2013) gave the ISO the responsibility for maintenance scheduling. They took into account consumer satisfaction by maximizing the annual social welfare and also consider the profit-seeking GENCOs. They suggested a maintenance bidding approach to model the coordination mechanism. Finally, Zhan et al. (2014) analyzed the relationship between the ISO and the GENCOs in GMS using a multiobjective approach.Along with generator maintenance, transmission-line maintenance must be scheduled. This problem, usually called the transmission maintenance scheduling (TMS) problem, has received less attention than the GMS problem (Abirami et al., 2014; Fu et al., 2007; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Langdon & Treleaven, 1997; Lv, Wang, & Sun, 2012; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1998, 1999b, 2000b). It is necessary to ensure that taking a line out for maintenance does not impact the network reliability and security. The TMS constraints are globally the same as those for GMS (e.g., time windows for maintenance tasks, resource requirements, demand satisfaction). These are also constraints on the line capacity and may include voltage considerations. The network can be modeled as either a transportation model (Abirami et al., 2014; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1998, 1999b) or a more complex but more realistic DC power flow model33Linearization of an AC power flow model.(Fu et al., 2007; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Langdon & Treleaven, 1997; Lv et al., 2012; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 2000b).The TMS problem can be addressed independently from the GMS problem (Langdon & Treleaven, 1997; Lv et al., 2012; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 2000b). In this approach, the state of the network appears as a constraint during the resolution of the GMS problem. Although this approach is especially valid for regulated systems it may also apply to deregulated power systems. For instance, Marwali and Shahidehpour (2000b) looked for a trade-off between maintenance costs and loss of revenue over a short-term horizon.When the TMS problem is tackled jointly with the GMS problem (Abirami et al., 2014; Fu et al., 2007; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1998, 1999b), it becomes more complex. The maintenance must take into account economic considerations while minimizing the unsatisfied demand. The GMS and TMS problems have been solved generally on a monthly or weekly basis. Marwali and Shahidehpour (1998) coordinated maintenance decisions over a long-term horizon. Marwali and Shahidehpour (1999b) included fuel and emission constraints in the problem, considering local transmission lines within a GENCO. Fu et al. (2007) proposed an optimal coordination approach between generation and transmission outages, mid-term maintenance outage and hourly security constrained generation scheduling. The technique can be used by a company in a monopoly position or by an ISO. Abirami et al. (2014) solved the integrated maintenance scheduling problem on hourly basis and consider partial maintenance for transmission lines. When deregulated power systems are based on the power exchange model, the GENCOs and TRANSCOs are profit-oriented and do not have global information about the state of the system. As explained earlier, the ISO has to coordinate the submitted schedules; the cheapest transmission lines and generating units might be overloaded. To our knowledge, only one study applies to this case ; Geetha and Swarup (2009) solved the problem for every actor (ISO, GENCOs, and TRANSCOs) and coordinate the decisions through penalties.Network considerations and especially coordination between GMS and TMS problems are important to maintain the security as well as the efficiency of the global system. If the TMS problem is not solved jointly with the GMS problem, network constraints can be introduced when the latter problem is solved (Badri & Niazi, 2012; Barot & Bhattacharya, 2008; Chattopadhyay, 1998; Chen & Toyoda, 1991; El-Sharkh et al., 2003; Leou, 2006; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1999a, 2000a; Silva, 2000; Silva & Morozowski, 1995; Wu et al., 2008). These constraints can implicitly include the maintenance tasks planned for the network. Maintenance and unit commitment decisions must never exceed the line capacities. To our knowledge, Chen and Toyoda (1991) were the first to consider these constraints in a multi-area problem, but they did not handle unexpected breakdowns. The transportation model is widely used, except by Silva (2000) who modeled a DC power flow.Uncertainty in GMS and TMS can be significant and it requires specific management. Indeed, the load curve and the fuel and energy prices may be difficult to estimate precisely. Furthermore, corrective maintenance, characterized by unexpected breakdowns, has a real impact on the production. Uncertainty has therefore to be handled with care.Reserve constraints can help to deal with these risks. Reliability objectives, as discussed earlier, can also be used. However, using only deterministic strategies may be inappropriate in the case of large disturbances.To explicitly consider unexpected breakdowns, researchers associate a forced outage rate (FOR) with generating units or transmission lines. The FOR represents the probability that it will not be available for service when required. It impacts the quantity of energy that can be supplied. Thus, it prevents unsuitable maintenance schedules when load constraints are considered. One can also (artificially) reduce the capacity of the generating units and solve a deterministic problem, but the not-supplied energy can be overestimated. However, the use of stochastic reliability indices such as the expected energy not served or EENS (Baskar et al., 2003; Chattopadhyay, 2004b; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Lv et al., 2012; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1999a, 1999b; Silva & Morozowski, 1995; Yellen & Al-Khamis, 1992) and the loss of load probability (LOLP) (Billinton & Abdulwhab, 2003; Han et al., 2011; Mohanta et al., 2004, 2007; Reihani et al., 2012; Suresh & Kumarappan, 2013; Volkanovski & Mavko, 2008) is better suited to tackle problems in this scenario. The EENS is minimized or a threshold for acceptability is defined. Satisfying EENS within a specific threshold results in an acceptable LOLP. Authors such as Mohanta et al. (2007), Reihani et al. (2012), Suresh and Kumarappan (2013) considered the LOLP reliability index in a stochastic levelized risk method. The first step of this technique is to build an outage capacity probability table (COPT) by associating a probability to every generation capacity level taking into account the forced outage rate of each generating unit. The table can be computed with a convolution algorithm. The second step consists in finding the system’s risk characteristic coefficient, defined as the change of the generating units outage capacity in MW when the systems risk changes by a certain factor. Each unit capacity is then replaced by an effective load carrying capacity based on the system’s risk characteristic coefficient and the FOR. It represents the actual capacity of the units which is used for meeting the load demand. Similarly, the load of each interval is replaced by a value, called the equivalent load, which takes into account the peak variation during this interval and the system’s risk characteristic coefficient. Leveling the risk may be finally realized by minimizing the sum of the squares of the reserves in the planning period. The reserve in each interval is obtained by subtracting the effective load carrying capacity of the available generating units and the equivalent load. In Mohanta et al. (2007), the risk associated with the resulting plan is evaluated by giving a confidence interval for the LOLP. Suresh and Kumarappan (2013) presented a coordination scheme to minimize the LOLP and the deviations of annual supply reserve ratio by considering the system’s risk characteristic coefficient as a control parameter of their approach. We refer the reader to the previous given references for more details. As a fairly closed approach, Volkanovski and Mavko (2008) chose to minimize directly the annual value of the LOLE. Billinton and Abdulwhab (2003) discussed a health levelization technique over a short-term horizon. Incorporated in a probabilistic framework, the objective is to maximize the health/security of the system, defined as the probability that the available reserves are greater than the required reserves. Chattopadhyay (2004b) simulated random outages using the Monte Carlo technique and proposes a stochastic optimization framework based on a game theory model to tackle the GMS problem. In Geetha and Swarup (2009), Lv et al. (2012), Marwali and Shahidehpour (1999a), Marwali and Shahidehpour (1999b), Marwali and Shahidehpour (2000a), Silva and Morozowski (1995), a probabilistic approach takes FOR into account in a problem with network constraints. Last but not least, Feng et al. (2009) analyzed the impact of unexpected unit failures on the GMS solution and especially on: maintenance periods, producer benefits, maintenance costs and the costs of repairing or replacing some generating units. A modified superposed power law process models the unit failure rate. Its parameters are determined via the Gauss–Newton algorithm.Fuzzy logic theory is also used to handle some data uncertainties (Dahal et al., 1999; El-Sharkh et al., 2003; Huang 1997; Mohanta et al., 2004). It allows the representation and the use of linguistic knowledge. This concept is mainly used through fuzzy fitness function in a genetic algorithm (GA). Huang (1997) used triangular and trapezoidal membership functions for the multiple objectives (reserve margin, production cost) and for the soft constraints (manpower, time windows, geographical constraint). They used a GA to tune the membership functions. Dahal et al. (1999) introduced a fuzzy evaluation function combining the reliability objective function, the manpower constraint and a penalty factor associated with the inflexible demand satisfaction constraint. Based on their experience, they used triangular and trapezoidal membership functions to define the fuzzy sets. Mohanta et al. (2004) incorporated uncertainty associated to the data and the forced outage rate by evaluating the reliability of power plants using fuzzy theory. They used a fuzzy LOLP to assess the quality of the method. The drawback of the fuzzy logic approach is the intensive need of expert knowledge and substantial amounts of data.The power demand may also be uncertain. Its stochastic nature can be explicitly considered. A set of scenarios that model alternative demands is used in Anghinolfi et al. (2012), Brandt et al. (2013), Buljubasic and Gavranovic (2012), Canto (2008), Canto and Rubio-Romero (2013), Gardi and Nouioua (2011), Godskesen et al. (2013), Gorge et al. (2012), Jost and Savourey (2013), Lusby et al. (2013), Rozenknop et al. (2013). The maintenance decisions ensure that the demand is met in all the scenarios. El-Sharkh et al. (2003) simulated the demand and the cost uncertainties using triangular membership functions defining fuzzy sets. Ekpenyong et al. (2012) presented an effective method, called model predictive control, that detects demand disturbances and makes appropriate corrections.When the objective is profit-based, it may be necessary to take into account the volatility of market prices. Wu et al. (2008) used a stochastic model based on an hourly price-based unit commitment. The hourly electricity and fuel prices are modeled as a set of scenarios determined via a Monte-Carlo method.Thermal production represents around 80% of the total global electricity production44The shift project data portal - Browse energy and climate data, http://www.tsp-data-portal.org/Breakdown-of-Electricity-Generation-by-Energy-Source , last accessed: 2015-05-07.. Fuel is fundamental for the effective functioning of these plants, therefore it can be subject to a specific management. In Badri and Niazi (2012), the fuel consumption is limited by period for every generating unit. If fuel shortages occur, energy can be purchased externally. In Wu et al. (2008), the fuel allocations, which depend on a predetermined contract with a supplier, are limited by group of units.A bigger challenge comes with refueling considerations. Few studies handle this problem. In some cases, refueling can be done continuously without significantly affecting production (Al-Khamis et al., 1992; Chattopadhyay, 1998, 2004b; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1999b; 2000a; Muñoz-Moro & Ramos, 1999), but sometimes (e.g., for nuclear reactors) it can occur only when the generators are offline (Anghinolfi et al., 2012; Brandt et al., 2013; Buljubasic & Gavranovic, 2012; Fourcade et al., 1997; Gardi & Nouioua, 2011; Godskesen et al., 2013; Gorge et al., 2012; Jost & Savourey, 2013; Khemmoudj et al., 2006; Lusby et al., 2013; Rozenknop et al., 2013). The introduction of fuel management into the GMS problem increases its complexity, but also makes it more realistic. Al-Khamis et al. (1992) focused on the case of fuel constraints for each generating unit. Muñoz-Moro and Ramos (1999) are concerned with the maximum fuel storage capacities of thermal plants. Marwali and Shahidehpour (1999b)2000a) solved a fuel dispatch problem with multiple suppliers. The fuel consumption is limited by week, month, and year and is linked with the output level of the generators. The coordination of long-term and short-term decisions is examined in Marwali and Shahidehpour (2000a). Chattopadhyay (1998) discussed coal supply management with different transport modes from the mine to the power stations. In Chattopadhyay (2004b), the author introduced fuel contracts with suppliers (with fixed fuel prices and volumes) in a GMS model and describes a successive linearization scheme to approximate the fuel consumption as a linear function. Two other studies (Fourcade et al., 1997; Khemmoudj et al., 2006) are concerned with planning shutdowns in production to carry out refueling and maintenance operations; the fuel quantity to supply is known in advance.A challenge submitted jointly by EURO55Association of European Operational Research Societies.and ROADEF66Société française de recherche opérationnelle et d’ aide à la décision.in collaboration with EDF77Electricité de France.has renewed interest in this latter problem. It presents a large-scale energy management problem with many constraints (Porcheron, Gorge, Juan, Simovic, & Dereu, 2010). The time horizon is long and fine-grained (up to 277 weeks with 7 or 21 timesteps per week). Two types of production units are considered. Non–nuclear plants can refuel continuously whereas nuclear plants must be shut down when fuel is supplied. In contrast to previous studies (Fourcade et al., 1997; Khemmoudj et al., 2006), the amount of fuel that is supplied for every nuclear plant is left as a decision variable. Furthermore, the production levels for the plants have to be planned under demand uncertainty modeled by a set of scenarios (up to 500). The objective is to plan the production and refueling while minimizing the production costs of non–nuclear plants and the refueling costs of nuclear plants. The problem has been proved to be NP-hard (Godskesen et al., 2013). Almost twenty teams participated in this challenge, and some of them (Anghinolfi et al., 2012; Brandt et al., 2013; Buljubasic & Gavranovic, 2012; Gardi & Nouioua, 2011; Godskesen et al., 2013; Jost & Savourey, 2013; Lusby et al., 2013; Rozenknop et al., 2013) published their results. This problem has also been considered by Gorge et al. (2012) with some simplifications. The problem is often decomposed into several components: planning of the refueling, computation of the refuel amounts, and planning of the production.Publicly accessible data to test optimization algorithms for maintenance scheduling in electricity systems are rather scarce. Probably the most classical instance is the IEEE88Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.Reliability Test System (IEEE-RTS) published in 1979 (Reliability Test System Task Force of the Application of Probability Methods Subcommittee, 1979) and released in 1996 (Reliability Test System Task Force of the Application of Probability Methods Subcommittee, 1999). The IEEE-RTS includes data on the network, the generating units, the demand, and the costs. This benchmark has been used in several articles (Badri & Niazi, 2012; Billinton & Abdulwhab, 2003; Elyas et al., 2013; Eshraghnia et al., 2006; Fattahi et al., 2014; Feng et al., 2009; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1998, 1999a, 1999b, 2000a; Mollahassani-pour et al., 2014; Schlünz & van Vuuren, 2013; Suresh & Kumarappan, 2013; Zhan et al., 2014). Another commonly used set of instances contributed by the IEEE99University of Washington Electrical Engineering, Power systems case archive, http://www.ee.washington.edu/research/pstca/ , last accessed: 2015-04-08.represent portions of the North American electricity system; this set served as a benchmark in Abirami et al. (2014), El-Sharkh et al. (2003), El-Sharkh (2014), Fu et al. (2007), Marwali and Shahidehpour (2000b). In addition, an instance with 21 generating units described by Yamayee, Sidenblad, and Yoshimura (1983) regularly serves as a test case (Baskar et al., 2003; Dahal et al., 1999; Dahal & Chakpitak, 2007; Ekpenyong et al., 2012; Schlünz & van Vuuren, 2013; Suresh & Kumarappan, 2013; Yare & Venayagamoorthy, 2010). Data associated with real cases are often used to validate proposed techniques. However, to our knowledge, the only publicly available data is that published of the EURO-ROADEF-EDF challenge (Porcheron et al., 2010).Various heuristic and exact approaches have been proposed for the GMS and/or TMS problems. The solution techniques mainly focus on metaheuristics and mathematical programming. This section provides details about all these techniques and discusses their applicability to the problems defined in the previous sections. To provide a global overview, Table A1 classifies the references according to the solution method they apply.Mathematical programming methods are essentially based on dynamic programming, pure mixed-integer programming, branch-and-bound, Lagrangian relaxation, and Benders decomposition.Until the 90s, dynamic programming was often used for solving the GMS problem because of its sequential decision process. For instance, Huang (1997) combined dynamic programming with fuzzy logic in a multiobjective problem. However, the “curse of dimensionality” limits the application of this method (Yamayee, 1982).Alternatively, many mixed integer programming models are proposed for the GMS and TMS problems. Objectives and constraints widely vary from one study to another; a clear indicator of the difficulty to point out a general model. Only linear models are likely to be handled by commercial solvers and only small or medium-size instances can be efficiently solved. Badri and Niazi (2012), Barot and Bhattacharya (2008), Bisanovic et al. (2011), Canto and Rubio-Romero (2013), Chen and Toyoda (1991), Conejo et al. (2005), Fourcade et al. (1997), Kovács et al. (2011), Mollahassani-pour et al. (2014), Muñoz-Moro and Ramos (1999), Wu et al. (2008) formulated mixed integer linear programming (MILP) models and solved them combining branch-and-bound with the simplex method or interior-point methods. Among studies based on multiobjective optimization, Kralj and Petrovic (1995) designed a customized branch-and-bound, and Muñoz-Moro and Ramos (1999) proposed a two-stage goal programming approach solved by branch-and-bound.The direct use of mixed integer programming is sometimes unsuitable as the computational time grows prohibitively with problem size. To overcome this drawback, decomposition techniques can be applied. The most studied technique is the Benders decomposition which allows to decouple a large-scale problem into a master problem and one or several independent small-scale subproblems which are easier to solve. The master problem works only with a subset of the variables and the constraints. Infeasibility cuts are generated in the master problem to ensure that the subproblem constraints are satisfied. Optimality cuts are also introduced if some parts of the objective are related to the subproblems. The resulting algorithm iteratively solves the master problem and the subproblems until it converges or concludes that there is no solution. For more details, the reader is invited to consult the original paper (Benders, 1962). This decomposition technique applies particularly well to the GMS problem because of the problem’s intrinsic two-stage structure. The master problem is concerned only with the constraints regarding the scheduling of the maintenance tasks as well as the resources requirement if needed. Load and network constraints, as well as fuel management, are moved to the subproblems. Benders decomposition is applied for both regulated (Al-Khamis et al., 1992; Canto, 2008; Fu et al., 2007; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1998, 1999a; Silva, 2000; Silva & Morozowski, 1995; Yellen & Al-Khamis, 1992) and deregulated (Fu et al., 2007; Geetha & Swarup, 2009; Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1999b, 2000a) power systems. Lv et al. (2012) introduced modified Benders feasibility cuts. They also define an index of critical lines—related to the system reliability—to reduce the computational complexity and the solution time. Marwali and Shahidehpour (2000a) coordinated long-term and short-term generation decisions with a dynamic scheduling algorithm. They used a Benders decomposition to define the maintenance decisions and an augmented Lagrangian relaxation to solve the underlying unit commitment. The same authors proposed also a deterministic (Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1998) and a probabilistic (Marwali & Shahidehpour, 1999a) Benders based approach to jointly schedule the generation and transmission maintenance.Mathematical programming may be coupled with heuristic approaches. For instance, linear programming has been used in combination with local search (Gardi & Nouioua, 2011), genetic algorithms (Feng et al., 2009), and customized heuristics (Jost & Savourey, 2013). Examples of the latter include the work of Rozenknop et al. (2013) who combined column generation with customized heuristics, and that of Gorge et al. (2012) who applied a technique based on semidefinite programming, followed by a randomized rounding procedure.It is worth noting that mathematical programming does not seem to be better adapted to one or other of problems discussed in the previous sections. However, all the methods presented in this part are mainly suitable when only linear objectives and constraints are considered in the GMS and/or TMS problems. Therefore, they cannot be used with the main reliability criterion (i.e. the minimization of the square of the reserves) or with quadratic cost functions.Due to the NP-hardness of the maintenance problems faced in power systems and the size of real-word instances, heuristic techniques have been largely developed. These methods also allow for more flexibility to deal with non linear or very complex constraints and/or objectives.GAs are widely used for solving the GMS problem due, mainly, to the structure of the decisions that are made. These algorithms are inspired by natural evolution. A population of abstract representations of solutions, called individuals, evolves through an iterative process toward better solutions. Solutions are usually encoded to facilitate the application of the several techniques used in GAs such as selection, mutation and crossover. In the particular case of GSM, different coding methods have been considered. In the binary representation, an individual has G x T genes (where G is the number of generating units and T is the number of periods) and the value of gene (g,t) is set to 1 if unit g starts maintenance at time t, and 0 otherwise. In the integer representation, a individual has G genes and the value of gene g corresponds to the maintenance starting period of generating unit g. Binary or gray encoding of the latter values may also be used. Dahal and McDonald (1997) showed that integer-coding is the most efficient encoding strategy since it generates the smallest search space. Moreover, the integer coding reduces the probability of infeasibility during the process, and it avoids the overhead necessary to code and decode a solution. Baskar et al. (2003) revisited the binary for integer representation, the real encoding (using real values instead of integer values), and the classic integer encoding. For their experiments, integer coding proves to be the best independently of the problem size. Wang and Handschin (2000) and Reihani et al. (2012) reached the same conclusions about the efficiency of integer-coding. Despite these findings, binary coding is still used in some approaches (Eshraghnia et al., 2006; Leou, 2006; Mohanta et al., 2004, 2007; Suresh & Kumarappan, 2013). Finally, Volkanovski and Mavko (2008) introduced a completely different encoding strategy that uses real values between 0 and 1 obtained by dividing the maintenance starting time value by the number of periods of the horizon.Needless to say, contrary to solution encoding, the fitness function associated to every individual is problem dependent. Usually, it includes penalties associated with the violations of some constraints. Fuzzy models may be developed to handle data uncertainties (see Section 2.3) through the use of fuzzy evaluation functions.Being population-based metaheuristics, GAs require initial solutions to built the initial population. The literature reports on randomly generated solutions (Dahal et al., 1999; Huang, 1997; Leou, 2006; Mohanta et al., 2004, 2007; Reihani et al., 2012) and heuristically generated solutions (Burke & Smith, 2000; Dahal & Chakpitak, 2007; Volkanovski & Mavko, 2008). The latter are often built using constructive methods that are mainly based on the following process: ranking generating units in order of decreasing capacity, and iteratively schedule the maintenance of the units when the demand is at its lowest level, while satisfying the constraints of the model. GAs try to improve solutions by applying the classic operators such as tournament or roulette wheel selection, one or two-point crossovers, random mutation and a replacement policy based usually on elitism. To reduce the probability of trapping in local optima, Dahal and Chakpitak (2007), Mohanta et al. (2004), Mohanta et al. (2007) accepted non-improving solutions at each iteration according to the probabilistic acceptance criterion of simulated annealing.Langdon and Treleaven (1997) designed a GA to schedule the maintenance of the transmission lines combined with some greedy heuristics. Some GAs include a local search algorithm for improving the quality of the solutions. Neighborhoods are usually defined by changing the maintenance starting time of a randomly selected generator. Burke and Smith (2000) tested the combination of a genetic algorithm with several local search methods: a basic hill climbing technique, a simulated annealing, and a tabu search. Hybridization with tabu search proved to be the most efficient approach in their experiments. El-Sharkh et al. (2003) maintained feasibility using a hill climbing technique during the solution process. Leou (2006) executed simulated annealing for each individual solution of the population. Reihani et al. (2012) designed an hybrid algorithm based on extremal optimization and a GA.GAs are mostly used in regulated power systems; they allow dealing with the non-linearity of the main reliability-based objectives.Recent studies (Ekpenyong et al., 2012; Suresh & Kumarappan, 2013; Yare & Venayagamoorthy, 2010) applied the particle swarm optimization (PSO) to the GMS problem. PSO is another population-based metaheuristic which bares many similarities with GAs. It simulates the social behavior of birds within a flock, or even fishes within a school evolving by information exchange. The population is composed of particles moving in the search space of the optimization problem. The position of a particle represents a candidate solution. Each particle is guided according to the best solution (fitness) it has achieved so far, and according to the current best particle, or particles if multiple swarms are considered. On its original version, PSO handles only continuous variables; however, Ekpenyong et al. (2012) introduced a penalty function to deal with the discrete nature of the variables involved in the GMS problem. Suresh and Kumarappan (2013) chose to test a particular binary version of PSO. They defined the particle according to the capacity outage probability table. To improve the effectiveness of the algorithm, they applied crossover and mutation operators to some particles during the iterative process. Yare and Venayagamoorthy (2010) considered only the latter operator in a multiple swarms-modified discrete PSO where information sharing is enhanced by using multiple populations.Non-linear reliability-based objectives (Suresh & Kumarappan, 2013; Yare & Venayagamoorthy, 2010) and cost-based objectives (Ekpenyong et al., 2012) of regulated power systems have been tackled using PSO.Apart from GAs and PSO, other population-based techniques have been explored in the literature. The first three studies deal with regulated power systems and are concerned with the maintenance and generation costs.Digalakis and Margaritis (2002) applied a parallel co-operating cultural algorithm to solve the GMS problem. Contrary to GAs, this method considers multiple populations, but it uses similar operators (selection, crossover, mutation). The exchange of individuals between the populations allows to guide the algorithm towards the promising areas of the search space. The authors used local search to improve the quality of the solutions after the initialization and the application of the genetic operators.El-Sharkh (2014) tested a clonal selection algorithm (CSA) to schedule the maintenance in a regulated power system. CSA imitates the mechanisms of the adaptive immune system. From a population of individuals randomly generated, all infeasible individuals are repaired using a hill climbing algorithm. The best individuals are then cloned and a mutation operator is applied to these copies. The hill climbing technique is used again to repair them. According to the outages planning, an economic load dispatch problem is solved within the process. This algorithm is also used for deregulated power systems in Elyas et al. (2013).Recently, Abirami et al. (2014) presented a teaching-learning based optimization algorithm (TLBO) for solving the GMS problem. This technique is inspired by the transfer of knowledge between teacher and students in the classroom. TLBO is a population-based iterative learning algorithm. However, it does not use genetic operations like selection, crossover, and mutation but tries to improve individuals based on their interaction with the teacher and the communication with the other individuals. The population is initialized by randomly setting the starting period for the maintenance of the generators and the transmission lines. The best individual is deemed as the teacher. Other individuals are modified to move towards the teacher.Finally, Zhan et al. (2014) proposed an approach based on a novel evolutionary algorithm called group search optimizer inspired by animal searching behavior. They computed a set of Pareto-optimal solutions for a multiobjective problem based on reliability, costs, and profits.Simulated annealing (SA) is a stochastic metaheuristic inspired by the annealing process in metallurgy. At each iteration, SA randomly generates a neighbor of the current solution. The algorithm accepts non-improving solutions according to some probability, allowing the search to escape local optima. These probability decrease as the number of iterations increases.SA has been used as the main approach to solve the GMS problem (Burke and Smith 2000; Dahal & Chakpitak 2007; Fattahi et al., 2014; Han et al., 2011; Saraiva et al., 2011). Fattahi et al. (2014) used in addition customized heuristics to solve the underlying UC. Saraiva et al. (2011) built new solutions by randomly selecting a generating unit and setting a new random maintenance starting time for it. At each iteration, Han et al. (2011) selected first the unit with a weighted roulette wheel where weights are fixed according to the LOLP associated with each generator, and then change randomly its maintenance starting time. SA has been also combined with other techniques. For instance, Anghinolfi et al. (2012) hybridized SA and linear programming; Godskesen et al. (2013) coupled a SA and constraint programming; and Burke and Smith (2000), Dahal and Chakpitak (2007), Mohanta et al. (2004), Mohanta et al. (2007), Leou (2006) embedded a SA into a GA.SA has been mainly used to solve problems arising in the regulated power systems.Tabu search (TS) is a local search-based metaheuristic that avoids revisiting solutions by recording the recent history of the search in a short-time memory called tabu list. To escape local optimum, non improving solutions are accepted during the algorithm. To our knowledge, TS has only been applied to solve the GMS problem in regulated power systems. Burke and Smith (2000) found better computational results when TS is used as a local search embedded in a GA. The neighborhoods are those described in Section 3.2.1. El-Amin et al. (2000) applied TS by randomly selecting a generator and modifying its maintenance starting time.Ant colony optimization (ACO), a constructive metaheuristic inspired by the behavior of ant colonies, has been also applied to solve the GMS problem in regulated power systems with a cost-based objective (Fattahi et al., 2014; Foong et al., 2007; Mytakidis & Vlachos, 2008). The algorithm builds solutions incrementally by selecting a maintenance starting period for each generator. The selection process is based on the combination of pheromone level, related to the number of times the component has been selected, and some greedy heuristics. Fattahi et al. (2014) combined ACO with some sub-algorithms to deal with a complex problem based on operational hours. According to the outages fixed in the previous phase, UC is solved by a customized heuristic which proves to be better in their experiments than a GA.Constraint programming (CP) is particularly useful for highly constrained problems. It is a powerful and flexible tool which makes express complex constraints relatively easy. It applies particularly well to the ROADEF challenge where maintenance tasks faced a variety of constraints such as overlapping, spacing, and incompatibility (Brandt et al., 2013; Buljubasic & Gavranovic, 2012; Godskesen et al., 2013). Brandt et al. (2013) coupled CP to a greedy heuristic to solve the unit commitment and the refueling problems. Buljubasic and Gavranovic (2012) presented a heuristic approach combining a constraint satisfaction problem to both a local search based on the marginal cost and a constructive optimization algorithm. Godskesen et al. (2013) used it with a local search and a greedy heuristic in a 3-phase algorithm. For a quite similar problem, Khemmoudj et al. (2006) proposed an approach combining constraint programming and local search.CP is less suitable when the main objective of the problem is to find near-optimal solutions. Therefore, it has been scarcely used for solving the GMS problem. Frost and Dechter (1998) iteratively applied constraint programming to solve a cost bound problem; learning constraints are added to improve the efficiency of the algorithm.Game theory-based approaches have been explored on the problem arising in deregulated power systems (Chattopadhyay, 2004a; Kim et al., 2005; Min et al., 2013). These approaches are especially suitable since every GENCO tries to predict its competitors actions so as to stay one step ahead. The strategies adopted by the GENCOs are defined by a Nash equilibrium of the game.The GMS and TMS problems are the two main maintenance scheduling problems in the electricity industry. The constraints concern the maintenance tasks (time windows, incompatibility, sequence), the resource requirements, the reliability, and the demand satisfaction. Sometimes, e.g., for nuclear power plants, fuel consumption management is required. The GMS and TMS problems can be solved jointly or network constraints can be introduced into the former. Production planning is often incorporated into GMS, especially over a short-term horizon. This results in a complex problem that is generally NP-hard.Maintenance scheduling is a major challenge in the electricity industry, especially since the liberalization of the electricity market. The objectives of regulated power systems are based mainly on the reliability (leveling, maximization of net reserves) and the costs (minimization of the operational costs). These objectives are not necessarily suitable for deregulated systems. It may be more appropriate to maximize the profits of the GENCOs and to coordinate the decisions of the various actors. The objectives of regulated systems remain relevant to the ISO—the actor that must ensure system reliability and security—but may conflict with the goals of the other actors (GENCOs, TRANSCOs, DISCOs). A Multiobjective optimization is thus a future solution framework.Many solution methods have been proposed for the GMS and/or TMS problems. They include heuristics, metaheuristics (genetic algorithms, particle swarm optimization, simulated annealing, tabu search,ant colony optimization), hybrid approaches, mathematical programming (dynamic programming, MILP, branch-and-bound, Benders decomposition), constraint programming, game theory. As the problem complexity increases making frontal resolution impracticable, the use of decomposition techniques becomes more and more relevant.To the best of our knowledge, some problems have not yet been investigated. These include load uncertainty and price volatility when the TMS problem is solved jointly with the GMS problem or where coordination is needed between the GENCOs and the ISO. Apart from that, the growing renewable energy industries and its stochastic nature have an impact on the planning in power systems. Maintenance decisions in wind industry are very complex since the weather has a huge impact on the possible concrete realization of the scheduled tasks. Moreover, wind predictions can only be established in a very short term horizon. To explicitly handle these uncertainties via stochastic programming approaches may lead to substantial energy and cost savings. Taking into account numerous unexpected breakdowns, short-term rescheduling could be investigated. In conclusion, future research will have to improve the handling of uncertainty, the coordination of decisions as regards the different actors of the power systems as well as to answer the new challenge power systems will face especially with renewable energies.Table A1 classifies each reference according to:•The problem it solves: GMS, TMS (a checkmark in both GMS and TMS columns means that the two problems are addressed in the paper), GMS with network constraints (GMS+N)The power system it targets: regulated (Rg) or/and deregulated (Dg)The objective function it handles: reliability-based (R), cost-based (C), profits-based (P).Some features it deals with: forced outage rate (FOR), stochastic demand (D), refueling management (F).The solution method it proposes.It is not however exhaustive to cover the wide range of features that can occur for the maintenance scheduling in the electricity industry. Some classifications may also be debated since some studies do not fit well into the boxes, but we aim at being the most consistent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
