@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A semi-parametric approach for estimating critical fractiles under autocorrelated demand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study forecasting the critical fractile of a lead time demand distribution when demand is autocorrelated.We propose a semi-parametric approach to estimate the critical fractile.The proposed approach uses empirical forecast errors to correct a possibly misspecified demand forecasting model.We provide conditions for its asymptotic validity and evaluate its small sample performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forecasting,Newsvendor model,Autocorrelated demand,Model misspecification,Forecast bias,Retail operations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Forecasting critical fractiles of the lead time demand distribution is an important problem for operations managers making newsvendor-type inventory decisions. In this paper, we propose a semi-parametric approach to forecasting the critical fractile when demand is serially correlated. Starting from a user-defined but potentially misspecified forecasting model, we use historical demand data to generate empirical forecast errors of this model. These errors are then used to (1) parametrically correct for any bias in the point forecast conditional on the recent demand history and (2) non-parametrically estimate the critical fractile of the demand distribution without imposing distributional assumptions. We present conditions under which this semi-parametric approach provides a consistent estimate of the critical fractile and evaluate its finite sample properties using simulation and real data for retail inventory planning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Forecasting critical fractiles of the lead time demand (LTD) distribution is an important problem for operations managers making newsvendor-type inventory decisions. It corresponds to finding a cost-minimizing order quantity that optimally balances the costs of understocking and the costs of overstocking in a single period. The critical fractile solution has found numerous applications in inventory theory (see review by Khouja (1999)), particularly in the management of highly perishable or seasonable goods. It can also be repeatedly applied when one takes a multi-period inventory model with a myopic order up-to-policy (e.g., Graves, 1999; Lee, So, & Tang, 2000), which is noted as an appropriate policy for major retail chains (Smith & Agrawal, 2000). In this paper, we consider the problem of forecasting critical fractiles when demand is serially correlated.The standard parametric approach to this problem starts with a demand forecasting model and estimates the critical fractile as if the chosen model were correctly specified and estimated (Silver, Pyke, & Peterson, 1998). Specifically, this approach assumes that (1) the fitted forecasting model produces unbiased LTD forecasts and (2) the forecast error follows a Gaussian distribution. However, in most practical situations, it is not possible to know the correct demand generating process and satisfy these assumptions (Chatfield, 1995). There are several reasons why this is the case. First, managers will often have to produce simultaneous forecasts for a very large number of items. For example, a typical US grocery store carries anywhere between 15,000 and 60,000 SKUs (FMI, 2012). It is impractical to expect that one can specify the correct model for each individual SKU. Instead, simple forecasting models, such as exponential smoothing, are used in real-life scenarios, without testing for their validity (Taylor, 2007). Second, the choice of the demand forecasting model used for inventory management might not be under the control of the operations/inventory planning department. Instead, it is often dictated by the sales and marketing group, which may well provide biased (usually overoptimistic) forecasts due to incentive misalignment (Goodwin, 1996; Oliva & Watson, 2009). For instance, Manary and Willems (2008) report that at Intel, the sales and marketing group, which is responsible for feeding demand forecasts directly into the manufacturing resource planning system, consistently overestimates demand across virtually all SKUs. Third, forecast errors may not follow a Gaussian distribution (Bookbinder & Lordahl, 1989; Fricker & Goodhart, 2000).Under model uncertainty, the parametric approach inevitably produces biased fractile estimates. It is important to understand and reduce the bias as the biased fractile estimate leads to increased inventory costs, as well as failure to meet required service levels (Badinelli, 1990; Kim & Ryan, 2003). Moreover, it can amplify the increase in demand variability as one moves up a supply chain, a phenomenon known as the bullwhip effect (Chen, Drezner, Ryan, & Simchi-Levi, 2000).When we need to be concerned by the possibility that the forecasting model has been misspecified and/or the demand series is non-Gaussian, empirical approaches are widely used in practice as a useful alternative. The non-parametric approaches (e.g., Bookbinder & Lordahl, 1989; Levi, Roundy, & Shmoys, 2007) are established to negate the need to make any assumptions about the demand model and to use solely the observed samples of demand to forecast critical fractiles. However, they are limited to independent demand processes and cannot be applied to serially correlated demand processes. Alternatively, one can begin with a user-specified forecasting model that captures autocorrelation in the process and collect past LTD forecast errors of the chosen model. One then uses an empirical distribution of these forecast errors, together with a point forecast for an upcoming period, to construct a LTD distribution and thereby calculate a critical fractile non-parametrically. This traditional empirical approach, which is often used in practice (Manary & Willems, 2008) and cited in textbooks (Cachon & Terwiesch, 2006), avoids the assumption that the forecasts are unbiased by checking whether the mean of past forecast errors is zero. If the mean of errors is not equal to zero, then it is used to correct for the bias in the most recent point forecast when calculating a critical fractile. However, this empirical approach can only deal with the unconditional forecast bias (such as the forecast bias in unconditional mean) and is not valid under autocorrelated demand. When the underlying demand is serially correlated, the point forecasts we make are conditional on the recent demand history (e.g., when a first-order autoregressive model (AR(1)) is the chosen forecasting model, the point forecasts are calculated conditional on the most recent demand) and the bias in the point forecasts, if there is any, would also be conditional on the recent demand history. Note that demand autocorrelation is indeed found to be present in numerous practical settings, such as consumer goods, fuel, food and machine tools (Chopra & Meindl, 2001; Erkip, Hausman, & Nahmias, 1990; Nahimas, 1993) and failure to model demand autocorrelation can have negative effect on the stockout rate experienced by a firm (Charnes, Marmorstein, & Zinn, 1995).In this paper, we present an approach that corrects for the conditional forecast bias prior to using an empirical distribution of past forecast errors to forecast critical fractiles. The proposed approach can be viewed as an extension of the traditional empirical approach, which is suited to an autocorrelated demand process. Using a sample of forecast errors of the chosen forecasting model, we first estimate a parametric (linear) bias-adjusting regression model, conditional on the recent demand history. We then use the empirical residuals of this bias-adjusting regression model to estimate the critical fractile non-parametrically. The framework is semi-parametric as we specify the parametric bias-adjusting model but use the empirical distribution of the model errors to calculate the critical fractile.Using asymptotic theory, we show that if the demand process follows a stationary autoregressive (AR(p)) demand process, the semi-parametric approach provides consistent estimates of the critical fractile, independently of the user-specified forecasting model, as long as it is within the autoregressive integrated (ARI(p̃,d̃)) class. This is because if the user-specified model is misspecified, we can correct for the conditional forecast bias in constructing critical fractiles using the parametric bias-adjusting regression. No specific parametric assumptions about the forecast error distribution are necessary. The proposed approach therefore has practical relevance as it is applicable to forecasting models that are commonly used in practice (e.g., the autoregressive, random walk and independent demand models) and is robust against incorrectly specified error distributions. We also demonstrate that when the chosen forecasting model is correctly specified (i.e., the conditional bias is equal to zero), the semi-parametric approach collapses to the traditional empirical approach and the asymptotic variance of the critical fractile estimation is reduced. A smaller asymptotic variance is of practical importance as it implies lower inventory costs for a given sample size. The benefit of robustness against the unbiasedness of the forecasting model is traded off against the loss in efficiency resulting from a higher asymptotic variance.To investigate the finite sample properties of the proposed framework we report on a simulation study. We demonstrate that, in comparison to the traditional parametric and empirical approaches, the proposed semi-parametric approach can significantly reduce inventory costs by correcting for a conditional forecast bias before estimating critical fractiles non-parametrically with empirical forecast errors. The cost reduction is increasing in sample size, lead time, and service level. Perhaps more importantly, our simulation results indicate that the proposed approach is a good heuristic for estimating critical fractiles under more general conditions than those specified by our asymptotic analysis. In particular, we show that the semi-parametric approach works well for the more general autoregressive moving average (ARMA) demand processes and under a broader class of user-specified forecasting models, which includes autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models. Finally, we illustrate the practical applicability of the proposed approach using real data in retailing. We find that the semi-parametric approach can significantly reduce inventory costs – by up to 57% – and also meet the required service levels better, compared to best-practice alternatives that fail to account for model uncertainty.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the critical fractile estimation problem when an arbitrary demand forecasting model is used; In Section 3, we describe the semi-parametric approach to estimating critical fractiles; Section 4 provides conditions for the asymptotic validity of the proposed approach; Section 5 provides numerical experiments to investigate the small sample properties of our asymptotic results; Section 6 shows the practical applicability of the proposed approach in retail inventory planning; and Section 7 concludes. All proofs are provided in the Supplementary material.We study the critical fractile estimation problem with a fixed replenishment lead time L where demandYtis serially correlated. Our main variable of interest is the lead time demand (LTD) in periodt,YtL=∑τ=1LYt+τ. We allow the LTD to be dependent on the demand historyXt=(Yt,Yt-1,…,Yt-ẇ+1)′, whereẇdenotes the time-invariate length of an observation window. The distribution of the LTD in period t, conditional on the demand historyXt=x, is then defined asΨt(yx)=Pr(YtL⩽yXt=x).We assume that in period t, we first observeYtand determine the inventory targetQt. Note that the inventory targetQtneeds to be calculated conditional onXt=xbecause the underlying demand process is serially correlated (i.e.,Qtis state-dependent). We also adopt the standard assumption of linear overage and underage costs, which we denote by h and s, respectively. The inventory targetQtis then given by the following well-known Newsboy-type result (Cachon & Terwiesch, 2006):(1)Qt=miny:Ψt(yx)⩾K,whereK=ss+his the targeted service level (i.e., the likelihood of being able to meet demand with inventory) that minimizes the expected cost by balancing the costs of understocking and the costs of overstocking. (1) implies that the optimal inventory targetQtis given by the Kth quantile of the conditional LTD distribution and this is known as the critical fractile solution.We note that the critical fractile solution can be repeatedly applied when one takes a multi-period inventory model with a myopic order-up-to policy, in which the inventory position is brought to a prescribed level at the beginning of each period (e.g., Graves, 1999; Lee et al., 2000). Denote the inventory at the beginning of period t before placing an order byIt. The myopic policy then implies that, the inventory position, after ordering in period t, is given bymax{Qt,It}. Johnson and Thompson (1975) examine the optimality of the myopic policy for periodic inventory systems operating when no backorders are permitted and zero lead time is assumed. They show that under a stationary autoregressive (AR(p)) demand process, the myopic policy is optimal for any period in an infinite horizon.Next we provide an expression for the conditional LTD distributionΨtand the critical fractileQtwhen an arbitrary demand forecasting model is used. Note that the choice of the demand forecasting model used for inventory management might not be under control of the operations or inventory planning department and the model is often exogenously given (Manary & Willems, 2008; Oliva & Watson, 2009). We assume that the firm will makeτ-step-ahead point forecasts,τ∈{1,2,…,Ł}, using a demand forecasting modelg=(g1,g2,…,gL), wheregτis a function of past demand observations. Specifically, we denote theseτ-step-ahead point forecasts at time t byY^t,τ=gτ(Yt,Yt-1,…,Yt-w̃+1), wherew̃⩽ẇis the number of past observations used to make the forecast. For example, if AR(p) model is a chosen forecasting model, then we use the p lagged demand observations to generate the point forecasts and thereforew̃=p. Theτ-step-ahead forecasts are then used to calculate a point forecast of LTD in period t as the sum of the single period forecasts over the lead time:Y^tL=∑τ=1LY^t,τ.The uncertainty in LTD, given the firm’s point forecasting model, is captured by the forecast error(2)EtL=YtL-Y^tL=∑τ=1L[Yt+τ-Y^t,τ]=∑τ=1L[Yt+τ-gτ(Yt,Yt-1,…,Yt-w̃+1)].Our main interest therefore lies in the estimation of the conditional forecast error distributionFt(ex)=Pr(EtL⩽eXt=x). Note that conditional onXt=xthe estimateyˆtLis non-random (recall thatw̃⩽ẇ). Therefore all uncertainty in the LTD is captured in the single random variableEtL. Consequently, we can writeΨt(yx)=Ft(y-yˆtLx).If we denote byξtLthe Kth quantile of the LTD forecast-error conditional onXt=x, which represents the safety stock level associated with the chosen forecasting model, then the critical fractile (1) in period t is the sum of the firm’s LTD point forecast and this safety stock levelQt=yˆtL+ξtL.The standard parametric approach to critical fractile estimation starts with a demand forecasting model and estimates the critical fractile as if the chosen model were correctly specified and estimated (Silver et al., 1998). Specifically, this approach makes the following three assumptions about the LTD forecast error distribution:1.The conditional mean of the error distribution is zero, i.e., the fitted model produces unbiased LTD point forecasts.The forecast error follows a Gaussian distribution.The estimated standard deviation of the LTD forecast error in period t, denoted byσˆEtL, is computed analytically as a function of a single period forecast errorσˆEtL=A^σˆu, whereA^is a positive constant derived from a fitted model (see, e.g., Gaur, Giloni, & Seshadri, 2005) andσˆuis the estimated standard deviation of the single period forecast error.Under these assumptions, the parametric approach calculates the critical fractile as(3)Q^t=yˆtL+zσˆEtL,wherez=Φ-1(K), in whichΦis the c.d.f. of the standard normal distribution; z is known as the safety factor.If the forecasting model is correctly specified, its parameters are correctly estimated, and the demand process is indeed Gaussian, (3) estimates the correct critical fractile. However, the approach is flawed if the demand model is misspecified or parameter estimates are incorrect as the point forecast made by an incorrect model is biased, i.e.E[EtL]≠0, and the use of analytical formulae to calculate the standard deviation of the errors becomes invalid. Furthermore, the Gaussian distribution assumption might be invalid.When there are doubts about the chosen forecasting model and demand distribution, the empirical approach is widely used as a useful alternative (e.g., Cachon & Terwiesch, 2006; Manary & Willems, 2008). Here the Kth quantile of the LTD forecast error is calculated using a sample of empirical LTD forecast errors, which are generated by iteratively applying the firm’s forecasting model g to subsamples of past observations and recording the deviations of the model predictions over the lead time horizon from the known out-of-sample realizations. Given n observed demand realizations, we start the process in periodt=w̃. For everyt=w̃,…,n-L, we produce the point forecast of L period demands using the firm’s model g based on the pastw̃demand realization, and then compute the corresponding empirical forecast error for LTD asetL=ytL-yˆtL=∑τ=1L(yt+τ-gτ(yt,yt-1,…,yt-w̃+1)). In this way we obtain a sample ofn-L-w̃+1empirical LTD forecast errors. If the forecasting model g is not exogenously given, then one could use all/part of the observed data to estimate the model. Note that the collected empirical errors would then become in-sample errors (the differences between the in-sample observations that are included in the fitting process and fitted values of the model) rather than out-of-sample errors (the differences between the out-of-sample observations that are not included in the fitting process and the predictions of the model).The empirical distribution of the past LTD forecast errors is given byF^=(n-L-w̃+1)-1∑t=w̃n-LI(etL⩽z)whereIis an indicator function. The empirical approach then calculates the critical fractile asQ^t=yˆtL+minz:F^(e)⩾K.If the chosen forecasting model produces a forecast bias in unconditional mean, the mean of the forecast error is not zero but equal to the unconditional forecast bias. In this case, the Kth quantile estimated from the empirical distribution of the forecast errorF^would take account of this unconditional forecast bias (Lee & Scholtes, 2013). However, the resulting Kth quantile is not conditioned onXt=xand fails to correct for the conditional bias under autocorrelated demand series.In this section we propose an alternative semi-parametric approach which does not require that the point forecasting model used is correctly specified and does not rely on specific distributional assumptions on the forecast error. The proposed approach can be viewed as an extension of the traditional empirical approach by adding an on-line check for the conditional forecast bias.Our proposed approach assumes that the LTD forecast error depends on the recent demand historyXtvia a parametric functionη:EtL=η(Xt,β)+∊t,whereβis the unknown bias-correction parameter vector, and∊tis a residual error with zero mean, which we assume to be independent ofXt. In order to operationalize our approach, we will assume that the conditional LTD forecast bias is a linear function of the recent demand history. With this assumption it is natural to specify a linear regression model to estimate the bias adjustment conditional on past demand realizations ofXt=(Yt,Yt-1,…,Yt-w+1)′:(4)EtL=β0+∑i=1wβiYt-i+1+∊t=Xt′β+∊t,whereXt=(1,Xt′)′. The parameterβ0captures the unconditional bias andβicaptures the bias conditional on the recent demand history due to the incorrect assumption on the demand autocorrelation structure. The total bias in the LTD forecast conditional onXt=xis thenE[EtLXt=x]=x′β, wherex=(1,x′)′; the regression error∊tcaptures the intrinsic stochasticity of LTD.The linearity assumption onη, as per (4), requires justification. First, as we will show in Lemma 2, Section 4, if the underlying demand model follows an AR(p) process withp⩽wand an arbitrary ARI(p̃,d̃)demand forecasting model is employed withmax(p̃,d̃)=w̃⩽w, the LTD forecast bias is indeed linear in the recent demand history and (4) is exact. However, even if the demand process is not linear in the current history, the linear specification can be thought of as a first order linear approximation, which, as we show in Section 6, works well with real data in practice. Note that ifη=E[EtLXt=x]is a nonlinear function of x, then the linear least square estimator is the best linear approximation to the bias in the mean squared error sense, i.e. the estimateβˆsolvesminβE[E[(EtLXt=x]-x′β)2](see Angrist & Pischke, 2008, Theorem 3.1.6).If we denote the unknown cumulative distribution function of the regression error∊tbyH(z)=Pr(∊t⩽z)and its Kth quantile byκ, then the Kth quantile of the LTD forecast error, conditional onXt=x, isξtL=x′β+κand the critical fractile (1) becomes(5)Qt=yˆtL+ξtL=yˆtL+x′β+κ.In order to avoid distributional assumptions on demand, we adopt a semi-parametric approach: the bias-adjusting equation is parametric, while the estimation of the distribution H is non-parametric. It is important to note that the termx′βis introduced in the critical fractile calculation in order to correct for the conditional LTD forecast bias arising from the selected point forecasting model. This is in contrast to the traditional empirical approach in Section 2.2, which can only account for the unconditional bias using the mean of past forecast errors.Since(β,κ)are unknown, they must be estimated in order to calculate the critical fractile (5). We estimate these parameters by fitting the bias-adjusting model in (4) to a sample of empirical LTD forecast errors, which can be generated similarly to the empirical approach as described in Section 2.2. The main difference here is that we start the process of collecting empirical errors in periodt=w, wherew⩾w̃is the chosen window size for the bias-adjusting regression fitting in (4). This is to check for any bias conditional on at least the past demand observations that are used to make forecasts and also to check for any potential bias conditional on the higher lag orders that is not captured by the chosen forecasting model. As a result, we collect a sample ofn-L-w+1empirical LTD forecast errors.These realizations of LTD forecast errors are used as dependent variables in the linear regression model (4):(6)ewLew+1L⋮en-LL.Using the past demand observations, we have the observed data on(1+w)predictors as independent variables in (4), which are contained in the(n-L-w+1)×(1+w)matrix:(7)11⋮1ywyw-1⋯y1yw+1ywy2⋮⋮⋮yn-Lyn-L-1⋯yn-L-w+1.Given (6) and (7), we fit the bias-adjusting model (4) and estimate the model parametersβibyβˆiusing least squares. Note that the forecast errors generated by iteratively applying the chosen forecasting model to subsamples of past data are serially correlated. This serial correlation, however, does not affect the consistency of the parameter estimates as an asymptotic property of least square estimates is preserved for the autocorrelated dependent variable (see White, 2001, Theorem 3.37).We also need to estimate the critical fractileκof the regression-error distribution. The estimates of the regression error∊tare∊ˆt=etL-x′βˆ, wherew⩽t⩽(n-L)andβˆis the least squares estimator. To find the Kth quantile ofH^we use the empirical distribution of the regression errors,H^=(n-L-w+1)-1∑t=wn-LI(∊ˆt⩽z), whereIis an indicator function; the estimated Kth quantile becomesκˆ=minz:H^(z)⩾K. The empirically estimated parameters,βˆandκˆ, are then used to correct for the conditional forecast bias and to estimate non-parametrically the critical fractile of the regression-error distribution, respectively. The semi-parametric critical fractile given n historical demand data is thus calculated byQ^n=yˆnL+x′βˆ+κˆ.In this section, we provide sufficient conditions for the large-sample validity of the proposed semi-parametric approach. In Lemma 2 we identify for which demand processes and forecasting models the linear bias-adjusting model defined in (4) is exact. We then present the main theorem to demonstrate that under a stationary AR(p) demand process, the critical fractile is consistently estimated by the semi-parametric approach for any (possibly misspecified) forecasting model g within the general class of ARI(p̃,d̃) models (Theorem 1). Let(β,κ,ξtL,Qt)denote generic values of the parameters and let(β∗,κ∗,ξtL∗,Qt∗)denote the unknown true values.Assumption 1Demand process: The underlying demand process is an autoregressive process AR(p):(8)Yt=μ+∑i=1pϕi(Yt-i-μ)+ut(i)The order p is smaller than or equal to the window size w of the bias-adjusting regression model (i.e.,p⩽w).Ytis a stationary process, i.e., all roots of the characteristic equation(1-ϕ1z-ϕ2z2-⋯-ϕpzp)=0exceed unity in modulus, where{ϕ1,ϕ2,…,ϕp}are defined in (8).The residual errorsutare independent and identically distributed andE(ut)=0.E(Ytut)=0.EXtut+i<∞for1⩽i⩽L, whereXt=(Yt,Yt-1,…,Yt-w+1)′.E∣Xt∣2<∞.E(XtXt′)is positive definite (of full rank).EXtXt′2r⩽Cfor someC<∞, andr>1that is arbitrarily close to unity.Assumptions 1(ii)–(viii) describe a set of general regularity conditions that ensure good asymptotic behavior of the least squares estimates of a stationary ergodic sequence (White, 2001). Note that Assumption 1(ii) requires that the average demand of the underlying demand process is adjusted for seasonality and product life cycles prior to applying the semi-parametric approach. The following linear representation result of the underlying AR(p) process follows immediately from Gaur et al. (2005), Eq. (2).Lemma 1UnderAssumption 1, the LTD is a linear function of the recent demand historyXt=(Yt,Yt-1,…,Yt-w+1)′and the vector of future residual errors(ut+1,…,ut+L)′:(9)YtL≔∑τ=1LYt+τ=c+∑i=1wϕi′Yt-i+1+∑i=1Lρiut+i.If the forecasting modelg∗is correct, then the LTD point forecast is given by(10)Y^tL∗=c+∑i=1wϕi′Yt-i+1and the LTD forecast errorEtL∗=YtL-Y^tL∗=∊t=∑i=1Lρiut+ihas zero mean and a standard deviation of the formσEtL=Aσu, where A is a positive constant independent of t andσuis the standard deviation of the single period forecast error.Demand forecasting model: The prespecified demand forecasting modelg=(g1,g2,…,gL)producesτ-step-ahead LTD point forecasts in period t by(11)Y^t,τ=c̃τ+∑i=1w̃ϕ̃i,τYt-i+1,wherew̃⩽w.Assumption 2 covers demand forecasting models within the ARI(p̃,d̃) class withmax(p̃,d̃)=w̃, where point forecasts are generated by the conditional expectation of the demand forecasts made by the chosen ARI model. This class includes many models that are frequently used in practice, such as the autoregressive model, the random walk model and the independent demand model. For a chosen ARI class demand model, one can derivec̃τandϕ̃i,τin (11) by calculating the constant term and autoregressive parameters of the model to be used to makeτ-step ahead point forecasts.Using (9) and (11), we can write the LTD forecast error associated with the chosen model g in period t as(12)EtL=YtL-Y^tL=(c-c̃)+∑i=1w(ϕi′-ϕ′̃i)Yt-i+1+∑t=1Lρiut+i,which can be written in the form of the bias-adjusting regression equation given by (4), whereβ0=c-c̃,βi=(ϕi′-ϕ′̃i)and∊t=∑i=1Lρiut+i. We summarize this fact in the following Lemma for future reference.Lemma 2UnderAssumptions 1 and 2, the LTD forecast error of the chosen forecasting model g is equal toEtL=Xt′β+∊t, whereβis a bias correction parameter vector and∊t=∑i=1Lρiut+ifor some coefficientsρi.Lemma 2 shows that the LTD forecast error of any arbitrary ARI forecasting model is linearly dependent on the current state of the system when the demand follows an AR process. The following final assumption is on the distribution of LTD forecast errors.Assumption 3Distribution of LTD forecast errors: The LTD forecast errorsEtL∗of the correct forecasting modelg∗have a marginal distribution functionD(z), which is continuously differentiable in z with bounded density0<d(z)⩽d¯<∞.Under Assumptions1–3,n(Q^n-Qn∗)→dN(0,σQ2),whereσQ2=Eot2and(13)ot=I(EtL∗⩽κ∗)-Kd(κ∗)-(x-EXt)′(EXtXt′)-1XtEtL∗,whereQn∗is the true critical fractile and→ddenotes convergence in distribution.The assumptions for the large-sample consistency of the proposed semi-parametric approach include the linearity conditions on the true demand process and point forecasting model (Assumptions 1 and 2) and the mild conditions on the LTD forecast error distribution (Assumption 3). Therefore, the prespecified point forecasting model can be arbitrary within the general class of ARI models and no specific parametric assumptions on the demand distribution are necessary.If the specified assumptions are satisfied, the conditional forecast biasx′βand the non-parametric error quantileκare consistently estimated and, consequently, the semi-parametric critical fractile produces an asymptotically correct service level. The asymptotic variance of the semi-parametric critical fractile in (13) has two components: the first results from the non-parametric estimation ofκ, and the second comes from the parametric estimation of the bias correction parametersβ. Next, we look at an special case, where we make one additional assumption that in turn reduces the asymptotic variance.Assumption 4The prespecified forecasting model g produces unbiased LTD point forecasts.Under Assumptions 1, 3 and 4,n(Q^n-Qn∗)→dN(0,σQ2),whereσQ2=Eot2and(14)ot=I(EtL∗⩽κ∗)-Kd(κ∗).Corollary 1 shows that if the chosen point forecasting model is correctly specified and estimated then the second component of the asymptotic variance in (13) becomes zero (see (14)); there is no longer any need to estimate and correct for the bias in the LTD point forecast. If the same point forecasting model is used andw=w̃, the semi-parametric approach collapses to the traditional empirical approach in Section 2.2 as both approaches use the same set of empirical forecast errors to calculate the critical fractile. This reduction in the asymptotic variance is important from a practical standpoint and it highlights a second advantage of the semi-parametric approach: If the user-specified model g is the correct model (as per Assumption 4), the semi-parametric critical fractiles will have a smaller asymptotic variance, which for any given sample size n implies lower inventory costs. If the choice of g is poor and leads to biased forecasts, the method will correct for this bias but the poor choice of forecasting method will increase the asymptotic variance of the overall method. Therefore if one can have a control over choosing a forecasting model, it is best to improve the forecasting model prior to applying a semi-parametric approach as this way we can reduce asymptotic variance compared to the case with a misspecified model. Note that the rate of convergence is equal ton, independent of the choice of g.This section presents a numerical analysis which aims to illustrate the finite sample performance of the semi-parametric approach, particularly when we face model uncertainty in the classical newsvendor problem with a fixed lead time L. Given n demand observations, a correct demand forecasting model is not known with certainty, but one chooses (or is given) a forecasting model and estimates the critical fractileQ^nto minimize mismatch costs during the lead time (t=n+1,n+2,…,n+L). To test the proposed approach we use the following autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models to describe the true demand processes:Model1-AR(1):Yt=μ+0.8(Yt-1-μ)+ut,Model2-AR(3):Yt=μ+0.8(Yt-1-μ)-0.4(Yt-2-μ)+0.2(Yt-3-μ)+ut,Model3-ARMA(1,1):Yt=μ+0.5(Yt-1-μ)+0.2ut-1+ut,Model4-ARIMA(0,1,1):Yt=Yt-1-0.8ut-1+ut,whereμis the unconditional mean of the demand process andutis the i.i.d. residual error with mean zero and standard deviationσu. The AR(1) demand process described by Model 1 with Gaussian residual errorsutis commonly used for describing settings with serial correlation (e.g., Aviv, 2002; Chen et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2000). The ARMA(1,1) and ARIMA(0,1,1) demand processes described by Models 3 and 4 are studied in Gaur et al. (2005) and Graves (1999). Note that Models 1–2 satisfy the conditions of the underlying demand process for the asymptotic validity of the semi-parametric approach (Assumption 1). For a robustness check, we included an ARMA process (Model 3) and an ARIMA process (Model 4).The first source of model uncertainty we consider is the specification of the point forecasting model. We consider two cases where the decision-maker (i) knows the correct model specification but faces parameter estimation uncertainty and (ii) “naively” employs one of two forecasting models commonly used in practice: simple exponential smoothing or the i.i.d. demand model (Makridakis, Wheelwright, & Hyndman, 1998). In the second case we assume that the parameter values of the chosen forecasting model (exponential smoothing or i.i.d.) are estimated in order to minimize the mean square forecast error. We note that exponential smoothing provides the minimum mean square error forecasts only when the demand follows an ARIMA(0,1,1) demand process and the i.i.d. demand model gives unbiased forecasts only when the demand process is indeed i.i.d. Using exponential smoothing or i.i.d. demand models under the demand processes described by Models 1–4 represents using misspecified forecasting models, except in the case where exponential smoothing is used for Model 4.The second source of model uncertainty we consider comes from the error distribution. We examine three error distributions for the residual errorsut: the normal, gamma and student-t distributions, which represent the symmetric, positive skewed and fat-tailed alternatives, respectively. Each distribution has been centered to have zero mean and scaled to have the same standard deviationσu.Under the semi-parametric approach, we fix the order size of the bias-adjusting regression model (4) atw=w̃(i.e. we check for the bias conditional on the past demand observations that are used to make forecasts).1In theory, one can increase the size of w (i.e.,w>w̃) to check if there is any conditional bias in the higher lag order. Fitting a bias-adjusting model withw>w̃predictors will generally result in a small estimated (in-sample) variance inEtL, but substantial out of sample variance due to errors arising from the parameter estimation. When w is large, in order to select the appropriate number of regression coefficientsβithat are nonzero in the biased-adjusting model, it is practical to use a model selection method that balances goodness of fit with parsimony. One possibility is to use the information criterion, e.g., Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) (see Miller, 1990 for more details as well as alternative model selection methods). In the Supplementary material, we report the performance of the semi-parametric approach for different values of w. This sensitivity analysis is based on using the retail data in Section 6 and shows that the semi-parametric approach with w=5 or 6 makes a good performance.1To assess the quality of the semi-parametric approach, we use the parametric, empirical and non-parametric approaches as benchmarks. The parametric approach and empirical approach employed in the simulation study are described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, respectively. The purely non-parametric approach we consider is a simple sampling-based approach which assumes an i.i.d. demand process.2More specifically, given n demand observations, we generate 1000 samples forYn+τfor eachτ=1,2,…,Lindependently, denoted byẎn+τ, by sampling with replacement and assigning probability mass1/nto each realized demand observation,{y1,y2,…,yn}. This allows us to construct 1000 samples of the LTD:ẎnL=∑τ=1LẎn+τ. The empirical distribution of these samples is used to calculate the non-parametric critical fractiles. WhenL=1, this non-parametric approach is equivalent to the bootstrap approach examined by Bookbinder and Lordahl (1989).2The performance of each approach is evaluated in terms of how far the estimated critical fractiles and inventory costs are from the optimal valueQn∗and its costC(Qn∗), which are calculated using the true underlying demand model (Models 1–4). We consider both the high-margin and low-margin conditions; in the high-margin condition, we set the unit underage costs=9and overage costh=3to obtain the desired service levelK=0.75. In the low-margin condition, we sets=3andh=9to obtainK=0.25. In the case of symmetric error distributions (e.g., normal and student-t distributions), the results for the two profit conditions are symmetric. In this case, we report the results only for the high profit condition.The parameters we use across all simulations areμ=100,σu=4,n=300andL=5. Given these parameters, the simulation experiment is designed as follows: For each simulation run we generate the demand for n consecutive time periods using the true demand generating model (Models 1–4). Based on the generated history, the critical fractiles for the lead time L are calculated using each estimation approach (parametric, empirical, semi-parametric, non-parametric). We then generate 1000 realized out-of-sample demand observations for each post sample period,n+1,n+2,…,n+L, conditional on the last n observations. Based on the LTD realizations, we calculate the critical fractile bias(Q^n-Qn∗)/Qn∗and cost error(C(Q^n)-C(Qn∗))/C(Qn∗)of each estimation approach. We report the average critical fractile bias and average cost error with their standard errors, which are calculated over 1000 simulation runs. The outlined simulation experiment has been carried out in the R (version 2.13.1) statistical package and the R code used in this study can be provided on request. The average computational time to estimate the semi-parametric critical fractile was 0.15seconds per simulation on a 2.3Gigahertz Intel Core i5 machine with 6Gigabyte RAM.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
