@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Home care service planning. The case of Landelijke Thuiszorg

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We studied a home care planning problem faced by Landelijke Thuiszorg, a non-profit organisation that provides home care services in several provinces of Belgium.A set partitioning formulation of the bi-objective problem is proposed.We propose a two-phase approach that allows to analyse the trade-off between the prioritised objectives.Our solution strategy is flexible in the sense that it can be easily adapted to tackle additional and complicating constraints.The solution strategy is simple and easy to understand which facilitates the communication and the acceptance of our algorithm within the organisation.Our two-phase algorithm will be the core optimisation component of a decision support system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Home care,Staff planning,Routing,Bi-objective optimisation,Local search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Landelijke Thuiszorg is a “social profit” organisation that provides home care services in several Belgian regions. In this paper, the core optimisation component of a decision support system to support the planning of the organisations’ home care service is described. Underlying this decision support system is an optimisation problem that aims to maximise the service level and to minimise the distance travelled by the caregivers of the organisation. This problem is formulated as a bi-objective mathematical program, based on a set partitioning problem formulation. A flexible two-stage solution strategy is designed to efficiently tackle the problem. Computational tests, as well as extensive pilot runs performed by the organisation’s personnel, show that this approach achieves excellent performance, both in terms of the service level and total travelled distance. Moreover, computational times are small, allowing for the weekly planning to be largely automated. The organisation is currently in the process of implementing our solution approach in collaboration with an external software company.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Belgian long-term care policy aims to help, support and nurse dependent (mostly elderly) persons in their own homes as long as possible. To this end, the federal public health insurance system finances a set of public and private organisations to provide home care assistance, including cleaning, grocery shopping, personal grooming, and other (non-medical) activities. In 2006, the subsidised home care sector in Belgium produced about 25 million care hours, provided by the equivalent of 17,000 full time employees (Willemé, 2010).Landelijke Thuiszorg is a “social profit” organisation that provides home care services for the Belgian provinces of Antwerpen, Limburg, Vlaams-Brabant and part of Oost-Vlaanderen. In 2010, the organisation provided over one million hours of home care to its 5107 patients. In the scientific literature, it has been argued that the development and use of rigorous methodologies to support long-term care are becoming ever more important as the population ages (Zhang, Puterman, Nelson, and Atkins, 2012). Following this trend, Landelijke Thuiszorg has launched a strategic programme to increase its use of new technologies. For this reason, the Operations Research Group of the University of Antwerp (ANT/OR) was invited to participate in a joint project aimed at developing a decision support system to support regional service planning. This paper presents the core optimisation component of the developed system, which is currently undergoing extensive field tests within the organisation, and will soon be rolled out throughout the organisation in collaboration with an external software development company.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the planning problem at Landelijke Thuiszorg is explained. Section 3 reviews the literature on home care and other related planning problems. The planning problem is formally defined in Section 4, and the solution strategy that we developed for this problem is presented in Section 5. Section 6 describes the development of a decision support system (DSS) based on our solution strategy. The testing stage of our algorithm and the DSS is described in Section 7. Finally, Section 8 contains some conclusions and pointers for future research.For organisational purposes, the area covered by the Landelijke Thuiszorg is divided into forty-four independent regions. Each region has its own region manager, who is responsible for planning the activities of a set of caregivers. Both patients and caregivers are assigned to a region. Therefore, the solution strategy proposed in this paper can be applied independently to each region.The process starts when a patient applies for home care services and a pre-admission assessment is carried out in order to determine the patient’s needs and the services to be provided. Based on this evaluation, the frequency (number of visits per week), the intensity or duration of the service (number of hours per visit), as well as the periodicity (weekly or fortnightly schedule) of the visits are determined, and the most suitable caregivers to serve the patient are identified. A patient can be visited between one and five times a week, and each visit can last between 1 and 4 hours (although blocks of 4 hours are by far the most common). The region manager determines the suitability of the patient–caregiver assignment by taking into account a very diverse, and often subjective, set of factors that includes the training and skills of the caregiver (e.g., the ability to work with blind or deaf people, cancer patients, immobilised people, etc.), the patient’s medical status and disabilities (e.g., blindness, deafness, mobility, ...), the proficiency of the caregiver in speaking different languages (not all patients and caregivers are fluent in Dutch, the language of Flanders), the patients’ and caregivers’ characters, pet allergies, as well as personal preferences of both the caregiver and the patient. In addition, the patient is allowed to express her/his preferences regarding the times at which she/he would like to be visited.The organisation takes into account two different objectives when planning its home care service: to meet the preferences of both patients and caregivers to the largest possible extent, and to minimise the accumulated travelled distance by all caregivers. The second objective is due to the fact that a financial compensation is paid to each caregiver for the travelled distance required to visit the patients that have been assigned to her11A large majority of both caregivers and region managers at Landelijke Thuiszorg are women and, therefore, we refer to them using female pronouns (“she”, “her”). However, a higher importance is granted to the first objective and, hence, the assignment of patients to caregivers and the schedule with which each patient is visited are of crucial importance to the quality indicators used within the organisation. Nevertheless, the organisation’s management desires a plan that not only optimises the satisfaction of its clients and caregivers, but also minimises the total costs for travel expenses. Although other objectives might be considered when planning home care services (see Section 3, Table 1), this work focuses on the two objectives above because these align with the practical interests of the organisation.Several constraints have to be considered when building a service plan at Landelijke Thuiszorg. First, the visits of a patient that requires more than one visit a week must be evenly distributed over the different days of the week, i.e., they should preferably not to take place on consecutive days. Second, when a patient is visited three or more times a week, these visits should be assigned to at least two different caregivers in order to mitigate the effect of possible absenteeism. Third, for each patient, the time and day of the visits within a week should be the same for all weeks in the planning horizon in order to facilitate the patient’s time planning and to not interfere with other activities that he/she is involved in. Additionally, there are some restrictions derived from the type of labour contract between the organisation and the caregivers, such as the maximum number of hours per week that each caregiver is allowed to work and the distribution of those hours over the different days of the week. The maximum number of working hours per week can vary from week to week depending on additional activities such as training, meetings, and administrative duties. Caregiver overtime and non-regular shifts are not taken into account when generating the service plan because there are usually enough regular working hours to cover all required visits. Non-regular shifts are generally only used when re-scheduling the service plan after unpredictable disruptions (e.g., caregiver absence). The rescheduling of the service plan, however, is done manually and is therefore beyond the scope of this research.Determining a home care service plan involves three simultaneous decisions: (1) the scheduling of the visits to each patient in a time slot (i.e., a day and a time period, morning or afternoon, in the planning horizon), (2) the assignment of a caregiver to each of the visits, and, (3) the order in which the caregivers visit each of their assigned patients in a time slot considering that due to the fact that the length of each time slot is 4 hours, maximum four visits, of 1 hour each, can be scheduled in a time slot. We have labelled the bi-objective optimisation problem defined by the objectives, constraints and decisions that have been described above the home care planning problem (HCPP).At the beginning of each planning period, a home care service plan is created by the region manager in which a service scheme is chosen for each patient, and a schedule is generated for each caregiver. A service scheme consists of a visit pattern and a caregiver assignment. The pattern indicates the time slots (day and hour) in which the patient must be served, and the caregiver assignment specifies the caregiver(s) that provide(s) that service. Based on the selected schemes for the patients, a schedule is generated for each caregiver that indicates the time slots in which she is due to work, as well as the specific patients that she has to serve.Currently, each region manager autonomously creates the service schemes for the patients and defines schedules for the caregivers in her region. However, this process is very time-consuming (and therefore expensive), and requires considerable expertise from the region manager. The main goal of the collaboration between Landelijke Thuiszorg and the ANT/OR group is to automate this process by designing a DSS for the regional planning. The solution strategies for the HCPP constitute the core of the system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we studied a home care planning problem faced by Landelijke Thuiszorg, a non-profit organisation that provides home care services in several provinces of Belgium. The problem involves two different objectives, namely service level maximisation and total travelled distance minimisation. The optimisation of these objectives is performed in a hierarchical order in which the service level optimisation is prioritised. Therefore, the approach used in this paper differs from other approaches in the literature in which an aggregated function of the objectives is considered. A mathematical formulation based on the set partitioning problem has been proposed and a two-stage solution strategy has been designed to tackle the HCPP. The first stage of the solution strategy aims to optimise the service level, while the second stage minimises the total travelled distance ensuring that the first objective function value does not decrease by more than a maximum tolerable value. The new formulation and the solution strategy are the main contributions of this paper.The results of our computational experiments show that our approach has an excellent performance when it comes to optimising both the service level and the total travelled distance. Moreover, our solution strategy is shown to be flexible in the sense that it can be easily adapted to tackle additional and complicating constraints, as they can be taken into account when generating feasible schemes for each patient. In addition, the solution strategy is simple and easy to understand as it consists of two clearly defined stages, each of them involving a basic optimisation procedure. This facilitated the communication and the acceptance of our algorithm within the organisation. Moreover, our two-stage solution strategy allows the decision maker to establish a trade-off between the two objectives by modifying the maximum allowable decrease in service level when optimising the total travelled distance. Our two-stage algorithm will be the core optimisation component of a decision support system that is currently being developed in collaboration with an external software developer.