@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the optimal control of manufacturing and remanufacturing activities with a single shared server

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a stochastic manufacture–remanufacture system with a single shared server.The structure of the optimal policy depends on holding costs and server rates.For some parameter values, the optimal policy is a simple threshold policy.Otherwise, the optimal policy is characterized by more complex switching curves.The optimal policy greatly outperforms simple threshold heuristics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Manufacturing,Remanufacturing,Shared server,Inventory control,Stochastic dynamic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a single-product make-to-stock manufacturing–remanufacturing system. Returned products require remanufacturing before they can be sold. The manufacturing and remanufacturing operations are executed by the same single server, where switching from one activity to another does not involve time or cost and can be done at an arbitrary moment in time. Customer demand can be fulfilled by either newly manufactured or remanufactured products. The times for manufacturing and remanufacturing a product are exponentially distributed. Demand and used products arrive via mutually independent Poisson processes. Disposal of products is not allowed and all used products that are returned have to be accepted. Using Markov decision processes, we investigate the optimal manufacture–remanufacture policy that minimizes holding, backorder, manufacturing and remanufacturing costs per unit of time over an infinite horizon. For a subset of system parameter values we are able to completely characterize the optimal continuous-review dynamic preemptive policy. We provide an efficient algorithm based on quasi-birth–death processes to compute the optimal policy parameter values. For other sets of system parameter values, we present some structural properties and insights related to the optimal policy and the performance of some simple threshold policies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The reuse of products and materials is not a recent discovery. However, it is only during recent decades that product recovery and reverse logistics have gained increasing importance as a profitable and sustainable strategy for companies around the world (see e.g. Dekker, Fleischmann, Inderfurth, & van Wassenhove, 2004; Srivastava, 2007). Reusing may be motivated by economical, legislative or environmental reasons. As stated in Thierry, Salomon, van Nunen, and van Wassenhove (1995), there are several options to recover a product. Via remanufacturing, a product is completely recovered and its quality after remanufacturing is as good as that of a new product. Remanufacturing complicates inventory control. Integrating this reverse flow of used products affects both the materials planning and the inventory control of the supply chain. Indeed, managers have to take into account the uncertain flow of used products and they have to coordinate the remanufacturing stage with the regular mode of procurement (Inderfurth & van der Laan, 2001).Coordination between manufacturing and remanufacturing operations is a central issue (Van der Laan, Salomon, Dekker, & van Wassenhove, 1999). The company has to decide who takes care of each operation, when and how much to manufacture or to remanufacture. In our model, we consider a single server that can perform manufacturing and remanufacturing operations. The server can switch at any time between these two operations. As stated in Ferrer and Whybark (2000), shared resources increase the flexibility of the system but also the complexity of the coordination. The study of Tang and Teunter (2006) is an example of a concrete application of a hybrid manufacturing and remanufacturing system with a shared resource. Their research was motivated by a company which manufactures and remanufactures car parts. New and remanufactured parts are processed in the same facilities by the same workers. In their study, the remanufactured products represent approximately 30% of the annual sales. Trebilcock (2002) discusses a catalog retailer that has to prepare and ship around 65,000 products weekly. Around 15% of the products come back to the retailer. In this case, managers can ask some workers for a few days to inspect, clean and repack returned products. This type of situation (where workers switch between manufacturing and remanufacturing to satisfy customer orders) may be modeled by a hybrid system as described in our study.In this paper, we consider a hybrid manufacturing–remanufacturing system. Manufacturing and remanufacturing operations are executed by a single shared ressource. This situation can be found in small companies or in dedicated specialized units within companies dealing with complex products (like large medical systems and dedicated copiers), when both manufacturing and remanufacturing require deep understanding of the product. Remanufactured and new products can equally well be used to satisfy customer demand. The times to manufacturing and remanufacturing a product are exponentially distributed. Demand and used products arrive via mutually independent Poisson processes. We consider the situation where products are manufactured or remanufactured one by one. The objective is to minimize discounted or average costs (holding, manufacturing, remanufacturing, backorder) over an infinite horizon. We do not include neither setup times and costs nor disposal option. These limits of our model our discussed in Section 8.More generally, our problem can be seen as a production-inventory control with two supply channels. The first supply channel is completely controlled while the second supply channel is autonomous and random. For example, car companies like DaimlerChrysler can get very easily low quality (often less expensive) engines that are supplied by dealers in the context of take back programs or internet offers. However, it is much more difficult and uncertain to get high quality (often more expensive) engines.To the best of our knowledge, the problem described in this paper has not been studied before. In particular it is the first paper to investigate an hybrid system with a shared resource in a stochastic environment. For the problem described above, we characterize the optimal manufacture–remanufacture policy for certain sets of system parameter values and provide for these sets an efficient method to calculate the optimal values of the policy parameters. For other sets of system parameter values, we provide insights into the optimal policy structure. We also present a sensitivity analysis for several system parameters.In Section 2, we review the literature and our contributions. In Section 3, a detailed description and mathematical formulation of the problem is given. In Section 4, we derive several characteristics of the optimal policy structure for different sets of parameter values. In Section 5, we provide an efficient method to calculate the optimal values of the policy parameters. In Section 6, we present some insights into the optimal behavior of the system for sets of parameter values for which it is not possible to derive the optimal policy structure. Based on these insights, we introduce in Section 7 some simple heuristics that we compare with the optimal policy. In Section 8 we conclude the paper and indicate directions for further research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
