@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhanced models and improved solution for competitive biofuel supply chain design under land use constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study effects of farmland use regulation to balance food and biofuel production.We propose two models with a land use constraint and a cap-and-trade mechanism.We propose two adaptive “relax-and-tighten” schemes to solve the DC-MPEC models.Our algorithms outperform publicly available solvers for problems in realistic sizes.Cap-and-trade level affects supply chain behavior and should be carefully selected.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Food versus fuel debate,Biofuel supply chain,Non-cooperative game,Farmland use regulations,DC-MPEC,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies the effect of government regulation on farmland use to balance food and energy production in a competitive biofuel supply chain design framework. We propose a Stackelberg–Nash game model with a direct land-use constraint that captures farmland, food, and fuel market equilibrium. To provide farmers with incentives to comply with the land-use regulation, we implement the land-use constraint through a cap-and-trade mechanism which we show attains equivalent land-use patterns. We further prove the existence of optimal solutions of the two equivalent discretely constrained mathematical program with equilibrium constraints (DC-MPEC) models. Two adaptive “relax-and-tighten” schemes, integrality and Lagrangian duality based relaxation, are proposed to handle the binary variables in a mixed integer formulation of the models. The proposed methodology is tested in a case study for the State of Illinois. The computational results demonstrate the superiority of our customized algorithms to publicly available solvers for solving problems with realistic sizes. Finally, the efficiency of the cap-and-trade mechanism is demonstrated through comparisons of scenarios with and without regulation as well as a sensitivity analysis on the cap-and-trade level. The cap-and-trade policy is found to effectively reduce biomass farmland use and profits of the biofuel industry. It may have different impacts on social welfare depending on problem settings and market parameters. Cap-and-trade levels also affect system behavior and thus should be carefully selected.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Increasing concerns over environmental Enhanced sustainability and energy security have led to a series of environmental and energy regulations and government subsidies for bio-energy production in recent years. As a result, the annual production of bio-ethanol in the U.S. has grown from 200 million gallons in 1983 to about 13 billion gallons by the end of 2010 (Brown, Orwig, Nemeth, & Rocha, 2007). The recent congressional mandate (US-EPA, 2007) further requires the annual bio-ethanol production to reach 36 billion gallons by 2022, of which over 80 percent must be based on cellulosic biomass feedstocks such as crop residues (e.g., corn stover) and dedicated energy crops (e.g., switchgrass and miscanthus). In observance of the mandatory requirement, the ethanol production industry is expected to grow as the technology continues to improve toward maturity. The bio-ethanol manufacturing infrastructure (particularly the cellulose-based ones) needs to be significantly expanded to provide sufficient production capacity and ensure overall efficiency and reliability of the bioenergy supply chain.The expected growth in U.S. biofuel consumption induces further demand for bio-energy crops including first (e.g., from arable crops) and second generations of biomass (e.g., woody or fibrous biomass). The new outlet for these agricultural commodities results in competition between food and energy use of the limited farmland. In other words, biomass feedstock production would have an impact on the food market through new farmland allocation, including direct land-use change (i.e., direct conversion of land from some other use into biomass production) and indirect land-use change (i.e., a cascade of land use offset elsewhere) (USDA, 2011). Empirical observations have provided evidence of the direct impacts. Biofuel production has been criticized for reducing corn supply and raising food prices in recent years (Rajagopal, Sexton, Hochman, Roland-Holst, & Zilberman, 2009). According to Oladosu et al. (2011) and IAPC (2012), the share of corn being used for ethanol production has increased up to more than 40 percent in 2010 compared to only 10 percent in 2004/2005, and corn prices reached record high levels in 2010/2011 (e.g., more than 3.5 times of those in 2005). In light of the ever-increasing food demand and food price, the development of a biofuel supply chain (e.g., locating biorefineries and producing and transporting feedstocks) and the resulting changes in farmland use has imposed pressing challenges on food security for a growing global population. Hence, it is critical for policy makers to regulate agricultural and energy production so as to achieve a balance between food and energy supplies. Marginal lands11These lands are with little immediate usefulness due to problems with access, water control, topography, environmental restrictions, or other such factors.hold the promise to accommodate large scale production of cellulosic biomass in the future. It has been estimated that about 22 million hectares of idle cropland, marginal land can yield about 377 million dry tons of biomass in the U.S. (Perlack et al., 2005). However, the potential for economically reclaiming the marginal lands and the extent to which farmers would be willing to utilize marginal lands under economic incentives remain unclear (Rajagopal, Sexton, Roland-Holst, & Zilberman, 2007).The expansion of the biofuel industry has strong implications on multiple related engineering, social, and economic infrastructure systems (Ng, Cai, & Ouyang, 2011). For example, the establishment of the biofuel supply chain would attract farmers to divert agricultural land use from food crop production to energy crop production. As a result, future land-use patterns and business modes at local, regional and national levels may be affected. Furthermore, farmers face a wide variety of risks such as crop yield uncertainties, market prices volatility, and regulation/policy changes. Given the inflexibility and cost associated with farmland-use variations (e.g., crop rotations), farmers will need to develop a complex long-term plan for using their existing land (such as growing one or more types of crops), purchasing or selling farmland, as well as optionally enrolling part of their land in the government-led Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) (USDA-FSA, 2011). The triple challenge of land use competition among food, fuel and environmental conservation is referred as “farmland use trilemma” (University of Minnesota, 2009). On the other hand, the high cost of building new refineries and transporting biomass feedstocks mandates careful selection of biorefinery locations and sufficient provision of economic incentives encouraging farmers to supply feedstocks — the farmers’ land-use decisions and market equilibria for food, fuel, and farmland must be taken into account. As such, both farmers and biofuel manufacturers depend upon one another in making long-term plans (Keeney & Hertel, 2009). Since the cellulosic biomass market is still new, there is interest in mitigating various uncertainties in the market through long-term contracts between farmers and biofuel manufacturers (Larson, English, & He, 2008). Furthermore, government regulations/policies may directly affect the strategic planning of the farmland use and the biofuel supply chain. It is highly complex to design a sustainable biofuel supply chain system that involves the biofuel manufacturer, farmers, food and fuel consumers, and satisfies government regulations.In this paper, we explore the possibility of imposing government regulation policies on farmland use to balance food and energy production, and investigate the impacts of such regulations on (i) a biofuel manufacturer’s supply chain design, (ii) farmers’ land use including the option of reclaiming marginal land, and (iii) the food, energy and land market equilibria. In a recent paper (Bai, Ouyang, & Pang, 2012), we introduced a binary-constrained Stackelberg–Nash game model to optimize a biofuel supply chain under competitive agricultural land use and feedstock market equilibrium. It provided a fundamental framework to model food-versus-fuel competition and evaluate market and social impacts of biofuel industry growth. However, it does not fully capture additional issues such as the farmland use trilemma, farmland trading, and possible marginal land reclamation and acquisition. It also does not address the challenge of involving government regulations or policies to mitigate the impacts of the biofuel industry on food markets and food security. In this paper, we extend the previously proposed Stackelberg–Nash game framework in Bai et al. (2012) to incorporate more land-use options including CRP enrollment and the possibility of marginal land reclamation in a land market. The enhanced model is a better representation of the problem realism, thus providing deeper economic insights. We further consider a regulation scenario through land use constraints. Since in practice it is hard to impose any land-use constraints directly on farmers, we implement these regulations by providing farmers with incentives to limit energy crop production. To this end, we propose a cap-and-trade mechanism (Chen, Liu, & Hobbs, 2011c; Zhao, Hobbs, & Pang, 2010) for farmland use which is shown to theoretically attain the same regulation goal as the explicit land-use constraints. We further prove the existence of optimal solutions to these equivalent Stackelberg–Nash models.The proposed Stackelberg–Nash game models fall into the class of DC-MPECs, which have been studied in the literature. Yet to date there are few approaches that can efficiently solve such problems for even moderately sized instances; see e.g., the reformulation approach in Bai et al. (2012). This paper also makes a major contribution in solution methodology by developing two adaptive “relax-and-tighten” schemes to handle the binary variables in a mixed integer formulation of this class of DC-MPEC problems. The proposed algorithms (based on integrality and Lagrangian relaxation) are shown to be effective in solving the proposed competitive supply chain model for instances with realistic sizes, and significantly outperform existing applicable solvers including CPLEX and NLPEC. We apply our model and solution approach to a case study for the State of Illinois, and conduct a before-and-after analysis to illustrate the impacts of the proposed land-use regulation on supply chain design and farmland-use patterns. The proposed cap-and-trade mechanism is found to improve the total social welfare in some cases. Finally, economic insights are drawn on how policy makers could improve the social benefit and how biofuel companies could design a sustainable biofuel supply chain.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related research on biofuel economic analysis and MPEC models. Section 3 first presents a base model for biofuel supply chain design with explicit farmland-use constraints, and then reformulates the model to implement the land-use constraints via a cap-and-trade mechanism. Equivalence and feasibility of these two formulations are also presented. Section 4 develops the proposed solution approach, which first transforms the original DC-MPEC problem into an equivalent single-level mixed integer quadratic program (MIQP), and then solves the MIQP by two adaptive “relax-and-tighten” algorithms. Section 5 illustrates the Illinois case study where computational results are shown for a series of scenarios with different problem sizes. Section 6 concludes the paper and discusses possible future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed a land-use regulation mechanism and integrated it into a biofuel supply chain design problem that addresses the interactions among biofuel industry expansion, farmers’ land use, and food, fuel, marginal land markets. We presented a Stackelberg–Nash game model with direct land-use constraints, and then an equivalent model with a cap-and-trade mechanism that indirectly implements the land-use constraints. We further developed two solution algorithms, i.e., integrality and Lagrangian dual based adaptive “relax-and-tighten” algorithms, and showed their superior performances to the existing methods in solving various sized problem instances. In addition, the numerical case study for the State of Illinois has shown that the cap-and-trade regulation mechanism effectively reduces farmland use for energy crops and thus protects the food supply chain. In some cases, it could result in less profit for the biofuel manufacturer, but higher social welfare for the entire system (including food, fuel and land use markets). The sensitive analysis on different cap-and-trade levels shows its significant impact on land use pattern and supply chain behavior. Therefore, such regulation/policy shall be effective in practice, and it should be carefully designed and implemented to not only stabilize food market but also at the same time ensure social benefit of the entire system.In this paper, we assumed a constant value of land-use capE¯and a very simple rule of initial allowance allocation, future work should address more details of the cap-and-trade system, such as how policy makers could determine the optimal land-use capE¯,and what would be a good allowance allocation policy. It is also of interest to explore possible contract scenarios between farmers and biofuel manufacturers under government regulations, and their effects on risk reduction and sustainable biofuel production. Besides, this research can be also extended to a dynamic model of biofuel supply chain design and farmland-use planning problem in a rolling horizon. Considering the static models in this paper are already very complex to solve, how to solve a dynamic model is another challenging direction for future research. On the solution algorithm side, it will be interesting to extend our proposed “relax-and-tighten” scheme to other MPEC problems and compare it with other solution approaches (e.g., the regularization of complementarity constraints Steffensen & Ulbrich, 2010) that have been proposed in the literature.