@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Controlling for the use of extreme weights in bank efficiency assessments during the financial crisis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Extreme input/output mixes result in extreme weights in DEA.We propose using weight restricted DEA models to limit banks’ abilities to use such extreme weights.Very topical in light of the recent financial crisis.We empirically examine differences between bailed-out and non-bailed-out banks in Europe.The approach improves efficiency measurement and has potential use in regulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA),Weight restrictions,Banking,Efficiency,Risk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a method for bank efficiency assessment, based on weight restricted DEA, that limits banks’ abilities to use extreme weights, corresponding to extreme judgements of the risk adjusted prices on funding sources and assets. Based on a data set comprising the largest European banks during the financial crisis, we illustrate the impact of the proposed weight restrictions in two different efficiency models; one related to banks’ funding mix and one related to their asset mix. The results show that using a more balanced set of weights tend to reduce the estimated efficiency scores more for those banks which were bailed out during the crisis, which confirms the potential bias within standard DEA that does not control for extreme weights applied by highly risky banks. We discuss the use of the proposed method as a regulatory tool to constrain discretion when complying with regulatory capital benchmarks such as the Basel regulatory capital ratios.The recent financial crisis made it painfully clear that bank risk can arise from heavy reliance on certain types of funding and/or assets, for example the relative exposure to real estate loans or reliance on wholesale funding. Risk consideration in this respect has not previously been explicitly recognised in the literature assessing bank efficiency. Therefore it is important to understand the implications on bank performance measures, of using extreme rather than well-balanced funding or asset portfolios, as was evidently the case for some banks during the recent crisis.On an abstract level, the definition of true risk is not immediately clear in the financial literature. Holton (2004) makes this point clear: Risk depends on the notions of exposure and uncertainty, neither of which can be defined operationally. Probabilities quantify perceived uncertainty. The litmus test for exposure is “would we care if we were…”–it is a hypothetical and unobserved test. Therefore, at best, we can operationally define our perception of risk.In the banking literature, several studies have made significant contributions to the understanding of the nature of banking and perceived risks. For instance, Diamond and Dybvig (1983) explain why bank contracts are less stable than other types of financial contracts: demand deposit contracts allow lenders to withdraw money when needed thus provide liquidity; this service provided by banks of transforming illiquid assets into liquid liabilities leave banks vulnerable to runs which occur because there are multiple equilibria with differing confidence levels. Diamond and Rajan (2001) further demonstrate that this fragile nature associated with bank runs and bank capital structure commits banks to creating liquidity, enabling depositors to withdraw when needed while buffering borrowers from depositors’ liquidity needs. Other than liquidity risk, banks also face other types of risks such as default risk arising from default of borrowers and market risk arising from the change of market conditions (such as interest rates, exchange rates etc.) resulting in potential losses in banks’ trading portfolio. With the rising of structured finance prior to the crisis, a recent study by Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009) demonstrates how during the process of pooling and tranching of structured financial products, the default risk of senior tranches can be concentrated in systematically adverse economic states. They show that this systemic risk exposure is not appropriately priced by investors (which include banks) who invest in structured financial products. This shows banks are often exposed to systemic risks too.The method proposed in the paper is motivated by identifying bank managers’ perceptions of risks (which could be related to all types of risk mentioned above) reflected in their funding structures and asset portfolios, while assessing bank efficiency.Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) is often used to assess the efficiency of banks. In the ratio (multiplier) formulation of DEA, efficiency is estimated as the ratio of a weighted sum of outputs over a weighted sum of inputs. The weights (multipliers) for the inputs and outputs are free variables in the optimisation maximising the efficiency measure for each bank, subject only to the constraint that the efficiency scores for all banks must be between 0 and 1 when applying those weights. If no further restrictions are imposed on the weights, in order to maximize the efficiency for a bank, high weights are placed on variables it performs relatively well on, for examples outputs it produces a lot of, and low weights are placed on variables it performs relatively poorly on, for example inputs it uses a lot of. Therefore, banks with extreme funding or asset portfolios will also prefer, or be assigned, extreme choices of weights in the efficiency assessment. Furthermore, for a bank with the highest ratio of any one output to any one input in the constant returns to scale (CRS) models employed here, weights can be used that result in the largest possible efficiency score of one and thus such banks become “efficient by default”, simply because the extreme funding or asset portfolios means that it cannot really be compared to any other bank(s) in the efficiency assessment.11Under the alternative variable returns to scale assumption this problem is actually exacerbated, since any bank with the highest value of any one output or the lowest value on any input will also be efficient by default.A potentially unfortunate consequence of this characteristic of DEA is that the method implicitly rewards extreme behaviour in terms of the composition of the input- and output portfolios. In some cases, like that of bank performance assessment, extreme input- and output (funding or asset) portfolios are associated with high risks, which should be properly accounted for, rather than necessarily rewarded, in the assessment. Since the weights can be interpreted as relative prices for the inputs and outputs, we argue that a proper choice of weights should also reflect the underlying risks of the variable such that the weights reflect risk adjusted prices. This is particularly pertinent for bank efficiency measurement, since studies have shown that banks differ wildly in their assessments of the risks associated with certain assets.In this paper we suggest that weight restrictions should be used in cases like this, to counter the inclination towards choosing extreme weights that do not account for the risk reflected in extreme input- and output portfolios. We specifically consider two different weight restricted DEA models to measure bank performance, where we restrict the weights attached to different types of funding and other inputs, in a model concerning the transformation of funding and other inputs into assets, and also restrict the weights on the different types of loans and other assets in a second model concerning the transformation of assets into income. The (relative) weights are restricted to having to belong to ranges determined from the average (relative) weights used across the efficient facets of the frontier. This way, efficiency scores are obtained by comparing all banks, regardless of their mixes of inputs and outputs in the two models and corresponding differences in preferred weights, to a balanced set of weights. As robustness checks, we also apply weight restrictions based on the average observed unit and furthermore weight restrictions based on the median rather than mean values. As detailed in the following, the contribution of our proposed method comprises two aspects: One related to performance measurement and the other concerning regulation.In terms of the first contribution of this paper related to bank efficiency measurement, it is important to note that the standard DEA models (cf. Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes, 1978) commonly used in the literature to measure bank performance (cf. e.g. Berger and Humphrey, 1997; Berger, 2007) are not well suited to dealing with bank risks reflected in their asset or funding portfolios, cf. the discussion above. Despite the fact that standard DEA is the approach most widely used in the literature to measure bank performance, this feature of the DEA models makes it unsatisfactory for the assessment of the performance of banks where the use of extreme input and output portfolios might mean risky behaviour – a problem which has never been more apparent and relevant than during the recent financial crisis.It is worth noting that restricting weights can make previously efficient funding and asset portfolios inefficient. But we are not proposing that banks should restrict (the mixes within) their input–output portfolios to belonging to specific ranges or that there exists a unique good risk portfolio. Our weight restrictions are indirectly defined from the weights of the efficient banks (via the corresponding fully dimensional efficient facets, cf. Section 3). So the set of restricted weights depends on the average risk judgement of all included banks; it is not a pre-determined or unique set. Using the actual crisis as our context, we are proposing that when evaluating efficiency in the banking sector, balanced risk judgements are preferred to extreme risk judgements at the practice level. Different sets of weight restrictions can be used in different contexts to achieve the purpose of measuring bank efficiency without being biased by banks’ extreme risk judgements. As rightly pointed out by Thanassoulis and Allen (1998), also in the context of weight restricted DEA models, “…it is not so much what ranges of input and output weights are permissible but rather how prior judgements on the relative values of input and output variables can be clarified and incorporated in DEA assessments” (p. 586). Another motivation for using average weights is the possible trade-off between risk and efficiency. On the one hand, an extremely conservative risk attitude is likely to result in inefficiency in the first place; on the other hand, apparently efficient banks may be extremely risky. Therefore we believe that the use of balanced weights across all banks is preferable to extreme weights for individual banks, which can be achieved through weight restrictions based on the average weights.In terms of the second contribution of the paper, we posit that our method can be used as a regulatory tool to create reference points to complement supervisory benchmarks for risk currently used by regulators, as will be discussed further in Section 5.3.The rest of this paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we provide a brief review of selected literature that links DEA measurement of bank efficiency to bank risk. In Section 3 the theoretical DEA models, both without and with weight restrictions, used to assess the efficiencies of the banks are defined. Section 4 provides a description of the data, models and variables used for the analysis and Section 5 comprises the results. Finally Section 6 concludes the paper.The recent financial crisis highlighted bank’s risks associated with its funding structure, as e.g. over-reliance on wholesale funding exposes a bank to excessive risk if there is a sudden withdrawal of funding in the wholesale funding market, as was the case during the crisis. This is supported by emerging empirical evidence in the wake of the financial crisis. For instance, Bologna (2011) finds evidence from U.S. banks (2007–2009) that banks relying heavily on non-retail deposit or less stable deposit funding are more likely to fail. Vazquez and Federico (2012), considering both European and U.S. banks during 2001–2009, also suggest that the strength of a bank’s funding liquidity (measured by the proportion of long-term illiquid assets that are funded with liabilities that are either long-term or deemed to be stable (such as core deposits)) prior to the crisis is negatively related to the bank’s probability to fail. Consistent with the above European and U.S. findings, Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga (2009), based on world-wide data, show that a sizeable proportion of banks attract most of their short-term funding from non-retail deposits at a cost of increased bank fragility. The global financial crisis therefore raised questions regarding bank risk management practices and triggered a thorough revision of the regulatory and supervisory frameworks in the new Basel III proposals with stricter regulations on funding and leverage (BIS, 2010).Besides bank fragility associated with liquidity creation and risks associated with banks’ unstable funding structures, the exposure of banks’ asset portfolios is also an important concern common to many previous crises in history. It is well known that the burst of the real estate bubble in the United States triggered the recent crisis, which quickly spread to other countries. The cross-country empirical analysis by Claessens, Dell’Ariccia, Igan, and Laeven (2010) confirms that countries which had closer links with the U.S. financial system or direct exposure to asset backed securities (i.e. those closer to patient zero) were the first to be affected. Also, those countries displaying features such as rapid credit growth and high leverage, as well as asset price bubbles, were the most severely hurt.However, the bank risks discussed above, which relate specifically to the mixes of funding sources and/or assets, are largely ignored in the bank efficiency literature.22Note that the selected literature considered here is used to motivate the adoption of weight-restricted data envelopment analysis models for bank efficiency assessment, rather than meant as a meta-analysis of this very large body of literature.Laeven (1990) is amongst the earliest to consider a risk measure in the analysis of bank efficiency and uses excessive loan growth, defined as the growth above the level of loans that a bank would have provided if it would have put its inputs to use as efficiently as in a defined base year, as their measure of risk. Hughes, Mester, and Moon (2001) use a best-practice risk-return frontier to measure inefficiency, where expected return is obtained from a managerial utility maximising profit function. Therefore, in their framework, instead of the common considerations of profit maximisation or cost minimisation, a bank is considered efficient if the trade-off between risk and expected return is made with minimum agency cost. More recently, Settlage, Preckel, and Settlage (2009) propose a DEA model in which banks are assumed to behave as mean-variance utility maximisers. More specifically, their model determines the maximum level of profits given the additional constraint that the observed level of variance of a bank’s portfolio (an indicator of risk) cannot be exceeded. This maximum level of expected profit is then compared to the observed level of profits, with equality implying risk-adjusted efficiency. Other studies incorporate risk measures directly into their models to control for risk. For instance, Berg, Forsund, and Jansen (1992) and Hughes and Mester (1993) included non-performing loans as an input. Altunbas, Gardener, Molyneux, and Moore (2001) use equity capital and Pastor and Serrano (2005) incorporate loan loss provisions in their efficiency estimations to control for risk. There are also studies treating risk as an external factor and analysing the effect of risk on efficiency in two-stage DEA or Stochastic Frontier Analysis33Stochastic Frontier Analysis is parametric analysis of efficiency based on a frontier function (such as a production or cost function). It was first proposed by Aigner, Lovell, and Schmidt (1977) and Meeusen and van den Broeck (1977) independently.models, see for instance Carvallo and Kasman (2005); Chang (1999); Koutsomanoli-Filippaki and Mamatzakis (2011); Yildirim and Philippatos (2007).The present work differs from the above studies by proposing a way to incorporate the consideration of risk into the efficiency measurement model without explicitly quantifying the risk beforehand. Based on the lessons learned during the recent financial crisis, we suggest that, besides explicit risk measures such as loan quality (along the lines of what is used in some of the above studies), certain risk as discussed above is implicitly reflected in banks’ business models through their reliance on certain inputs and/or outputs. Therefore we, as well as controlling for loan quality and loan loss provision (as explained in Section 4), account for this implicit risk element by restricting the weights that are allowed for inputs and outputs in the efficiency measurement. This way, the efficiency model ensures that the risks associated with extreme reliance on certain inputs and/or outputs are properly accounted for in the efficiency assessment, since the banks are not allowed to use correspondingly extreme weights for those variables. Extreme reliance on certain assets or funding sources can arise from both extreme risk preferences and from extreme risk judgements at the practice level. To avoid discouraging heterogeneity in risk preferences regarding the assets or funding portfolios, whilst constraining heterogeneity in risk judgements of particular types of funding or assets, we impose restrictions on weights rather than directly on the assets or funding portfolios.The research in this paper is also related to another strand of literature discussing the relationship between risk and efficiency. As argued by Berger, Saunders, Scalise, and Udell (1997), the relationship between efficiency and risk can be in different directions. If bank managers are bad at managing the banks efficiently, the poor management may lead to both low efficiency as well as high levels of problem loans, i.e. higher risk (bad management hypothesis). Alternatively, short-run “inefficiency” of banks devoting resources to loan underwriting and monitoring may lead to less problem loans in the long run, indicating a risk-efficiency trade off (skimping hypothesis). Or the other way around, a bank may take higher risk to pursue short-run efficiency. Similarly, a bank which is currently inefficient may be expected to take higher risk in the near future (also known as the moral hazard hypothesis). Using U.S. evidence, Berger et al. (1997) and Kwan and Eisenbeis (1997) show that poorly performing banks in the U.S. are more vulnerable to risk-taking and increases in problem loans (bad management). However, Altunbas, Carbo, Gardener, and Molyneux (2007) do not find a positive relationship between inefficiency and bank risk-taking in Europe. Instead, inefficient banks appear to be less risky (skimping). By contrast, using a slightly different sample in Europe, Williams (2004) finds that poorly managed banks tend to make more poor quality loans, consistent with the U.S. evidence. More recently, Fiordelisi, Marques-Ibanez, and Molyneux (2011) suggest that banks lagging behind in their efficiency levels might expect higher risks in the near future (moral hazard). Wanke, Barros, and Faria (2014) use a sample of Brazilian banks to illustrate that bank management slacks, or input saving or output enhancement potentials, could be good proxies for an eventual financial distress situation. This idea is related to the bad management hypothesis.The research setting in this paper is quite different from this strand of literature as we are primarily interested in proposing an approach to measuring bank efficiency that more directly incorporates certain risk elements. But the behaviour indicated by the skimping hypothesis makes our approach of measuring bank efficiency (more precisely, the weight-restricted DEA model) relevant and worthwhile: Bank managers may have incentives to take risks in order to boost short-run performance. Since certain risks are reflected in banks’ funding and asset portfolio, extreme risk judgements (weights) might have been motivated by short-run profitability. In standard DEA models these extreme judgements would make the corresponding banks appear efficient whereas that is not the case in our proposed weight-restricted models, which more directly account for the associated risks. In the next section we formally define the DEA models used to analyse bank efficiency with and without weight restrictions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
