@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Branch-and-price algorithm for the Resilient Multi-level Hop-constrained Network Design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose three mathematical formulations to model the Resilient Multi-level Hop-constrained Network Design problem.We evaluate the performance of algorithms based on the proposed formulations.We show that two formulations are equivalent and provide the same bounds for the problem.A Branch-and-price approach for the problem presents a much better performance than other traditional optimization tools

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Integer programming,Branch-and-price,Multi-level,Resilience,Hop-constrained,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work, we investigate the Resilient Multi-level Hop-constrained Network Design (RMHND) problem, which consists of designing hierarchical telecommunication networks, assuring resilience against random failures and maximum delay guarantees in the communication. Three mathematical formulations are proposed and algorithms based on the proposed formulations are evaluated. A Branch-and-price algorithm, which is based on a delayed column generation approach within a Branch-and-bound framework, is proven to work well, finding optimal solutions for practical telecommunication scenarios within reasonable time. Computational results show that algorithms based on the compact formulations are able to prove optimality for instances of limited size in the scenarios of interest while the proposed Branch-and-price algorithm exhibits a much better performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Network Design problems arise in diverse settings ranging from telecommunication to transportation planning. In the telecommunication context, we have been facing evolving technologies which offer a variety of services such as audio, video and general data transmission. The increasing demand from customers and the concern about service reliability in order to avoid customer dissatisfaction require grades of organization, leading to a hierarchical telecommunication network. The basic idea is that priorities are associated to sets of customers so that network providers can offer higher levels of service in both serviceability (e.g., low delay, high bandwidth) and survivability (failure protection) to certain key customers.The need to integrate priorities in the design of networks has led to the introduction by Balakrishnan et al. (1991) of the Multi-level Network Design (MLND) problem. This problem generalizes several well-known optimization models and addresses design decisions for hierarchical telecommunication, transportation, and electrical power distribution networks. The nodes of the network under consideration have different levels of importance (priorities are associated with the nodes), requiring different levels of facilities in communication. More precisely, the problem is defined over an undirected graph whose nodes are partitioned into L levels; each edge can contain one of the L different levels of facility, with higher priority levels having higher fixed costs. The goal is to select a connected subset of edges assigned to a facility level so that each origin–destination pair communicate via its minimal necessary level or higher-priority level facilities, minimizing the total cost of the assignment. This paper investigates the application of Integer Programming techniques to the Resilient Multi-level Hop-constrained Network Design (RMHND), an extension of MLND, in which the subgraph of selected edges must include at least two edge-disjoint paths with at most H hops for each pair of nodes, i.e., single-edge failure resilience and a maximum delay are assured.Fig. 1shows a RMHND example for a network with 16 nodes, two sets of nodes and edges (two different levels) and a hop constraint where H=9. Fig. 1a depicts the original network, in which dotted lines represent the edges that might be included in the solution. Fig. 1b displays the resulting network for the RMHND. Let us consider, for instance, pair (5,14), where nodes 5 and 14 belong to the first level (the higher priority level with higher fixed costs). Note that two edge-disjoint paths using only first level technology edges are available, one with 4 hops (5-9-10-13-14) and another with 6 hops (5-6-7-8-12-11-14). Taking pair (2,16), where both nodes belong to the second level, we can also observe two edge-disjoint paths. The first path, represented by (2-3-4-8-12-16) with 5 hops and the second path (2-1-5-9-10-13-14-11-15-16) with 9 hops, cross edges of its minimal required level (second one) or a higher-priority level (the first level). It is important to point out that two edge-disjoint paths are available for any pair of nodes.In the present study, we devise two compact formulations for the RMHND which solution is accomplished by solving a Mixed Integer Program (MIP) to optimality through a Branch-and-bound (BB) solver. Given the complexity of the problem, the main drawback of both compact formulations of a MIP is certainly the very limited size of the instances likely to be solved. In order to overcome this, we propose a column generation embedded in a Branch-and-bound algorithm, leading to an exact Branch-and-price (BP) algorithm, which has been applied successfully in the solution of large-scale problems (Lasdon, 1970; Barnhart et al., 1998).The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review some existing approaches in the literature to design multi-level networks. In Section 3, we introduce the Integer Programming formulations while, in Section 4, the Branch-and-price algorithm is described. Our computational experiments are presented and discussed in Section 5. The conclusion and future directions are given in Section 6. Finally, A is devoted to present the equivalence between two formulations for the problem.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
