@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Joint optimization for coordinated configuration of product families and supply chains by a leader-follower Stackelberg game

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Studies in joint configuration of product families and supply chains are reviewed.Mathematical models for product families and supply chains are formulated.Joint configuration is modeled by a Stackelberg game.A bi-level, nested genetic algorithm is employed to solve the game.Experiments are conducted and the managerial implications are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Product family,Supply chain,Module configuration,Stackelberg game,Bi-level optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Product family design by module configuration is conducive to accommodating product variety while maintaining mass production efficiency. Effective fulfillment of product families necessitates joint decision making of product family configuration (PFC) and downstream supply chain configuration (SCC), due to nowadays manufacturers’ moving towards assembly-to-order production throughout a distributed supply chain network. Existing decision models for joint optimization of product family and supply chain configuration are originated from an “all-in-one” approach that assumes both PFC and SCC decisions can be integrated into one optimization problem by aggregating two different types of objectives into a single objective function. Such an assumption neglects the complex tradeoffs underlying two different decision making problems and fails to reveal the inherent coupling of PFC and SCC.This paper formulates joint configuration of a product family and its supply chain as a leader-follower Stackelberg game that is enacted through a bi-level hierarchical optimization mechanism to model the coordination between two self-interested decision makers for PFC and SCC. The PFC decisions are modeled as an upper-level optimization problem (called leader) for optimal selection of modules, module instances, and product variants. The SCC decisions are modeled as a lower-level optimization problem (called follower), which responds to decisions of the upper level in order to determine an optimal supply chain configuration and inventory policies. A nonlinear, mixed integer programming model is formulated for the bi-level joint decision in the leader-follower game. To solve the nonlinear optimization model, a bi-level, nested genetic algorithm with constraint reasoning is developed and implemented. A case study of a power transformer product family and supply chain configuration is reported to demonstrate the feasibility and potential of the proposed leader-follower game-theoretic method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Product family design and module configuration have been well recognized as an effective means for achieving mass customization production (Jiao & Tseng, 1999). Product family configuration (PFC) aims to offer optimal product varieties to satisfy diverse needs of multiple market segments by configuring common modules and variant modules through a modular product platform (Simpson, 2004). Owing to its advantages in accommodating customization while keeping mass production efficiency, PFC has received much attention from both industry and academia alike (Simpson, Siddique, & Jiao, 2005).Originally PFC has been motivated toward optimizing the total cost of aggregated modules or customer-perceived utilities (Jiao, Zhang, & Wang, 2007). While the traditional focus of PFC is on the product design domain, there is limited emphasis on the downstream supply chain-related issues. With nowadays globally distributed operations and assembly-to-order production of more and more manufacturers, the fulfillment of PFC is closely coupled with downstream decisions of supply chain configuration (SCC), involving such issues as facility locations and node selections in a supply chain network (ElMaraghy & Mahmoudi, 2009; Park, 2001). For example, PFC much also take into account the implications and consequence of different outsourcing policies of certain modules in the supply chain (Lamothe, Hadj-Hamou, & Aldanondo, 2006). While PFC determines the topology and structures of the supply chain for a product family, the modules to be selected in PFC are to be delivered by appropriate suppliers in the supply chain. Therefore the PFC and SCC problems are closely interrelated to each other, and in turn joint decision making is deemed to be imperative (El Hadj Khalaf, Agard, & Penz, 2011; Huang, Zhang, & Liang, 2005; Shahzad & Hadj-Hamou, 2013).Existing decision models for joint optimization of product family and supply chain configurations are originated from a basic assumption that both PFC and SCC decisions can be integrated into one optimization problem by aggregating two different types of objectives into a single objective function through certain coordinated protocol, such as weighted sum (Fujita, Amaya, & Akai, 2013; Shahzad & Hadj-Hamou, 2013). However, such a straightforward “all-in-one” approach neglects the complex tradeoffs underlying two different decision making problems and fails to reveal the inherent coupling of PFC and SCC. Key technical challenges of joint PFC and SCC optimization can be observed as the following:(1) Coordinated configuration: The joint PFC and SCC optimization involves coordination in multiple dimensions. The joint decision first entails a cross-domain configuration problem from the product family domain to the supply chain domain. The heterogeneity of the goals and constraints as well as information exchange exists between these two different domains. Furthermore, the joint configuration starts with a cross-space configuration problem in the product family domain, encompassing from the customer space, to the product space and to the module space (Jiao et al., 2007). Meanwhile it involves cross-level configuration in the supply chain domain, mapping from the strategic to tactical level decisions (Simchi-Levi, Kaminsky, & Simchi-Levi, 1999). The interrelationships across the product spaces and the supply chain levels are non-trivial. Additionally, PFC and SCC must be coordinated in line with the cross-echelon configuration decisions in the supply chain domain as well, involving facility location decisions for suppliers, distribution center (DCs) and assembly plants (Daskin, Snyder, & Berger, 2005; Melo, Nickel, & Saldanha-da-Gama, 2009). It is challenging to model such coordinated configuration along these multiple dimensions.(2) Conflicting goals: Either PFC or SCC may involve inconsistent, or even conflicting, objectives in their own optimization problems. For example, the optimization objective of PFC is mainly geared towards a maximal customer-perceived utility per cost (Jiao et al., 2007), whereas SCC aims at minimization of total supply chain costs (Graves & Willems, 2005). On the one hand, an optimal product family configuration itself may not ensure effective and efficient operations of the supply chain. It is also possible that a pre-determined supply chain network cannot feedback its network configuration decision for PFC to improve such decisions as selection or de-selection of certain modules and product variants for specific market segments. It thus necessary to explicitly deal with the tradeoffs related to inconsistent interests of two different configuration optimization problems.(3) Non-cooperative games: The prevailing “all-in-one” approach treats joint optimization decisions as an aggregated problem (Fujita et al., 2013) and assumes that the self-interested decision makers can always be coordinated, regardless that they often possess different or even conflicting objectives. In practice, PFC and SCC are carried out by different departments or even different companies, and thus different decision makers are of their conflicting interests in maximizing their own payoffs. In this sense, joint optimization decision entails a non-cooperative game. Moreover, such a coordinated configuration decision game exemplifies a leader-follower decision making process, whereby PFC takes place first and subsequently SCC responds to the PFC decisions.(4) Constraint handling: Various types of configuration constraints exist for such a cross-domain, cross-space, cross-level and cross-echelon configuration problem. For product family configuration, typical configuration constraints include compatibility constraints and incompatible constraints among module instances (Jiao et al., 2007). For supply chain configuration, production capacity constraints, inventory constraints and transportation constraints are widely found in a supply chain network (Daskin et al., 2005). Furthermore, the mapping constraints from the product family to supply chain domains are coupled with production compatibility constraints related to different module production facilities (Jiao, Xu, Wu, & Ng, 2009). It is important to explore effective constraint handling techniques throughout the coordination.To handle inherent interactions and hierarchical characteristics of joint decisions between two self-interested roles of PFC and SCC, we explicitly formulate joint optimization for coordinated configuration of product families and supply chains as a Stackelberg game (von Stackelberg, 1952), which is also referred to a leader-follower game, such that a bi-level decision structure performs to model PFC as a leader and SCC as a follower. Acting as the leader, PFC decides the combination of potential product variants and anticipates manufacturing costs of modules to be provided by the supply chain partners. The follower serves SCC decisions by observing the results of PFC (namely decisions on selection of product variants and modules), and in the meantime has the autonomy in determining appropriate facility locations (such as selection of DCs and manufacturing plants) and the corresponding inventory operations polices. Consistent with the bi-level programming model, a bi-level nested genetic algorithm with constraint-reasoning is developed to derive optimal or near-optimal product family and supply chain configuration solutions

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
