@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measurement of returns to scale using non-radial DEA models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
How to find returns to scale in non-radial DEA models is investigated.An empirical example shows that imposing SCSC may not work.A procedure for discovering all units belonging to the minimum face is developed.Theorems and lemmas underpinning the procedure are given.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Returns to scale,Non-radial models,Efficiency,Strong Complementary Slackness Conditions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There are some specific features of the non-radial data envelopment analysis (DEA) models which cause some problems for the returns to scale measurement. In the scientific literature on DEA, some methods were suggested to deal with the returns to scale measurement in the non-radial DEA models. These methods are based on using Strong Complementary Slackness Conditions from optimization theory. However, our investigation and computational experiments show that such methods increase computational complexity significantly and may generate as optimal, solutions contradicting optimization theory. In this paper, we propose and substantiate a direct method for the returns to scale measurement in the non-radial DEA models. Our computational experiments documented that the proposed method works reliably and efficiently on the real-life data sets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The measurement of scale properties of frontier functions estimated using data envelopment analysis (DEA) models may in some cases be problematic. In particular the non-radial DEA models (Banker, Cooper, Seiford, Thrall, & Zhu, 2004) can possess some specific features that give rise to estimation problems. First, multiple reference sets may exist for a production unit. Second, multiple supporting hyperplanes may occur on optimal units of the frontier. Third, multiple projections (a projection set) may occur in the space of input and output variables. All these features cause certain difficulties under measurement of returns to scale1Returns to scale (RTS) may be increasing, constant or decreasing and is measured by the value of the elasticity of scale evaluated at a point on the frontier function; therefore RTS and scale elasticity are often used synonymously.1of production units.Banker et al. (2004) proposed a two-stage approach to determine returns to scale in the non-radial models. Sueyoshi and Sekitani (2007) showed that this approach may generate incorrect results in some cases. An interesting approach was proposed for measurement of returns to scale based on using strong complementary slackness conditions (SCSCs) in the non-radial DEA models (Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2007).However, our theoretical consideration and computational experiments show that the SCSC non-radial model may not be efficient from the computational point of view. The SCSC non-radial model generates ill-conditioned basic matrices during the solution process, which results in solutions that do not coincide with the optimal solution of the corresponding non-radial DEA model.2In Krivonozhko, Førsund, and Lychev (2012a) this was demonstrated for the radial Banker, Charnes, and Cooper (1984) (BCC hereafter) DEA model. Because the frontier function is identical for the radial and non-radial models the computational problems encountered with the radial model will also occur for the non-radial model.2This naturally contradicts the optimization theory.In our work we propose a two-stage approach to measure returns to scale at projections points in the non-radial DEA models. At the first stage a relative interior point, belonging to the optimal face, is found using a special elaborated method. In Krivonozhko, Førsund, and Lychev (2012b) it was proved that any relative interior point of a face has the same returns to scale as any other interior point of this face. At the second stage, we propose to determine the returns to scale at the relative interior point found in the first stage with the help of Banker and Thrall’s (1992) method or using the direct method of Førsund, Hjalmarsson, Krivonozhko, and Utkin (2007), Førsund, Kittelsen, and Krivonozhko (2009).Our computational experiments in Krivonozhko et al. (2012a) documented that the proposed approach is reliable and efficient for solving real-life DEA problems.The plan of the paper is to state the problem to be investigated in Section 2, and to develop a direct method for discovering all units belonging to the minimum face in Section 3. Section 4 reports some of the numerical experiments with the non-radial model specification based on data for Russian banks. Section 5 concludes.The non-radial DEA model can be written in the following form (Banker et al., 2004; Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2007)(1)maxh=(C+TS++C-TS-)subject to∑j=1nXjλj+S-=Xo,∑j=1nYjλj-S+=Yo,∑j=1nλj=1,λj⩾0,j=1,…,n,S+⩾0,S-⩾0,where Xj=(x1j,…,xmj) and Yj=(y1j,…,yrj) represent the observed inputs and outputs of production units (Xj,Yj), j=1,…,n,S-=(s1-,…,sm-)andS+=(s1+,…,sr+)are vectors of slack variables. The superscript «T» indicates the vector transpose. The components of the objective-function vectors C+ and C- are specified as follows:ck-=(m+r)-1(max{xkj|j=1,…,n}-min{xkj|j=1,…,n})-1,k=1,…,m,ci+=(m+r)-1(max{yij|j=1,…,n}-min{yij|j=1,…,n})-1,i=1,…,rModel (1) is also called range-adjusted model (RAM) (Cooper, Park, & Pastor, 2000).In model (1), an efficiency score for unit (Xo,Yo) is evaluated, where (Xo,Yo) is any production unit from the set (Xj,Yj), j=1,…,n. If the optimal value h∗ of the model is equal to zero, then unit (Xo,Yo) is considered efficient, if h∗>0, then the unit is inefficient (Banker et al., 2004).The dual problem to model (1) is written in the form:(2)min(νTXo-uTYo+u0)subject toνTXj-uTYo+u0⩾0,j=1,…,n,ν⩾C-,u⩾C+,where v=(v1,…,vm) and u=(u1,…,ur) are vectors of dual variables associated with the first and the second group of constraints of problem (1), u0 is a free variable associated with the convexity constraint.In the papers Sueyoshi and Sekitani (2007, 2009), it was proposed to use strong complementary slackness conditions from optimization theory in order to find the set of optimal solutions in the primal and dual space. The SCSC non-radial model (Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2007) is written in the following form(3)maxη∑j=1nλjXj+S-=Xo,∑j=1nλjYj-S+=Yo,∑j=1nλj=1,λj⩾0,j=1,…,n,S+⩾0,S-⩾0,νTXj-uTYj+u0⩾0,j=1,…,n,ν⩾C-,u⩾C+,C-TS-+C+TS+=νTXo-uTYo+u0,λj+νTXj-uTYj+u0⩾η,j=1,…,n,sk-+νk-ck-⩾η,k=1,…,m,si++ui-ci+⩾η,i=1,…,r.The first six conditions are from the primal model (1), the next three conditions are from the dual problem (2), and the tenth condition provides the equality of the objective functions of the primal and dual problems. The last three conditions express the SCSC constraints. In order to secure that strong complementarity is obtained the variable η is entered as the objective function in (3).In Sueyoshi and Sekitani (2007) problem (3) is used in order to find the minimum face that contains the set of optimal solutions (a projection set) on the efficient hypersurface of set T in the space of input and output variables. Next, two additional fractional-linear optimization problems are determined for measurement of returns to scale.The SCSC non-radial model is very interesting as a theoretical idea. However, our computational experiments show that model (3) may generate unacceptable results even for medium-size problems using well-reputed optimization software. The size of model (3) increases significantly in comparison with model (1). Indeed, the size of model (3) is equal to (3m+3r+2n+2)×(2m+2r+n+2), where m is the number of inputs, r is the number of outputs, and n is the number of production units. Remember that the size of model (1) is equal to (m+r+1)×(m+r+n), and n is usually much greater than (m+r) in real-life models. Moreover, economic interpretation of some constraints of model (3) does not make sense because in model (3) one has to add variables measured in quite different units. The reasons mentioned above may result in ill-conditioned basic matrices(Wilkinson, 1965) during the solution process. This may generate the unacceptable results in the optimal solution.In order to investigate our suspicions about what will happen when using real datasets, we conducted computational experiments using two middle-sized models.3The same data are utilised in Krivonozhko et al. (2012a).3For the first model, call it Case 1, we took the data for electricity utilities in Sweden 1987; see Førsund et al. (2007). We used the total amount of low- and high-voltage electricity in MWh delivered to the customers and the number of low- and high-voltage customers served as the four outputs. On the input side we use kilometers of low- and high-voltage power lines and total transformer capacity in kVA as the capital variables. Labour is measured in full time equivalent employees. The number of production units in this model is 163.For Case 2 we took the data from 920 Russia bank’s financial accounts for January 2009, where we used the following variables as inputs: working assets, time liabilities, and demand liabilities. As output variables we took: equity capital, liquid assets, fixed assets.In the computational experiments we used the well-reputed optimization software CPLEX, the software Mathematica that is very popular among mathematicians, and the software FrontierVision, a specially elaborated program for DEA models that enables one to visualize the multidimensional frontier with the help of constructing two- and three-dimensional sections of the frontier.It is interesting to note that the three software programs generated identical results when solving model (1) on data sets of Cases 1 and 2. However, the software CPLEX produced significant discrepancies between the solution of model (1) and model (3), which are described in detail in (Krivonozhko et al., 2012a).Observe that the software Mathematica is not intended for solving large-scale LP problems, for this reason this program was not used for solving model (3). The software FrontierVision was not elaborated either for solving the type (3) model.The main discrepancies in solving model (1) and model (3) with the help of the program CPLEX (though theoretically optimal solutions of these problems have to coincide) are as follows: (a) efficiency scores of model (1) and model (3) may differ significantly and (b) reference sets obtained in the solution of model (3) may contain inefficient units.In the linear programming problem (1), the set of optimal points Λ∗ (the set of projections of unit (Xo,Yo) on the frontier) is situated on the boundary (frontier) of the production possibility set T. Since T is a polyhedral set, the boundary consists of a number of faces.Remember that in the DEA models the dimension of a face may vary from 0 up to (m+r−1),the maximal dimension. Faces of maximal dimension are called facets. Faces of 0-dimension are known as vertices and 1-dimension as edges. In our exposition, riΓ stands for the relative interior of face Γ.The set Λ∗ of projections of unit (Xo,Yo) on the frontier in model (1) can be written in the following form:Λ∗={(X,Y)|X=Xo-S-∗,Y=Yo+S+∗,where(λ∗,S-∗,S+∗)is an optimal solution of problem(1)},and whereλ∗=(λ1∗,…,λn∗)is a vector of optimalλ-variables.The solution set Λ∗ cannot belong to different faces that do not have common points, otherwise interior points of T would belong to the solution set. Thus, optimal solutions of set Λ∗ can belong only to the intersection of some faces of the set T.Lemma 1Let two different faces Γ1 and Γ2 of the set T intersect. Then faces Γ1 and Γ2 do not have common relative interior points, i.e. riΓ1∩riΓ2=∅.The proof of Lemma 1 is given in Appendix A.Corollary 1Let two different faces Γ1 and Γ2 of the set T intersect. Then only one of the following cases occurs:(i)One face belongs to the other face entirely, to be precise let Γ1⊂Γ2, and set Γ1∩Γ2 is a part of the boundary of Γ2.The set Γ1∩Γ2 is a part of the boundary of the face Γ1 and face Γ2, moreover the set Γ1∩Γ2 is also a face and its dimension is less than the dimensions of the face Γ1 or the face Γ2.It is proven in Lemma 1 that an interior point Zoof face Γ1 cannot belong to intersections of riΓ1 and riΓ2. However, an interior point Zoof Γ1 may belong to Γ2. In this case face Γ1 belongs to face Γ2 entirely and set Γ1∩Γ2 is a part of the boundary of Γ2. This can be shown by the same way as in Lemma 1.However, if point Zobelongs to Γ1∩Γ2 and Zo∉riΓ1∪riΓ2, then set Γ1∩Γ2 is a part of the boundary of the face Γ1 and the face Γ2.Summarizing all statements given above, we can prove that there exists a unique minimum face Γminthat contains the set Λ∗. The notion minimum face Γminmeans that any other face that contains set Λ∗ also contains Γmin.Theorem 1In model (1), there exists a unique minimum face Γmin that contains set Λ∗.From Lemma 1 and Corollary 1, it follows that faces can intersect only along the boundaries of these faces. Taking into account also that the number of faces of the set T is finite, we obtain that there exists a unique minimum face Γmincontaining set Λ∗. By virtue of the non-negativity constraints on slack variables and the specific objective function associated with all slack variables in problem (1), set Λ∗ may constitute only some part of face Γmin.□This completes the proof.Corollary 2Face Γmin is a bounded polyhedral set (polyhedron).This assertion follows from the constraints structure of problem (1).Now, we proceed to the construction of the procedure that finds all production units belonging to the minimum face Γminand to the set Λ∗. Let problem (1), respectively problem (2), be solved by the simplex-method(Dantzig & Thapa, 2003) and optimal primal variables{λj∗,j=1,…,n;sk-∗,k=1,…,m;si+∗,i=1,…,r}and dual variables{vk∗,k=1,…,m;ui∗,i=1,…,r;u0∗}be obtained.Determine the following index sets for primal variables(4)I∗={j|λj∗>0,j=1,…,n},Ix-={k|sk-∗>0,k=1,…,m},Iy+={i|si+∗>0,i=1,…,r}Introduce the index sets associated with the dual variables(5)J∗={j|ν∗TXj-u∗TYj+u0∗=0,j=1,…,n},Jν={k|νk∗=ck-,k=1,…,m},Ju={i|ui∗=ci+,i=1,…,r}.Since the optimal solution is obtained with the help of the simplex-method, every non-basic variable is equal to zero. However, some basic variables may be equal to zero also, then the optimal solution is considered degenerate.For the dual problem (2) all indices belonging to the set (J∗∪Jv∪Ju) contain a basic set of indices for model (1). However, the set (J∗∪Jv∪Ju) may also contain non-basic indices; in this case the dual problem(2) is considered degenerate. Thus, the following relations hold(I∗∪Ix-∪Iy+)⊆JB⊆(J∗∪Jν∪Ju),where JBis a set of optimal basic variables of problem (1).Variablesλj∗, j∊I∗ determine only one point on the minimum face. To find all points belonging to the face Γminit is necessary to solve additional problems.Problem Qol(l∊J∗):(6)maxfl=λlsubject to∑j∈J∗Xjλj+∑k∈Jνeksk-=Xo,∑j∈J∗Yjλj-∑i∈Jueisi+=Yo,∑j∈J∗λj=1,λj⩾0,j∈J∗,sk-⩾0,k∈Jν,si+⩾0,i∈Ju,whereek-∈Emandei+∈Erare identity vectors associated with variablessk-andsi+, respectively.Notice that problem (6) includes only those variables for which the corresponding dual constraints hold with strict equality for optimal dual variables (5). According to the dual theorems of linear programming, this means that optimal variables of problem (6) will also be optimal variables of problem (1).The Procedure that finds all production units belonging to the minimum face Γminand to the set Λ∗ is described as follows:1.Initialize setsJo=∅,JH=J∗,J1=∅. If the set JH is not empty, then go to the next step. If the set JH is empty then go to step 3.Choose index l∊JH, if the set JH is empty, then go to step 3. Solve problem (6). Iffl∗>0, then determine Jo=Jo∪l. Iffl∗=1, then J1=J1∪l. Delete index l from the setJH=JH⧹l. Go to the beginning of the step. Iffl∗=0, then delete index l from the setJH=JH⧹l. Go to the beginning of step 2.Set Jodetermines the set of units belonging to the face Γmin. Set J1 determines the set of units belonging to the set Λ∗.The Procedure is completed.A standard present-day optimization software generates only one point in the multidimensional space as an optimal solution. However, this may be not sufficient in order to determine returns to scale on the whole minimum face, since different vertices of the face may display different returns to scale. Any unit from set J∗ may belong to the minimum face. A standard software generates set J∗ as a by-product. So, the Procedure enables one to check whether some unit from set J∗ belongs to the minimum face or not. The validity of this assertion is based on the theorems given below.After running the Procedure, the minimum face Γmin, containing the optimal set Λ∗, can be written in the form:(7)Γmin=(X,Y)X=∑j∈JoXjλj,Y=∑j∈JoYjλj,∑j∈Joλj=1,λj⩾0,j∈Jo.However, some points of the set Γminmay not belong to the set Λ∗ on the frontier. The set Λ∗ is written as:(8)Λ∗=(X,Y)(X,Y)∈Γmin,X⩽Xo,Y⩾Yo,C+TY-C-TX=(ν∗-C-)TXo-(u∗-C+)TYo+u0∗The Procedure enables one to find all units belonging to the face Γminand to the set Λ∗. The validity of this assertion is based on the following theorems.Theorem 2Let unit Zt∊Em+r be an interior point of polyhedron Γ⊂Em+r, let also unit Zp∊Em+r be any point of this polyhedron, which is distinct from point Zt. Then unit Zt can be represented as a convex combination of (m+r+1) units of set Γ and unit Zp enters this combination with a nonzero coefficient.The optimal value of problem (6) is strictly positive,fl∗>0if and only if unit (Xl,Yl) belongs to the minimum face Γmin that contains the set Λ∗.The proofs of Theorems 2 and 3 are given in Appendix A.In essence, Theorem 2 says that, if some unit Zpis a vertex of face Γmin or belongs to the face, then it is necessary that there exists such a solution that variableλp∗enters this solution with a nonzero coefficient.Corollary 3If the optimal value of problem (6) isfl∗=1, then unit (Xl,Yl) belongs to the set Λ∗.Iffl∗=1, thenλl∗=1, this means thatλl∗is the only non-negativeλ-variable in the optimal basis, hence unit (Xl,Yl) belongs to the set Λ∗.It was proved in (Krivonozhko, Førsund, & Lychev, 2012b) that interior points of a face have the same returns to scale, so it is sufficient to determine returns to scale at any interior point of this face. An interior point(X¯,Y¯)of the face Γmincan be chosen as a strong convex combination of units from the set Jo, that is(9)X¯=∑j∈JoXjλj,Y¯=∑j∈JoYjλj,∑j∈Joλj=1,λj>0,j∈Jo.Returns to scale of unit(X¯,Y¯)can be measured by two methods at least. In the first (indirect) method (Banker et al., 2004) the BCC model is solved at the first step, the dimension of this problem is equal to (m+r+1)×(m+r+n), then at the second step two additional problems are solved, the dimension of these two problems coincides with the dimension of the BCC problem. Returns to scale is determined with the help of dual variables.In the second (direct) method (Førsund et al., 2007), an intersection of the set T and two-dimensional plane is constructed with the help of some algorithms at the first step. At the second step returns to scale of any point on the graph is measured by using derivatives of this graph.Now we are ready to represent the Algorithm for determination of the RTS at projection points of unit (Xo,Yo) in model (1).1.Solve model (1) for unit (Xo,Yo).Run the Procedure in order to find all production units belonging to the minimum face Γmin and to set Λ∗.Find some interior point(X¯,Y¯)of face Γmin according to (9).Calculate the RTS and scale elasticity at point(X¯,Y¯).Calculation of the RTS and scale elasticity can be performed also for any interior point of set Γmin or Λ∗ and for any production unit (Xj,Yj), j=1,…,n.It is interesting to note a significant distinction between the radial and non-radial DEA models.In the non-radial DEA models, even if unit (Xo,Yo) belongs to the efficient frontier, all steps of Algorithm have to be performed, since the set of optimal points on the frontier belongs to the minimum face Γmin and RTS has to be calculated at some interior point of face Γmin. Certainly, face Γmin may be point (Xo,Yo) itself, i.e. it has 0-dimension.In the radial DEA models, if unit (Xo,Yo) belongs to the efficient frontier, it is sufficient to calculate the RTS immediately at point (Xo,Yo).In Fig. 1, the production function for unit 618 is depicted, which is constructed as an intersection of the two-dimensional plane and the six-dimensional production possibility set T in Case 2 for banks. In Fig. 1 point Zo(open circle) is the bank that has number 618 in the data set of banks. Small grey circles denote the projections of the actual observations of banks onto the two-dimensional plane. In the figure, scale elasticity values (from the left and from the right) are shown for three points of the graph Z1, Z2, Z3, respectively. The software Frontier Vision constructs intersections for any unit, spending less than one second per section, and enables one to calculate scale elasticity instantly, hence to measure returns to scale of any points on the graph.Consider computational experiments with the data set of Case 1 in detail. Problem (1) was solved for every unit (Xj,Yj), j=1,…,n, where every (Xj,Yj) was inserted in problem (1) instead of (Xo,Yo). Next, the problem of the form (6) was determined on the basis of optimal solution of problem (1) and solved for every j∈J∗ using the software CPLEX. Thus, all production units belonging to Γminor to Λ∗ were found for every solution of problem (1).Fig. 2represents the dependence of the number of problems of the form (1) on the number ofλ-variables in the optimal basis of problem (1). Remember that the number ofλ-variables in the optimal basis determines the dimension of the face associated with this solution for the bounded face. The dimension of space in Case 1 is equal to 8, so the maximal dimension of face is equal to 7; the optimal basis associated with a face of maximal dimension has to have eightλ-variables in the basis.Fig. 2 shows that faces of maximal dimension did not appear in optimal solutions of problems (1). This fact can be easily explained. The number of faces of the production possibility set is a finite number. However, the number of possible directions of vector (C+,C−) in problem (1) is a non-countable infinite number. So, the possibility of cases, where vector (C+,C−) is perpendicular to the face of maximal dimension, is very low.As one can see from the figure, the maximal number of faces (62) turned out to have dimension 2.Computational experiments showed that there are only two cases (for units 75 and 254) when a vertex belongs to set Γminand Λ∗ simultaneously. Consider the first case in detail.Solving problem (1) by CPLEX program for unit 75, we obtain the following reference set:λ139=0.403,λ241=0.023,λ246=0.574,all otherλ-variables in the optimal solution are equal to zero.Units 139 and 246 display constant returns to scale, unit 241 has increasing returns to scale.After getting the solution of problem (6) for unit 75, we obtain that only for unit 139 the objective functionf139∗=1. This means that unit 139 belongs to Γminand Λ∗ simultaneously.Define the convex combination of units 139, 241 and 246 as artificial unit 1075Z1075=13(Z139+Z241+Z246)Fig. 3represents an intersection of the eight-dimensional production possibility set with a two-dimensional plane for unit 1075, where the directions of the plane are determined by the input and output vectors of unit 1075. The light and dark points in the figure denote projections of units from the reference set onto the two-dimensional plane.Fig. 3 shows also scale elasticities (ɛ−,ɛ+) for corner points Z1, Z2 and artificial unit 1075. Projection of unit 241 onto the plane almost coincides with corner point Z1. It follows from the figure that unit 1075 has increasing returns to scale. Since unit 1075 is an interior unit of the face formed by units 139, 241 and 246, points lying on this face display increasing returns to scale, see (Krivonozhko et al., 2012b). However, the software could generate units 139 plus slacks as optimal solution. If one determined returns to scale only on the basis of this information, then all units of the face would display constant returns to scale.The production function for unit 241 is depicted in Fig. 4, where the vectors of the two-dimensional plane are determined by input and output vectors of unit 241. Again, the dark and light points in the figure denote projections of units from the reference set onto the two-dimensional plane. Left and right scale elasticities (ɛ−and ɛ+) are shown also in the figure for unit 241, according to their values unit 241 displays increasing returns to scale.Fig. 5represents the production function for unit 139. Left and right scale elasticities shown in the figure indicate that this unit displays constant returns to scale.Hence, this example show that only an interior point of a face can determine return to scale of points lying on this face.However, the question arises: What is the ‘payment’ for discovering all vertices of the face Γmin?We calculated the number of iterations accomplished by the CPLEX software in order to solve problem (1) for all units (Xj,Yj), j=1,…,n. This number is equal to α=2876 iterations. Next, we calculated the number of iterations accomplished by CPLEX in order to solve problems (6) for all units (Xj,Yj), j=1,…,n. This number makes up β=1782=0.62α iterations in problems of the type (6). That is really not a heavy burden, even for an ordinary notebook.It is worth noting that interior unit 1075 of face Γminis depicted as a corner point in Fig. 3. Moreover, the intersection of the two-dimensional face Γminand the two-dimensional plane spanned by input and output vectors of unit 1075 generates just one point (unit 1075). This situation is impossible in three-dimensional space. However, such cases do exist in the multidimensional case. Let us dwell on this more detail.Designate (m+r) by p. Every face of the production possibility set in Euclidean space Epbelongs uniquely to some minimum affine set.Remember that the affine set Aff (Rockafellar, 1970) generated by units Zl=(Xl,Yl)∈Ep, l∈IA, where IAis a subset of index set j=1,…,n, can be written in the following form(9)Aff=ZZ=∑l∈IAZlμl,∑l∈IAμl=1,whereμlareanyrealnumbers.The affine set Aff is parallel to the subspace L (Rockafellar, 1970), passing through the origin, which can be written in the form:L=ZZ=∑l∈IA(Zl-Zp)γl,whereZpisanyunitfromthesetIA,γlareanyrealnumbersThe dimension of the affine set Aff is equal to the dimension of the subspace L.Now, we are ready to state the following result.Theorem 4The intersection of the 2-dimensional plane and the k-dimensional affine set,k⩾2, result in a point in the multidimensional space Ep only ifp⩾k+2.The proof of the theorem is given in Appendix A.It follows from Theorem 4 that in the 3-dimensional space the intersection of two 2-dimensional planes cannot result in a point. In fact, Fig. 3 shows that the interior artificial unit 1075 represents in the 8-dimensional space the intersection of the 2-dimensional face Γminand the 2-dimensional plane spanned by input and output vectors of the unit 1075.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
