@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Managing critical success strategies for an enterprise resource planning project

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A model for evaluating critical success strategies of an ERP project with three-level objectives.Three optimization models for setting the optimal management priority for implementing CSSs.Objectives-oriented management of CSSs by integrating individual departments’ preferences.A management matrix as a strategic map for effective management of CSSs.An empirical study with managerial insights and implications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Enterprise resource planning project,Critical success strategies,Objective hierarchy,Multiattribute decision making,Optimization,Prioritization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper develops an innovative objectives-oriented approach with one evaluation model and three optimization models for managing the implementation of a set of critical success strategies (CSSs) for an enterprise resource planning (ERP) project in an organization. To evaluate the CSSs based on their contribution to the organizational objectives, the evaluation model addresses an important issue of measuring the relationship between objectives in a three-level hierarchy involving the organization, its functional departments, and the ERP project. To determine the optimal management priority for implementing the CSSs from the organization’s perspective, the three optimization models maximize their total implementation value by integrating individual departments’ management preferences. An empirical study is conducted to demonstrate how these models work and how their outcomes can provide practical insights and implications in planning and managing the implementation of the CSSs for an ERP project.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An enterprise resource planning (ERP) system is implemented in an organization to support its cross-functional business process integration and standardization (Davenport, 1998). As an enterprise-wide information system, the ERP system provides various functional modules for all departments of the organization to help achieve their stated departmental objectives, which are established in line with the organizational objectives (Rajagopal, 2002). The ERP implementation is a complicated and costly project with a high failure risk (Su and Yang, 2010; Aloini et al., 2012). The project is deemed a success if it helps the organization achieve a substantial proportion of its organizational objectives (Umble et al., 2003). To ensure that the organizational objectives will be achieved, the organization should ideally develop and implement a set of critical success strategies (CSSs) that are critical to the success of the project.The CSSs for an ERP project can be developed based on the critical success factors (CSFs) that have been identified in practical settings of ERP implementation (e.g. Hong and Kim, 2002; Al-Mashari et al., 2003; Umble et al., 2003; Somers and Nelson, 2004; Motwani et al., 2005; Sun et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2005; Law and Ngai, 2007). When planning to implement an ERP system, the organization should first identify context-related CSFs relevant to the operational settings of its departments and then develop the CSSs that are essential for successfully achieving its stated objectives. With limited management resources available, it is of managerial importance for the organization to set management priority for implementing the CSSs for the ERP project. To help achieve the organizational objectives effectively, the implementation should be managed from the organization’s perspective, although these CSSs are to be implemented at all the departments involved.No existing methods are available to address this important issue in implementing an ERP project. It is thus the primary purpose of this paper to develop an innovative methodology for setting management priority for the CSSs based on their potential contribution to the organizational objectives. This methodological development and its managerial implications in ERP project implementation are indeed the innovative contributions of the paper. It provides a structured approach for planning and managing the CSSs effectively. To realize this methodological contribution, we address two important research issues concerning the contribution evaluation and the implementation management of the CSSs from the organization’s perspective while considering the management preferences of individual departments.The issue of evaluating the contribution of the CSSs is complicated by the fact that these CSSs are to be implemented at individual departments for primarily achieving the ERP objectives, but they are to be evaluated in terms of their contribution to the organizational objectives. Addressing this issue thus requires measuring the relationship between the objectives in a three-level hierarchy involving the organization, the departments, and the ERP project. In this paper, we develop an objectives-oriented evaluation model to measure the relationship among the organizational objectives, the departmental objectives, and the ERP objectives.The issue of managing the implementation of the CSSs at the organizational level is complicated by the fact that individual departments often have different management preferences on the CSSs as these CSSs have varying degrees of contribution to their own departmental objectives. The contribution degree of each CSS to a department is determined by its importance to the departmental objectives and its achievability level. First, each CSS will have different importance values to individual departmental objectives, indicated by the degree to which it helps achieve the departmental objectives if effectively implemented at the department. Second, each CSS may have varying levels of achievability at different departments, indicated by the degree to which it can be effectively implemented under the current operational settings and resource availability of individual departments. To address this issue, we develop three optimization models for obtaining an overall management priority for these CSSs at the organizational level, while considering their varying degrees of contribution to individual departments.In subsequent sections, we first present a three-level hierarchy of objectives in the context of an ERP project in order to describe how the CSSs contribute to the organizational objectives while being performed at lower-level departments. Next, we develop an objectives-oriented evaluation model for addressing the issue of evaluating the CSSs. With the evaluation results, we then develop three optimization models for addressing the issue of managing the CSSs at the organizational level. Finally, we conduct an empirical study to demonstrate the effectiveness of the models developed and discuss the managerial implications of the study outcomes.Fig. 1shows a three-level hierarchy of objectives in an organization when an ERP project is being undertaken. Working with the functional departments of the organization, a project team is formed to administer the ERP project (Sarker and Lee, 2003). The project team usually consists of senior managers of the organization, department managers, key users, consultants, and technical staff. The project team aligns the functional modules of the ERP system with the current business requirements of the functional departments (Laughlin, 1999; Mandal and Gunasekaran, 2003). To address the resource requirements of the functional departments, the project team works cooperatively to reach mutual agreements on shared resources among the departments for implementing the ERP system. In particular, the project team must ensure that all departments have an explicit understanding on the availability of resources required for them to implement the ERP system.Based on the functionality of the ERP system designed for the whole organization, the project team works out a set of ERP objectives (as shown at Level 3 in Fig. 1) in order to essentially meet specific requirements of the core business processes of the departments involved. As such, the ERP objectives are defined in line with the departmental objectives to ensure that the ERP system will help enhance core business processes of each department. The achievement of the ERP objectives will thus help achieve the departmental objectives, as shown at Levels 2 and 3 in Fig. 1. In a strategy focused organization with management by objectives, the departmental objectives are established in alignment with the organizational objectives (Drucker, 1954; Kaplan and Norton, 2001). The achievement of the departmental objectives will thus help achieve the organizational objectives, as shown at Levels 1 and 2 in Fig. 1.To successfully achieve the ERP objectives, the project team identifies a set of CSSs for implementation at each department through discussions among themselves and with the organization’s top management on the basis of the current operational settings and the resources available for the implementation. Effective implementation of these CSSs will contribute to the achievement of the ERP objectives, as shown at Level 3 in Fig. 1.A successful ERP project will help achieve the organizational objectives. This is the ultimate goal for the organization to undertake the ERP project. Therefore, from the organization’s perspective, the CSSs identified for ensuring the success of the ERP project should be evaluated and managed based on their contribution to the organizational objectives. The ultimate contribution of the CSSs to the organizational objectives is made through their implementation at each department for achieving the ERP objectives and the departmental objectives, as indicated in Fig. 1. As such, to measure each CSS’s contribution to the organizational objectives, we need to measure the relationship between the objectives at Levels 2 and 3, and between the objectives at Levels 1 and 2 in the three-level objective hierarchy.The alignment of lower-level objectives with higher-level objectives in a multi-level organizational structure has been facilitated by widely used management concepts such as the balanced scorecard (Kaplan and Norton, 1992) and management by objectives (Drucker, 1954). To measure the relationship between two-level objectives under a balanced scorecard framework, Xu and Yeh (2012) develop a multiattribute decision making (MADM) based evaluation model. In this paper, we extend this evaluation model to measure the relationship between the objectives at a three-level hierarchy.MADM has been widely used to evaluate a finite set of decision alternatives with respect to a set of evaluation criteria (Hwang and Yoon, 1981). Multiattribute value theory (MAVT) developed by Keeney and Raiffa (1976) has been widely used in solving MADM problems (Schuwirth et al., 2012). MAVT-based MADM methods will generate a cardinal preference or ranking of the decision alternatives, for each of which a relative value is obtained.In this paper, we formulate the higher-level objectives as the evaluation criteria and the lower-level objectives as the decision alternatives in the context of an MAVT-based MADM problem. The development of this formulation is for measuring the relationship between lower-level and higher-level objectives, based on the notion that MAVT has a thorough axiomatic basis for dealing with problems of measurement of criteria weights (Weber and Borcherding, 1993).For the ERP project problem with the three-level hierarchy of objectives shown in Fig. 1, the Level-1 organizational objectives are the criteria for evaluating the relative importance of the Level-2 departmental objectives. With an MAVT-based MADM algorithm, a relative value is obtained for each Level-2 departmental objective (as a decision alternative). This value represents the relative importance (or weight) of the corresponding Level-2 objective to the Level-1 organizational objectives as a whole, thus representing the quantitative relationship between Level-1 and Level-2 objectives. To obtain the relative weights of Level-3 ERP objectives, the evaluation criteria are the Level-2 departmental objectives and the criteria weights are the relative weights of Level-2 objectives, which are obtained by measuring the relationship between Level-1 and Level-2 objectives.With the MAVT-based MADM problem formulation process described above, the relative weights of lower-level objectives can be measured to indicate their relative importance to the higher-level objectives. This measurement process will be incorporated into the objectives-oriented evaluation model to be presented in the next section for evaluating the relative contribution of the CSSs implemented at each department to the organizational objectives. An MAVT-based MADM algorithm based on the weighted-sum method will also be presented to measure (a) the relative weight of each Level-2 departmental objective to the Level-1 organizational objectives, (b) the relative weight of each Level-3 ERP objective to the Level-2 objectives of each department, and (c) the relative weight of each CSS with respect to the Level-3 ERP objectives. The weighted-sum method is also used to give each CSS a relative weight at each department in order to reflect its relative importance degree in achieving the organizational objectives.A set of CSSs Sj(j=1,2,…,J) are to be implemented at departments Di(i=1,2,…,I) of an organization for achieving a set of ERP objectivesOlE(l=1,2,…,L). These ERP objectives are independent and compensatory of each other in terms of their contribution to the departmental objectives. Achieving the ERP objectives at departments Diwill help achieve its departmental objectivesOikD(k=1,2,…,Ki), which are independent and compensatory of each other in terms of their contribution to the organizational objectives. The achievement of the departmental objectives will help achieve a set of organizational objectivesOhO(h=1,2,…,H).The purpose of the evaluation problem is to give each CSS implemented at each department a relative implementation value in terms of its overall potential contribution to the organizational objectives. The implementation value of a CSS indicates the degree to which it contributes to the organizational objectives as a whole, relative to other CSSs. The implementation value of the CSSs is a relative concept and is used in this paper for managing the implementation of the CSSs.The implementation value of a CSS at a department is obtained by multiplying its weight by its achievability level at the department. The relative weightwijSof a CSS Sjat department Diindicates the degree to which it helps achieve the organizational objectives as a whole if it is effectively implemented at the department. The achievability level aijof a CSS Sjat department Diis called the local achievability level in this study. It indicates the degree to which the CSS can be effectively implemented under the department’s current operational settings and available resources. Appendix A lists the key variables used and their notation.The relative weightswijSare obtained by an MAVT-based MADM algorithm using the assessment results obtained from the project team, the departments, and the organization respectively. The local achievability levels aijare assessed by individual departments based on their current operational settings and resource availability. The evaluation procedure begins with a subjective assessment process.To obtain the relative weights of the CSSs implemented at each department with regard to their relative importance to the organizational objectives, three sets of subjective assessments are to be made. First, the importance rating of each CSS for achieving each ERP objective is to be assessed by the ERP project team. Second, the importance rating of each ERP objective for achieving each departmental objective is to be assessed by the corresponding department. Third, the importance rating of each departmental objective for achieving each organizational objective is to be assessed by the top management of the organization.In making subjective assessments using absolute judgment, a point estimate measurement such as a five-point Likert type scale has been conveniently and effectively used (Chang and Yeh, 2002). The rating value in a five-point scale is given by using a set of five linguistic terms {Very Low,Low, Medium,High,Very High}, which is associated with a corresponding set of numerical values {1,2,3,4,5} (Yeh and Chang, 2009). When associated with a numerical scale, these linguistic terms have a strong qualitative connotation and can be used in MADM (Lootsma, 1999). This set of linguistic terms is thus well suited to assess the importance ratings of the CSSs, the ERP objectives, and the departmental objectives to their higher-level objectives respectively, shown as in Fig. 1. For assessing the local achievability level of the CSSs at each department, a scale of 1–100 percent is used.The ERP project team assesses the importance rating of each CSS Sjwith respect to each ERP objectiveOlE. This assessment produces a decision matrix with importance ratings xlj, indicating the importance degree to which the CSS Sjcontributes to the ERP objectiveOlEif achieved effectively.Each department Diassesses the importance rating of each ERP objectiveOlEwith respect to each of its own departmental objectivesOikD. For each department Di, this assessment produces a decision matrix with importance ratingsykli, indicating the importance degree to which the ERP objectiveOlEcontributes to the departmental objectiveOikD.Each department Dialso assesses the local achievability level aijof each CSS Sjbased on its current operational settings and available resources on a scale from 1% to 100%. The local achievability level of a CSS at a department is assessed individually and independently of other CSSs by the department manager and key users within the department. As a member of the ERP project team, the department manager and key users have an explicit understanding on the availability of resources for the department to implement the ERP system. Therefore they have sufficient knowledge to assess the achievability level of the CSSs at their department. The local achievability level of a CSS can be obtained by averaging the assessment results of the manager and the key users at each department. The vector (ai1,ai2,…,aiJ)Tindicates the degree to which CSSs Sj(j=1,2,…,J) can be effectively implemented at each department Diunder the current operational settings and available resources.The senior managers of the organization assess the importance rating of each departmental objectiveOikDwith respect to each organizational objectiveOhO. For each department Di, this assessment produces a decision matrix with importance ratingszhki, indicating the importance degree to which the departmental objectiveOikDcontributes to the organizational objectiveOhO. The organization also assesses the relative importance (weights) of the organizational objectivesOhOto its strategic goal, producing the weight vectorwhO(h=1,2,…,H).Given the importance ratings xljassessed by the ERP project team, the importance ratingsykliassessed at the departmental level, and the importance ratingszhkiand the organizational objective weightswhOassessed at the organizational level, the relative weightwijSof each CSS Sjat each department Diwith respect to the organizational objectives can be obtained by using the algorithm presented in the following section.To solve the evaluation problem formulated above, we use an MAVT-based MADM method with a linear additive weighted value function for aggregating the importance ratings and the associated weights. The linear form of the additive value function or the weighted-sum method is the most used form in practice, due to its intuitive interpretation and easy computation (Jacquet-Lagreze and Siskos, 1982; Greco et al., 2010). It has been applied in widely used MADM methods such as simple additive weighting (SAW) and the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) (Saaty, 1980; Hwang and Yoon, 1981; Grošelj and Stirn, 2012). Thus, the use of the weighted-sum method for value aggregation is intuitively appealing to the decision makers in practical applications. Research results have shown that the linear form of trade-offs between attributes used in the additive value function produces extremely close approximations to complicated nonlinear forms, while maintaining far easier to use and understand (Hwang and Yoon, 1981). In addition to its comprehensibility, this additive method is well justified theoretically and empirically (Stewart, 1992, 1996; Deng and Yeh, 2006; Siskos et al., 2007).In the algorithm, the weighted-sum method is first used to aggregate the importance ratingszhkiof departmental objectivesOikDand the weightswhOof organizational objectivesOhO(where∑h=1HwhO=1)for each department Dias follows:(1)wikD=∑h=1HwhOzhki;∑k=1KiwikD=1;k=1,2,…,Ki;i=1,2,…,I.The vectorwi1D,wi2D,…,wiKiDgiven in Eq. (1) represents the relative weightswikDof departmental objectivesOikDwith respect to the organizational objectives, which are normalized to sum to 1 within each department.The weights of departmental objectives obtained by Eq. (1) are to be aggregated with the importance ratingsykliof ERP objectivesOlEin order to obtain the relative weightswilEof ERP objectives to the departmental objectives at each department Di. This is done by using the weighted-sum method as follows:(2)wilE=∑k=1KiwikDykli;∑l=1LwilE=1;k=1,2,…,Ki;i=1,2,…,I.The vectorwi1E,wi2E,…,wiLEgiven in Eq. (2) represents the relative weights of ERP objectives with respect to the organizational objectives from the perspective of department Di, which are normalized to sum to 1 within each department.The weights of the ERP objectives obtained by Eq. (2) are to be aggregated with the importance ratings xljof CSSs Sjin order to obtain their relative weightswijSat each department Di. This is done by using the weighted-sum method as follows:(3)wijS=∑l=1LwilExlj;∑j=1JwijS=1;j=1,2,…,J;i=1,2,…,I.The vectorwi1S,wi2S,…,wiJSgiven in Eq. (3) represents the relative weights of CSSs Sjimplemented at each department with respect to the organizational objectives, which are normalized to sum to 1 within each department. The relative weight of each CSS at each department indicates its relative importance to the organizational objectives, relative to other CSSs.The CSSs to be implemented usually have different weights (i.e. importance degrees) and achievability levels at individual departments, as these departments have different departmental objectives and operational settings. To manage these CSSs with limited management resources at the organizational level, implementation weights on these CSSs are to be assigned. This weight assignment is based on the CSSs’ potential implementation values for achieving the organizational objectives, thus reflecting their values and priorities in the ERP project.Based on their own interests in achieving the departmental objectives, individual departments have their own management preferences on the implementation weights of the CSSs. In order to get agreement on the implementation weighting from all departments, the implementation weights of the CSSs for the whole organization should ideally be optimized so that their total potential implementation values for the organization are maximized.The potential contribution made by a department Dito the organizational objectives for implementing a CSS Sjcan be regarded as its implementation value vij, which is obtained by multiplying the relative weightwijSof the CSS at the department by its local achievability level aij. That is, the organization will gain an implementation value vijby implementing CSS Sjat department Di.For each department Di, there will be a total department implementation value Vifor implementing all the CSSs Sj, i.e.Vi=∑j=1Jvij=∑j=1JwijSaij. To maximize Vifor meeting its own best interests, each department Diwill have its own preferred implementation weights of CSSs Sj, called the local optimal weights wij.The following optimization model is used for each department Di(i=1,2,…,I) individually to determine its own local optimal weights wijthat maximize its total department implementation value Vi:Objective(4)Maximize∑j=1Jwijaij(5)Subject toLj⩽wij⩽Uj(6)∑j=1Jwij=1;wij⩾0;j=1,2,…,J.whereDecision variableswijthe local optimal weights of CSS SjParametersaijthe local achievability level of CSS Sjgiven by each department DiLjthe smallest of relative weightswijSof CSS Sjgiven by all departments DiUjthe largest of relative weightswijSof CSS Sjgiven by all departments DiThe objective function (4) is to maximize the total value of implementing all CSSs for each department. Constraint (5) states that the local optimal weights generated must lie within the ranges of relative weights assessed by all departments. Constraint (6) states that the local optimal weights generated for each department are to be normalized to sum to 1. It also states the non-negativity condition for the local optimal weights.There are I optimization models (4)–(6) developed individually for each of the I departments Di(i=1,2,…,I). Solving each model will obtain a set of local optimal weights of the CSSs for the corresponding department. With different local achievability levels for the same CSSs, individual departments will generally have different local optimal weights for the CSSs. To set a unified implementation weighting for the organization to manage the CSSs, a single set of global optimal weights is needed. The global optimal weights of the CSSs will generate the maximum total expected implementation value for the organization, while considering the local optimal weights obtained at each department. To achieve this, the following optimization model is used:Objective(7)Maximize∑i=1I∑j=1JWjaij(8)Subject toLj∗⩽Wj⩽Uj∗(9)∑j=1JWj=1;Wj⩾0;j=1,2,…,J.whereDecision variablesWjthe global optimal weight of CSS SjParametersaijthe local achievability level of CSS Sjgiven by each department DiLj∗the smallest of local optimal weights wijof CSS Sjobtained by all departments DiUj∗the largest of local optimal weights wijof CSS Sjobtained by all departments DiThe objective function (7) is to maximize the total expected implementation value for the organization by implementing the CSSs at all departments. Constraint (8) states that the global optimal weights generated must lie within the ranges of local optimal weights obtained by all departments using Model (4)–(6). Constraint (9) states that the global optimal weights generated are to be normalized to sum to 1. It also states the non-negativity condition for the global optimal weights. Solving Model (7)–(9) will obtain a set of global optimal weights for the CSSs from the perspective of the whole organization.The set of global optimal weights gives a unified implementation weighting for the CSSs. With different operational settings and available resources, individual departments generally have different achievability levels for the same CSSs. To effectively plan and manage the implementation of the CSSs from the perspective of the whole organization, a single set of global achievability levels of the CSSs is required. Based on the global optimal weights and global achievability levels, the implementation planning and management of the CSSs will allow the organization to maximize its total implementation value. To achieve this, we develop the following optimization model:Objective(10)Maximize∑i=1I∑j=1J(WjAj-wijaij)(11)Subject toLja⩽Aj⩽Uja(12)∑j=1JAjJ=∑i=1I∑j=1Jaij/JI.whereDecision variablesAjthe global achievability level of CSS SjParametersWjthe global optimal weight of CSS Sjwijthe local optimal weight of CSS Sjat each departmentaijthe local achievability level of CSS Sjat each departmentLjathe smallest of local achievability levels aijof CSS Sjgiven by all departments DiUjathe largest of local achievability levels aijof CSS Sjgiven by all departments DiThe objective function (10) is to maximize the differences between the best total implementation planning value and the best local implementation value for all departments. The best local implementation value for each department is represented by multiplying the local optimal weights by the local achievability levels of the CSSs at the department. The best total implementation planning value for the organization is represented by multiplying the global optimal weights by the global achievability levels of the CSSs for all departments. The objective function ensures that (a) if the total implementation planning value for the organization is greater than the sum of the best local implementation values for all departments, the difference is maximized, and (b) if the total implementation planning value for the organization is less than the sum of the best implementation values for all departments, the difference is minimized.Constraint (11) states that the global achievability levels generated must lie within the ranges of the local achievability levels assessed by all departments. Constraint (12) states that the overall average planning achievability level for all CSSs must equal the overall average local achievability level assessed by all departments. Both constraints (11) and (12) ensure that the global achievability level for the implementation planning of the CSSs is reasonably set and is in line with the assessed local achievability level. With the global optimal weights Wjand the global achievability levels Ajof the CSSs Sj, the organization can then obtain a global management priority for their implementation by ranking the CSSs based on their implementation planning value.In addition to their global management priority, the CSSs can be categorized into a management matrix for their implementation planning with better use of limited management resources (Politis and Siskos, 2004; Chang et al., 2007). As shown in Fig. 2, the management matrix is divided into four zones by the mean of the global optimal weights and the mean of the global achievability levels obtained by the three optimization models (4)–(12). The matrix can be used as a strategic map for managing the implementation of the CSSs at all departments by giving appropriate management focus to each CSS.With high contribution and high achievability, the CSSs in the high attention zone (I) are regarded as crucial to the success of the ERP project. High attention from the top management and sufficient management resources should be given to these CSSs to ensure their successful implementation at all departments. Their implementation processes should be under frequent supervision of the top management, the ERP project team, and department managers. Management focus for the CSSs in the special attention zone (II) should be on their effective execution to ensure their expected achievability levels are reached, due to their high contribution and relatively low achievability. In the long term, the company may consider increasing the resources relevant for facilitating the implementation of the CSSs within this special attention zone in order to increase their achievability level. For the CSSs in the regular attention zone (IV), regular or periodical check on their progress would be sufficient. Management attention on the CSSs in the low attention zone (III) can be minimal or be focused only after all other CSSs are under sufficient management attention.To demonstrate how the evaluation and optimization models work, we conduct an empirical study on a manufacturing company which has identified a set of 18 CSSs to ensure the success of its ERP project. These CSSs are to be implemented at its five functional departments Di(i=1,2,…,5), which are resources (D1), supply chain (D2), sales and marketing (D3), finance and accounting (D4), and information technology (D5) for primarily achieving the ERP objectives. Table 1shows the company’s objectives, the departmental objectives of its five departments, and the ERP objectives in a three-level hierarchy. Table 2shows the 18 CSSs Sj(j=1,2,…,18) identified, which are grouped into five implementation dimensions: management, process, people, communication, and system. The evaluation and optimization models developed in this paper provide the company with a structured approach for effective planning and management of these CSSs from the company’s perspective while considering the management preferences of its five departments.The senior management of the company decides to use equal weights for the four company objectives, i.e.WhO=(0.25,0.25,0.25,0.25), due to the fact that current company’s strategic settings have no reason to prefer one objective to another. The senior management also assesses the importance rating of each departmental objective with respect to each company objective using the five-point scale discussed in Section 3.2. Take the human resources department (D1) as an example, the importance ratingszhk1(h=1,2,3,4;k=1,2,3,4)of the four departmental objectivesO1kD(k=1,2,3,4)are assessed as3541351151551353. According to Eq. (1), the relative weights of the four departmental objectives are calculated asw1kD=(0.235,0.275,0.294,0.196).Each department assesses the importance rating of each ERP objective with respect to its own departmental objectives. Again, take the human resources department (D1) as an example. The importance ratingsykl1(k=1,2,3,4;l=1,2,…,7)of the seven ERP objectivesOlEare assessed as5515154521111544554451355555. According to Eq. (2), the relative weights of the seven ERP objectives for D1 are calculated asw1lE=(0.155,0.138,0.117,0.155,0.105,0.142,0.188).The importance rating of each CSS Sjwith respect to each ERP objectiveOlEis assessed by the ERP project team. For example, the importance ratings of CSS S1 with respect to seven ERP objectivesOlEare assessed as x1l=(5,3,5,5,5,5,4)T. With the importance ratings xljof 18 CSSs Sjat each department and the relative weights of seven ERP objectives, the relative weightswijSof CSSs at each department are obtained by Eq. (3). In this study, for clear presentation and easy comparison with less decimal places, the value of the relative weights is multiplied by 100. The Relative weightwijScolumn of Table 3shows the result.The local achievability levels of the 18 CSSs are assessed individually and independently by the department manager and key users within each department on a scale of 1–100 percent. For instance, the achievability level of CSS S1 is assessed as 75 percent, which is the average of 70 and 80 percent given by the manager and one key user respectively at the human resources department (D1). In this manner, the achievability level of S1 at each of the five departments is assessed as ai1=(0.75,0.70,0.75,0.85,0.75)T. The Local achievability level (aij) column of Table 4shows the achievability levels of the 18 CSSs assessed within each department Di.With the relative weightwijSand local achievability level aijof the CSS Sj, Model (4)–(6) can be applied to determine the best local implementation value for each department. A set of department preferred implementation weights (i.e. local optimal weights) wijfor the CSSs at each department can be thus obtained, as shown in the Local optimal weight (wij) column of Table 3. Given the local optimal weights and local achievability levels of the CSSs, Model (7)–(9) and Model (10)–(12) can be applied to obtain the total implementation planning value of the company. A set of company’s preferred implementation weights (i.e. global optimal weights) (Wj) and a set of global achievability levels (Aj) for the CSSs can thus be obtained respectively, as shown in Table 4. Accordingly, the relative implementation planning value (Wj×Aj) and the global management priority of the CSSs can be obtained, as shown in Table 4.Table 5shows the total implementation values for each department and for the company obtained by using different pairs of implementation weights and achievability levels of the CSSs. For example, the Local value column of Table 5 shows the local implementation value for each department obtained by using one set of local optimal weights wij(i=1,2,…,5) of the CSSs given by five departments respectively. The Best local value column shows the best local implementation value for the five departments, where each department uses its own set of local optimal weights (i.e. department’s preferred weights). If the company plans and manages the implementation of the CSSs based on company’s preferred weights (i.e. the global optimal weights Wj) and global achievability levels Aj, its total implementation planning value (as shown in the Optimal planning value column) is greater than the sum of the best local implementation values for the five departments.The outcomes of applying the evaluation and optimization models provide the company with practical insights in planning and managing the implementation of the 18 CSSs. As shown in the second last column of Table 4, the global management priority indicates the relative implementation value of the 18 CSSs to the company objectives. Management attention for implementing each CSS can be given based on its relative implementation value and global management priority. For example, change management (S1) contributes most to the company objectives, thus requiring the highest management attention from the company.In addition to giving management priority to individual CSSs, the company can give appropriate management focus on the five implementation dimensions based on their total implementation value to the company objectives, as shown in the last column of Table 4. As given in Table 2, these five implementation dimensions are identified by the company for classifying and implementing the 18 CSSs. In this regard, the company should give the highest attention to the people-related CSSs (i.e. S8, S9, S10, S11 and S12) in the ERP project, as the people dimension has the highest total implementation value to the company objectives. This outcome is consistent with existing research findings (Thong et al., 1994; Willcocks and Sykes, 2000; Kumar et al., 2003; Abdinnour-Helm et al., 2003; Somers and Nelson, 2004).For effective implementation planning and management, the 18 CSSs are categorized into four management zones in terms of their global optimal weights and global achievability levels, as shown in Fig. 3. This categorization allows the company to give appropriate management resources and management focus to each CSS, as discussed in Section 5. When there is a need to set priorities for the CSSs within a particular management zone, the global management priority given in the second last column of Table 4 can be used. For example, the highest attention should be paid to change management (S1), followed by end user involvement (S9), manager commitment (S8), interdepartmental communication (S15), and data integration (S17). In addition to the management of individual CSSs, the company can draw an implementation management plan based on the five implementation dimensions.For managing the people dimension, high attention should be given to the mangers and end users, relative to other members involved in the project. For example, the leadership and management style of the mangers are to be closely reviewed to ensure their high commitments throughout the whole project (S8). The success of the ERP project depends highly on the strong, sustained, and committed leadership at the management level (Sarker and Lee, 2003; Sheu et al., 2004; Somers and Nelson, 2004). The progress of the training and education for the end users is to be frequently monitored by the company to ensure their understanding and acceptance of the ERP system (S9). As suggested by existing studies, a proper training designed for the end users will help implement and operate the ERP system effectively (Loh and Koh, 2004; Koh et al., 2009).Change management (S1) will play a more crucial role in the management dimension than other management approaches such as phase management (S2) and knowledge management (S3) for this company. An effective plan for change management is to be well prepared by the company and constantly reviewed throughout the ERP project. An effective change management will increase the perceived value of the ERP system and the intention of its usage (Aladwani, 2001; Kwahk and Lee, 2008).For the communication dimension, the top management of the company needs to put more focus on strengthening the interdepartmental communication (S15) than other communication channels such as top-down communication between top managers and end users (S13), and two-way communication between end users and system developers (S14). Periodical reports are to be issued to all key users in each department with up-to-date ERP implementation information. Open and effective interdepartmental communications will help increase the transparency of the ERP implementation process and build consensus among all users (Somers and Nelson, 2004; Amoako-Gyampah, 2004).For the CSSs in the system dimension, data integration and conversion (S17) needs more supervision than upgrading the technical infrastructure (S16) and providing ongoing technical support (S18). The data conversion is an integral task during the system implementation and its accuracy is critical for the effectiveness of the ERP system (Goodhue et al., 1992; Al-Mashari et al., 2003; Wu et al., 2007).All the CSSs (S5, S6 and S7) for the process dimension are in the special attention zone, which are important but relatively difficult to achieve. The ERP project involves changing the business processes of the company, which means rethinking and redesigning core business processes to achieve dramatic improvements (Davenport and Short, 1990; Hammer and Champy, 1993; Earl and Khan, 1994; Motwani et al., 2002). The difficulty of performing the process-related CSSs is thus dependent on the degree of the process change. When additional resources become available, the company can consider adding extra resources to increase the achievability level of the CSSs in the process dimension for enhancing their contribution to the company’s business processes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
