@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Operational research models applied to the fresh fruit supply chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First review on OR methods in fresh fruit supply chain.Review complemented with papers of other similar supply chains.Use of different criteria to classify the revised papers.Future perspective of OR developments in this field of application.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fruit operations research,Supply chain fresh fruit,Agricultural planning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The fresh fruit supply chain is characterized by long supply lead times combined with significant supply and demand uncertainties, and relatively thin margins. These challenges generate a need for management efficiency and the use of modern decision technology tools. We review some of the literature on operational research models applied to the fresh fruit supply chain. It is an attempt to gain a better understanding of the OR methods used in the revised papers apparently independent and oriented towards problem solving rather than theory developing. We conclude by outlining what we see as some of the significant new problems facing the industry like the lack of holistic approaches for the design and management of fresh FSC. Finally, some future research directions are indicated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the recent years the fresh fruit sector has grown significantly fueled by an increasing demand of customers concerned in healthier diets, food quality requirements and all year around availability of fruit (Reynolds, Buckley, Weinstein, & Boland, 2014). Fresh fruit is defined by the Food Agricultural Organization's (FAO, 2014) as: the portion of a plant housing seeds commonly eaten as dessert (i.e. tomatoes are considered vegetable). The previous definition is important for this review to avoid the inconsistencies in segmenting fruits, flowers and vegetables reported by Shukla and Jharkharia (2013). Fresh fruits are consumed raw, whether whole or prepared. Prepared refers to minimally processed such as peeling, slicing or shredding, having not undergone any treatment (chemical, physical or biological) to ensure preservation other than chilling. According to FAOStat (2012) the fresh fruit production has been increasing worldwide by 20 percent between 2003 and 2012. It is observed a notable trading activity during the same period, doubling the overall imports, being the European Union (EU) who dominates the import/export market. Other aspects affecting such development are the industrialization of the production process, governmental food safety regulations and price variability. The industrialization refers to the use of mechanical means, the adoption of good agricultural practices and the automatization of sorting, selecting and packaging fruits including sometimes some minor minimal processing tasks. As a consequence of the globalization, competitors, regulations and the increasing demand for high quality, value-added and customized products, the fresh fruit sector tends to be specialized and integrated vertically in Fruit Supply Chains (FSC) to become more competitive and dynamic. The fast handling and seasonable attributes of fruits in relation to high volatility of supply and demand make the storage a critical activity to manage robust FSC. In addition, fresh fruits' quality is related with parameters like sweetness, crunchiness and strength, connected in some way with the optimal ripeness of the fruit. Hence, special considerations to preserve freshness and product quality require more limited delivery deadlines, more controlled storage conditions, better quality of end-products and minimize losses due to deterioration (Dabbene, Gay, & Sacco, 2008; Verdouw, Beulens, Trienekens, & Wolfert, 2010), making the underlying supply chain more complex and harder to manage than other supply chains (Ahumada & Villalobos, 2009). These challenges generate a need for management efficiency and the use of modern decision technology tools (Akkerman, Farahani, & Grunow, 2010; Lowe & Preckel, 2004). As FSC comprise all the activities to procure, produce and distribute fruits to the end customers, production, transport and distribution planning needs to be integrated in order to be optimized simultaneously (Shen, 2007; Mula, Peidro, Díaz-Madroñero, & Vicens, 2010).The present review aims at determining current state of the art in operational research models applied to the fresh FSC in an attempt to gain a better understanding of the mathematical modeling methods used in these applications. Future trends are pointed out to provide a basis for future research. Hence, we intend to do that by (1) reviewing the literature on planning models for fresh FSC, (2) classifying the literature by different criteria (3) considering other planning models of interest to fresh FSC and (4) outlining the fresh FSC perspectives in the future. To achieve this, we did an extensive research of scientific papers including optimization or operational research (OR) models for fresh fruit regardless the modeling approach and covering all or part of the FSC.In view of the proposed classification of the literature done by Mula et al. (2010) and Ahumada and Villalobos (2009), a synthesis of both has been performed including additional criteria used to organize and present this review. In this sense, as shown in Fig. 1, we have proposed different taxonomies to classify the revised papers and giving a multidimensional approach of each one. So that, the proposed taxonomy in this paper considers the following six classification criteria:Decision level: Regarding the scope of decisions there are three levels: strategic, tactical or operational corresponding to long, medium and short time horizon respectively. Ahumada and Villalobos (2009) identified activities such as financial planning and network design as strategic; the harvest planning, crop selection and scheduling and labor as tactical; and activities such as production scheduling, transportation planning and storage as operational. Such a classification might become a bit difficult when dealing with activities moving between strategic and tactical decisions, or between tactical and operational (Shukla & Jharkharia, 2013; Farahani, Rezapour, Drezner, & Fallah, 2014).Analytical modeling approach: Considering the mathematical methods or mathematical relationships used to model and solve the problem within the context of fresh FSC.Purpose: Models are classified based on the type of decision variables related to different activities: sowing, production, harvesting, distribution or inventory. The nature of the objective function (revenue, profit, cost or other function) to optimize (maximize or minimize) and whether the objective involves one or more criteria are also revised.Practical application: The existence of a real problem inspiring the paper or a case study is important to value the applicability and interest of the model beyond the theoretical approach. Furthermore, we register other relevant information such as the type of fruit and the country of origin where the case study was developed.Novelty:This aspect is interesting to highlight the author's contribution and originality of the paper to the fresh FSC with respect to contemporary literature, i.e. at the moment the revised paper has been published.Research segmentation by journal:The scope of the journals where revised papers are published may be useful to understand the motivation of the research and the multidisciplinary approach.Works done in non-perishable, processed and long shelf life fruit like canned, dried or transformed in juice or wine overlapping part of the fresh FSC have been discussed apart in this review. The decisional problems regarding fresh FSC for canning or processing plants or wineries are similar to human consumption of fresh fruit as all of them are consumers.A comprehensive search of related research papers from last decades was applied to produce a synthesis of peer-reviewed literature. We searched papers published in international peer-reviewed journals or books from the main electronic bibliographical sources (Scopus, Web of Science) using different keywords. We have used the following keywords to do the search: “Fresh fruit” and “Supply chain” and “Optimisation” or “Operational Research” or “Operations Research”. The outcome depended on which fields are performed on the search. For instance, only 9 papers were found in Scopus searching the proposed keywords within the Title, Abstract or Keyword's list of the paper. However, 127 were found if the keywords appeared in whatever part of a paper. This keywords' set was difficult to be fixed because always there were listed many irrelevant papers. In the end, an individual paper by paper examination was necessary to make a final decision. Other keywords like “harvesting” or “scheduling” or “management” were also used to catch susceptible papers of being included. From the collected material, we filtered the papers according to the following rules: (i) the papers should be written in English language, (ii) they include decision variables modeling the production planning or logistics of fresh FSC, (iii) the papers satisfying the previous rule but dealing with other perishable agricultural product like vegetables instead of fruit were also selected but processed apart. From the second rule, we included some articles dealing with the production planning of fresh fruit regardless they are not for fresh consumption. This is the case, for example, in the paper by Ferrer, MacCawley, Maturana, Toloza, and Vera (2007), in which the authors present a scheduling model for grape harvesting for wine production. The third rule enabled us to consider several papers in the field of perishable products. Double checking with keywords in the Title, Abstract or Keyword's list was done arising few references more. We use back-tracking to find earlier relevant sources (e.g. Willis & Halon, 1976), and forward-tracking in Web of Science to find literature that are referring to the central sources. We also looked for recent surveys in related domains in order to find additional sources excluding conference papers.We can classify the revised papers in two categories. The first category gathers papers dealing with Fresh FSC or one fruit or family of fruits. In these papers, fruit is not processed, just packaged and delivered to retailers for marketing. The second category regroups papers either sharing or overlapping part of the FSC, or in neighboring domains or perishable products with similar problems to the FSC (e.g. vegetables). Examples of that would be Munhoz and Morabito (2001) who illustrate problems related with the processing of juicy fruits, or Ahumada and Villalobos, 2011a, 2011b) who show similar problems in the tomato industry.The organization of this paper is as follows: in the next section we introduce some background about the fresh FSC, decision levels and some examples. In Section 3 we present supply chain models that have been developed for fresh fruit, and we classify them according to the different criteria presented in Fig. 1. Later on, in Section 4, we present some related models to fresh FSCs and in Section 5 we outline a view of OR in FSCs. In the last section we provide a summary of the review and conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have revised operational research models to solve decision problems related to fresh FSCs. It is an attempt to gain a better understanding of the OR methods used in the revised papers apparently independent and oriented towards problem solving rather than theory developing. Although there are some reviews done by previous researchers regarding ASCs, there is no review focused on fresh FSCs. We have stated the rapid growth and technification of the sector in the last years to satisfy the increasing demand, regulations and competiveness present in the sector. As a consequence, the number of papers published in this last years has been growing. Despite this, a few papers are focused on SCs structures and there is a lack of holistic approaches for the design and management of fresh FSC.Among the papers revised, most of them were focused on tactical and operational decisions and less considered strategic decisions. In particular, the problems attracting more attention were transport, routing, planning and allocation problems involving the production and distribution stages. Regarding modeling techniques and mathematical methods, linear programming, integer or mixed integer are the most dominant methods. Other techniques are not so used and it is a consequence of the novelty of the proposals or the solvers available. Although the common objective of the papers were the maximization of the benefit, only cost function was described in detail and income was calculated from averaged prices considering roughly uncertainty in sale prices over time. Most of the papers were based in real cases and became real applications tailored to particularities of specific fresh FSCs.Finally, we also extend and reinforce the work done by previous authors in regard to the perspective of OR in agri-fruit industry pointing out new opportunities, for instance, the challenge of dealing with organic fruit production, or proposing sustainable fresh FSCs, climate adaptation, food security and seasonability's issues, and at methodological level, the integration of complementary methods such as optimization and simulation, or changing the perspective from a monocriterion to a multicriteria approach related to multi-echelon FSC.