@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Designing a sustainable closed-loop supply chain network based on triple bottom line approach: A comparison of metaheuristics hybridization techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a closed-loop supply chain network with six echelons.The triple bottom lines of sustainability are modeled as three distinct objectives.We compare our three proposed algorithms with three benchmark algorithms.The nested method generates better Pareto-optimal solutions but needs more time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Multi-objective programming,Metaheuristics,Network design,Environmental management,Corporate social responsibility,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, there is a growing concern about the environmental and social footprint of business operations. While most of the papers in the field of supply chain network design focus on economic performance, recently, some studies have considered environmental dimensions.However, there still exists a gap in quantitatively modeling social impacts together with environmental and economic impacts. In this study, this gap is covered by simultaneously considering the three pillars of sustainability in the network design problem. A mixed integer programming model is developed for this multi-objective closed-loop supply chain network problem. In order to solve this NP-hard problem, three novel hybrid metaheuristic methods are developed which are based on adapted imperialist competitive algorithms and variable neighborhood search. To test the efficiency and effectiveness of these algorithms, they are compared not only with each other but also with other strong algorithms. The results indicate that the nested approach achieves better solutions compared with the others. Finally, a case study for a glass industry is used to demonstrate the applicability of the approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supply Chain Network Design (SCND) as a strategic decision plays the main role in the performance of a supply chain. SCND contains the determination of locations, numbers and capacities of network facilities as well as the material flow through the network. The configuration of the logistics network cannot be changed in short term as its change is very costly and time-consuming. SCND is also a crucially important decision, as it constrains the subsequent tactical and operational decisions.While for many years, minimizing the total cost or maximizing the profit was the main objective of supply chains, nowadays, they are responsible for the environmental impacts of their products and operations, the health and safety of their employees and the whole society. In this way, activists, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and media are demanding the firms to take the responsibility of not only their own actions but also other partnersin the supply chains. Moreover, governments have enacted legislations in favor of the environment such as regulations for greenhouse gases (GHGs) reduction in European Union, Australia and Canada.All in all, supply chains are shifting toward Sustainable Supply Chain Management (SSCM) with various motivations such as gaining public image (Fombrun, 2005), satisfying activists’ requirements (Spar & La Mure, 2003), and maintaining customers for long term (Bhattacharya & Sen, 2004). Sustainable Supply Chain Management (SSCM) is defined as the consideration of environmental and social impacts of supply chain operations as well as its economic performance in the management of information, material and capital flow (Seuring & Müller, 2008). Accordingly, there is a gap in the previously published papers in the area of logistics network design. These papers lack in the simultaneous consideration of triple bottom lines of sustainability which can be attributed to the complexity of modeling social impacts and to some extent environmental aspects.Based on the aforementioned considerations,this paper addresses the issue of multi-objective, multi-echelon logistics network design including suppliers, plants, distribution centers, retailers, customer zones, collection/inspection centers and recycling. This model can be distinguished from the previous studies in the following directions. Firstly, the social dimension of sustainability is quantified and embedded as a distinct objective besides total costs and environmental impacts. Secondly, the forward and reverse logistics are integrated in a general Closed Loop Supply Chain (CLSC) model. Finally, it should be noted that logistics network design is an NP-hard problem (Eckert & Gottlieb, 2002; Jo, Li, & Gen, 2007; Syarif, Yun, & Gen, 2002). Thus, we have developed and compared three novel metaheuristics called nested, hybrid, and two-phase to find Pareto-optimal solutions.The paper is organized as follows. Relevant previous researches are reviewed in Section 2. In Section 3, the problem is described in detail. In Section 4, the optimization technique and characteristics of metaheuristics are explained, respectively. Experimental evaluations are conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms against each other in terms of different criteria in Section 5. Section 6 is devoted to the case study. Finally, Section 7 presents the main conclusions and future lines of research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the inherent multi-dimensionality of sustainability was captured by proposing a multi-objective optimization model for a general closed-loop supply chain network with six echelons. The objectives were (1) minimization of total costs, (2) minimization of total environmental impacts, and (3) maximization of social benefits. The model consists of two levels: strategic and operational. To optimize this complex problem, three proposed approaches, constructed on two popular metaheuristics (adapted imperialist competitive algorithm (AICA) and Variable neighborhood search algorithm (VNS)) are: (1) HIV benefits from hybridizing AICA and VNS, (2) TIV by which the problem is optimized in two phases: strategic and operational, and (3) NIV in which the second phase algorithm, VNS, is placed as a nested loop in the first phase, ICA. In order to test the validity of the proposed algorithm, we generated some test problems. The performance and reliability of the proposed algorithms were evaluated in comparison with available benchmark algorithms (i.e. HGS, TST and NGS). For a fair comparison, all the algorithms’ parameters were estimated by response surface method (RSM) and MODM approach based on four different comparison metrics were proposed to validate the efficiency of the algorithms. The results obtained by the NIV algorithm almost dominate the results of other approaches; however, it needs more computational time.A direct goal for further research is to assess the performance of the proposed method in other optimization problems. In addition, it can be engaging to model the inherent uncertainty of real cases. Another extension could be the inclusion of more real-life constraints like the cross-docking operations and vehicle routing practices which can reduce the transportation total cost by using the same facility in forward and reverse logistics and can also reduce the unused capacity of vehicles. Finally, a periodic timeline can be considered for the problem to analyze the decisions related to time such as backlogging, forecasting, and ordering.