@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The impact of information sharing, random yield, correlation, and lead times in closed loop supply chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Advance notice, lead times, random yield and correlation are considered.The production variance could increase as the result of the advance notice scheme.Longer remanufacturing lead times could reduce inventory variance.Increasing the returns and the yields could result in lower performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Closed loop supply chain,Information sharing,Random yield,Lead time,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We investigate the impact of advance notice of product returns on the performance of a decentralised closed loop supply chain. The market demands and the product returns are stochastic and are correlated with each other. The returned products are converted into “as-good-as-new” products and used, together with new products, to satisfy the market demand. The remanufacturing process takes time and is subject to a random yield. We investigate the benefit of the manufacturer obtaining advance notice of product returns from the remanufacturer. We demonstrate that lead times, random yields and the parameters describing the returns play a significant role in the benefit of the advance notice scheme. Our mathematical results offer insights into the benefits of lead time reduction and the adoption of information sharing schemes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to growing concerns with environmental issues, collection and recycling systems for post-consumer products have been developed in many countries. Return rates for polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles, for example, are increasing year by year in many countries. The 2012 rates in Europe, Japan and the USA are 52 percent (Petcore, 2013), 90.4 percent (CPBR, 2014) and 30.8 percent (Napcore, 2013), respectively. At the same time, many companies have been developing new remanufacturing processes. Suntory, one of the largest food and beverage companies in Japan, has developed bottle-to-bottle mechanical recycling technology that enables the company to produce PET bottles solely from reused resin (Suntory, 2013).This world-wide environmental movement is mainly driven by the sustainability ethic (Welle, 2011), but the impact of the recycling system on the dynamics of the supply chain is not well understood.Akçalı and Çetinkaya (2011) argue closed loop supply chains (CLSCs) are generally acknowledged to be more complex than traditional supply chains due to a number of factors: Both the demands and the product returns must be forecasted and incorporated into replenishment decisions. The demand and return may be correlated to each other. Two different lead times are present, the manufacturing lead time and the remanufacturing lead time. In many practical situations, the returned products will also be variable in quality, resulting in a remanufacturing process with a random yield.It is often advocated that to improve supply chain performance, information should be shared between players. The value of such information sharing in traditional supply chains is well recognized (see Gavirneni, Kapuscinski & Tayur, 1999; Lee, So & Tang, 2000). However, there is little research that addresses information sharing in CLSCs.This research investigates the impact of the remanufacturer providing advance notice of the product returns on the performance of the manufacturer in a decentralised CLSC. We focus on the stochastic and dynamic performance of the supply chain. The lead times, the degree of correlation between the demand and the product returns, and the random yield of the remanufacturing process are all incorporated into a mathematical model to investigate the benefit of advance notice via a variance analysis. With a constant lead time, the returns are converted into “as-good-as-new” products that are used alongside newly manufactured items to satisfy market demand. To cope with the uncertainty in demand and returns the manufacturer must forecast them both. However, the returns are already known to the external remanufacturer and this information could be shared in an advance notice scheme. We demonstrate that both the remanufacturing and the manufacturing lead times, the remanufacturing yield, the parameters of the return process, and the advanced notice scheme can have a significant impact on the manufacturer's performance.As we progressed through our study we became aware that certain knowledge from our understanding of traditional supply chains does not hold true for CLSC. For example, the rule-of-thumb that “reducing lead time improves the dynamic performance of a traditional supply chain” does not always hold true in our CLSC. We were also surprised to learn that higher returns can sometimes reduce supply chain performance.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review. Section 3 defines our CLSC model. Section 4 deduces managerial properties from an analysis of the production quantities and inventory levels. Section 5 presents insights from a numerical exploration. Section 6 concludes. Some proofs are provided in the appendices, and summarises some numerical experiments for verification.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Using a mathematical model and a numerical study, we have investigated the benefit of an advance notice scheme and its dependence on lead times, random yield and correlation between demand and returns. We have shown that sharing return and yield information may be beneficial to the manufacturer. In certain scenarios, however, the production variance could increase, although the net stock variance decreases as the result of the advance notice scheme. We found that longer remanufacturing lead times Trmay reduce inventory variance. This is a rediscovery and mathematical validation of the lead time paradox first identified by van der Laan, Salomon, Dekker and van Wassenhove (1999) and then investigated by Inderfurth and van der Laan (2001). Our model considers a somewhat different setting to these previous studies, suggesting that the lead time paradox may be quite common in CLSCs. We have also shown that increasing the returns and the yields could have a negative impact on the system. This might be an interesting topic for future research.Our findings yield the following general guidelines for managers. Advance notice of returns allows tighter control of inventories, especially when two lead times are equal and both are minimised. CLSCs with advance notice and two identical and minimised lead times not only reduce inventory variance but also can avoid the lead time paradox and the fundamental trade-off between the volume of return and dynamic supply chain performance.Finally, research limitations should be mentioned. The findings shown in the research may not be applicable to other settings. For example, we considered a decentralised, push system. In a centralised system, an inventory of remanufacturable products at remanufacturer could be held to allow the remanufacturer to exploit a pull policy in order to achieve a more efficient supply chain. This is a different scenario that requires a different model and may result in different findings.