@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Heterogeneous beliefs, regret, and uncertainty: The role of speculation in energy price dynamics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a model where fundamental and chartist traders co-exist and are subject to uncertainty.We investigate the impact of financialization on energy markets during both normal times and extreme fluctuations.Energy prices are governed by fundamental and chartist agents neutral to uncertainty during normal times.Irrational chartist investors averse to uncertainty are more important during periods of extreme movements.The recent surge in energy prices is viewed as the consequence of irrational exuberance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Energy forward prices,Financialization,Heterogeneous agents,Uncertainty aversion,Regret,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes to investigate the impact of financialization on energy markets (oil, gas, coal, and electricity European forward prices) during both normal times and periods of extreme fluctuation by using an original behavioral and emotional approach. With this aim, we propose a new theoretical and empirical framework based on a heterogeneous agents model in which fundamentalists and chartists co-exist and are subject to regret and uncertainty. We find significant evidence that energy markets are composed of heterogeneous traders who behave differently depending on the intensity of the price fluctuations and the uncertainty context. In particular, energy prices are governed primarily by fundamental and chartist agents that are neutral to uncertainty during normal times, whereas these prices face irrational chartist investors averse to uncertainty during periods of extreme fluctuations. In this context, the recent surge in energy prices can be viewed as the consequence of irrational exuberance. Our new theoretical model is suitable for modeling energy price dynamics and outperforms both the random walk and the ARMA model in out-of-sample predictive ability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The recent and unprecedented surge observed in energy prices, particularly in the price of crude oil, from 2003 to 2008 has given rise to heated public and academic debates about the true nature of these shocks. Due to the potential impact of these huge movements on most economies (Edelstein & Kilian, 2007; Hamilton, 2003; Kilian, 2008, among others), the effectiveness of economic policies strongly depends on the identification of the major causes of energy price movements. Since Greenspan’s (2004) intervention regarding the existence of speculators in the oil market, a popular view of the origins of the price surge has been that these movements cannot be attributed to economic fundamentals (such as changes in the conditions of supply and demand) but were caused by the increasing financialization of commodities. This financialization should, in turn, cause volatility clustering phenomena, extreme movements, higher comovements between oil, financial assets, and commodity prices, and an increased impact of financial investors’ decisions (such as hedge funds and swap dealers). In the context of market deregulation where certain market players may now have the ability to exert market power, the question of the influence of financial investors on energy prices is of primary importance from both economic and political points of view. Economically, the role of speculation in energy markets raises the question of the trade-off between private and public interests because financialization is often defined as being beneficial from the private perspective without any beneficial considerations from a social planner’s point of view. Politically, the debate is even more relevant because it lends credibility to the regulation of the markets for commodity derivatives in the same way that the G20 governments try to regulate financial markets by limiting speculative behavior.11In 2010, the U.S. government initiated the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for commodity markets to limit speculative behavior by mandating the centralized clearing of OTC standard contracts and automation of the Securities and Exchange Commission.Coupled with the concern over the energy security supply, the potential financialization of commodity markets is also of primary importance for operational and management issues in the energy industry because key players now face uncertainty rather than deterministic dynamics in the decision-making process due to extreme price movements (see Zhuang & Gabriel, 2008; Gabriel, Zhuang, & Egging, 2009; Gabrel, Murat, & Thiele, 2014).Therefore, there has been a renewal of interest in the academic literature on this topic, although no clear-cut conclusion has emerged. Indeed, the question of the role of speculation in commodity markets is not trivial; identifying and quantifying this phenomenon is a difficult task because trader positions are relatively opaque. As we will see in Section 2, some studies have defined the phenomenon as the consequence of increased comovements between markets, whereas others consider markets composed of different shocks that affect price dynamics. These approaches mainly assume that the market is efficient in the sense that investors are rational and representative, and the oil price fully reflects all the available information. However, oil market efficiency was rejected by Gjølberg (1985) and by Moosa and Al-Loughani (1994). Moreover, according to Kirman (1992), aggregation arguments under rational behavior are insufficient to reduce markets to a single representative agent. Indeed, following Townsend (1983) and Singleton (1987), it seems reasonable to assume heterogeneous expectations, and it appears optimal for each agent to forecast the forecasts of others. Fundamentals are important, but a variety of different models may be relevant to explaining behavior in energy markets. For instance, as discussed by Gabriel et al. (2009), investors can exert both strategic and hedging behavior in the market. The purpose of this paper is to provide new theoretical elements to understand who and what drive the markets. Another important limitation in the existing literature is that it has been based on an analysis of risk as opposed to uncertainty.22In the portfolio management literature, three popular definitions of risk exist: (i) variance (Crama & Schyns, 2003; Huang, 2007; Leung, Daouk, & Chen, 2001); (ii) semivariance (Huang, 2008); and (iii) Value-at-Risk (Castellacci & Siclari, 2003).Previous studies have supposed that agents do not allow for any uncertainty in their models, their priors, or the future evolution of prices, although allowing endogenous uncertainty could be relevant to account for some of the “anomalies” and stylized facts of markets. As discussed by Gabrel et al. (2014), uncertainty is also of primary importance in the optimization problem in energy systems given the framework of the energy industry. Indeed, the fossil market industry is subject to a number of uncertainties, such as unstable prices, fluctuations in energy production, and unpredictable demand for refined products that may be important to account for in management decisions. For the electricity market, uncertainty is even more important given the non-storability of energy produced.Previous analyses have thus evolved in a constrained world where agents are rational and where uncertainty does not exist. To deal with these limitations, we propose a new theoretical and empirical framework to investigate what drives energy price fluctuations. Our theoretical model overcomes the restrictive assumption of rationality by allowing for the possibility that heterogeneous expectations could be the cause of recent price movements. We propose to extend the traditional heterogeneous agent model (HAM) of Brock and Hommes (1997) in the same way as Kozhan and Salmon (2009) to account for uncertainty in the markets. We therefore assume that investors are faced with forming energy price expectations and consider the worst outcome within the set of different models in some interval, where the size of the interval is a subjective choice of the agents, which allows us to capture different degrees of uncertainty aversion. In traditional HAM, agents are supposed to switch between different strategies characterizing heterogeneous specifications according to a cognitive learning process. We propose to extend this rule to a more realistic one that accounts for both cognitive and emotional dimensions using a regret criterion à la (Bell, 1982; Loomes & Sugden, 1982). We also estimate our model empirically using nonlinear least squares (NLS) methods to investigate whether heterogeneous expectations and uncertainty exist in the markets and can lead to strong fluctuations in energy prices. The estimations are performed for both normal times and periods of extreme movements33Normal times are approximated by price movements in the mean of the distribution, whereas extreme fluctuation periods are those in the quantiles.to see whether the behavior of prices depends on the intensity of the markets. The theoretical model is then evaluated in terms of predictive ability and compared with a random walk (RW) and an ARMA model. To the best of our knowledge, investigating the relative impact of financialization on energy price fluctuations through behavioral and emotional aspects under uncertainty during normal and extreme situations has not previously been done. Our main results reveal that although previous studies fail to find evidence of market exuberance during the recent period, a less restrictive framework incorporating heterogeneous interactions and uncertainty aversion allows us to disentangle the existence of irrational behaviors in energy price dynamics during extreme movements.The present paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a review of the literature on the role of speculation in energy markets as well as its managerial implications. Section 3 describes our theoretical framework, and Section 4 outlines the specification and estimation procedure of the model. Section 5 contains in-sample and out-of-sample estimation results, and Section 6 concludes the paper.This section reviews the literature related to the impact of speculation on energy markets, specifically oil future prices. We discuss the relative conceptualization of “commodity speculation” and how it can impact price dynamics. We identify four strands in this literature.In this heated debate about the financialization of the oil market and, more generally, of commodity markets, the key question is how to define what we call “commodity speculation”. According to Kilian and Murphy (2014), a general definition of speculation in the oil market refers to a situation of “anyone buying crude oil not for current consumption, but for future use.” Following this definition, speculative investors can have two options: buying physical oil now and storing it to accumulate oil inventories or buying crude oil futures contracts. Therefore, according to Alquist and Kilian (2010) analysis, speculation in one of these markets will be necessarily reflected in speculation in other markets. In this sense, speculation would not be economically “irrational” because it seems reasonable that oil producers, considered physical traders, would stock up on crude oil to smooth the production of refined products. Speculation would be essential for the oil market to function because it provides liquidity and assists the price discovery process. However, speculation in the public debate has a negative connotation because it is often viewed as an excessive phenomenon. This excessive phenomenon would be the consequence of private interests, increasing price movements and affecting social welfare. Determining excessive speculative behavior is a difficult task because it does not necessarily come from the positions taken by traders. Commercial traders generally act as hedgers to protect their physical interests, whereas noncommercial traders are often considered speculators. However, as documented by Büyüksahin and Harris (2011), we can have situations where commercial investors take a speculative position in the sense that they take a stance on the commodity price without hedging it in the futures market.The debate about the intrinsic nature of energy price movements has several implications. Together with the economic and political issues of extreme price fluctuations, price behaviors may have important managerial consequences in the energy industry.44Thanks to an anonymous referee for mentioning this point.The oil and gas industries have become increasingly heavy users of operational research to support the management of refinery operations and productions, whereas electricity companies must manage generator operations and a supply chain given the non-storability of energy produced. Price fluctuations and the potential exuberance of energy markets may therefore create important uncertainty for industries that it is important to apprehend in the context of energy market liberalization. Thus, understanding the financialization of commodities and the accompanying energy price formation is of primary importance for operational research. Some portfolio management implications can also emerge given the growing relationship between commodity and equity markets.55See Andriosopoulos and Nomikos (2014).Since 2003, without explicit mention of financialization, there has been clear evidence of an increased proportion of financial investors in the oil futures market (see Alquist & Kilian, 2010; Tang & Xiong, 2011; among others). The first strand of literature on this topic focuses on comovements between commodity prices, mainly oil prices, and stock markets as well as volatility spillover effects. Filis, Degiannakis, and Floros (2011) analyze time-varying correlations between oil prices and stock markets by differentiating between oil-importing (US, Germany, and the Netherlands) and oil-exporting (Canada, Mexico, and Brazil) countries. They find that the conditional variances of oil and stock prices do not differ for each group. Silvennoinen and Thorp (2013) and Creti, Joëts, and Mignon (2013) show that conditional correlations between commodity returns and stock indexes have increased recently, especially in periods of high volatility. Büyüksahin and Robe (2014) further document that the increase in price comovements is related to the entry of hedge funds into both markets. Different general conclusions can emerge from these studies. Indeed, some studies argue that increased comovements between markets lead to decreased potential diversification (Silvennoinen & Thorp, 2013), whereas others suggest that these comovements between prices develop transmissions from a wide range of commodity and financial markets (Tang & Xiong, 2011). However, this literature does not imply that the recent surge in commodity prices was caused by “commodity speculators”.Other studies have focused on the question of whether index fund positions can create higher commodity returns. Master (2010), and Singleton (2012), using highly aggregated Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) data on the positions of index funds, conclude that financial investments affect crude oil returns. However, Büyüksahin and Robe (2014) show that heavily aggregated data are not suitable for studying the impact of speculation. By considering specific categories of traders (such as hedge funds and swap dealers), Büyüksahin and Harris (2011) investigate the impact of positions in oil futures prices and volatility. They find a relevant causality from market conditions to speculators as well as the fact that speculators provide liquidity to the market.A third strand of the literature is concerned with structural economic models of oil markets. Kilian and Murphy (2014) are among the first to quantify the effect of speculative demand shocks on the real price of oil. In the same line as Kilian (2009); Kilian and Murphy (2012), and Baumeister and Peersman (2013), they use structural vector autoregressive (VAR) models to disentangle demand and supply shocks in oil markets. They consider four structural shocks: (i) an unanticipated disruption in the flow of supply of oil, (ii) an unanticipated increase in the flow of the demand of oil associated with an unexpected change in the business cycle, (iii) a positive speculative demand shock, and (iv) a residual oil demand shock.66For more details, see Kilian and Murphy (2012).Using data back to 1973, the model finds no evidence for speculation having caused the price surge, price changes having been caused by fundamental characteristics, such as supply and demand conditions. More recently, Juvenal and Petrella (2015) propose extending Kilian and Murphy’s model by introducing an additional shock (viz., speculation by oil producers for the former and a ‘non-fundamental’ financial speculation shock for the latter) and find evidence of an impact of financial speculation on oil markets.All of the previously mentioned studies are based on the representative agent paradigm and assume intuitively that agents in commodity markets are fully rational. It appears that results about the impact of speculation regarding the recent energy price surge are not so clear. Some of them attest to the existence of “commodity speculation” , whereas others reject this explanation. Since the work of Simon (1957), the representative agent assumption seems to be too restrictive in the sense that there is only one way of behaving rationally but an infinite number of ways of behaving boundedly rationally. A possible cause of the large price volatility of commodity markets could be the existence of heterogeneous speculators in the markets. Originally focusing on financial and exchange rate markets, this literature turned to commodity markets to investigate potential anomalies in price fluctuations. He and Westerhoff (2005) and Reitz and Westerhoff (2007) are among the first to introduce models with heterogeneous agents for commodity markets and to find significant evidence of trader heterogeneity and switching behavior in price fluctuations.77Quérou and Tidball (2010) have used heterogeneous agents models in operational research and natural management literature.More recently, Ellen and Zwinkels (2010) rely on the HAM of Brock and Hommes (1997) to study the impact of heterogeneous traders in Brent and WTI crude oil prices. They find that oil prices are mainly governed by fundamental factors (such as political and economic issues), but they also find that speculators are present in the markets and usually have destabilizing effects on the price of oil. These studies are mainly concerned with spot prices, for which the oil companies are essentially the same. More importantly, they cannot drive up the price without increasing inventories (unless the elasticity of demand is literally zero).The literature explaining the potential reasons for the recent commodity price surge is not in accordance, so we cannot fully understand what causes these markets to be so volatile. It seems clear that the dynamics of commodities, especially of energy prices, has increased significantly since 2003, and it appears relevant that the properties of these prices tend to be close to those of traditional financial assets (such as volatility clustering and autocorrelation, to name a few).88See Joëts (2014).What really causes these specific types of behavior?Our paper proposes to investigate these specific characteristics by considering a less restrictive approach than previous methodologies. Because quantifying the problem of excessive speculation is not trivial, we will not discuss the speculative phenomenon in its economic sense but rather will attempt to understand whether “irrational” expectations99In “irrational” , we include, for example, naïve behavior and noisy investors.can cause abnormal fluctuations in the markets. More formally, we propose relaxing the rational agent paradigm by considering a model with heterogeneous beliefs (Brock & Hommes, 1997) where agents are allowed to switch between “rational” and “irrational” behavior depending on an emotional regret process. Moreover, we introduce a new circumstance in which energy prices can experience strong fluctuations. Indeed, as suggested by Knight (1921) and Keynes (1921), the reason why the standard approach, based on expected utility theory, fails to explain “abnormal” behavior may be because agents in the markets are facing uncertainty rather than risk.1010According to Bewley (2002), the distinction between risk and uncertainty is defined by the fact that a random variable is risky if its probability distribution is known but uncertain if its distribution is unknown.In our context, investors may simply face uncertainty when they have no prior information about their future energy price expectations. Uncertainty-averse agents are therefore supposed to interact with uncertainty-neutral ones, which can cause even more significant energy price movements. The purpose of this paper is therefore to investigate theoretically and empirically the proportion of each trader in energy markets (oil, gas, coal, and electricity) during both normal times and periods of extreme fluctuations to see whether the weight of the irrational agents can exceed that of the rational ones and lead to excessive energy price movements (i.e., which do not reflect fundamentals of each market).In this section, we develop a simple and stylized HAM that will be used to evaluate the effect of heterogeneous speculators on energy prices. The model is based on the model introduced by Brock and Hommes (1997) and extended by Kozhan and Salmon (2009). We propose a new specification of the HAM by integrating Bell (1982) and Loomes and Sugden (1982) regret approaches, where agents are allowed to switch between strategies through an emotional learning process.The dynamics of prices can be expressed by(1)Δpt(i)=ζ+κΔDt(i)+ɛt,whereΔpt(i)denotes the dynamics of the prices of energy i between t andt−1,with i indicating oil, gas, coal, or electricity.ΔDt(i)is the variation of the aggregate demand function, and εtis an error termɛt∼(0;σɛ2). The aggregate demand function is the consequence of the disaggregated demands of each different type of trader.In our economy, we assume that each agent can invest in both risk-free and risky assets. An agent’s wealth at time t is determined by his trading activity and is equal to1111From now on, for simplicity, we omit the exponent i.(2)Wt=(1+rt−1)Wt−1+(Pt+yt−(1+rt−1)Pt−1)dt−1,where Wt, respectively,Wt−1,is the wealth of each agent at time t, respectively,t−1; Ptis the price (ex-dividend) of the risky asset at time t; ytis the dividend of the risky asset; anddt−1is the demand for the risky asset att−1. rtis the risk-free rate.As in the traditional (Brock & Hommes, 1997) model, there are two types of investors that interact in the market: fundamentalists and chartists. The former group believes that there exists an equilibrium price (the fundamental value) around which the price will always fluctuate. Fundamentalists’ expectations of the energy price dynamics are therefore proportional to the observed difference between the fundamental value and the price att−1according to the equation(3)Et(Pt+1∣F)=Pt−1+α(P¯t−Pt−1),with 0 ≤ α ≤ 1.P¯tis the fundamental price of the energy market considered. F denotes the fundamentalist behavior at time t. Etdenotes the conditional expectation at time t.In parallel, we assume that to predict future price evolution, chartist investors use a simple long–short moving average rule, given by(4)Et(Pt+1∣C)=Pt−1+α′(1MAs∑j=1MAsPt−j−1MAl∑j=1MAlPt−j),withα′>0,MAs, and MAlthe respective lengths of the short and long moving average windows. C denotes chartist behavior at time t.The fact that the market can be summarized by these two types of beliefs is well established in the financial and exchange rate literature (see, Boswijk, Hommes, & Manzan, 2007; De Jong, Verschoor, & Zwinkels, 2009; to name a few). Because energy markets can, depending on the context, behave as traditional financial assets (see Joëts, 2014), we assume that these two types of traders can also be present in these markets. Ellen and Zwinkels (2010) and Büyüksahin and Harris (2011), among others, have shown that in the oil market, participants act as “trend followers” , where retroactive effects influence the positions taken by stakeholders. In our model, the information available to both types of traders at time t is the past level of prices and past and present values of fundamental variables. Following Brock and Hommes (1997), Boswijk et al. (2007), and Kozhan and Salmon (2009), we assume for analytical tractability that investors have homogeneous expectations about the conditional second moment of price movements.1212Et(Pt2∣B)=Et(Pt2),where B ∈ {F, C}.Following Kozhan and Salmon (2009), we have four distinct individual demand functions depending on the strategy used and the uncertainty context (i.e., uncertainty-neutral/averse demand from fundamentalist/chartist traders). In the sequel, we writedtu(B)anddtn(B)for the individual demands from uncertainty-averse and uncertainty-neutral traders, with B ∈ {F, C}.In this case, we are in the situation where both fundamentalist and chartist investors are considered to be neutral to uncertainty. In other words, they are indifferent between their ignorance about an uncertain prospect or a situation in which they have no prior experience. Their risk preferences are characterized by a myopic mean-variance utility function, and agents maximize their expected utility functions as follows:(5)MaxdtnEt(U(Wt+1n)∣B)=Et(Wt+1n∣B)−γ2Vt(Wt+1n∣B)where U and V denote, respectively, the utility and the conditional variance, and γ is the risk aversion parameter, assumed to be the same across individuals. The wealth of an uncertainty-neutral agent att+1is given by(6)Wt+1n=(1+rt)Wtn+(Pt+1+yt+1−(1+rt)Pt)dtnMaximizing the mean-variance expected utility with respect todtngives us the following expression1313See Kozhan and Salmon (2009) for a proof.(7)dtn=Et[(Pt+1+yt+1−(1+rt)Pt)∣B]γVt′[(Pt+1+yt+1−(1+rt)Pt)∣B]Beliefs about future dividends are assumed to be the same for all types of traders and to be equal to the true conditional expectationEt(yt+1∣B)=Et(yt+1). We also assume that in a special case, the dividend follows an i.i.d process, such asEt(yt+1)=y¯.1414y¯being a constant term.For analytical tractability, the conditional variance is assumed to be equal and constant for all types of investors, soVt=σ2. Eq. (7) can be simplified as follows:(8)dtn=Et(Pt+1∣B)+y¯−(1+rt)Ptγσ2Because the assumption of neutral uncertainty appears to be too restrictive in our case, we allow the existence of uncertainty-averse agents in the energy markets. Unlike the neutral category, uncertainty-averse agents are attentive to the misreading and potential unmeasurability of their models or associated probability distributions. They maximize their maxmin myopic mean-variance utility function of future wealth.1515For more details, see Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989) and Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang (2007).As in Kozhan and Salmon (2009), the preferences of uncertainty-averse fundamentals/chartists are expressed by the set of possible expectations of future energy price evolutions. In turn, the set of different possibilities is determined by a symmetric bandwidth ϑ around the base of uncertainty-neutral expectations. Therefore, the future energy price movements expected by the uncertainty-averse agents are assumed to fluctuate in the intervalΛ=[Et(Pt+1∣B)−ϑ;Et(Pt+1∣B)+ϑ].(9)MaxdtuEt(U(Wt+1u)∣B)=minθ∈ΛEt(Wt+1u(θ)∣B)−γ2Vt(Wt+1u(θ)∣B)where θ is the anticipated price in the interval Λ. The wealth of the averse agents att+1is given by(10)Wt+1u(θ)=(1+rt)Wtu(θ)+(Pt+1+yt+1−(1+rt)Pt)dtu.When averse agents maximize their maxmin expected utilities with respect todtu,they are able to determine three optimal demand functions depending on the interval Λ, namely, S(B), Smax (B), and Smin (B)S(B)=Et(Pt+1∣B)+y¯−(1+rt)Ptγσ2Smax(B)=(Et(Pt+1∣B)+ϑ)+y¯−(1+rt)Ptγσ2Smin(B)=(Et(Pt+1∣B)−ϑ)+y¯−(1+rt)Ptγσ2According to Kozhan and Salmon (2009), given the level of energy prices Pt, the optimal strategy in Λ for uncertainty-averse investors is to keepdtuunits of energy according to the following rules:1616See the proof of the Lemma 2 in Kozhan and Salmon (2009) for more details.(11)dtu={Smin(B)ifPt<Et(Pt+1∣B)−ϑ0ifEt(Pt+1/B)−ϑ≤Pt≤Et(Pt+1∣B)+ϑSmax(B)ifEt(Pt+1∣B)+ϑ<PtIn traditional HAMs, agents may change their strategies at any period of time (choosing to become fundamentalists or chartists). The learning process is generally similar to case-based reasoning scenarios, where agents evaluate the market and choose their investment strategies based on a comparison of the cumulative past performances of each forecasting rule (see De Grauwe & Grimaldi, 2006; Boswijk et al., 2007; among others). These learning processes are cognitively oriented because they refer to biases related to the memory. However, psychological studies have shown that investors’ decision processes are a combination of both cognitive and emotional factors (see Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch, 2001; among others).1717The impact of feelings in the decision process has been widely confirmed empirically in stock market fluctuations (Dowling & Lucey, 2005; Hirshleifer & Shumway, 2003; Kamstra, Kramer, & Levi, 2000, 2003) and more recently in energy price dynamics (Joëts, 2012).In the behavioral finance literature, different categories of behavioral biases related to emotions and feelings are often discussed, such as overconfidence, the endowment effect, self-serving bias, and regret aversion (among others). Experimental studies have shown the importance of each bias in investment strategies, but regret aversion in particular has attracted significant attention in the operational research and management science literature because a large body of evidence in psychology, economics, neuroscience, and consumer research indicates that the satisfaction people derive from their experiences is influenced by their perception of what would have occurred had they made different choices (see Aissi, Bazgan, & Vanderpooten, 2009 for a review of regret aversion in operational research literature).1818See Ribas, Hamacher, and Street (2010) for an operational research study using regret aversion in the area of energy systems.Crucially, regret emotion, compared with other well-known emotional biases, is a response of an ex-post evaluation of the actions relative to unchosen alternatives. It suggests that people anticipate feelings before making decisions. In other words, whereas other behavioral biases are defined as a general state during times of decision making, regret aversion implies both backward- and forward-looking considerations in times of investment decisions because agents anticipate the regret that they could experience given their current and past states if they choose one action compared with another. Assuming that energy prices behave as traditional financial assets and are composed of heterogeneous traders, we can presume that regret aversion is at play in energy investment strategies.Three other psychological observations motivated our choice to model the switching mechanism between agents with an emotional regret interaction. First, investors’ outcome evaluation is often determined by the comparison with salient reference points. People appear to be care directly about the comparison of the outcomes of their choices to pertinent counterfactuals such as what should, could, or might have happened (see Krähmer & Stone, 2013).1919Several experimental studies indicate that counterfactual emotions such as disappointment and regret tend to influence agents’ behavior (see Mellers, 2000; Mellers & McGraw, 2001).Second, Kahneman and Miller (1986) documented that reference points are constructed by the conjunction of ex-ante and ex-post events once the outcomes of the considered events have been realized. Third, agents’ regret concerns allow specific behaviors that are relevant in our context, such as conservatism and herding behaviors.For all these reasons, we choose to model the potential impact of feelings on the behavior of agents by introducing a learning emotional switching process based on anticipated emotions, defined as emotions that are expected to be experienced by investors given a certain outcome level. Intuitively, as stressed above, the switching mechanism is based on the regret theory of Loomes and Sugden (1982) and Bell (1982). More formally, at the beginning of period t, agents anticipate the regret they could experience if they were to choose the fundamental strategy rather than another one. Agents are allowed to switch between different strategies (fundamental vs. chartist) and between their reaction to uncertainty in the market (averse vs. neutral) according to this regret criterion. Regret appears to be a cognitively based emotion of pain and anger when agents observe that they made a bad decision in the past and could have made a decision with better outcome. In our case, agents will experience regret when their investment (based, for example, on fundamental strategy) yields, ex-post, lower performance than an obvious alternative strategy (chartist strategy) they could have chosen.2020Unlike disappointment, which is experienced when an outcome happens that is negative in terms of prior expectations, regret is strongly associated with a feeling of responsibility for the choice that has been made.Within this framework, suppose thatπt+1(F,C)denotes the probability of a trader adopting fundamentalist behavior at timet+1by the following multinomial logistic expression(12)πt+1(F,C)=eβHtn(F,C)eβHtn(F,C)+eβHtn(C,F),whereπt+1(F,C)∈[0,1].πt+1(C,F)=1−πt+1(F,C),is the fraction of chartists at timet+1. The parameter β is the intensity of choice and represents the matter to which the regret/rejoice feelings relative to a certain strategy at t determine whether it is adopted att+1. More explicitly, β measures the extent to which investors hold their beliefs even though the other option might be more attractive.Htn(F,C)andHtn(C,F)are both based on the following regret expression:Htn(F,C)=Vn(F)+f(Vn(F)−E[Vn(C)])Htn(C,F)=Vn(C)+f(Vn(C)−E[Vn(F)]),with f(.) the increasing regret function.2121If Vn(F) < E[Vn(C)]⇒ΔVn, F< 0, the group of fundamentalists feels regret, and the probability of becoming F at timet+1decreases (the same analysis holds for the chartist group).Vn(F) is the utility of being F and not C, and Vn(C) is the utility of being C and not F. Each utility is the discounted sum of the one-period utilities of the respective uncertainty-neutral fundamentalist and chartist investors in the general form(13)Vn(B)=∑k=1Kωk−1U(ht−k+1n(B))ω being the discount factor,htn(B)=(1+rt−1)Wt−1n(B)+(Pt+yt−(1+rt−1)Pt−1)dt−1n(B). Anticipation of Vn(B), is expressed asE[Vn(B)]=Vn(B)+ɛt,with εtan error termɛt∼(0;σɛ2).Simultaneous with the fundamental/chartist switching mechanism, an agent can change his reaction according to the level of uncertainty present in the market. An agent can be neutral to uncertainty if he considers the information available in the market certain and has “no doubt” about his model or potential prior. He will be more willing to choose the expected utility strategy. However, a neutral agent is allowed to switch to uncertainty-averse behavior. Although the learning process between fundamentalist and chartist behaviors appears to be reasonable, one may argue that the switching attitude toward ambiguity is intuitively difficult to believe because the behavior of agents faced with uncertainty is difficult to modify.2222Thanks to an anonymous referee for mentioning this point.However, in our context, this assumption is plausible. It is crucial to our argument that all uncertainty about past price evolutions is resolved at the end of each period and that both uncertainty-averse and uncertainty-neutral agents use the utility function in the same way to evaluate the past performance of different strategies. To illustrate our argument, Fig. 1 below reports the two-period switching mechanism with respect to uncertainty. To simplify the discussion, suppose that the regret aversion between fundamentalists and chartists is not important and that what counts is the attitude toward the level of uncertainty. At timet=0,the agent does not know a priorithe future price evolutions and faces uncertainty. He therefore may have two different options depending on his anticipated regret aversion and confidence in the strategy: (i) uncertainty neutral if the agent is confident in his strategy to apprehend future price dynamics or (ii) uncertainty averse if he is not. At timet=1, the uncertainty of the previous period is resolved because he knows the performance of his ex-ante strategy and the regret aversion he experienced with respect to the alternative. Given the level of regret aversion, the agent also has two possibilities: (i) he can keep the same the strategy (if the latter has performed well), for instance, the uncertainty neutral one, or (ii) he can become averse to uncertainty if the uncertainty neutral strategy has increased his regret aversion. However, given that uncertainty for the next period remains, the agent can also remain uncertainty averse. This framework allows agents to switch between different strategies depending on the level of perceived uncertainty. Moreover, the risk preference is the same between investors, so the performance of each strategy and therefore the regret aversion of each agent are reflected only in the demand from uncertainty-neutral and uncertainty-averse traders. In this context, regret and uncertainty aversion are linked because when facing decisions, individuals may anticipate the possibility of feeling regret after the uncertainty is resolved and thus may incorporate in their choice their desire to eliminate or reduce this possibility.As discussed by Kozhan and Salmon (2009), under severe uncertainty about the conditions and the future evolution of the market, the agent will use the maxmin strategy, whereas under weak uncertainty, he will earn some positive utility and will be less sensitive to negative outcomes. In the same manner, the probability of becoming uncertainty neutral is given by(14)πt+1(n,B)=eβ′Htn(B)eβ′Htn(B)+eβ′Htu(B)Htu(B)is the regret expression of an uncertainty-averse agent withHtu(F,C)=Vu(C)+f(Vu(F)−E[Vu(C)])Htu(C,F)=Vu(F)+f(Vu(C)−E[Vu(F)])and(15)Vu(B)=∑k=1Kωk−1U(ht−k+1u(B)),wherehtu(B)=(1+rt−1)Wt−1u(B)+(Pt+yt−(1+rt−1)Pt−1)dt−1u(B).The aggregate demand function is determined by the four disaggregated demands of each trader. ztdenotes the proportion of fundamentalists in the market and(1−zt)the proportion of chartists. Wtis the proportion of uncertainty neutral investors, whereas(1−Wt)represents the proportion of uncertainty-averse agents. Finally, N is the total number of agents. The general form of the aggregate demand function is(16)Dt=N[(ztWtFdtF,n+zt(1−WtF)dtF,u)︸fundamentalistgroup+((1−zt)WtCdtC,n+(1−zt)(1−WtC)dtC,u)︸chartistgroup].Eq. (16) is then inserted into the relation (1) to investigate the impact of each category of investors on the dynamics of energy prices.Because of the complex nonlinear specification of the model, HAMs have not often been estimated but have instead been simulated. Boswijk et al. (2007); De Jong et al. (2009), and, more recently, Ellen and Zwinkels (2010) are among the first to estimate HAMs with switching mechanisms on the S&P500, the options market, and the oil market, respectively. In our empirical section, we consider daily data over the period from 2005 January 3 to 2010 December 31. The sample has the property of covering the strong dynamics that we have recently observed in the energy markets. To allow for both fundamental and speculative pressures, we rely on European forward prices at one month for oil, gas, coal, and electricity. Energy prices are quoted in US dollars per ton of oil equivalent ($/toe) and are extracted from the Platt’s Information Energy Agency.As mentioned in Section 3, our model is characterized by the interaction of fundamentalist and chartist agents. Therefore, for the model to function, it is necessary to set a stabilizing group against a destabilizing one. The fundamentalist group bases expectations around the fundamental valueP¯t. To compute the fundamental value of each energy market, we use the moving average of each price over a period of 60 days.2323The results are robust to the choice of the window length. They are available upon request to the author.One might argue that the moving average rule cannot constitute a true theoretical fundamental value. However, as discussed by Ellen and Zwinkels (2010), a more sophisticated fundamental value causes an informational advantage, making this method inappropriate in practice. Moreover, our moving average rule allows us to consider fundamentalists somewhat more broadly.2424Relying on a more complex fundamental value would not be consistent because one needs to have a simple rule to which each type of trader can refer.The chartist agents, for their part, use a simple 1–50 moving average rule. Fig. 2 depicts the energy prices and their respective fundamental values (in logarithms) and shows the relevance of our fundamental prices.Table 1 in Appendix A reports the descriptive statistics of energy price returns and the misalignment between prices and fundamentals. These statistics reveal that the kurtosis of each energy return series is largely above three, which means that the distribution is peaked with fat tails, indicating strong uncertainty in the markets. The specific properties of the electricity market (e.g., its non-storablility and the inelasticity of the supply) cause thicker tails than for the other series. Skewness shows that oil, gas, and electricity returns are generally right skewed, whereas coal returns are left skewed. These findings confirm our view of large fluctuations in energy prices. Regarding the misalignment between prices and fundamental values, the positive mean for oil and gas signifies that prices are generally overvalued, whereas the negative mean for coal and electricity suggests an undervaluation.Our model, characterized by the general form of Eq. (1), is estimated using NLS. As mentioned, the proportion of each agent in the markets follows a multinomial logistic rule. The optimal values for K in Eqs. (13) and (15) are determined by the Akaike criterion.2525K=6for oil,K=3for gas,K=3for coal, andK=2for electricity.This section is devoted to testing whether the different types of traders we specified are active in the energy markets and to determine their relative weights in explaining price fluctuations. We also propose an out-of-sample analysis to compare the predictive ability of our theoretical model against a simple random walk and an ARMA(1,1) model.To investigate whether heterogeneous beliefs, especially uncertainty, can dictate energy price dynamics, we propose to estimate different specifications of our model (i.e., with and without ambiguity). Moreover, as documented by Joëts (2014), the dynamics of energy prices can be considerably different depending on the intensity of the market.2626Using a new test of Granger causality in risk, Joëts (2014) finds that interactions between energy prices can be more intense during extreme periods.Therefore, we also intend to estimate our model during extreme fluctuations periods to investigate whether investors’ behavior is more severe in this circumstance.Our model is estimated for each energy market.2727Due to space constraints, detailed estimation results for each market are reported in Tables 1 and 2 in the supplementary material.First, regarding the neutral case (i.e., without uncertainty), only fundamental traders impact the energy markets during normal times. Indeed, although there is a significant switching phenomenon2828The intensity of choice β is positive and highly significant for each market.between fundamental and chartist expectations, the role of “trend followers” appears to be irrelevant. In the neutral restrictive case scenario, fundamental considerations, such as changes in the supply and demand conditions (for example, OPEC decisions, refining capacity, humanitarian unrest, and increasing energy demand from Asian emerging countries), would drive the evolution of future energy prices. Let us now turn to a less restrictive case by considering that uncertainty can exist in the markets and can cause future price fluctuations even more ambiguous for the participants. In this context, the influence of uncertainty in the decision-making process could create large gaps between prices and fundamental values, leading non-commercial investors to be more motivated to enter into the market. As we can see, neutral and averse fundamentalists coexist with averse chartists for almost all prices, whereas averse fundamentalists appear to be rationally bounded and more prone to switch toward a chartist strategy. The switching mechanisms between fundamental/chartist and between neutral/averse are significant and positive, indicating that a double change of attitude exists. Fundamentalist and chartist traders are not sure about their respective beliefs on the market, so they perpetually switch between strategies following “the way of largest number”, making price movements even more important and creating more uncertainty. This market phenomenology tends to favor “trend followers” against fundamental traders.Figs. 3–6report the time-varying weights of the two most antagonist traders (i.e. fundamentalist and chartist uncertain) for each market2929To have an understandable representation of the dynamic of the weight of traders in each market, we compute a moving average of 50 days.and reveal that the proportion of each agent varies significantly depending on the period and the market considered. On the one hand, periods of price increase3030From Fig. 2, energy market price increases mainly occur in the 2005–2008 and 2009–2010 periods.in oil and gas markets seem to be the consequence of both types of traders, whereas price increases in coal and electricity markets are mainly driven by uncertain chartists. Conversely, the 2008–2009 period of declining prices in all markets appears to be the result of chartists averse to uncertainty. To analyze in more detail the proportion of agents in the overall period, Fig. 7depicts the trader weights in means for each market with respect to their significance. For each market, chartist agents seem to be dominant. Although this dominance is weak for the gas market, it is clearer for the other series. Indeed, considering that the oil market is mainly composed of fundamentalist and chartist neutral and uncertain traders, the role of the chartists’ behavior is largely ascendant. Turning to the coal market, this superiority is even more important, where fundamentalist uncertain agents seem to prefer to switch to the “trend follower” attitude than to keep to a fundamental strategy. Regarding electricity prices, two types of traders are mainly present in the market (i.e. , uncertain fundamentalists and chartists). As for the gas market, the preponderance of one group (uncertain chartists) against another (fundamentalists) is not immoderate in this market. This similarity between gas and electricity prices could be the consequence of existing input–output relations between both markets.3131Usually, natural gas is used as an input to the electricity production process.The specific nature of the gas market compared with oil can be attributed to the recent European liberalization process, which made long-term gas contracts no longer indexed to the oil market but to spot and futures prices.3232Unlike futures prices, which are the most likely to be influenced by financial investors, spot prices usually reflect market fundamentals.This fact leads gas prices to submit to fundamental and financial pressures in almost the same proportion. Moreover, unlike oil prices, which are internationally organized through liquid markets, gas prices are regionally managed and less subject to international macroeconomic uncertainty.As previously mentioned, the dynamics of prices can be considerably different if we look at extreme price movements. We propose to investigate the proportion of each type of trader during periods of extreme fluctuations using a quantile regression approach.3333For simplicity, we suppose that the switching parameters are the same as those estimated during normal times.This method allows us to distinguish between extreme downward and upward movements. As before, we propose restrictive and unrestrictive forms of our model (i.e., neutral and uncertain specifications). The proportion of each agent is not constant in the markets; it depends on which side of the distribution one is on. Indeed, for all series, fundamentalists and chartists interact during downward extreme price fluctuations, whereas during upward movements, only fundamentalist behavior is determinant (except for oil, where both agents coexist). In other words, if we assume no uncertainty in the decision-making process, fundamental considerations would be the main consequence of a price increase, whereas both fundamental and speculative pressures would follow from a price decrease. However, because no ambiguity is a restrictive assumption, we propose to extend our analysis to the case of uncertainty to investigate whether averse behavior is more important during extreme movements than normal times. Tables 5 and 6 in the supplementary material show the estimation results of the uncertain HAM for each price, respectively (downside and upside). We can see that compared with normal times, the composition of each market has changed significantly. Energy market movements are characterized by the interaction of both neutral and averse agents, but the weight of the averse traders seems to be higher than in normal times. As before, the proportion of each trader in the markets is different and depends on which side of the distribution one is on. Regarding the downside context, uncertainty causes chartist behavior to be more present in the market, making prices decrease extremely rapidly through self-fulfilling prophecy. This phenomenon has been recently observed empirically in energy markets. For instance, the oil Brent price increased sharply between mid-2007 and mid-2008 to a level of almost $140 per barrel and decreased to less than $40 per barrel at the end of 2008. With less intensity, the same movements have been observed in the gas, coal, and electricity markets, showing potential herd behavior in prices. Turning to the upside context, unlike during normal periods, extreme upward movements are not only characterized by fundamental expectations but also by speculators that are probably not related to physical interests. Generally speaking, the fundamental nature of energy prices seems to fade in deference to “irrational exuberance” as the fluctuations become more intense.Figs. 8–11show the weight of the types of traders in each market during extreme downward and upward movements and confirm this fact. Indeed, during extreme price decreases, energy markets are clearly dominated by uncertain chartist agents, supporting our intuition about the fact that uncertainty increases and in turn leads to “cascading behavior”. During an extreme price increase, the oil and electricity markets are dominated by both uncertain fundamentalists and chartists in the same proportion, whereas the latter are more important for the coal market and less significant for the gas market. However, the difference between each market appears to be less pronounced than during normal times.3434This finding goes the same way as that of Joëts (2014) about the asymmetric behavior of energy markets during upside and downside movements.This phenomenon can be explained by the existing interconnections between energy prices, which are exacerbated during extreme fluctuation periods by diversified commodity index investors who have large, diversified multi-asset investment strategies.In this section, we investigate the forecasting ability of our HAM regret model against the RW and the ARMA(1,1) models, both of which are often defined as benchmark specifications. Forecasts are created using an expanding window of observations. More precisely, all models are estimated from 2005 January 3 to 2007 December 31, and then out-of-sample estimations are computed until 2010 December 31. The relative performance of the three forecast alternatives is evaluated by using the conditional Giacomini and White (2006) approach. Giacomini and White (2006) propose a test of Conditional Predictive Ability that allows for comparison of the forecasting properties of two models given a general loss function.3535This literature was initiated by Diebold and Mariano (1996); West (1996), McCracken (2000), among others.This test uses a less restrictive framework than previous methods because it permits a unified treatment of nested and nonnested models and can accommodate more general estimation procedures in the derivation of the forecasts. As discussed by Giacomini and White (2006), to choose the best forecasting model, we use a two-step decision rule. The first step allows us to see whether there is a different predictive ability between the two competing models, and the second step allows us to decide which model is the best.3636For more details, see Giacomini and White (2006).This method is applied to each energy market.Table 2in Appendix A reports the results of the two-step test procedure for each energy market. The first step is characterized by the rejection of the null hypothesis of equal performance, meaning that the HAM and RW models are not equally accurate on average (i.e., one model outperforms the other one in terms of predictive ability). The second step of the Giacomini and White procedure reveals that for each energy price, the HAM outperforms the RW in terms of forecasting performance. The same results hold for the ARMA (1,1) specification, where HAM outperforms the other model. Our HAM is therefore more adequate for understanding the dynamics of energy prices, reinforcing the fact that heterogeneous beliefs, regret, and uncertainty could be the causes of the high volatility of energy prices.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we provide an original behavioral and emotional analysis of the impact of financialization on energy markets under uncertainty. For this purpose, we suppose that energy price fluctuations can be caused by heterogeneous expectations as well as by uncertainty in the decision-making process. Our stylized heterogeneous agent model allows investors to switch between different strategies according to market circumstances. Turning to the empirical analysis of the oil, gas, coal, and electricity markets over the period from 2005 January to 2010 December, our results indicate that the proportion of each type of trader in the markets varies depending on the degree of uncertainty assumed as well as the intensity of the fluctuations. Energy price fluctuations are mainly governed by fundamentalist expectations when agents in the markets evolve in the context of certainty, whereas both fundamentalist and speculative behaviors are the source of price movements in an uncertain world. We have also shown that the weights of the types of traders could be different if we look at extreme situations. The proportion of uncertainty-averse agents increases during extreme downward movements, leading to situations where the fundamental nature of the markets fades in favor of irrational fluctuations, such as “cascade behavior”. The conclusion is more parsimonious regarding extreme upward movements because price increases are the consequence of both fundamental and chartist traders. Overall, our paper shows the limitations of the previous literature, which has assumed an overly restrictive framework. If we extend the analytical framework, we can obtain a better perception and understanding of what drives the energy markets. Thus, the model outperforms standard benchmarks and provides a first step toward the analysis of the behavioral and emotional attitudes of energy investors facing uncertainty. Given the complex situations faced by energy industries, several managerial implications emerge from our results, especially in the use of more sophisticated models that are able to account for such heterogeneity and potential price exuberance in operational research problems. Other energy portfolio management issues may be also important in our results, particularly the fact that irrational, regret and uncertainty-averse agents are at play in the markets and affect portfolio diversification dynamics. We leave these questions to future research. Further work should also provide a concise definition of what we call excessive “commodity speculation” and should explore more precisely whether it can be costly in terms of social welfare.Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 10.1016/j.ejor.2015.05.061.