@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An iterative approach for reducing the impact of infrastructure maintenance on the performance of railway systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Considering robustness when adapting the train schedule to maintenance actions is new.By iteratively re-routing and re-timing trains, cancelations are minimized.The developed algorithm improves the robustness of the service with more than 10 percent.All this is a significant improvement compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Railway timetabling,Robustness,Maintenance,Mixed integer linear programing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Planned infrastructure works reduce the available capacity of a railway system and make it more vulnerable to conflicts and delay propagation. The starting point of this paper is a published timetable that needs to be adapted due to the temporary unavailability of some resources. Since the timetable is in operation, changed arrival or departure times and cancelations have an impact on the passengers who need to adapt their travel behavior. In the light of passenger service, a trade-off is made between these inconveniences and the delays that occur in practice due to the reduced capacity. Taking the robustness of the adapted railway timetable into account is a new approach to rescheduling in case of a planned infrastructure unavailability. In this paper, an algorithm that adjusts the train routing and the train schedule to the planned maintenance interventions and keeps the level of passenger service as high as possible is presented. To avoid large inconveniences, the developed algorithm tries to minimize the number of cancelations. Computational results show that by allowing small modifications to the routing and the timetable, the robustness of the resulting solution can improve by more than 10 percent and only few trains need to be canceled.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When a track is blocked due to infrastructure works, a diversion and often some delays can be expected. In general, track maintenance or railway construction works are planned well in advance and, when possible, railway infrastructure managers try to schedule these interventions during periods of low activity or no activity. When this is not possible, the train schedule needs to be adapted. This is the situation that is considered in this paper. Where all related research is about scheduling the maintenance itself or about the impact the maintenance has on the train planning, we go one step further and focus on the impact of the maintenance on the performance of a railway system. The performance indicator that is used in this paper is the passenger service. How this passenger service is modeled and measured is explained in the following section. This paper presents an algorithm that integrates the rerouting, retiming and cancelation of trains in order to obtain a robust schedule in case of unavailable tracks due to planned maintenance interventions. The aim is to keep the total hindrance for the passengers as low as possible. Simulation of the altered railway planning proves that our algorithm indeed fulfills this aim. Next to this, we also show that the typical objectives used in the state-of-the-art literature are insufficient and not always beneficial for the passengers.A planned unavailability of some parts of the railway infrastructure occurs due to, for example, planned track maintenance or construction works. The term maintenance is used to cover all these reasons. In contrast with the (relatively short) maintenance actions that are studied in Van Zante-De Fokkert, Den Hertog, Van Den Berg, and Verhoeven (2007), we consider large maintenance tasks which last (much) longer: a group of tracks in the station area cannot be used for at least a number of consecutive days or weeks. Hence, interference with trains in operation has to be taken into account. Three examples of the kind of maintenance works that we consider are presented in Fig. 1. This figure is a schematic overview of the station area in Brussels (Belgium). The maintenance works are indicated with dashed lines. All tracks and platforms are bi-directional, except for the six oriented platforms in the central station.Because maintenance is very costly and the scheduling of maintenance interventions is very difficult and subject to many constraints (Budai-Balke, 2009), we consider the maintenance planning as given (and unchangeable) such that the tracks that are closed for maintenance, the so-called track possessions, are known well in advance. Due to these track possessions, the original timetable and routing become infeasible. Another consequence of the track possessions is the reduction of the available capacity, which is defined as the number of trains that can be scheduled in a conflict-free way such that no train uses closed tracks.To avoid conflicts with the maintenance actions, some rerouting and rescheduling interventions are required. In this paper, an algorithm is developed that can guide this process. When making the modifications to the published timetable, the goal that is strived for is to minimize the decrease in service level for the passengers (passenger service). This corresponds to (i) the condition that no train can be routed over any of the closed tracks during the maintenance period, (ii) the timetable for the remaining trains should be conflict-free, (iii) the number of trains that will be taken out of operation to fit the previous condition should be as small as possible, and (iv) the updated schedule should be as robust as possible.It should be noted that we don’t consider transferring passengers in our case study, since unfortunately no data is available about the numbers of passengers transferring between any pair of trains.DefinitionsBefore continuing, some definitions are needed. Define the (minimal) time span between two trains as the smallest time separation between their occupation times on the tracks and switches that they have in common. We say that a timetable is conflict-free or feasible when the minimal time span for all pairs of trains is positive. To distinguish a conflict between two trains (train-train conflict) from a conflict between a train and a track possession, the term maintenance conflict is used for a conflict between a train and a track possession. Similar to a (train-train) conflict-free timetable, a timetable without maintenance conflicts is said to be maintenance-conflict-free.Similar to the approach of Caimi, Burkolter, and Herrmann (2005), Kroon, Huisman, and Maróti (2008b), Salido, Barber, and Ingolotti (2012), the propagation of delays is reduced by enlarging the minimal time spans between two trains. Therefore, we define the spreading cost objective function in order to minimize the spreading cost. Let t and t′ be two trains whose routes have at least one track or switch in common and defineBt,t′∈R+as the minimal time span in minutes between these trains. The (spreading) costCt,t′of two trains t and t′ is given byCt,t′={15ifBt,t′<0.1(conflicting),1/B˜t,t′if0.1≤Bt,t′<15minutes,0ifBt,t′≥15oriftandt′don"tshareinfrastructure,whereB˜t,t′isBt,t′rounded to one decimal place. The cost corresponding to a conflict is set equal to 15 andCt,t′will be smaller than 15 ifBt,t′≥0.1. With this cost function, an increase of a smaller buffer will be better than an increase of a larger buffer. In this paper, we focus on small delays and consider a time span of 15 minutes large enough to avoid the propagation of delays. This cost function C was also used to build the objective function in Dewilde, Sels, Cattrysse, and Vansteenwegen (2014).If the planned arrival times and/or departure times of a train are rescheduled to avoid a maintenance conflict, the differences in journey time between the original and the updated timing will be indicated with the term planned delays. As the name suggests, planned delays are known in advance. In contrast with the planned delays, the real or unplanned delays are the commonly known delays that occur, for example, due to train-train conflicts during operation and are not known a priori.Define Δdep(Δarr) as the difference in departure (arrival) time for a train due to the rescheduling actions. If the train departs later (earlier) in the updated timetable than in the original one, Δdepbecomes larger (smaller) than 0. If the train arrives later (earlier) in the updated timetable than in the original one, Δarrbecomes larger (smaller) than 0. Using this notation, the planned delay of a given train is measured as follows(1)planneddelay={max(Δdep,Δarr)ifΔdep≥0andΔarr≥0,max(|Δdep|,|Δarr|)ifΔdep≤0andΔarr≤0,|Δdep|+|Δarr|ifΔdep≤0andΔarr≥0,0ifΔdep≥0andΔarr≤0.An earlier departure or postponed arrival is considered as a disadvantage. When a train is scheduled to depart later or arrive earlier than in the original timetable, this can be advantageous as well as disadvantageous for the passengers (Bates, Polak, Jones, & Cook, 2001; Savelberg & Bakker, 2010; Tseng, Rietveld, & Verhoef, 2005). For example, if it results in a longer waiting time before or after the trip by train. Since one or more trains can be canceled, it is possible, in theory, that a train departs later and arrives earlier than in the original timetable. In this case, the planned delay is set to zero, since this can also be advantageous or disadvantageous. Anyway, this phenomenon never actually happened during our experiments.In case of a planned cancelation, passengers (temporarily) need to take an alternative train or search for an alternative mode of transport. However, in this work, we assume that the passenger flows are the same for the original timetable and any updated one. So if a train needs to be canceled, the passengers of this train will face some planned delay when taking an alternative train. The values of Δdepand Δarrcan in this case be determined on the basis of the departure and arrival time of the original (canceled) train and the departure and arrival time of the alternative train or transport mode. Again, the planned delay, calculated with (1), is then a measure for the inconvenience of the passengers since they have to adapt their journey to the new schedule.Similar to the difference between planned delays and real delays, we also define the planned travel time as the travel time according to the originally published timetable, under ideal circumstances and without maintenance. In general, a small percentage of the planned travel time is included to absorb delays. This extra time is called a supplement. The real travel time is then the time needed in practice to make the trip.Finally, the algorithm we present consists of three parts: (i) solving the train routing problem in which each train is assigned to exactly one route through the network, (ii) the rerouting and rescheduling part in which a new, maintenance-conflict-free and conflict-free schedule can be assigned to each train after some changes in timing and routing are applied, and (iii) the cancelation module in which a train that cannot avoid a maintenance conflict is taken out of operation. When running the algorithm, the different parts are considered iteratively until no conflicts with the maintenance actions remain.The interference between the trains and the infrastructure maintenance is twofold. On the one hand, there is the foreseen hindrance due to one or more trains wanting to use the same part of the infrastructure at the same time, which leads to planned delays. On the other hand, there is the unforeseen hindrance since the reduced capacity, and thus the reduced number of alternative routes, increases the system’s sensitivity to delay propagation. This increased sensitivity will significantly influence the passenger service. Therefore, we believe that changing the train schedule to cope with the foreseen hindrance should only be considered as the first step. In order to avoid a cascade of secondary delays during operations, the robustness of the updated schedule should also be optimized. In previous research (Dewilde, Sels, Cattrysse, & Vansteenwegen, 2011), we defined robustness as follows: A railway system that is robust minimizes the real weighted travel time (RWTT) of the passengers in case of frequently occurring, small disturbances. According to this definition, a system is robust when all the passengers reach their destination as fast as possible, not on paper but during the real operation, while taking into account delays, missed transfers, and cancelations.In order to measure the RWTT, the durations of all events along the journey of all passengers are weighted and summed. For example, if a passenger arrives at his destination with a delay of 2 minutes and if the weight of this type of delay is 3, this arrival delay adds3·2=6minutes to the RWTT. Determining the exact value of these weights would be a complete research project in itself and is a different field of research. Therefore, the values that will be used in this research are based on the valuation of time in public transportation studied by Savelberg and Bakker (2010), Mackie, Jara-Díaz, and Fowkes (2001), Wardman (2004). Among others, Corman, D’Ariano, and Hansen (2014), Goverde (1998), Sels, Dewilde, Cattrysse, and Vansteenwegen (2013), Van Oort (2011), Vansteenwegen and Van Oudheusden (2006, 2007) used values of time to indicate the (negative) perception of delays. In case of maintenance actions that interfere with the regular train services, the timetable gets updated and planned delays arise. Since planned delays extend the normal journey time by an early departure and/or a postponed arrival, the adaptation to the updated timetable is considered as an extra action of a journey and is counted as part of the RWTT. In Table 1all events that influence the real travel time are included. The RWTT is then computed by summing the weighted duration of all events per passenger per day. For instance, in case of an unplanned cancelation, the passengers face a delay and thus this event gets a weight of 3. The duration of the delay due to a canceled train can be estimated based on the set of alternative trains (Dollevoet & Huisman, 2014; Dollevoet, Huisman, Schmidt, & Schöbel, 2012) or based on the period or the frequency of trains on the same line (Goverde, 1998; Vansteenwegen & Van Oudheusden, 2006). Independent of how the duration is estimated, the duration is multiplied by a weight of 3 in the RWTT, as is explained next. From the moment the passengers board an alternative train, their RWTT is affected by non-used supplements or arrival delays of the alternative train.For a fair comparison, a reference system (ref) needs to be defined and the robustness score is defined relative to this reference system. The robustness of system X is then computed as follows(2)Rob(percent)=RWTT(X)RWTT(ref).The smaller the resulting value, the shorter the RWTT of system X and thus the more robust system X is. We refer to Dewilde et al. (2011), Dewilde, Sels, Cattrysse, and Vansteenwegen (2013) for more details.The structure of our approach (iteratively trying to improve the routing and the timing of the trains) originates from the method that we developed to improve the robustness of a railway timetable (without maintenance actions) in and around large and complex stations (Dewilde et al., 2013, 2014), but the implementation is significantly different. We now start from an infeasible solution instead of a feasible solution, due to the restricted network, and, for instance, we consider the cancelation of trains.To perform the computational experiments, some assumptions are made. In this section, an overview of the most relevant assumptions is given.This paper focuses on infrastructure works that last for a number of days such that the transition between the original timetable and the updated one happens during periods of no or low operation. Moreover, the start and the duration of the resource unavailability is considered given and fixed. This means that no real-time changes are considered.Although safety regulations imply speed limitations on tracks neighboring the maintenance zone, this is not considered in this paper. The main focus of this paper is on station areas, which normally already have speed restrictions. As a consequence, maintenance actions in this case do not require further speed limitations. Thus, we consider differences in departure or arrival time and cancelations as the only source of planned delays.Finally, as is discussed in Section 4, the size of the planned delays is bounded from above by the algorithm to keep the structure of the original timetable. Therefore, it is assumed that these small timetable changes do not persuade passengers to take another train if theirs is not canceled. Furthermore, transfers are not considered in our case study because no data is available about the size of transferring passenger flows. Moreover, in case of only small timetable deviations, no rolling stock or crew schedule conflicts are expected to arise. Obviously, if trains need to be canceled, the rolling stock and crew schedule have to be adapted.In the next section, the presented approach is situated in the state of the art on rescheduling a railway system in case of railway maintenance works. Sections 3 and 4 discuss the developed methodology and the simulation module. In Section 5, the computational results are presented. This paper ends with the conclusions and some thoughts for further research.There are many works that concentrate on timetable and route planning on the mid-long term. Recent surveys on this topic are Cacchiani and Toth (2012), Caprara, Kroon, Monaci, Peeters, and Toth (2007), Caprara, Galli, and Toth (2011) and Lusby, Larsen, Ehrgott, and Ryan (2011). Recently, there are also many papers published on real-time timetable rescheduling in case of small disruptions (Acuna-Agost, Michelon, Feillet, & Gueye, 2011a, 2011b; Boccia, Mannino, & Vasiyev, 2013; Caimi, Fuchsberger, Laumanns, & Luethi, 2012; Corman, D’Ariano, Pacciarelli, & Pranzo, 2010, 2012; D’Ariano, Pacciarelli, & Pranzo, 2008; Dollevoet et al., 2012; Kecman, Corman, D’Ariano, & Goverde, 2013; Lusby, Larsen, Ehrgott, & Ryan, 2013; Mannino & Mascis, 2009; Schöbel & Kratz, 2009; Törnquist & Persson, 2007) or large disruptions (Albrecht, Panton, & Lee, 2013; Brucker, Heitmann, & Knust, 2002; Corman, D’Ariano, Hansen, & Pacciarelli, 2011; Louwerse & Huisman, 2014; Wiklund, 2007), Veelenturf, Kidd, Cacchiani, Kroon, and Toth. The situation that we address lies in between these two problem descriptions. This paper focuses on timetable rescheduling in case of large disruptions that are well-known in advance. Thus our planning is also situated on the mid-long term, which implies that there are almost no restrictions on the computation time and which gives us the opportunity to set high standards for the adapted schedule (low number of cancelations, robustness). However, there is the restriction that the adapted timetable should be close to the one that is in operation in normal conditions (without maintenance works). Another novelty of our approach is the focus on robustness for this type of timetable rescheduling.In Albrecht et al. (2013) and Pudney and Wardrop (2004) the train scheduling and maintenance planning is done simultaneously. Track possessions are modeled as pseudo trains and the train timetable, including the pseudo trains, is computed with the objective to minimize the planned delays. In our approach, however, we consider the place and time of the maintenance works as fixed input and we only allow small changes to the current timetable in order to obtain a feasible and robust train service.Railway maintenance during daily operation disturbs the timetable. Although in our approach, we consider the maintenance planning as fixed, there exist approaches for railway maintenance planning that take the impact on the timetable into account. For example Van Zante-De Fokkert et al. (2007) schedule cyclic preventive maintenance with a period of 4 weeks during the moments of low activity or no activity in the Dutch timetable. Their main goal was to improve the safety for the maintenance workers. However, in our research we consider large maintenance (or construction) tasks which last (much) longer such that interference with trains in operation is inevitable. In the dissertation of Budai-Balke (2009) an extensive literature overview on scheduling railway infrastructure maintenance within a given train timetable is given. Budai-Balke presents in this dissertation also several exact and non-exact solution methods to minimize the maintenance cost of a maintenance planning within a given timetable. Also Forsgren, Aronsson, and Gestrelius (2013) start from an initial timetable and use a mixed integer programing model (MIP) to schedule the track possessions in the (modifiable) train schedule. The track possessions they consider last for some hours and have flexible start and end times. The objective used in the MIP is threefold: (i) minimize the number of maintenance conflicts in the timetable, (ii) minimize the number of canceled trains, and (iii) minimize the planned delays.Once the maintenance planning is fixed, the next step is to make the timetable again feasible. Our research focuses on this step. By minimizing the planned delays, some of the previous mentioned approaches for planning railway maintenance already give a solution for this feasibility problem. Other actions to make the timetable again feasible are rerouting, canceling or slowing down trains, for example to let them wait until the maintenance is over (if realistic) (Forsgren et al., 2013). But, in our approach, we go one step further than the state of the art. We make sure that the adapted timetable is also as robust as possible, while constraining each departure and arrival time into a time window of a few minutes around its initial value. We present a method that assures feasibility and aims for robustness by doing stepwise small changes to the timing and the routing of the trains. This approach is closely related to the approach described by Burdett and Kozan (2009). Although they consider the insertion of additional trains in an existing service instead of changes due to track possessions, they do also consider time windows for the times used in the existing service and they consider stepwise small changes. Their first goal is to make the new service feasible and a secondary objective is to optimise a generic measure of quality such as total train delay.Our approach is the first that studies the sensitivity to delay propagation of updated train schedules and proposes an approach which takes the sensitivity to delay propagation into account when updating the train schedule for a set of planned track possessions. Furthermore, concerning feasibility, the stepwise small changes restrict the memory usage and the computation time of this approach in comparison with approaches that make use of a list of all combinations of routes and possible timings (Forsgren et al., 2013). Moreover, in Section 5.3, we show that the objective of minimizing the planned delays can have a negative impact on the passenger service as it is defined in Section 1.1. In our approach, we restrict the planned delays, but we don’t minimize them. In fact, the interference between the timetable and the infrastructure maintenance is twofold. On the one hand, there is the foreseen hindrance due to one or more trains wanting to use the same part of the infrastructure at the same time, which leads to planned delays. Also canceled trains lead to planned delays. On the other hand, there is the unforeseen hindrance because of the reduced capacity that increases the systems sensitivity to delay propagation. Our approach provides a solution that restricts both types of hindrances.When it comes to constructing a railway timetable, robustness is often considered as a crucial performance indicator. In short, the kind of robustness we consider is about minimizing the travel time in practice of all the passengers, taking into account daily occurring (small) delays (Dewilde et al., 2011; Sels et al., 2013; Takeuchi, Tomii, & Hirai, 2007). In Dewilde et al. (2013, 2014) as well as in Kroon, Maróti, Retel Helmrich, Vromans, and Dekker (2008a), systems with a high capacity usage and a heterogeneous fleet of trains have been studied. It is shown that with limited changes, the robustness of such a system can be significantly increased. In Dewilde et al. (2013, 2014), several aspects of the planning are considered to improve the system’s robustness. The first aspect is the routing of the trains through the station area, the so-called train routing problem that is also studied by Caimi et al. (2005), Lusby et al. (2011), and Zwaneveld et al. (1996). Secondly, the timing of trains is considered. In this phase, the heterogeneity of the system is analyzed like in Vromans, Dekker, and Kroon (2006) or slack time is allocated to and between some actions as is done by Kroon et al. (2008a), Salido et al. (2012), and Shafia, Aghaee, Sadjadi, and Jamili (2012). Doing so, a trade-off is made between the real-time effects of adding supplements and buffers that are too large and cause unnecessary idling time or too small and cannot buffer against primary delays. The last component to improve the robustness in and around large stations that is studied in Dewilde et al. (2013, 2014) is the platform assignment which is also considered by Carey and Crawford (2007) and Sels et al. (2014). Where during the optimization process, robustness is approximated by an objective function that spreads the usage of infrastructure resources by the trains (Kroon et al., 2008b; Vromans et al., 2006), a simulation module is used to measure the robustness of different timetables. We refer to Dewilde et al. (2013, 2014) and the references contained therein for more details. Burdett and Kozan (2014) consider a timetable as robust when the timetable performance is insensitive to delays of a specified level. The paper presents a generic approach to determine the operations “affected” by some level of delay and how these “affected operations” can be used to quantify the robustness of a timetable. Although the definition of robustness is clearly different compared to what we consider, we will also use this idea of affected operations when determining which trains need to be rerouted and/or rescheduled.In case of a large disruption or urgent, unforeseen maintenance, real-time interventions are required. Delay management strategies that concern the transfers such as in Dollevoet et al. (2012), Meng and Zhou (2011), or train reallocation actions to satisfy the passenger demand (Canca, Barrena, Zarzo, Ortega, & Algaba, 2012) as well as real-time rerouting and rescheduling as studied by, among others, Corman et al. (2010), Louwerse and Huisman (2014), Tamura, Tomii, and Sato (2013) become appropriate. Another important aspect that must be considered then, is the rolling stock (re-)scheduling like is done in, for example, Cadarso, Marín, and Maróti (2013), Nielsen, Kroon, and Maróti (2012). Often, the rolling stock scheduling is being revised in cases of (planned) maintenance, see Budai-Balke (2009) and Cacchiani et al. (2012) for some examples, however, real-time interventions are beyond the scope of this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
