@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Logistics capacity planning: A stochastic bin packing formulation and a progressive hedging meta-heuristic

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Modeling framework for tactical logistics capacity planning under uncertainty.A new class problems, the Stochastic Variable Cost and Size Bin Packing Problem.A new meta-heuristic for the two-stage formulation of the SVCSBPP.Extensive numerical experiments show the efficiency of the methodology.Analysis the impact of problem characteristics on capacity planning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Logistics capacity planning,Uncertainty,Stochastic Variable Cost and Size Bin Packing,Stochastic programming,Progressive hedging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider the logistics capacity planning problem arising in the context of supply-chain management. We address the tactical-planning problem of determining the quantity of capacity units, hereafter called bins, of different types to secure for the next period of activity, given the uncertainty on future needs in terms of demand for loads (items) to be moved or stored, and the availability and costs of capacity for these movements or storage activities. We propose a modeling framework introducing a new class of bin packing problems, the Stochastic Variable Cost and Size Bin Packing Problem. The resulting two-stage stochastic formulation with recourse assigns to the first stage the tactical capacity-planning decisions of selecting bins, while the second stage models the subsequent adjustments to the plan, securing extra bins and packing the items into the selected bins, performed each time the plan is applied and new information becomes known. We propose a new meta-heuristic based on progressive hedging ideas that includes advanced strategies to accelerate the search and efficiently address the symmetry strongly present in the problem considered due to the presence of several equivalent bins of each type. Extensive computational results for a large set of instances support the claim of validity for the model, efficiency for the solution method proposed, and quality and robustness for the solutions obtained. The method is also used to explore the impact on the capacity plan and the recourse to spot-market capacity of a quite wide range of variations in the uncertain parameters and the economic environment of the firm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The efficient consolidation of goods for movement and storage is essential for companies that aim to be competitive in the market and fulfill customer demand in a cost-efficient and flexible manner (Crainic, Marcotte, Rei, & Takouda, 2013b). Modern companies manufacture or acquire goods that are then consolidated into appropriate containers, which are in turn consolidated for long-distance, often international, transportation into ships or trains. Before reaching the final customer, the goods are stored for varying periods into a number of depots, warehouses or distribution centers. All these activities require that capacity, as containers, ship or train slots, motor carrier tractors, and warehousing space, be available when and where needed.The planning of such logistics capacity directly affects the distribution and operating costs of the company, and therefore is a major challenge in supply chain management (Monczka, Handfield, Giunipero, & Patterson, 2008). Logistics capacity planning as a tactical planning decision addresses the needs of the company for sufficient capacity to move and store its goods to meet demand in the next cycle of its activities. When tactical decisions are made, the company does not have detailed knowledge of many decision parameters such as the future demand and, thus, its real needs in terms of loads to be moved or stored, and the availability and costs of capacity. Such information becomes available, however, at the time for operational decisions, and it can be used to reconsider and update the capacity planning.Our goal is providing models and methods to support decision making in logistics capacity planning. We focus, in particular, on the relation between a firm and its logistics capacity provider, and the tactical-planning problem of determining the quantity of capacity to secure for the next period of activity (from four to twelve months) given the uncertainty on future demand as well as on the availability of the means providing the required capacity.Bin packing models offer important decision-support tools for transportation and logistics (Perboli, Gobbato, & Perfetti, 2014a), and appear appropriate for the problem at hand. In bin packing problems, items must be packed into containers or other types of boxes and spaces, generally called bins, the particular characteristics of items and bins in terms of dimensions and costs generating a rich set of problem settings and formulations (e.g., Crainic, Perboli, Rei, & Tadei, 2011b; Baldi, Crainic, Perboli, & Tadei, 2012). The packing formulations currently proposed in the literature deal only partially, however, with the requirements of capacity planning. Most research focuses on operational issues, and very few address packing and uncertainty.We aim to contribute to fill this gap and introduce the Stochastic Variable Cost and Size Bin Packing Problem (SVCSBPP), a new class of stochastic bin packing formulations providing a modeling framework for the tactical capacity-planning problem with uncertain demand, item characteristics, availability of extra bins in the future as well as their actual costs and dimensions. We propose a two-stage integer stochastic programming formulation. The first stage concerns the selection of bins, while the second stage concerns the acquisition of extra capacity (bins) and the assignment of loads (items) to bins selected in the first and second stages, once the actual demand information, i.e., number of characteristics of items, is revealed. To address realistically-sized instances, we also propose an efficient meta-heuristic based on Progressive Hedging principles (Rockafellar & Wets, 1991) for the SVCSBPP.The contributions of this paper are:1.A modeling framework for securing logistics capacity for a tactical-planning horizon, while explicitly considering uncertainty in both supply, i.e., the future availability and cost of various bin types, and demand as the number and dimension of items. This framework takes the form of a new class of stochastic bin packing problems, the SVCSBPP, which generalizes previous work (Crainic et al., 2014a) through (a) the possibility that bins available in the future be different in cost and dimensions from those planned, and (b) the explicit representation of the uncertainty on the future availability of bins in numbers and costs. This generalization contributes greatly to the practical relevance of the methodology, through the modeling of the spot market. It introduces, in particular, the possibility that no feasible solution exists due to insufficient availability of extra bins in the future, requiring additional care in formulating the two-stage model. Different from previous models, this generalization leads to a two-stage formulation that includes integer decision variables in the second stage to represent the selection of additional bins.A new and effective meta-heuristic for the two-stage formulation of the SVCSBPP. The proposed solution method is based on PH ideas, uses the heuristic of Crainic et al. (2011b) to address the scenario subproblems, and includes several enhancements to deal with the particular characteristics of the problem. A particularly challenging characteristic is the symmetry inherent to packing problems, and strongly present in the SVCSBPP due to the presence of several equivalent bins of each type. The many equivalent but apparently different solutions in their choice of bins significantly impairs the efficiency of a meta-heuristic implementing classical PH features. Several novel strategies are thus proposed, in particular a new definition of “consensus”, the associated temporary global solution, and the heuristic penalty adjustments, together with bundle variable fixing.An extensive computational campaign using a large set of instances of various dimensions and combinations of different levels of variability in the stochastic parameters. The campaign includes the assessment of the efficiency of the meta-heuristic, the evaluation of the interest to explicitly consider uncertainty, an analysis of the impact of problem characteristics on capacity planning, the structure of solutions and the sensitivity to changes in data in particular, as well as an evaluation of the robustness of the decisions over a long time period under different economic and demand-evolution scenarios.The numerical analysis indicates that the value of uncertainty is significant and that the proposed PH-based meta-heuristic finds good solutions fast. They also show that the proposed formulation is able to represent the impact of various levels of variation in the random parameters, and yields good-quality plans (solutions). Indeed, solutions are conservative and minimize the need to adjust the plan. Moreover, the capacity plan is robust (variations in the demand implying low operating costs) and relatively insensitive to changes. One may therefore conclude that SVCSBPP is a useful tool for logistics capacity planning under uncertainty, and that the proposed meta-heuristic is an appropriate and efficient solver for this class of formulations.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the logistics capacity planning problem we address in this paper. Section 3 briefly reviews the relevant literature. Section 4 presents the formulation of the problem. A lower bound and the meta-heuristic solution method are introduced in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Section 7 presents the experimental plan and analyzes the computational results. Section 8 provides concluding remarks.The tactical capacity planning problem we address is relevant in many contexts, e.g., manufacturing firms desiring to secure transportation capacity to bring in their resources or to distribute their products, wholesalers and retailers planning for transportation and storage capacity to support their procurement and sales processes, and logistics service providers securing capacity contracts with carriers for long-distance, regular shipments. Manufacturing and whole/retail distribution firms may negotiate directly with carriers and owners/managers of storage space but, very often, they do business with a logistic service provider. Consequently, in order to simplify the presentation, but without loss of generality, we describe the problem within the context of the process of contract procurement between a major retail firm and a third-party logistics (capacity) service provider (3PL).In the contemporary economic and business environment, firms are engaged in a continuous procurement process (Aissaoui, Haouari, & Hassini, 2007; Rizk, Martel, & D’Amours, 2008), and engage in various collaborations with its supply-chain partners. Such inter-firm alliances yield several benefits, including a reduction in inefficiencies, total cost, and financial risks. The greatest advantages result from the outsourcing of logistics activities to a 3PL (Marasco, 2008). The overall supply-chain process may then be summarized as follows. The firm regularly orders products from suppliers in a given geographical region, according to current inventories, short-term forecast demand, estimated lead times, and specific procurement and inventory policies (Bertazzi, Chan, & Speranza, 2007; Bertazzi & Speranza, 2005). The suppliers are instructed to deliver their goods to a consolidation center (Bertazzi & Speranza, 2012; Crainic & Kim, 2007). The 3PL then consolidates the goods into containers and ensures their shipping by consolidating these containers with those of other customers into the slots it secured on long-haul carriers, e.g., ships and trains (Chen, Federgruen, & Zheng, 2001; Crainic et al., 2013a), which generally operate according to a fixed schedule, e.g., twice a week.A key factor in this process is the procurement of sufficient supply capacity, which we express in the following in terms of bins, at different locations in the network and for varying periods of time, to satisfy the demand. This entails negotiations with the 3PL to book the necessary capacity a priori, before operations start, at the best rate (Ford, 2001). The results of these negotiations often take the form of medium-term contracts specifying both the capacity to be used, the quantity and the type of bins, and the additional services to be performed (storage, transportation, bin operations, etc.) for a given planning horizon, e.g., a semester or a year. These contracts guarantee a regular volume of business to the 3PL (e.g., a fixed number of containers to ship every week for the next semester), which ensures a cost-effective service to the firm.We refer to the costs of bins selected in advance as fixed costs because they are fixed by the contract and thus represent the specific rates offered by the 3PL for bins of different sizes. The values of the fixed costs are, in practice, influenced by several factors, including bin size, bin type (e.g., thermal or refrigerated containers), physical handling operations required, the time period for which the bin is to be used, and the economic characteristics of the departure location (e.g., access rules and costs). The result of negotiations, and the scope of the capacity planning problem, is then a tactical plan defining these quantities for the firm at each location, given the proposed bin types and costs and an estimation of the demand over the planning horizon. The plan thus specifies the set of bins of particular volumes and fixed costs to be made available at each location to ship the estimated items.Given the time lag that usually exists between the signing of the contracts and the logistics operations, the negotiations are performed under uncertainty, without all the necessary information concerning the actual demand to be serviced at each occurrence of the plan.Demand is defined as a number of items of variable sizes to be packed into the available bins for shipment or storage. This disaggregated demand representation makes the problem harder to tackle, but contributes to its relevance as it models the fact that item-to-bin assignment decisions have to be taken to ensure the feasibility of the loading/shipment plan (i.e., the technological restriction due to the bin capacity). Then, variations in demand occurring at each application of the plan generally yield numbers and sizes of items that differ from the estimations used during negotiations, requiring extra capacity (additional bins) to be secured when the planned capacity is not sufficient. The additional capacity is to be obtained through the spot market, from the original 3PL or other sources, and it generally comes at a much higher cost than the fare negotiated initially. Moreover, while the 3PL generally ensures the planned capacity, the extra capacity may not be available when needed, and “penalty” costs are incurred due to either the corresponding shipping delay or the decision to ship using the more expensive less-than-container-load (LCL) mode. The availability and cost of the bins providing the extra capacity is thus considered stochastic as well.The Stochastic Variable Cost and Size Bin Packing Problem thus consists in determining the most cost-effective tactical plan, including the costs of the bins secured within the negotiations and the possible cost of updating the plan and securing extra capacity when the actual item demand and the spot-market bin availability and costs become known.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
