@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fixed cost and resource allocation based on DEA cross-efficiency

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper uses cross-efficiency in DEA to approach cost and resource allocations.Our iterative approach is feasible, and ensures that all DMUs become efficient.The cross-efficiency method is extended into distributing available resources.Such allocations are more acceptable since they are jointly determined by all DMUs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA),Cross-efficiency,Fixed cost allocation,Resource allocation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In many managerial applications, situations frequently occur when a fixed cost is used in constructing the common platform of an organization, and needs to be shared by all related entities, or decision making units (DMUs). It is of vital importance to allocate such a cost across DMUs where there is competition for resources. Data envelopment analysis (DEA) has been successfully used in cost and resource allocation problems. Whether it is a cost or resource allocation issue, one needs to consider both the competitive and cooperative situation existing among DMUs in addition to maintaining or improving efficiency. The current paper uses the cross-efficiency concept in DEA to approach cost and resource allocation problems. Because DEA cross-efficiency uses the concept of peer appraisal, it is a very reasonable and appropriate mechanism for allocating a shared resource/cost. It is shown that our proposed iterative approach is always feasible, and ensures that all DMUs become efficient after the fixed cost is allocated as an additional input measure. The cross-efficiency DEA-based iterative method is further extended into a resource-allocation setting to achieve maximization in the aggregated output change by distributing available resources. Such allocations for fixed costs and resources are more acceptable to the players involved, because the allocation results are jointly determined by all DMUs rather than a specific one. The proposed approaches are demonstrated using an existing data set that has been applied in similar studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In real managerial decisions, situations frequently occur when a total expense is used in building the common platform of an organization, thus needs to be shared by all divisions within this organization. A typical example provided by Cook and Zhu (2005) is the allocation of a manufacturer’s advertising expenditures across related local retailers. Another example can be found in hotel chains sharing the common cost arising from the introduction of new information technology. It is of vital importance to allocate such fixed costs across a group of homogeneous but competing entities in an appropriate manner. Recently, the use of data envelopment analysis (DEA) has brought a new perspective to this problem from the side of efficiency analysis. First introduced by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), DEA is an effective approach to measuring the relative efficiency of peer decision making units (DMUs) with multiple performance measures that are characterized as inputs and outputs. Literally thousands of articles have been published in this field, including many relating to case studies of efficiency in organizations such as: (1) bank branches with inputs being various staff types, and outputs, the multitude of counter transactions and financial services products sold; (2) road maintenance patrols or crews where inputs can be the maintenance and construction budgets, and outputs the numbers of lane-miles serviced and accident sites repaired; (3) franchised home building stores with inputs being various staffing and technology resources, and outputs the numbers of units of products sold; (4) universities or university departments wherein inputs include numbers of teaching and research staff and outputs the quantity and quality of research produced, and numbers of students taught; and (5) proposed R&D projects in an organization, with inputs being financial resources and technical expertise, and outputs the various benefits that come from a successful completion of such projects. The list of applications is extensive.DEA-based approaches have been developed to deal with the cost/resource allocation issues. See, for example, Cook and Kress (1999), Beasley (2003), Golany, Phillips, and Rousseau (1993), Golany and Tamir (1995), Athanassopoulos (1995, 1998), Lozano and Villa (2004), Korhonen and Syrjänen (2004), Lin (2011), Lotfi, Hatami-Marbini, Agrell, Aghayi, and Gholami (2013), and Yu, Chern, and Hsiao (2013). We note that the above studies are based upon conventional DEA principles wherein the efficiency of each DMU arises from its own self-appraisal. In technical/economic terms, this amounts to allowing each DMU to be judged according to a set of input and output multipliers chosen by that DMU. In the current paper, we put forward the view that an allocation of shared resource or shared cost should be based on a cooperative or shared view of the importance (weights) attached to inputs and outputs. Specifically, if DMUs are being asked to agree on an allocation of a fixed resource or cost, it would seem pertinent to base that allocation on an agreed-upon set of weights or multipliers. Cross efficiency is a fair and reasonable mechanism for achieving this shared view of what the input and output multipliers should be.By maximizing the conventional efficiency for each of the n DMUs in the reference set, n sets of optimal weights/multipliers are obtained. Then the cross-efficiency score of a DMU is calculated by averaging the n scores of that DMU using the n sets of optimal weights. Thus, cross efficiency takes into account the preferences (regarding multipliers) from all DMUs, and produces a peer-evaluated efficiency score rather than a self-evaluation score. In the words of Doyle and Green (1994), “cross efficiency, with its intuitive interpretation as peer-appraisal, has more of the right connotations of a democratic process, as opposed to authoritarianism (externally imposed weights) or out and out egoism (self-appraisal)”. Cross efficiency provides an effective measure for differentiating performance among all DMUs, and thus it is widely applied to many real settings such as preferential elections (Cook & Kress, 1990) and R&D project selection (Oral, Kettani, & Lang, 1991). Take the R&D project selection for example. Each project is evaluated not only from its own side, but also from all other competing projects’ perspectives. In fact, whether it is a cost or resource allocation, we need to address the potential competition (and cooperation) existing among the peer DMUs. Consider again the applications mentioned in the previous paragraph. In all of these settings there is, first and foremost, an issue of allocating fixed resources/costs, hence the need to view the set of DMUs, in each case, as a form of collective. Bank branches fall under a central authority that provides fixed advertising funds, technology, etc. Maintenance patrols are managed by a transportation department that supplies fixed supervisory staff and equipment. Franchised stores must live up to certain regulatory conditions, and in return benefit from the flow of resources from corporate headquarters. Second, and in recognition of the centralized nature of these and similar settings, there is a desire to manage the collective of DMUs in a fair manner. This means taking all points of view, as expressed by the DMU multipliers on inputs and outputs, into account when evaluating individual efficiency scores. Cross evaluation facilitates the desire for fairness in cost and resource allocations.Using the cross-efficiency concept, the current paper develops a DEA-based iterative approach to cost and resource allocation problems. First, we note that in the current paper, we still take the conventional perspective, and treat the allocated cost as an additional and independent input measure to each DMU. An algorithm is developed for deriving an optimal fixed cost allocation. This iterative process continues until the peer-evaluated performance (in a cross-efficiency sense) for any DMU cannot be improved. In that way, the resulting fixed cost allocation is jointly determined by all DMUs rather than any specific DMU, thus being readily accepted by all (competing) DMUs. It is further shown that our iterative approach is feasible, and ensures all DMUs to become efficient after the fixed cost is allocated as an additional input measure, as in Beasley (2003).We then study the resource-allocation issue by proposing another DEA-based iterative approach in a manner similar to that of the fixed-cost-allocation problem. The iterative process continues until for each DMU, any of its peer-evaluated aggregated output enhancements cannot be further improved. In that way, the consequent allocation plans along with both input and output targets are obtained under the peer-appraisal assumption. The input level for each DMU is allowed to either increase or decrease, as long as the total amount of each input remains unchanged. No reduction is expected to occur in any output.This paper differs from the existing related literature and contributes to that literature as follows:(1)Our DEA-based approach involves only linear models, and consequently a global optimal solution can be easily found.Our approach deals with a general case of multiple inputs and outputs, and can be developed under both situations of CRS (constant returns to scale) and VRS (variable returns to scale).All involved DMUs negotiate with one another to adjust the allocation plan for a better peer-evaluated performance until no one can improve further. The allocation results are jointly determined and satisfied by all DMUs rather than one specific DMU. Thus, such an allocation is more acceptable by all (or at least most) members within an organization.Our DEA-based iterative approach is feasible, and especially for fixed cost allocation, it ensures all DMUs to be efficient with the fixed cost allocated as an extra input measure. This makes a majority of DMUs satisfied with the allocation scheme since it improves their performance.Input and output levels are simultaneously decided for resource allocation.No pre-determined weights/coefficients are required.The resource allocation approach allows for both input contraction and expansion, but no output reduction.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review on the existing DEA-based cost and resource allocation issues. Section 3 proposes a DEA-based iterative approach to allocating a fixed cost. Feasibility and justifications are discussed for the proposed approach. A similar iterative method is presented in Section 4 to reallocate input resources and reset output targets. Both approaches are illustrated in Section 5 with the numerical example used in previous studies. Section 6 presents some concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The current paper develops a DEA-based iterative approach to allocating fixed costs and resources. Such an approach is verified to be feasible, and especially for fixed cost allocation, it ensures all DMUs to be efficient with the fixed cost allocated as an extra input measure.Note that our approach may yield alternative allocations. However, more often than not, decision makers are only interested in obtaining a feasible and equitable allocation plan, which is further used as a rational reference for the final decision. Extra constraints can be added on the distributed amounts, or on input/output variations, to certain DMUs in order to search for a unique allocation as in Beasley (2003).Finally, note that if we include one additional variable in our models, we have models with variable returns to scale (VRS). All the discussion can be readily applied to the VRS situation.