@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Global minimum variance portfolio optimisation under some model risk: A robust regression-based approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a robust minimum variance portfolio rule under parameter uncertainty.We solve for the optimal portfolio using a robust regression.Our robust rule is a compromise between the sample and the naïve 1/N rules.Simulations show that the robust portfolio outperforms its non robust analogue.Empirically, our robust rule compares favourably with various competing rules.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Global minimum variance portfolio,Model risk,Parameter uncertainty,Robust least squares,Robust portfolio,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The global minimum variance portfolio computed using the sample covariance matrix is known to be negatively affected by parameter uncertainty, an important component of model risk. Using a robust approach, we introduce a portfolio rule for investors who wish to invest in the global minimum variance portfolio due to its strong historical track record, but seek a rule that is robust to parameter uncertainty. Our robust portfolio corresponds theoretically to the global minimum variance portfolio in the worst-case scenario, with respect to a set of plausible alternative estimators of the covariance matrix, in the neighbourhood of the sample covariance matrix. Hence, it provides protection against errors in the reference sample covariance matrix. Monte Carlo simulations illustrate the dominance of the robust portfolio over its non-robust counterpart, in terms of portfolio stability, variance and risk-adjusted returns. Empirically, we compare the out-of-sample performance of the robust portfolio to various competing minimum variance portfolio rules in the literature. We observe that the robust portfolio often has lower turnover and variance and higher Sharpe ratios than the competing minimum variance portfolios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Modern portfolio theory suggests a positive relationship between risk and expected returns and that the market portfolio with non-diversifiable risk should generate the highest risk-adjusted returns. However, much empirical work reports under-performance of market capitalisation-weighted portfolios relative to certain popular low-risk investment strategies, such as the global minimum variance portfolio (GMVP; Haugen and Baker, 1991; Chan, Karceski, and Lakonishok, 1999; Jagannathan and Ma, 2003; Clarke, de Silva, and Thorley, 2006). This outcome can be explained by the historical long-term success of low-risk stock portfolios compared to high-risk stock portfolios. For instance, Baker, Bradley, and Wurgler (2011) report that for the U.S. investment universe restricted to the top 1000 stocks by market capitalisation, a dollar invested in the lowest-volatility portfolio in January 1968 had increased to $10.12 in real terms by December 2008, while a dollar invested in the highest-volatility portfolio had declined to less than 10 cents in real terms over the same period. This striking result, which is well documented in the literature, is typically referred to as the “low-volatility anomaly”. This phenomenon appears to hold true regardless of whether risk is defined as total volatility (Baker et al., 2011) or as idiosyncratic volatility (Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang, 2006; 2009) and is robust across markets and regions (Blitz and van Vliet, 2007; Frazzini and Pedersen, 2010). Some papers attempt to provide rational explanations for the existence and the persistence of the low-volatility puzzle. The common theoretical approach has been to consider the existence, independently of risk, of certain institutional and behavioural aspects of equity markets (e.g. benchmarking, preference for lotteries and representativeness) with dominant predictive power over returns, causing markets to be inefficient (Baker et al., 2011, and references therein).Beyond these empirical considerations, the GMVP strategy is not directly feasible in practice as the optimal allocation depends on the covariance matrix of stock returns, which is not observable. The traditional plug-in approach consists of replacing the unknown covariance matrix with its empirical counterpart, i.e., the sample covariance matrix. This estimator is the most efficient one under the assumption that stock returns are independent and identically normally distributed. However, this plug-in approach is only optimal under the condition that the number n of available historical observations exceeds size k of the stock universe. Relying on the sample covariance matrix, GMVP managers face parameter uncertainty, an important component of model risk, when this condition is violated.Because k is of the same order or even larger than n in real-world portfolio optimisation problems,11It is worth noticing that using high frequency (daily) data increases the number of points n for the risk estimation and so, in most cases, n becomes larger than the number k of securities. However, a rebalancing horizon of the order of months is rather common among low-volatility investors (in particular in the presence of transaction costs). For such investment horizons, monthly return frequency is rather more adequate, and k is usually larger than n. Moreover, for high frequencies, the Gaussianity hypothesis is far more inaccurate than for low frequencies of observation, and some degenerated characteristics (leptokurticity, jumps, heteroskedasticity, regimes, etc.) are at stake for the highest scales, thus increasing model risk. For monthly data, the Gaussianity assumption is somehow less questionable, and it allows us to work in a framework where model risk is reduced to only parameter uncertainty or estimation risk.efforts have been made in the literature to cope with the effect of parameter uncertainty in the computation of the GMVP weights. Common solutions include the use of factor models, the imposition of short-sale constraints (Jagannathan and Ma, 2003), the use of Bayesian shrinkage covariance matrices (Ledoit and Wolf, 2003; 2004), and the normed-constrained approach in DeMiguel, Garlappi, Nogales, and Uppal (2009a). These solutions have been proven to successfully reduce the amount of parameter uncertainty, thus improving portfolio stability and out-of-sample risk-adjusted returns.22According to Lipper, a data provider part of Thomson Reuters Corp., more than $10 billion have been invested over the past three years in low-volatility mutual funds and exchange-traded funds. This trend may also explain why the subject became popular in the academic literature, with a particular focus on parameter uncertainty which is the main caveat for the practical implementation of such strategies.In the same vein, the goal of this article is to develop a method for mitigating the impact of parameter uncertainty on the performance of the GMVP. Formally, we introduce a robust strategy, which is useful to an investor who (i) wants to invest in the GMVP due to its strong historical track record of efficiency, but (ii) seeks a portfolio strategy that is robust to parameter uncertainty. Hence, our paper is related to the above-cited works, with the difference that we treat parameter uncertainty using a robust approach in the field of optimisation or regression under uncertainty (Ben-Tal, El Ghaoui, and Nemirovski, 2009; Ben-Tal and Nemirovski, 1998; 1999; Bertsimas, Brown, and Caramanis, 2011; El Ghaoui and Lebret, 1997, etc.). The idea behind this approach is to provide robust solutions to optimisation or regression problems given uncertain data, where such solutions are guaranteed to be a good fit for “realistic” realisations of uncertainty in the data.To reach our objective, we develop a two-step methodology. In the first step, we show that the optimal solution of the sample GMVP33By “sample GMVP”, we mean the global minimum variance portfolio computed using the sample or empirical covariance matrix.can be reformulated as a least squares regression with uncertain data (with uncertainty in both the dependent and explanatory variables). The uncertainty in the least squares inputs is more significant as the sample covariance matrix is noisier. Hence, we obtain the robust GMVP in the second step by solving this least squares regression using the robust approach introduced by El Ghaoui and Lebret (1997). This approach solves the least squares regression in the presence of uncertain data, thus providing the investor with protection against data uncertainty.Our method of constructing the robust GMVP has several attractive features. First, by construction, this portfolio corresponds to the GMVP in the worst-case scenario with respect to the set of plausible alternative estimators of the covariance matrix in the neighbourhood of the sample covariance matrix. Hence, it provides protection against estimation errors in the sample covariance matrix. Secondly, the robust GMVP is a compromise between the sample GMVP that ignores uncertainty and the equally weighted portfolio that is free of parameter uncertainty. More precisely, the optimal portfolio corresponds to the sample GMVP when the level of parameter uncertainty is zero, and it converges to the equally weighted portfolio when the level of parameter uncertainty is high. We provide a data-dependent solution for the choice of the uncertainty level. Third, using simulated and real stock return data, we show that our robust portfolio dominates the sample GMVP as well as various competitive minimum variance portfolio strategies in the literature. This dominance is consistent across different data sets and evaluation criteria, including out-of-sample portfolio turnover, variance and the Sharpe ratio.From a theoretical point of view, our article is related to several papers in the literature on portfolio selection that are robust to parameter uncertainty or that incorporate aversion to parameter uncertainty (ambiguity). These papers, which draw on the multi-prior approach of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989), include Goldfarb and Iyengar (2003), Tütüncü and Koenig (2004) and Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang (2007), to cite a few. They adopt a max–min approach, maximising investors wealth in the worst case scenario with respect to the unknown parameters. Goldfarb and Iyengar (2003) and Tütüncü and Koenig (2004) introduce optimisation algorithms to solve max–min saddle-point problems and apply them to the classical mean-variance problem of Markowitz (1952). Garlappi et al. (2007) modify the classical mean-variance rule in such a way that the optimal portfolio is chosen so as to maximise the investor expected utility under a worst-case scenario, where the worst case is based on uncertainty about the unknown expected returns.44For further contributions on robust portfolio optimisation, refer to Fabozzi, Kolm, Pachamanova, and Focardi (2007a), Fabozzi, Kolm, Pachamanova, and Focardi (2007b), Fabozzi, Huang, and Zhou (2010), Gabrel, Murat, and Thiele (2014), and Kim, Kim, and Fabozzi (2014). These contributions include robust formulations for the Markowitz mean-variance model, as well as works on deriving robust counterparts for value-at-risk and conditional value-at-risk problems.Our paper, however, differs from these ones in the sense that we aim to make the GMVP robust instead of targeting other optimal mean-variance portfolios. Our main reason for focusing on the GMVP is the existence and persistence of the low-volatility anomaly, as described above, which explains the historical performance of this particular portfolio on the efficient frontier. Moreover, as many empirical works (DeMiguel et al., 2009a; DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal, 2009b; Jagannathan and Ma, 2003) emphasise the outperformance of the GMVP over the mean-variance portfolios of Markowitz (1952), robust versions of the former are likely to outperform robust versions of the latter.55Other papers in finance (Chen and Epstein, 2002; Epstein and Miao, 2003; Maenhout, 2004; Uppal and Wang, 2004) solve the (dynamic) portfolio choice problem under uncertainty aversion, using the robust control approach of Hansen and Sargent (2001), and Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003). As these papers focus on the mean-variance model of Markowitz (1952), they also differ from our contribution. Moreover, they treat the problem of allocating wealth between risky assets and a risk-free asset rather than that of large-scale portfolio optimisation, which is the focus of our paper. This last remark also holds for another recent class of papers that address parameter uncertainty through learning (Epstein and Schneider, 2007; Miao, 2009).The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of the GMVP selection problem under parameter uncertainty. In Section 3, we introduce our robust method to address the issue of parameter uncertainty. Section 4 analyses the properties of the robust strategy via Monte Carlo simulations. Empirical applications are conducted in Section 5. The final section concludes the paper.Suppose that at each date t, there are k stocks in the investment universe. Let rtbe the vector of length k of excess (over the risk-free rate) returns on the k stocks. We consider a risk-averse investor, with a one-period investment horizon, who allocates his wealth to the k stocks by minimising the overall risk of the optimal portfolio, that is:(1)ω*=argminωω′Σωs.t.ω′ϑ=1,where ω is the vector of length k of portfolio weights, ϑ is a vector of length k with all entries equal to one, and Σ is the k × k covariance matrix of stock returns.The solution to the GMVP problem in (1) is well known and given by:(2)ω*=Σ−1ϑϑ′Σ−1ϑ.An estimator of the covariance matrix Σ is needed to make the above solution operational. Under the assumption that stock returns are independent, identically distributed and have a multivariate normal density with mean μ and covariance matrix Σ, the sample covariance matrix defined as:(3)Σ^S=1n−1∑t=1n(rt−μ^)(rt−μ^)′,is the most efficient estimator, where n is the available sample size andμ^is the sample mean. Hence, in practice, the global minimum variance strategy may be implemented, when approximating the true covariance matrix using its sampling estimator, thus yielding:(4)ω^*=argminωω′Σ^Sωs.t.ω′ϑ=1,with the following allocation:(5)ω^*=Σ^S−1ϑϑ′Σ^S−1ϑ.Nevertheless, as nicely summarised by Ledoit and Wolf (2004), no one should use the sample covariance matrix for the purpose of portfolio optimisation because it contains parameter uncertainty of a kind that is likely to perturb a mean-variance optimiser. Parameter uncertainty is even stronger when the size of the investment universe k is the same as or larger than the number n of observations available. Indeed, it is well known that when the ratio k/n is not close to zero, the eigenvalues of the sample covariance matrix will be more dispersed than the true unobservable eigenvalues (Marcenko and Pastur, 1967), and the eigenvectors will not be consistent (Johnstone and Lu, 2009).To gain more insight into the impact of dimensionality on the statistical properties of the sample covariance matrix, let us consider a simple simulation experiment. We simulate a time series of length n of k monthly stock returns using a 1-factor model:(6)rt=βft+ɛt,t=1,…,n,where rtis the vector of length k of excess returns, ftis excess returns on the market factor, β is the vector of length k of the market factor loadings, and ɛtis the vector of length k of residuals. To make our simulation realistic in the context of portfolio optimisation, we follow MacKinlay and Pastor (2000), DeMiguel et al. (2009b) and Tu and Zhou (2011) in assuming an annual excess return of 8 percent and an annual standard deviation of 16 percent of the return on the market factor. We further suppose that the factor loadings are evenly spread between .5 and 1.5. The residuals ɛtare drawn from a multivariate normal distribution with a nil mean and a covariance matrix that is assumed to be diagonal, with the diagonal elements drawn from a uniform distribution with support [.10, .30]. With the n × k matrix of simulated stock returns, we compute the sample covariance matrixΣ^Sand measure parameter uncertainty (PU) using the Frobenius norm of the difference betweenΣ^Sand the true covariance matrix Σ from the factor model in (6), as such:(7)PU=∥Σ^S−Σ∥F,where the Frobenius norm of a matrix A is defined as ‖A‖F = {tr(AA′)}1/2, with tr( · ) the trace operator.Table B.1in Appendix B displays the mean of PU across 1000 simulations, for different values of k ∈ {50, 100, 250} and n ∈ {60, 120, 180}. The results confirm that the sample covariance matrix is indeed noisy, with high levels of parameter uncertainty in a large k and small n setting. This property is known to affect the sample GMVP, leading to portfolio weight instability and substantial losses in risk-adjusted returns (DeMiguel et al., 2009a; Jagannathan and Ma, 2003; Ledoit and Wolf, 2003; 2004).In the sequel, we introduce a robust GMVP, using the framework of robust regression with uncertain data (El Ghaoui and Lebret, 1997). The new optimal portfolio accounts for parameter uncertainty because it is computed in the worst-case scenario with respect to the set of alternative estimators of the covariance matrix in the neighbourhood of the reference noisy sample covariance matrix. We will later show how to identify this set of alternative plausible estimators and how the investor can build a GMVP that is robust to parameter uncertainty in the reference sample covariance matrix, as well as in the alternative plausible covariance matrices.Consider the problem (4) of minimising portfolio variance using the noisy sample covariance matrix, with the solution as such:(8)ω^*=Σ^S−1ϑϑ′Σ^S−1ϑ.Let Q be the k × (k − 1) matrix with the following properties:(9)Q′ϑ=0andQ′Q=Ik−1,where, again, ϑ is a vector of length k with all elements equal to one, and Ik − 1 the identity matrix of dimension (k − 1)2. Following Van Trees (2002) and Selén, Abrahamsson, and Stoica (2008), the columns of the matrix Q are easily identified as the eigenvectors corresponding to the k − 1 non-zero eigenvalues of the matrix Θ, defined as such:(10)Θ=Ik−ϑϑ′k.The following proposition, which is at the core of our methodology, shows thatω^*in (8) can also be obtained using the classical least squares regression.Proposition 1With Q as defined in (9), the structure of the sample GMVP is:(11)ω^*=ϑk−Qη^*,whereη^*is the solution of the least squares regression as such:(12)η^*=argminη∥y−Xη∥2,with X and y equal to:(13)X=Σ^S1/2Q∈Rk×(k−1);y=Σ^S1/2ϑk∈Rk.See Appendix A for the proof.66Note that the seminal paper of Britten-Jones (1999) shows similar results, but for the tangency portfolio. Our results differ from those of Britten-Jones (1999), as we focus on the GMVP. However, the literature offers other reformulations of the global minimum variance portfolio using least squares regressions (Candelon, Hurlin, and Tokpavi, 2012; Kempf and Memmel, 2006).The matrixΣ^S1/2is such thatΣ^S=Σ^S1/2Σ^S1/2and is computed as follows:(14)Σ^S1/2=U|Λ|1/2U′,where U and Λ are the orthogonal matrix of eigenvectors and the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues, respectively, and are obtained through the eigenvalue decomposition ofΣ^S,and |Λ| refers to the absolute value of the matrix Λ.Proposition 1 indicates that the solutionω^*for the sample GMVP can be computed using (11), whereη^*is the solution of the least squares regression in (12). Note that (11) guarantees that the stock weights sum to one. Indeed, we have:(15)ω^*′ϑ=(ϑk−Qη^*)′ϑ=ϑ′ϑk−η^*′Q′ϑ=1.The main point we wish to emphasise here is that both the dependent variable y and the independent variables X in the least squares regression model (12) depend on the noisy sample covariance matrixΣ^S,via the expressions in Eq. (13). Therefore, the parameter uncertainty is incorporated into the regression variables y and X through the uncertain noisy sample covariance matrixΣ^S. Our objective in this article is to use the literature of robust least squares regression with uncertain data (Calafiore and Dabbene, 2005; Chandrasekaran, Golub, Gu, and Sayed, 1998; El Ghaoui and Lebret, 1997; Golub and Van Loan, 1980; Sayed, Nascimento, and Cipparrone, 2002) to solve the regression equation (12), enabling the investor to invest in a GMVP that is robust to parameter uncertainty.Because the inputs X and y in the least squares regression equation (12) are uncertain, it is obvious that one way to account for this uncertainty is to assume that this equation is not defined by a single pair (X, y), but by a family of matrices (X′, y′) = (X + ΔX, y + Δy), with Δ = [ΔXΔy] an unknown-but-bounded matrix of perturbations defined as such:(16)∥Δ∥F=∥[ΔXΔy]∥F≤ρ,where ρ ≥ 0 and ‖ · ‖Fdenotes the Frobenius norm of a matrix. In other words, the noisy sample covariance matrixΣ^S,which contains some degree of parameter uncertainty, defines the inputs X and y of the regression equation (12)via the relations in (13), and these inputs are uncertain. We seek to incorporate this uncertainty, allowing for the existence of other pairs of inputs (X′, y′) = (X + ΔX, y + Δy) close enough to the original pair (X, y), where ΔX and Δy are perturbations. The degree of closeness is measured by the parameter ρ, which represents the level of parameter uncertainty in the reference sample covariance matrix.A popular alternative to the least squares method with uncertain inputs is the Total Least Squares (TLS), introduced by Golub and Van Loan (1980). TLS solves the following problem:(17)ΔX*,Δy*,η^*=argminΔX,Δy,η∥(y+Δy)−(X+ΔX)η∥2.Thus, compared to the traditional least squares method in (12), TLS can deal with perturbations in both the dependent and the explanatory variables. Nevertheless, in practical situations, TLS has some drawbacks that degrade its performance. For instance, it may unnecessarily overemphasise the effect of uncertainties and it does not take into account the issue of robustness, which is the main focus of this paper. Hence, we do not rely on the TLS method, but we instead rely on the Robust Least Squares (RLS) regression of El Ghaoui and Lebret (1997), which treats the problem of robustness by minimising the worst-case residual. For a fixed value of the regression parameter η, the worst-case residual is defined as:(18)r(X,y,ρ,η)=max∥ΔX,Δy∥F≤ρ∥(y+Δy)−(X+ΔX)η∥2.The robust GMVP we introduce in this article is then obtained by minimising the worst-case residual r(X, y, ρ, η) with respect to the regression parameter vector η.Definition 2Letω¯(ρ)be the robust GMVP weights. Thus, we have:(19)ω¯(ρ)=ϑk−Qη¯(ρ),withη¯(ρ)defined by:(20)η¯(ρ)=argminηmax∥ΔX,Δy∥F≤ρ∥(y+Δy)−(X+ΔX)η∥2.Therefore, our methodology implies robustness in the sense that we solve the regression problem (12) in Proposition 1 for the least favourable outcome with respect to the set of plausible inputs (X′, y′) = (X + ΔX, y + Δy).Note that our robust GMVP encompasses the sample GMVP, which ignores parameter uncertainty. Indeed, when the uncertainty parameter ρ is set to zero, the worst-case residual in (18) is equal to the usual least squares residual, and the robust solution converges to the usual solution, yielding:(21)ω¯(0)=ϑk−Qη¯(0)=ϑk−Qη^*=ω^*.In the more general case, where ρ > 0, the worst-case residual r(X, y, ρ, η) can be rewritten (El Ghaoui and Lebret, 1997) as follows:(22)r(X,y,ρ,η)=∥y−Xη∥2+ρ∥[η1]∥2.Hence, for a given value of the uncertainty parameter ρ > 0, the robust solution is:(23)ω¯(ρ)=ϑk−Qη¯(ρ),and is found by solving the program:(24)η¯(ρ)=minη∥y−Xη∥2+ρ∥[η1]∥2,using second-order cone programming (SOCP).The limiting behaviour of the robust portfolio is summarised in the following proposition.Proposition 3The robust GMVP, with weightsω¯(ρ),converges to the equally weighted portfolio at very high levels of uncertainty, that is:(25)limρ→∞ω¯(ρ)=ϑk.The proof is straightforward. Indeed, when ρ increases indefinitely,η¯(ρ)in (24) converges to the null vector andω¯(ρ)in (23) tends to the vector of length k, with all elements equal to 1/k. This is an elegant feature of our robust approach, as it suggests that an investor with very high uncertainty in the reference noisy sample covariance matrix invests in the equally weighted portfolio, which is free of parameter uncertainty. Moreover, the results in DeMiguel et al. (2009b), obtained both from simulated and real market data, show that the uncertainty-free, equally weighted portfolio is a competitive investment strategy, as many other investment rules can hardly outperform it.Using results of Theorem 3.2 in El Ghaoui and Lebret (1997), which provides an analysis for the optimal solution of the robust least squares regression, our robust portfolioω¯(ρ)satisfies the system of implicit equations given by (26) and (27):(26)ω¯(μ)=ϑk−Qη¯(μ),(27)η¯(μ)=(X′X+μIk−1)−1X′y,where the positive parameter μ is given by:(28)μ=∥y−Xη¯(μ)∥ρ∥η¯(μ)∥2+1.These last expressions show the connection between our robust portfolio problem and the Tikhonov regularization or ridge regression. This issue will be discussed further below.A data-driven estimation of the uncertainty parameter ρ is required to make our robust GMVP operational. To estimate ρ, we employ bootstrapping techniques. Our method consists in randomly resampling stock returns from the original data set, generating a sample S of B (for example, B = 1000) different values of the sample covariance matrix:(29)S={Σ^S,b;b=1,…,B}.With the sample S, alternative values of the uncertain least squares regression inputs X and y in Proposition 1 can be generated, yielding:(30)SX,y={(Xb,yb):Xb=Σ^S,b1/2Q;yb=Σ^S,b1/2ϑk;b=1,…,B}.It follows that the set Sρdefined as:(31)Sρ={ρb:ρb=∥ΔXbΔyb∥F=∥X−Xby−yb∥F;b=1,…,B},contains reasonable values of ρ. Let qξ(Sρ) be an upper quantile of this set, with, for example, ξ = 99.00 percent. The calibrated value of ρ is thus:(32)ρ^=qξ(Sρ).This method of calibrating the parameter ρ is data-adaptive. Indeed, when the original sample covariance matrixΣ^Sis not affected by parameter uncertainty, the resampled covariance matrices{Σ^S,b;b=1,…,B},should be close toΣ^S. Therefore, the generated inputs Xband ybshould also be close to X and y, respectively, with an estimated value ofρ^close to zero. In this configuration, our robust GMVP with weightsω¯(ρ^)should not diverge too much from the sample GMVP defined byω^*. The converse case will arise for a very noisy sample covariance matrix(ρ^→∞),with our robust GMVP converging to the equally weighted portfolio. In Section 4, we show using Monte Carlo simulations that our bootstrap method for calibration is indeed fully data-adaptive.Our robust formulation of the GMVP can be interpreted as the 2-norm constrained portfolio, introduced by DeMiguel et al. (2009a). Indeed, these authors propose a general framework for finding minimum variance portfolios that perform well out-of-sample in the presence of parameter uncertainty. Their framework solves the global minimum variance problem, subject to the additional constraint that the 2-norm of the portfolio-weight vector is smaller than a given threshold.77Note that DeMiguel et al. (2009a) also consider the 1-norm constrained portfolio which is deeply explored in Fan, Zhang, and Yu (2012). See also Brodie, Daubechies, Mol, Giannone, and Loris (2009) and Carrasco and Noumon (2012). However, we consider here in our discussions only the 2-norm constrained portfolio, because of its similarity with our robust portfolio. Moreover, results in DeMiguel et al. (2009a) show similar performances for the 1-norm and 2-norm rules.More precisely, they consider the following optimisation problem:(33){ω^nc*=argminωω′Σ^Sωs.t.ω′ϑ=1,ω′ω≤π,withΣ^Sthe sample covariance matrix and π > 0 an upper-bound for the square 2-norm of the portfolio weights.Using our result in Proposition 1 which recasts the computation of the GMVP into the classical least squares regression problem, we can reformulate the 2-norm constrained portfolio problem in (33) as:(34)ω^nc*=ϑk−Qη¯nc,(35){η¯nc=argminη∥y−Xη∥22s.t.η′η≤π*,with X and Y defined as in Proposition 1, andπ*=π−1k.88Indeed, the norm-constraint ω′ω ≤ π is equivalent to(ϑk−Qη)′(ϑk−Qη)≤π,which gives after some simple algebraic calculus:η′η≤π−1k.The last optimisation can be alternatively written as:(36)η¯nc=argminη∥y−Xη∥22+μη′η,where μ > 0 is a constant penalty parameter inversely related to π*.The last equation shows the connection between the 2-norm constrained portfolio problem in DeMiguel et al. (2009a) and the ridge regression or Tikhonov regularization. Hence, we can derive the explicit solution of the 2-norm constrained portfolio problem, which is given by (34) with:(37)η¯nc(μ)=(X′X+μIk−1)−1X′y.The explicit solution of the 2-norm constrained portfolio in (37), compared with the one of our robust portfolio in (27), shows the similarity between the two portfolios. Indeed, for a fixed common value of the regularisation parameter μ, the two strategies lead to identical portfolios. Nevertheless, although our robust approach leads to a solution equivalent to the 2-norm constraint portfolio, our contribution to the literature is threefold.Our first contribution is theoretical, as our robust min–max formulation provides a new justification for the 2-norm constrained portfolio rule that goes beyond the uncertainty-neutral Bayesian justification provided by DeMiguel et al. (2009a). Indeed, they give a Bayesian interpretation of the 2-norm constrained portfolio rule, showing that under multivariate normality for stock returns, the Bayesian rule is rational for an investor that believes a priori (i) that the GMVP weights are distributed as a multivariate normal distribution, and (ii) that the variance of the minimum variance portfolio return has an independent prior distribution. In contrast, our robust min–max formulation shows that the 2-norm constrained portfolio is optimal for an uncertainty-averse investor which deals with errors in the reference sample covariance matrix, seeking for the GMVP in the worst-case scenario, with respect to a set of plausible alternative estimators of the covariance matrix. Hence, our uncertainty-averse interpretation gives more rationality to the 2-norm constrained portfolio, because experiments in the field of choice under uncertainty (Becker and Brownson, 1964; Camerer and Weber, 1992; Ellsberg, 1961) confirm that decision-makers are averse to uncertainty rather than neutral.The second contribution is related to the way the Tikhonov regularization is achieved in our robust framework. As shown in (28), the regularization parameter μ in our robust portfolio rule has an implicit expression which is given by:(38)μ=∥y−Xη¯(μ)∥ρ∥η¯(μ)∥2+1,and appears to be related both to data (X and y) and to the level of parameter uncertainty ρ. Hence, for our robust portfolio rule, the Tikhonov regularization is performed endogenously such that robustness is optimal, given the data and the uncertainty level. This is in contrast to the 2-norm constrained portfolio rule, where the Tikhonov regularization parameter μ is only determined by the upper bound π on portfolio weights (see Eqs. (33) and (35)), and is related neither to data, nor to the level of parameter uncertainty.99See El Ghaoui and Lebret (1997, Section 6.2.) for a discussion on the difference between traditional Tikhonov regularization and Tikhonov regularization in robust least squares regression.The last contribution is related to the calibration of the tuning parameters, namely ρ, for our robust portfolio rule, and π in (33) for the 2-norm constrained portfolio rule. Indeed, because π is an exogenous parameter, DeMiguel et al. (2009a) suggest using the cross-validation principle to calibrate its level. Unfortunately, applying the cross validation technique can produce very unstable sequences of tuning parameters through time. This instability can generate frequent portfolio re-balancing accompanied by high transaction costs, which can alter the overall return on the portfolio. In contrast, our robust formulation, as shown in the above section, offers a very simple and intuitive way to calibrate the tuning parameter ρ endogenously, via bootstrapping techniques. By the term “endogenously”, we mean that, in our framework, ρ is estimated so that it matches the level of parameter uncertainty present in the sample covariance matrix. This issue is illustrated in the empirical part of the paper (see Section 5) with the turnovers (and hence transaction costs) of our robust portfolio being much less important than the ones of the 2-norm constrained portfolio. The picture is consistent across three data sets of different sizes.In this section, Monte Carlo simulations are conducted to measure to what extent the new robust global minimum variance strategy mitigates the impact of parameter uncertainty. In the evaluation of portfolio strategies, Monte Carlo simulations are useful, as they help to draw pure conclusions which are not affected by the existence of market inefficiencies, anomalies or micro-structure biases, such as momentum, mean-reversion, calendar or small-firm effects, etc. Moreover, with Monte Carlo simulations, the vector of the true optimal portfolio weights is known exactly, and the error that arises from the implementation of a given portfolio strategy can be easily computed.Our Monte Carlo simulations design is similar to that in DeMiguel et al. (2009b) and Tu and Zhou (2011). We generate a data set of k monthly stock returns rt= (r1t, r2t, …, rkt)′, assuming a multivariate normal distribution and relying on a three-factor model as such:(39)rt=βft+ɛt,where ftis the 3 × 1 vector of excess returns on the three factors, β is the k × 3 matrix of factor loadings, and ɛtis the k × 1 vector of residuals. The first two moments (means and covariance matrix) of the factors are calibrated based on the monthly data from July 1963 to August 2007 for the market factor and for Fame and French (1993) size and book-to-market portfolios. The stock factor loadings are randomly paired and evenly spread between .90 and 1.20 for the market β’s, − .30 and 1.40 for the size portfolio β’s, and − .50 and .90 for the book-to-market portfolio β’s. The residual variance-covariance matrix is assumed to be diagonal, with the diagonal elements drawn from a uniform distribution with support [.10, .30], so that the cross-sectional average annual idiosyncratic volatility is 20.00 percent.Using the three-factor model in (39), we simulate a sample of stock returns of dimension N × k where N = 12, 000 is the number of months (a millennium) and k is the number of stocks. With the simulated data, we use a rolling-window procedure to compare the sample global minimum variance strategy (with weightsω^*) with its robust counterpart introduced in this article (with weightsω¯(ρ^)). More precisely, the simulated returns for the first n months (where n is the estimation sample length) are used to computeω^*andω¯(ρ^),which are considered to be competitive portfolios for the month n + 1, and the two corresponding out-of-sample portfolio returns are computed. This process is iterated by repeatedly moving the estimation window forward one month (including the data for a new month and dropping the data for the earliest month) until the last observation is reached. Note that at the end of this procedure, for each of the two global minimum variance strategies, we have computed N − n portfolio weightsω^t*andω¯t(ρ^),t = n, …, N − 1, with corresponding out-of-sample returnsRt=ω^t*′rt+1andR¯t(ρ^)=ω¯t′(ρ^)rt+1,where rt + 1 is the k × 1 vector of stock returns at time t + 1.Before comparing the two global minimum variance strategies, it is of great interest to examine the above rolling-window procedure to gauge whether the bootstrap method (see Section 3.2) used to calibrate the level of ρ in our robust framework is relevant. Indeed, it is worth checking whetherρ^,the estimator of the uncertainty coefficient ρ, increases when parameter uncertainty in the sample covariance matrix increases. To this end, Table B.2in Appendix B displays the mean ofρ^across the N − n optimisations. We consider different configurations of k ∈ {50, 100, 250}—the number of stocks, and n ∈ {60, 120, 180}—the estimation sample length. The results reveal that for a given n, the calibrated level of parameter uncertaintyρ^increases, on average, with the number of stocks k. For example, with n = 120, the mean ofρ^is .1514, for k = 50, and .2936 and .6219, for k = 100 and k = 250 respectively. Moreover, when the size of the stock universe k is kept fixed, the mean ofρ^decreases on average. These results are as expected since, as highlighted above, when the ratio k/n diverges from zero, the parameter uncertainty in the reference sample covariance matrix grows. Hence, our bootstrap method used to estimate the uncertainty coefficient ρ is indeed fully data-adaptive.The comparison of the new robust GMVP with its non-robust sample counterpart is now conducted from a statistical point of view using the mean square differences (MSD) of the estimated portfolio weights. For the two strategies, both MSD are computed as follows:(40)MSD(ω,ω^*)=1N−n∑t=nN−1∑j=1k(ω^t*(j)−ωj)2,and:(41)MSD(ω,ω¯(ρ^))=1N−n∑t=nN−1∑j=1k(ω¯t(j)(ρ^)−ωj)2,where ω is the vector of length k of the true GMVP from the specified three-factor model in (39).Table B.3in Appendix B displays, for different values of n and k, the MSD of the sample GMVP weights, followed in brackets by the MSD of its robust analogue based on the robust least squares approach. The results show that when the number k of stocks under consideration is not low relative to the number n of historical return observations available (such that the ratio k/n is not close to zero), the sample estimatorω^*of the GMVP weights ω is very noisy, leading to large mean square differences. The results also suggest that in these configurations, the robust GMVP strategy developed in this article decreases the MSD of the estimated weights. For instance, with (n, k) = (60, 250), the MSD of the sample estimatorω^*is 295.51, whereas it is only .30 for the robust estimatorω¯(ρ^).Economically, we compare the properties of the two GMVP strategies using three criteria: the out-of-sample portfolio turnover that provides an insight into the temporal stability of each strategy, the out-of-sample variances and the Sharpe ratios. The out-of-sample Sharpe ratioSR^ω^*of the sample GMVPω^*is defined as such:(42)SR^ω^*=μ^ω^*σ^ω^*,whereμ^ω^*andσ^ω^*2estimate, respectively, the mean and the variance of Rtas such:(43)μ^ω^*=1N−n∑t=nN−1Rt,and:(44)σ^ω^*2=1N−n−1∑t=nN−1(Rt−μ^ω^*)2,and the same statisticSR^ω¯(ρ^)for the robust GMVP can be computed by replacing RtbyR¯t(ρ^)in Eqs. (43) and (44).The portfolio turnover is defined as:(45)TOω^*=1N−n−1∑t=nN−1∑j=1k(|ω^t+1*(j)−ω^t+*(j)|),whereω^t*(j)is the weight of stock j in the optimal portfolio based onω^t*,ω^t+*(j)is the weight of stock j before rebalancing at t + 1, andω^t+1*(j)the desired weight of stock j at time t + 1 (after rebalancing). The same expression in Eq. (45) is used to define the turnover of the robust portfolio with weightsω¯(ρ^).Table B.4in Appendix B displays the out-of-sample portfolio turnover for different values of n and k. For each pair (n, k), we first report the turnover of the sample GMVP, followed by the turnover of our robust GMVP in brackets. The results convincingly demonstrate that our robust estimation of the optimal GMVP succeeds in reducing the time instability of the estimated portfolio weights. For example, with (n, k) = (60, 250), the turnover of the sample portfolio is 259.23, while that of the robust portfolio is only .35.The out-of-sample variances of the two competitive GMVP are reported in Table B.5. For each (n, k) pair, the out-of-sample variance of the sample GMVP is first reported, followed in brackets by the out-of-sample variance of the robust portfolio. The third reported value in parentheses is the p-value of the test for equality between the variances. We compute these p-statistics using the robust test of variance comparison in Ledoit and Wolf (2011). Based on the results, it appears that our robust methodology does not cause the out-of-sample portfolio variances to increase significantly when the ratio k/n is not close to zero. In other words, the robust strategy is successful in reducing portfolio variances relative to the sample non-robust strategy, for medium and large portfolio selection problems (k = 100, 250). Indeed, in these configurations, the reported p-values are less than 5 percent. Obviously, for the smallest value of k, when the sample size increases, so that the sample covariance matrix is less noisy, our robust approach does not significantly decrease the portfolio variances. As an illustration of this, for (n, k) = (180, 50), the out-of-sample variances for the sample and robust portfolios are, respectively, .00202 and .00199, with a difference between the two values which is not statistically significant at the 5 percent significance level.Table B.6displays the out-of-sample Sharpe ratios of the two GMVP. The presentation is similar to Table B.5, except that the differences in the Sharpe ratios are tested using the studentised circular block bootstrapping methodology of Ledoit and Wolf (2008). The overall picture from Table B.6 is that our robust approach significantly improves the performance of the sample GMVP. For example, with (n, k) = (120, 100), the monthly Sharpe ratio of the robust portfolio is .1590, while that of the sample portfolio is just .0584, less than a third of the value of the Sharpe ratio of the robust portfolio. Note that for the largest value of k , the risk-adjusted values of the out-of-sample returns are all negative for the sample non-robust strategy, suggesting that investors lose money on a risk-adjusted basis.To summarise, Monte Carlo simulations show that, for realistic values of the sample size n and number of stocks k, the robust GMVP strategy performs well in (i) stabilising portfolio turnover, (ii) reducing portfolio variances, and (iii) improving portfolio risk-adjusted returns, when parameter uncertainty is a concern. As a result in practical uses, our robust method should naturally contribute to increase the performance while reducing cost and risk of the strategy.In this section, we stress the empirical relevance of the robust GMVP strategy using three different data sets. The first data set includes monthly excess returns on the forty-nine industry portfolios (k = 49) representing the U.S. stock markets. The second data set contains monthly excess returns on the one hundred Fama and French portfolios of firms sorted by size and book-to-market (k = 100). Both data sets, extracted from Kenneth French’s website,1010http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.are frequently used in empirical applications to compare alternative portfolio strategies (DeMiguel et al., 2009a; DeMiguel et al., 2009b; Tu and Zhou, 2011). For each data set, the period under investigation ranges from July 1963 to December 2013. As for the third data set, it includes weekly returns of all stocks in the STOXX Europe 600 universe, with non-missing data over the period from January 2000 to December 2013, with a total of k = 218 stocks.1111We use weekly instead of monthly data to have enough data for out-of-sample analysis.This data set is extracted from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).For each series, we apply the rolling-window procedure described in the last section (with a monthly re-balancing period), and compute the out-of-sample turnover of the both sample and robust GMVP weights.1212Note that for the largest investment universe (k = 218), the sample covariance matrix is not invertible. We then compute the optimal portfolio weights using the Moore–Penrose inverse of the sample covariance matrix.In applying the rolling-window procedure, we set the estimation sample length to n = 120.1313The results for other values of n are quite similar and are available from the authors upon request.Note that with this value of n, we have two data sets where parameter uncertainty is of concern (k = {100, 218}).The results are displayed in Panel A of Table B.7. To provide practitioners with sufficient incentive to implement our robust portfolio strategy, in Panel B of Table B.7, we report the out-of-sample turnover of various performing minimum variance portfolio strategies in the literature: the minimum variance portfolio with shortsale constraints (Jagannathan and Ma, 2003), the minimum variance portfolios based on shrinkage estimators of the covariance matrix (Ledoit and Wolf, 2003; 2004), and the 2-norm constrained portfolio in DeMiguel et al. (2009a).1414Following DeMiguel et al. (2009a), the tuning parameter in the 2-norm constrained portfolio rule is calibrated, relying on the cross-validation principle with the out-of-sample variance as a criterion.We also display the out-of-sample turnover of the equally weighted portfolio. We consider this last portfolio because it constitutes a relevant benchmark strategy that outperforms many other strategies in the presence of parameter uncertainty (DeMiguel et al., 2009b). Moreover, we have shown above that our robust minimum variance portfolio degenerates to the equally weighted portfolio asymptotically (ρ → ∞). Therefore, it is useful to compare our portfolio strategy to this target portfolio.Beyond the Monte Carlo simulation results in the last section, Table B.7 provides additional evidence that our robust strategy drastically improves the stability of optimised minimum variance portfolios. For example, with the 100FF data set, the sample GMVP has a turnover of 1.18, while the turnover of our robust GMVP using the same data set is only .16. This observation is consistent across the three data sets. Except for the equally weighted portfolio and the shortsale constrained strategy of Jagannathan and Ma (2003), the turnover of the robust portfolio is less than for the minimum variance portfolios in the literature. This result favours our robust methodology, because high turnover is accompanied by high transaction costs, which can alter the overall return of a given portfolio strategy.1515Practically, less turnover not only means a reduction in trading costs, but also real-world management costs, such as, e.g. middle-office staffing level or the time spent by portfolio managers to verify and execute the portfolio changes. Though the cost of trading is directly born by the investor, a reduction in management costs benefit investors indirectly as they often contribute to reduce management fees. This is especially true in the market segment of low-volatility funds that has become very competitive over the last couple of years.Although we prove that there is an equivalence between our robust portfolio and the 2-norm constrained portfolio in DeMiguel et al. (2009a), applying both rules leads to very different levels of out-of-sample portfolio turnovers. These differences spring mainly from the calibration of the tuning parameter. Indeed, while our robust framework offers a simple way to calibrate the tuning parameter ρ endogenously, via bootstrapping techniques, DeMiguel et al. (2009a) suggest using cross-validation to calibrate the tuning parameter π in the 2-norm constrained problem (see Eq. (33)). Nevertheless and as already stressed, the cross validation method can produce very unstable sequences of tuning parameters through time, which can lead to frequent portfolio re-balancing, and high levels of portfolio turnover. To confirm this statement, we display in Table B.8the variance of the sequence of tuning parameters obtained through the rolling-window procedures, for both rules. We observe that the time-instability as measured by the variance is less important for the estimated values of the tuning parameter in our robust portfolio procedure.Table B.9reports the out-of-sample variances for the different GMVP strategies and the corresponding p-values indicating whether the portfolio variance for a given strategy is significantly different from that for the robust strategy. The p-values are computed using the robust test of variance comparison in Ledoit and Wolf (2011). In Panel A of Table B.9, we observe that the out-of sample variances of the robust portfolio are always lower than those of the sample portfolio, with the differences being statistically significant for the three data sets. Comparing the variances of the robust portfolio to those resulting in the various GMVP reported in the literature, Panel B of Table B.9 shows that our robust strategy is a competitive alternative. For instance, with the 100FF data set, the robust portfolio always achieves out-of-sample variances lower than those of the minimum variance portfolios considered. The differences are statistically significant in the cases of the shortsale constraint minimum variance portfolio of Jagannathan and Ma (2003), and the equally weighted portfolio.Lastly, we compare the out-of-sample Sharpe ratios of the competitive GMVPs. To measure the impact of transactions costs on out-of-sample performances, we compute the Sharpe ratio net of transaction costs. For a given portfolio strategy with estimated weightsω^,this risk-adjusted statistic is defined as:(46)SR^ω^net=μ^ω^netσ^ω^net,whereμ^ω^netandσ^ω^netmeasure the mean and the standard error, respectively, of the returns net of transaction costs (Rtnet) over the out-of-sample period:(47)μ^ω^net=1N−n∑t=nN−1Rtnet,and:(48)(σ^ω^net)2=1N−n−1∑t=nN−1(Rtnet−μ^ω^net)2.The returns net of transaction costs are expressed as follows:(49)Rtnet=(1+Rt)(1−c×∑j=1k(|ω^t+1(j)−ω^t+(j)|))−1,where Rtis raw out-of-sample portfolio returns, and c is proportional transaction costs, that we realistically set to 50 basis points per transaction (as in DeMiguel et al., 2009b).Table B.10 in Appendix B displays, for the three data sets, the out-of-sample Sharpe ratios net of transaction costs and, in parentheses, the corresponding p-values indicating whether the portfolio net Sharpe ratio for a given strategy is significantly different from that for the robust strategy. We obtain p-values using the studentised circular block bootstrapping methodology in Ledoit and Wolf (2008), where the number of bootstrap replications and the size of each block are set, respectively, to B = 1000 and b = 5. The results in Panel A show, once again, the relevance of our robust approach. For instance, with the STOXX 600 data set, the sample GMVP has a negative net Sharpe ratio of − 16.21 percent, which suggests that, by ignoring parameter uncertainty, investors lose money on a risk-adjusted basis. By contrast, the robust strategy leads to a positive net Sharpe ratio of 8.82 percent. In addition, Panel B of Table B.10 shows that the robust portfolio delivers statistically higher or equal net Sharpe ratios when compared to competing strategies in the literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Because of the troublesome but persistent historical track records of low-volatility stocks, global minimum variance investing has gained repute in both the academic and financial spheres. Nevertheless, applying this investment strategy in practice requires estimating the covariance matrix of stock returns. The plug-in approach that consists of approximating the covariance matrix by its sampling counterpart is known to be not economically valuable. Indeed, parameter uncertainty, which affects the sample covariance matrix, leads to unstable portfolio weights and low risk-adjusted returns.For an investor optimising a portfolio using the GMVP strategy, this paper provides a robust approach to mitigate the impact of parameter uncertainty. Our robust portfolio provides protection against parameter uncertainty because it corresponds to the GMVP in the worst-case scenario with respect to the set of plausible alternative estimators of the covariance matrix, in the neighbourhood of the sample covariance matrix. The robust portfolio has the nice property that it is equivalent to the sample GMVP when the level of parameter uncertainty is zero, and it converges to the equally weighted portfolio under very high levels of uncertainty. For intermediate values of the uncertainty coefficient, the optimal portfolio shrinks the sample GMVP toward that of the equally weighted portfolio. We, furthermore, provide a data-adaptive method to calibrate the uncertainty coefficient.Using Monte Carlo simulations, we show that, in the presence of parameter uncertainty, the robust strategy dominates the plug-in approach in terms of portfolio weight stability, portfolio variance and risk-adjusted returns. We also empirically compare, across three data sets, the out-of-sample performance of our robust strategy to that of various competing minimum variance strategies in the literature. We find that the robust portfolio often has lower turnover and variances, and higher Sharpe ratios than the competing minimum variance strategies.There are some papers that propose robust versions of other low-risk investing strategies. Examples include the robust minimum value-at-risk (VaR) portfolio in El Ghaoui, Oks, and Oustry (2003) and the robust minimum conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) portfolio in Zhu and Fukushima (2009) and Huang, Zhu, Fabozzi, and Fukushima (2010). An empirical comparison of our robust minimum variance portfolio to these robust portfolios will be valuable.From a methodological point of view, generalising our robust approach to other types of model risks will also be valuable (see for instance Boucher, Danielsson, Kouontchou, and Maillet, 2014). These forms of model risks which are even more relevant when using high frequency data, must also go beyond parameter and specification uncertainty, dealing with anomalies, market inefficiencies and financial return characteristics, which includes among others, departures from Gaussianity, non i.i.d. data, jumps and micro-structure biases.With Q as defined in (9), i.e.:(A.1)Q′ϑ=0andQ′Q=Ik−1,consider the reparameterisation of the weights vector ω, i.e.:(A.2)ω=ϑk−Qη,with η a vector of length k − 1. This reparameterisation does not impose any restrictions on ω other than ω′ϑ = 1. Given the reparameterisation, the program of minimising the portfolio variance with the sample covariance matrixΣ^S:(A.3)ω^*=argminωω′Σ^Sωs.t.ω′ϑ=1,can be equivalently rewritten as:(A.4){ω^*=ϑk−Qη^*η^*=argminη(ϑk−Qη)′Σ^S(ϑk−Qη),which gives, after some simple algebraic calculus:(A.5){ω^*=ϑk−Qη^*η^*=argminη∥y−Xη∥2,with:(A.6)X=Σ^S1/2Q;y=Σ^S1/2ϑk.Note thatη^*in (A.5) is nothing but the solution of a least squares regression problem. Therefore, we have:(A.7)η^*=(X′X)−1X′y(A.8)=(Q′Σ^SQ)−1Q′Σ^Sϑk,andω^*in (A.5) takes the following expression:(A.9)ω^*=ϑk−Q(Q′Σ^SQ)−1Q′Σ^Sϑk,which can be simplified as follows:(A.10)ω^*=[Ik−Q(Q′Σ^SQ)−1Q′Σ^S]ϑk=Σ^S−1/2[Ik−Σ^S1/2Q(Q′Σ^SQ)−1Q′Σ^S1/2]︸AΣ^S1/2ϑk.Remarks that matrix A is the orthogonal projection matrix onto the complement of the column space ofΣ^S1/2Q. Moreover, with the definition of the matrix Q, we have:(A.11)Q′ϑ=0(A.12)Q′Σ^S1/2Σ^S−1/2ϑ=0(A.13)(Σ^S1/2Q)′(Σ^S−1/2ϑ)=0.The last expression implies thatΣ^S−1/2ϑspans the complement of the column space ofΣ^S1/2Q,and Eq. (A.10) becomes:(A.14)ω^*=Σ^S−1/2[Σ^S−1/2ϑ(ϑ′Σ^S−1ϑ)−1ϑ′Σ^S−1/2]︸AΣ^S1/2ϑk=Σ^S−1/2Σ^S−1/2ϑϑ′Σ^S−1/2ϑ′Σ^S−1ϑΣ^S1/2ϑk=Σ^S−1ϑϑ′Σ^S−1ϑ.The last equation corresponds to the familiar expression of the sample GMVP.