@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Demand forecasting with high dimensional data: The case of SKU retail sales forecasting with intra- and inter-category promotional information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Selecting key explanatory variables from a very large data set.Retail store level modelling and forecasting at SKU level for thousands of products.Including both intra- and inter-category promotional effects.Comparative results for a large number of SKUs in a large number of categories.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Analytics,OR in marketing,Forecasting,Retailing,Promotions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In marketing analytics applications in OR, the modeler often faces the problem of selecting key variables from a large number of possibilities. For example, SKU level retail store sales are affected by inter and intra category effects which potentially need to be considered when deciding on promotional strategy and producing operational forecasts. But no research has yet put this well accepted concept into forecasting practice: an obvious obstacle is the ultra-high dimensionality of the variable space. This paper develops a four steps methodological framework to overcome the problem. It is illustrated by investigating the value of both intra- and inter-category SKU level promotional information in improving forecast accuracy. The method consists of the identification of potentially influential categories, the building of the explanatory variable space, variable selection and model estimation by a multistage LASSO regression, and the use of a rolling scheme to generate forecasts. The success of this new method for dealing with high dimensionality is demonstrated by improvements in forecasting accuracy compared to alternative methods of simplifying the variable space. The empirical results show that models integrating more information perform significantly better than the baseline model when using the proposed methodology framework. In general, we can improve the forecasting accuracy by 12.6 percent over the model using only the SKU's own predictors. But of the improvements achieved, 95 percent of it comes from the intra-category information, and only 5 percent from the inter-category information. The substantive marketing results also have implications for promotional category management.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many marketing problems require the analyst to understand the interactions of a large number of potentially inter-related variables. For example, grocery retailers rely heavily on accurate sales forecasts at SKU level when making business decisions in a wide range of areas including marketing, production, inventory, and finance etc. Sales and promotional effects in any one SKU are potentially affected by marketing and sales activities in a large number of other categories—in other words, there are intra and inter-category variables that may affect the target variable(s). However, identifying important variables from such a large set of possibilities poses a serious modelling challenge—it is the subject of this paper.In a retail forecasting system, product sales history, intra-category promotional schedules, and inter-category promotional schedules are all potential rich sources of information which may influence forecasting accuracy. When building product sales forecasting models, a series of related but fundamental questions must be answered: which sources of information should be inputted into the forecasting model? To what extent do different sources of information contribute to forecasting accuracy improvements? And critically, how to manipulate the high dimensional information to generate better forecasts?The main challenge to be faced is that the dimensionality of promotional explanatory variables grows very rapidly when cross-product promotional information is considered, potentially much larger than the length of SKU sales history. The model may be easily over-fitted or even cannot be estimated. To build a forecasting model for an SKU, when considering both intra- and inter-category promotional interactions, the number of candidate explanation variables is usually in the order of tens of thousands. With high dimensionality, important predictors can be highly correlated with some unimportant ones, and the maximum spurious correlation also grows with dimensionality (Fan & Lv, 2008).Traditional methods which deal with the problem of high dimensionality include the subset selection method, the penalized L-1 likelihood method, and the information summary approach. The subset selection method and the penalized L-1 likelihood method both try, but using different mechanisms, to find out the most influential variables affecting the dependent variable. However, in the retail context, store managers may promote similar products simultaneously (e.g., different SKUs under the same brand), which makes the price and promotional variables of different SKUs highly correlated to each other. As a result, these two methods may select some unimportant predictors which are highly correlated with the important predictors but fail to select the truly important predictors. The information summary approach condenses the information of the vast number of variables (which we cannot directly use due to high dimensionality) into a small number of factors but at the cost of (potentially high) information loss.To overcome the problem, a four step methodological framework is proposed in this paper which consists of the identification of potentially influential categories, the building of explanatory variable space, variable selection and model estimation by a multistage LASSO (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator) regression, followed by a scheme to generate forecasts. The method breaks down the process of variables selection into three stages: (1) to select variables related to promotional history of the focal product; (2) to select intra-category variables and (3) finally, to select inter-category variables.The development of a successful modelling system, necessarily automatic in order to deal with the large number of SKUs, would also allow retailers to simulate the expected results based on different promotional plans so that they can then optimize their promotional schedules (Levy, Grewal, Kopalle, & Hess, 2004, Zhang, Chen, & Lee, 2008). The need for an effective modelling and forecasting system is therefore transparent. Existing studies in the literature have overlooked the inter-categorical variables because available methods are incapable of effectively integrating the useful information contained by these variables, as we discuss in the next section.In this paper, we focus on developing an automatic modelling approach which we validate by applying it to the problem of forecasting many thousands of retail SKUs in order to produce improved short term forecasts. Through a series of empirical data experiments, we show that the proposed method of variable selection is an effective approach to simplifying the dimensionality of the promotional marketing space: it improves forecasting accuracy significantly by simplifying and integrating more retail information. But generally, the inter-category information contributes limited accuracy improvements comparing to that of intra-category information.The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we review existing related studies and address their limitations. In Section 3 we discuss methodological issues. Section 4 describes the data, introduces the experimental design and forecasting accuracy measures, and presents the empirical results. Section 5 discusses the findings, offering conclusions as to forecasting practice and further academic research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In analyzing high-dimensional marketing data, the problem faced is that valuable predictors of consumer behavior are often hidden in a large number of useless noisy variables. When the dimensionality increases with the integration of intra- and inter-categorical information, the number of unreliable predictors which are correlated with valuable ones also increases rapidly. This makes the model difficult or even impossible to estimate. It is also difficult to select the ‘correct’ best specified model because the corresponding candidate models are many. Various methods have been proposed for selecting important variables from within the space. A key contribution of this paper is to propose a novel sequential selection method building on an approach, LASSO, well-known in statistics but rarely if ever used in marketing where the underperforming stepwise selection method is most often applied. This new method meets one of the key requirements when analyzing ‘big data’ of being fully automatic. It is therefore suitable for application in the important marketing problem of SKU/ store level sales forecasting and promotional planning, when considering intra- and inter-category promotional information leads to high-dimensionality, which is this paper's concern. The second substantive contribution of this paper is that it develops guidelines to practitioners on whether and how they can improve sales forecasting accuracy at SKU level by integrating intra- and inter-category promotional information when they are building a forecasting system for grocery retailers.Specifically, on the methodological side, we propose a four steps framework to overcome the high dimensionality of the retail data set that results from integrating the intra- and inter-category promotional information. Our results show that the scheme of how one generates the sequence of regression estimates necessary to make forecasts is very important when integrating extra information. The multi-stage LASSO strategy is the key to improving the forecasts. This contributes to avoiding the selection of misleading variables among correlated variables by separating different sources of information into several layers. When considering inter-category information, the first stage in simplifying the problem and lessening the computational burden is to limit the number of categories to be considered: LASSO Granger is an effective way to identify the promotional interactions among categories. Then, various simplification schemes have been evaluated but a key element is to break down the process of variables selection into three stages: models that include just the target variables promotional history, those that also include the intra-category variables and finally, inter-category variables are included. In addition to selecting from among these variable sets, diffusion indices were also developed (based on PCs) that reduced the dimensionality of these sets. Differing from existing approaches (e.g., Stock and Watson), we combine diffusion factor with LASSO selection. We first cluster the massive number of explanatory variables into hundreds of subsets according to their common attributes (i.e., sales lag, price, display and feature), then for each subset, we conduct PCA dynamically and extract PCs as the inputs to the proposed multistage LASSO. This combines the merit of PCA which is effective in dealing with collinearity and LASSO which is good at variable selection in high dimensional space while make up for their drawbacks. Finally, a rolling forecasting scheme was shown to effectively utilize extra information by capturing complex dynamic relationships among products. The total selection process is fully automatic and therefore can be easily integrated into a forecasting system.Our substantive results demonstrate which of the methods of variable selection work best in SKU level retail forecasting. Those models that integrate extra information, even if including extra information only from the intra-category five top sales products, perform significantly better than the baseline model when using a rolling forecasting scheme. Considering various measures of performance, the diffusion approach proved the most robust. In general, we can improve forecasting accuracy by about 12.6 percent over the baseline model that includes only the focal SKU's own predictors. But among the improvements, about 95 percent comes from the intra-category information, and only 5 percent from the inter-category information. However, the forecasting results at category level show that the accuracy improvements are spread unevenly among different categories. Though intra-category information still consistently contributes the main part of the forecasting improvements across categories, inter-category information can also contribute up to 78 percent in some categories. But integrating more information increases the computational complexity substantially: from data processing, model selection and estimation. In return, better forecasting accuracy can consistently be achieved. In practice, we need to weigh the benefit from increasing forecast accuracy and the cost and practicality of increasing computational complexity. Because of the rapidly decreasing cost of data storage, processing and computation, integrating more information to improve the grocery retailer's forecasting is a promising option.When faced with large numbers of potentially explanatory variables it is all too easy for researchers to identify misleading relationships. In the existing marketing analytics literature, association-rule discovery or cross category choice models are popular methods to analyze the correlations between sets of products. These methods are often promoted as a means to obtain product associations on which to base a retailer's promotion strategy. Based on this approach, researchers have argued that associated products with a high lift/interest can be promoted effectively by only discounting just one of the two products (e.g., Mehta, 2007; Song & Chintagunta, 2007; Van den, Schamphelaere, & Wets, 2004; Wang & Shao, 2004). But Vindevogel, Van den Poel, and Wets (2005) empirically show that this implicit assumption does not hold. A simple reason is that while associated products are often purchased together, this does not necessary imply that promotion of one product stimulates the other. The methods proposed in this paper directly capture this promotional interaction to form a correlation set for every product to improve their forecasts. They have the advantage of being rigorously validated through a rolling origin forecasting scheme. Based on the results the methods proposed could also be used to build a promotional optimization expert system for retailers. This opens a very interesting direction for further exploration.