@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-criteria decision making model for advanced repair-to-order and disassembly-to-order system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce ARTODTO system to address uncertainty issues in product recovery.Sensors and RFID tags in products provide components status without disassembly.A novel multicriteria model allows for environmental as well as financial targets.Remaining life of returned products was introduced as a solid measure of quality.The model provides item level remanufacturing, disassembly and recycling plans.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sensor-embedded products,Disassembly-to-order,End-of-life management,Radio frequency identification (RFID),Linear physical programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sensor-embedded products (SEPs) eliminate a majority of uncertainties involved in product recovery by providing item-based life-cycle information. This information includes the content of each product and component conditions, and enables the estimation of remaining useful life of the components. Once the data on the products are captured, it is possible to make optimal recovery decisions without any preliminary disassembly or inspection operations.This paper presents a multi-criteria advanced repair-to-order and disassembly-to-order (ARTODTO) system for SEPs. ARTODTO system deals with products that are embedded with sensors and RFID tags. The goal of the proposed approach is to determine how to process each and every end-of-life product (EOLP) on hand to meet remaining life based product and component demands as well as recycled material demand while optimizing an aggregate objective function. Demands are met by disassembly, repair, and recycling operations. Outside component procurement option is used to eliminate the component and material backorders. A linear physical programming (LPP) model is proposed to optimize the multi-criteria ARTODTO system. The LPP approach is explained in detail and a case example is considered to illustrate its application.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rapid technological advancements have resulted in the availability of high-tech products at low prices so that it has become economically viable for customers to satisfy their desire for newer products even before their current products reach their technological ends of lives. Increased turnover of such products have led to early disposal of goods, depletion of virgin resources and disappearance of landfills resulting in huge environmental concerns. With the increase in public awareness about environmental issues, both environmental legislations and customers have forced manufacturers to manage their end-of-life products (EOLPs) in a responsible manner. Manufacturers try to comply with customer expectations and governmental regulations by incorporating the concept of product recovery with their production models. Product recovery decreases the use of virgin resources by recovering the remaining value trapped in EOLPs, in turn, providing economic benefits by creating new markets for recycled materials, used components and remanufactured products. However, product recovery is fraught with uncertainty as the conditions of returns are not always known. These uncertainties provide major challenges in product recovery (Fleischmann et al., 1997;Gungor & Gupta, 1999; Ilgin & Gupta, 2010b).The management of EOLPs involves cleaning, disassembly, sorting, inspecting and recovery or disposal. The recovery may take one of several forms depending on the condition of EOLPs: viz., product recovery (refurbishing, remanufacturing, repairing), component recovery (cannibalization), and material recovery (recycling). A method that has gained attention in recent years is disassembly-to-order (DTO). DTO system aims to fulfill component and material demands by cannibalizing the EOLPs.The main objective of DTO is to determine the optimum number of EOLPs to disassemble to fulfill the demand for components and materials such that a criterion or a combination of criteria of the system is satisfied. EOLPs, however, originate from many sources in which the products are subjected to various operating environments, usage patterns and customer upgrades. This causes an unpredictable/uncertain status in EOLPs leading to errors in DTO’s outcome. Since the life cycle information of a product is unknown, inspection and testing become necessary to determine the conditions of EOLPs and their components. When a component turns out to be nonfunctional after testing, the time and effort made in disassembling and testing that component are wasted. This increases the backorders and prevents production planners from generating reliable recovery plans for the disassembly-to-order (DTO) system. Missing components also lead to unreliable recycling planning as planned number of components may not be harvested for recycling during disassembly.Another popular recovery option is repair. EOLPs may need component replacement to be in “working order”. This option usually requires disassembly of nonfunctional components and may involve disassembly of functional components due to disassembly precedence relationships. Depending on the condition of a recovered product, it may be sold in the market as a brand new or a used product. The components’ replacement operations that need to be performed during the repair option vary widely depending on the condition of EOLPs. When there is no information available on the components’ conditions, thorough testing is needed to determine that. If an EOLP is found not suitable for repair, the time and resources spent on determining that are wasted. It is clear that out of all EOLPs on hand, finding the EOLPs with minimal recovery costs requires testing of the whole EOLP inventory. That can be very expensive. However, emerging information technology devices, such as sensors and radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags, can be very helpful in mitigating such uncertainty.RFID has recently gained importance in closed loop supply chain operations, including reverse logistics, disassembly and remanufacturing, as a means of communication and data storage (Cao, Folan, Mascolo, & Browne, 2009; Zhou & Piramuthu, 2011). Although passive RFID tags are sufficient for tracking purposes, active RFID tags with embedded sensors can provide a lot more information about the usage/condition of every single object. These products are referred to as sensor embedded products (SEPs). A sensor is a device that detects and keeps a log of the changes in the value of various measures such as temperature, pressure, vibration and converts them into useful information to provide the conditions of the components. Sensor embedded products (SEPs) are manufactured with sensors implanted in them to monitor their critical components while they are in use. Sensors collect dynamic field data while the product is being used. Dynamic field data or information generated during the use of a product consist of patterns of usage, number of use cycles, run time in each use cycle, and environmental conditions. Dynamic data also include service history on inspections and, replaced and repaired parts. SEPs mitigate storage and collection of both static and dynamic data on the product. Collected data can be used to predict failures (Ilgin & Gupta, 2010a), estimate the remaining useful lives of components, and recognize missing components as the products reach their ends of lives. In addition, using the static information stored on the RFID tags, type, release date, sale date, sale location, maintenance history and scheduled part replacements of an EOLP can be acquired without any inspection or disassembly operation. Decrease in uncertainty allows better planning which in turn leads to improvements in financial and environmental goals. Furthermore, these devices enable fulfillment of remaining life based component and product demands, thus allowing customers to state minimum remaining life requirements in their orders. This also helps determine the warranty levels that can be offered to customers on recovered items. Warranty costs are directly related to the remaining lives of recovered components and customer requirements. Because of the available sensor information, orders can be prepared so that they exceed the minimum remaining life requirements as much as possible minimizing the warranty claims.In this paper, a multiple-criteria ARTODTO model for SEPs is proposed. The problem is formulated as a linear physical programming model. A case example of a residential air-conditioner (AC) ARTODTO system with disassembly precedence relationships among components is considered to illustrate the application of the methodology.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
With the alarming downfall of virgin resources, environmental conscious manufacturing and product recovery (ECMPRO) has recently gained a lot of attention from both researchers and practitioners. One of the main hurdles encountered in recovery operations is the uncertainty about the quantity and condition of the end-of-life products (EOLPs). Sensor embedded products (SEPs) embedded with active RFID tags with sensors mitigate end-of-life (EOL) management and product recovery by providing valuable static and dynamic information about their history.In this paper, a multi-criteria advanced repair-to-order and disassembly-to-order (ARTODTO) system was proposed. The proposed system was designed in such a way that emerging information technology devices (viz. sensors and RFID tags) are utilized to reach the optimum disassembly, repair, disposal, recycling and storage plans in a demand-driven environment. Then, a linear physical program (LPP) which utilized the life-cycle data collected, stored and delivered by sensors and RFID tags was developed to optimize various conflicting objectives, viz, total cost (financial objective), number of disposed items (environmental objective), material sales revenue (financial objective), customers’ satisfaction level (quality objective). The proposed product recovery system uses the remaining-life as a measure of quality and aims to increase customers’ satisfaction level by providing them with longer lasting products. The optimal solution of the model provided the serial numbers of the products to be subjected to various recovery operations. The solution also provided the detailed item-based repair. Therefore, this paper made its unique contribution to the literature by proposing an advanced product recovery system that utilizes valuable life-cycle data to make informed recovery decisions and presenting a solid measure for the quality of returned products to replace vague categorical approaches seen in the literature.A case example was considered to illustrate the application of the proposed approach and solved using MATLAB and LINGO 11.0 software packages. The optimal values of the first and third objectives fell in the “Tolerable” range, the second objective fell in the “Highly Undesirable” range, and the last objective fell in the “Undesirable” range showing how unrealistic (optimistic) the DM’s expectations were.Our experiments showed that the problem space grows drastically when the total number of returned products and their components increase. A computational complexity analysis is still to be performed to quantify the difficulty of the problem as a future research. Also, in order to increase the applicability of the model to bigger problems with multiple product types with many more reusable components, a more efficient solution methodology (optimal or near optimal) can be developed. Moreover, in future studies, the proposed model can be adjusted for specific situations. For example, in cases where complete disassembly is not feasible and/or needed, some extra constraints will be necessary.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.09.003.Supplementary material