@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An intelligent decomposition of pairwise comparison matrices for large-scale decisions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a BIP to decompose a Pairwise Comparison Matrix (PCM) into subsets.The methodology is applied to both AHP and ANP decision making methodologies.Results show that the number and inconsistency of pairwise comparisons is reduced.A trade-off is identified by changing the number of subsets of the PCM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
AHP,ANP,Pairwise comparison matrices,Inconsistency,Binary integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A Pairwise Comparison Matrix (PCM) has been used to compute for relative priorities of elements and are integral components in widely applied decision making tools: the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) and its generalized form, the Analytic Network Process (ANP). However, PCMs suffer from several issues limiting their applications to large-scale decision problems. These limitations can be attributed to the curse of dimensionality, that is, a large number of pairwise comparisons need to be elicited from a decision maker. This issue results to inconsistent preferences due to the limited cognitive powers of decision makers. To address these limitations, this research proposes a PCM decomposition methodology that reduces the elicited pairwise comparisons. A binary integer program is proposed to intelligently decompose a PCM into several smaller subsets using interdependence scores among elements. Since the subsets are disjoint, the most independent pivot element is identified to connect all subsets to derive the global weights of the elements from the original PCM. As a result, the number of pairwise comparison is reduced and consistency is of the comparisons is improved. The proposed decomposition methodology is applied to both AHP and ANP to demonstrate its advantages.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Anm×mpairwise comparison matrix (PCM) denoted by A is a reciprocal matrix which is composed of pairwise comparisonsaij∈[1/9,9]that represent the scaled relative importance scores of element i as compared to element j. These elements could be criteria or alternatives within a PCM. Typically, a PCM is generated from pairwise comparisons elicited from a decision maker (DM) to estimate element priorities for any decision problem. One of the most widely used multiple criteria decision making (MCDM) methodology that use PCMs is the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) developed by Saaty (1977). Currently, there are several successful applications of the AHP in a wide-range of MCDM problems (Ishizaka & Labib, 2011). Conversely, the AHP fails to account for the interdependencies of the criteria and alternatives, and hence it assumes that all criteria and alternatives are independent. If left unchecked, any DM using the AHP would then provide inaccurate decisions. To address this issue, the Analytic Network Process (ANP) has been developed by Saaty and Takizawa (1986) as a generalization of the AHP. The ANP requires additional pairwise comparisons to estimate the inner and outer dependencies of the criteria and alternatives. Although it addresses the limitations of the AHP, the ANP still use PCMs which are faced with the following issues: (1) numerous pairwise comparisons elicited from the DM are required for the ANP to work and (2) inconsistent pairwise comparisons are obtained when numerous pairwise comparisons are elicited from the DM are large.The first limitation is attributed to the fact that both methodologies suffer from the curse of dimensionality. Consider a PCM of m criteria. A total ofm(m-1)/2pairwise comparisons are needed to obtain the priorities. Additionally, for the ANP,m2comparisons are needed to estimate the inner dependencies of the criteria. This would be impractical when m is large. Saaty (1977) argues that the redundancy of the questioning process provides weights which are much less sensitive to biases and judgement errors. In a case study by Lin, Wang, and Yu (2008), it took two and a half hours on average to complete a three-level AHP decision problem per DM and a total of 380 man-hours to complete all pairwise comparisons. This could be greater for the case of the ANP. On the other hand, there are generally three reasons why a DM is reluctant to complete the required comparisons specifically: (1) there is insufficient time to complete all comparisons; (2) the DM is unwilling to make direct comparisons of two alternatives and (3) the DM is unsure of some of the comparisons (Harker, 1987a). In a Monte-Carlo simulation study (Carmone, Kara, & Zanakis, 1997), comparisons are deleted from large matrices and results show that at most 50% of the comparisons can be deleted without significantly affecting the weights of the criteria. Furthermore, to obtain a reasonable and consistent PCM, Saaty (1977) recommends that the number of criteria or alternatives within a PCM should only be at most seven. Hence, any PCM with eight or more elements is considered large. Unfortunately, lots of decision problems far exceed this maximum threshold. There exist several articles that attempt to address the issue of numerous pairwise comparisons, one of which are called decomposition methodologies (Ishizaka, 2008; Ishizaka, 2012; Shen, Hoerl, & McConnell, 1992; Triantaphyllou, 1995). When a PCM A of n alternatives is decomposed into k subsets, pairwise comparisons are elicited only in those subsets. Since the dimensions of the decomposed matrices are smaller than A, a reduction in the number of pairwise comparisons is realized. Unfortunately, these methods are not without any disadvantages. Firstly, these methodologies focus on decomposing PCMs for alternatives. Lots of pairwise comparisons can be saved when these methodologies are extended to decompose the criteria PCMs since both the AHP and ANP can have multiple criteria PCMs within the hierarchy or network respectively. Secondly, when a PCM is decomposed into subsets, the obtained relative weights of the elements are valid only within those subsets and the problem arises when aggregating the results back to its global counterpart. As a result, a pivot element is selected arbitrarily and assigned to all subsets and is used as a basis for comparing the elements across all disjoint subsets. The global weights can then be estimated (Shen et al., 1992; Ishizaka, 2008). Please note that pivot element selection is a challenging issue as the decisions should consider reducing the number and inconsistency of the pairwise comparisons, as well as reducing the amount of dependence present among elements within each subset. Thirdly, these methodologies lack guidelines to assign criteria or alternatives to respective subsets since they are done arbitrarily. This does not guarantee that the number of pairwise comparisons elicited is reduced optimally.The second limitation related to the curse of dimensionality is attributed to the consistency of the pairwise comparisons elicited from the DM when the number of alternatives or criteria is large. As the number of pairwise comparisons increases, the consistency of these comparisons is expected to be less reliable and results to inconsistent decisions (Weiss & Rao, 1987). A performance metric called consistency index (CI) is generally used to estimate the inconsistency of a PCM A (Saaty, 1977). The CI is computed by obtaining the eigenvalue of the pairwise comparison matrix using Eq. (1):(1)CI(A)=λmax-mm-1where m is the dimension of the PCM A andλmaxis the maximal eigenvalue of matrix A. The consistency ratio (CR) is the ratio of CI and RI and is computed using Eq. (2):(2)CR(A)=CI(A)RI(m)whereRI(m)is the random index obtained from the average CI of 500 randomly filled matrices and is dependent on the value of the m. According to Saaty (1977), if a PCM A has CR<10%, then A is considered to have an acceptable level of consistency. Nevertheless, DMs that use the PCMs are faced with the issues on bounded rationality (Simon, 1972). With this, due to their limited cognitive processing powers, the DMs are not expected to provide consistent pairwise comparisons all throughout the pairwise comparison elicitation process especially when the number of pairwise comparisons is large. Therefore, a methodology that reduces the pairwise comparisons elicited from the DM would lead to improved consistency levels since only a handful of pairwise comparisons are elicited and would not be cognitively taxing to the DM.This research proposes the PCM Decomposition Methodology (PDM) to address the limitations of PCMs when used in either the AHP or the ANP methodology. The contributions of the PDM are twofold: (1) The PDM seeks to reduce the number of pairwise comparisons elicited from the DM thereby increasing its consistency. A binary integer programming (BIP) model is proposed to accomplish this by intelligently decomposing PCMs into smaller and manageable subsets. Only pairwise comparisons within those subsets are elicited from the DM. The BIP uses the inner dependence comparisons of the elements to assign these elements into mutually exclusive subsets. Hence, interdependent elements are separated as much as possible thereby reducing the amount of interdependencies among subsets. (2) Since the subsets are disjoint, a pivot element is optimally selected and is used to connect all pairwise comparison matrices within each PCM. The pivot is selected that minimizes the interdependencies of the elements. Using the pivot element and the local weights, the global weights of the elements of the PCM are then calculated.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews existing literature that tries to solve the aforementioned problems. Section 3 illustrates the steps of the proposed PDM, while Section 4 describes the application of the PDM in reducing the number of pairwise comparisons in an AHP problem. On the other hand, Section 5 presents the application of the PDM in reducing the number of pairwise comparisons in an ANP problem. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and proposes further research areas.There exist methodologies that address the limitations for the PCMs, in terms of the numerous required pairwise comparisons and its inconsistency, can be mainly classified as: (1) optimization methods and (2) heuristic methods. Each category is reviewed as follows.Optimization models start with a handful of pairwise comparisons only. The remaining pairwise comparisons are estimated using optimization algorithms by taking advantage of the matrix properties of A. Starting with a of minimumm-1comparisons, a gradient descent method is proposed to select the next pairwise comparison that would have the biggest information gain (Harker, 1987b). Additionally, stopping rules are provided for terminating the pairwise comparison elicitation process. The methodology by Bozoki, Fulop, and Ronyai (2009) uses nonlinear optimization with exponential scaling to estimate the missing pairwise comparisons from available ones. However, all possible combinations of connecting paths must be considered. The number of combinations exponentially grows as the number of missing comparisons increases and thus would be inefficient to solve. A linear programming formulation by Triantaphyllou (1995) is used to estimate the missing pairwise comparisons of A by considering two arbitrary subsetss1ands2of the criteria PCM wheres1∪s2≠∅. By solving the linear programming problem, the global weights of the m criteria of the PCM can be estimated. Nevertheless, the algorithm only focuses on dividing the PCM A into two subsets. If m is large, then the two subsets are still large. Moreover, the error rates of estimating the missing comparisons are dependent on the number of common elements of subsetss1ands2. The smaller thes1∪s2, the estimation of the missing comparisons is expected to be less accurate and deviation error increases significantly. The issue of pairwise elicitation is addressed by Despotis and Derpanis (2008) which is composed of a min–max goal programming formulation to derive the priorities from an interval. Zhang and Chen (2009) develop a nonlinear programming model to improve the consistency of a PCM that uses a genetic simulated annealing algorithm. In general, the challenge of optimization based approach lies to the scalability of the problem. That is, as most decision problems tend to have large number of alternatives and criteria, these analytical approaches may suffer.There are several types of heuristic methodologies but all of propose to reduce the number of pairwise comparisons elicited from the DM. Saaty (1990) proposes the idea to group alternatives into subsets according to a common decision criterion. Ishizaka (2012) propose to assign the alternatives into k subsets based on a subjective absolute scale in which alternatives that have close “magnitudes” are grouped together. By using several pivot alternatives that is common to at most two subsets, the global priorities of the alternatives are then obtained. Note, the definition of close “magnitudes” is not well defined and is highly subjective. Furthermore, no guidelines are provided to determine which alternatives are assigned to which subset. Shen et al. (1992) propose an arbitrary decomposition of the alternative PCM into k subsets such that these k subsets have one common pivot alternative. Pairwise comparisons are first performed on each subset and local priorities are calculated. The global priority is then derived by using common pivot alternative and local priorities of each subset. Ishizaka (2012) applies the same decomposition algorithm on supplier selection. There exist models that use the concept of a balanced incomplete block designs in which subsets of the PCM A are assigned to different DMs treated as replicates in contrast to having all DMs focus on the large PCM (Takahashi, 1990; Weiss & Rao, 1987). The computation of the global alternative weights is done by using the geometric mean. To the best of our knowledge, no methodology has tried to optimally assign PCM elements to subsets that minimize the number of pairwise comparisons, the amount of dependence among criteria and the consistency of the pairwise comparisons. Any methodology that reduces the required number of pairwise comparisons for a PCM is fruitful for wider adoption of the AHP and ANP methodologies (Ishizaka & Labib, 2011). Triantaphyllou (2000) develops a method to reduce the number of pairwise comparisons via the duality approach when the number of alternatives is greater than the number of criteria plus one. Islam and Abdullah (2006) consider reducing the number decision criteria by the nominal group technique. The decision criteria that have insignificant weights are eliminated from future pairwise comparison elicitation process.There are several articles (Benítez, Delgado-Galván, Izquierdo, & Pérez-García, 2011b; Cao, Leung, & Law, 2008; Ergu, Kou, Peng, & Shi, 2011; Saaty, 2003) that focus on reducing the inconsistency of a given PCM without reducing the number of pairwise comparisons. Benítez et al. (2011b) propose a linearization heuristic that provides the closest consistent PCM which is later extended to balance the consistency and the preferences of the DM (Benítez, Delgado-Galván, Gutiérrez, & Izquierdo, 2011a). Still, upon applying these methodologies, the original pairwise comparisons significantly deviate from the resulting consistent pairwise comparisons and thus would not reflect the actual preferences of the DM. These methods focus on improving a given PCM which could be large. If the number of decision criteria or alternatives is large, these heuristics would still take a lot of time to complete and are more subject to human error when providing the initial pairwise comparisons.We present Table 1as an overview of the reviewed existing related literature and their corresponding methodologies on addressing PCM limitations.In summary based on the analysis from Table 1, the following four gaps in literature can be gleaned from the review as follows: (1) existing decomposition methodologies focus on decomposing the alternative PCMs with alternative elements. Additional pairwise comparisons can be saved when decomposing algorithms are extended to criteria PCMs. (2) These methodologies lack guidelines to assign elements to subsets of the PCMs that minimize the number of pairwise comparisons elicited, as well as the independence of elements within each subset. (3) These methodologies select the pivot element arbitrarily and no rules are provided in literature. (4) To the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of methodologies that try to reduce the number of pairwise comparisons of a PCM for the ANP but not for the AHP. Any methodology that can simplify the ANP would be beneficial for any decision with interdependent criteria and alternatives.This section outlines the proposed PDM decision making framework. Fig. 1presents a high level overview of the proposed PDM.We illustrate the decomposition of a PCM A with m elements. In step 1, the m elements are collected and a value of the number of subsetsk∈[2,m-1]is elicited from the DM. The pairwise comparisons that measure the inner dependencies of the elements are qualitatively elicited or quantitatively gathered. Quantitative pairwise comparisons are direct observations from the attributes of alternatives, while qualitative comparisons are elicited from the DM to quantify the degree of preference between any two elements. This is completed in step 2 (see Section 3.1). Let these comparisons beR={rii′|i,i′=1,2,…,m}. A symmetric interdependence matrix for the elements is derived from the R scores. Using the obtained interdependence matrices, the m elements are decomposed into k mutually exclusive subsetssl∈Susing the proposed BIP decomposition methodology (see Section 3.1). Additionally, in step 4, the pivot element is selected by choosing the most independent one and assigned to all subsets (see Section 3.2). In step 5, local pairwise comparisonsaijare then elicited for all subsets of S and local weights are calculated (see Section 3.3). In step 6, global priorities are estimated from the local pairwise comparisons for all elements (see Section 3.4).We start with the elicitedm2inner dependence pairwise comparisons denoted by matrix R as follows:(3)R=r11r21…rm1r12r22…⋮⋮⋮⋱⋮r1m……rmmAccording to Saaty and Takizawa (1986) if all elements are independent, thenR=ImwhereImis an identity matrix of size m. Otherwise, a scorerijis used to denote the dependence of element i to element j. Since it is unintuitive to partition the elements using a directed graph, we transform the directed graph into a symmetric undirected graph as follows:(4)R∼=R+RT2We then obtain a symmetric matrixR∼with scoresr̃ij∈R∼wherer̃ij=r̃ji. Given this, independent elements are intelligently assigned into the k subsets using the proposed BIP formulation as follows:Let the decision variables be:r̃ii′≔dependenceofelementitoi′xil=1ifelementiisassignedtosubsetwithindexl0otherwiseyii′l≔xilxi′l1ifbothelementsiandi′isassignedtol0otherwiseObjective Function:(5)max∑l=1k∑i=1m∑i′<ir̃ii′yii′lConstraints:(6)xil-yii′l⩾0,i∈[1,m],l∈[1,k](7)xi′l-yii′l⩾0,i′∈[1,m],l∈[1,k](8)xi′l+xil-yii′l⩽1,i,i′∈[1,m],l∈[1,k](9)∑l=1kxil=1i∈[1,m](10)∑i=1mxil⩾1l∈[1,k](11)yii′l∈BmC2×k,xi′l∈Bm×ki,i′∈[1,m],l∈[1,k]The output of the BIP is a mutually exclusive assignment of the m elements to subsetsS={sl|l=1,2,…,k}. Eq. (5) describes the objective function of minimizing the inner dependencies of the elements to be assigned in each subsetsl. The BIP formulation would work hard to assign two elements to two different subsets ifr̃ii′>0. Constraint sets (6)–(8) are constraints that linearize the quadratic constraintyii′l≔xilxi′l. Constraint set (9) forces each element to be a member of a subset while constraint set (10) forces all subsets to have at least one element. Eq. (11) definesxilas binary integer variables.Given the BIP formulation, the following properties can be realized: (1) the minimum number of elements assigned to a given subset is one and (2) the maximum number of elements assigned to a given subset ism-k. The minimum number of elements assigned follows from the BIP formulation; specifically constraint set (10) forces the number of elements assigned to subsets to be at least 1. In terms of the maximum, since thek-1subsets would have at least 1 element, then the kth subset hasm-kelements assigned.When the PCM elements are decomposed into k subsets, the elements are disjoint since there are no pairwise comparisons across subsets. In order to determine the relative priorities of the elements across subsets, a pivot element is selected and assigned to all subsets and is used as a basis for the global weights. To select the best pivot element, we select the element that has the least sum of interdependenciesr̃ii′across among elements within the PCM. Hence we shall choose the element that minimizes the following function:(12)PivotElementi=argmini∑i′r̃ii′Eq. (12) selects the least interdependent element as compared to all other elements within the PCM, and the selected element is then assigned to all k subsets.After decomposition, local pairwise comparisons are elicited from the DM for all subsets after the elements are assigned to subsets. The local pairwise comparisons for elements subsetslare illustrated in matrix formAlas shown in Eq. (13) as follows:(13)Al=1a1,2⋯a1,mla2,11⋯a2,ml⋮⋮⋱⋮aml,1aml,2⋯1,∀sl∈SA new performance measure is proposed to keep track of the consistency of the pairwise comparisons. The original definition of the CR of matrix A is no longer applicable since the m elements are assigned into k subsets. With this, a new definition of consistency is proposed as follows:Definition 1The Average Consistency Ratio (ACR) performance measure of an AHP problem decomposed into k subsets is defined as:(14)ACR=1m+k-1∑l=1kmlCR(Al)whereCR(Al)is the consistency ratio of the pairwise comparison matrixAlof subset l.In simple terms, the ACR is the weighted average of the CR of each of the local pairwise comparison matrices. The ACR is used to estimate the overall CR of the pairwise comparisons across all subsets.Given the assignment of m elements into k subsets and the addition of the pivot element in all subsets, we define a quantity to determine the reduction in the number of pairwise comparisons elicited from the DM as follows:Definition 2Given the set of the assigned elements into the k subsets with one pivot element, the total number of required pairwise comparisons needed to obtain the local priorities of the elements denoted byd(Ak)is computed as:(15)d(Ak)=∑l=1kml2=∑l=1kml(ml-1)2Remark: The maximum number of elements assigned to k subsets after including the pivot elements is:(16)∑l=1kml⩽m+k-1The total number of pairwise comparisons after decomposition is dependent on the distribution of the assignment of elements to the k subsets and as such is shown using Eq. (15). Ifk=1, no decomposition is performed, then all the requiredm(m-1)/2pairwise comparisons are elicited. On the other hand whenk=m-1, then the pivot element is compared to all other elements with a total of onlym-1pairwise comparisons. The following propositions can be drawn with regards to the number of pairwise comparisons.Proposition 1Given values of k, functiond(Ak)is maximized whenml=m+(k-1)forl∈Sandml′=2,∀l∈S⧹{l}See Appendix.□Given values of k, functiond(Ak)is minimized when:•ml=m+(k-1)kforl∈Sifm+(k-1)k∈Zorml=m+(k-1)kfor somel∈Sandml′=m+(k-1)kfor somel′ifm+(k-1)k∉ZSee Appendix.□Definition 3 illustrates the difference between the original total number of pairwise comparisonsm(m-1)/2and the amount of pairwise comparisons needed,D(Ak)when the elements are assigned to subsets.Definition 3The difference between the original number of pairwise comparisons of matrix A and number of pairwise comparisons after decomposition into k subsets denoted byD(Ak)is given by:(17)D(Ak)=m2-d(Ak)=m(m-1)2-∑l=1kml2Given Propositions 1 and 2, the amount of time saved by the DM in terms of the reduction of the number of pairwise comparisons can be generalized in terms of Theorem 1.Theorem 1Given m elements grouped into k subsets, the total number of required local pairwise comparison saved is bounded by:(18)(k-1)m-k+22⩽D(Ak)⩽(k-1)(m-1)22kSee Appendix.□Theorem 1 provides the pessimistic and the optimistic estimates of the reduction of the requiredm(m-1)/2pairwise comparisons of A. This performance metric would be a good yardstick to determine the amount time saved by the DM when making a complex decision using the proposed PDM.After eliciting local pairwise comparisons for all subsetsAlwe now define the local element weights computed for each subset. Letw(Al)be the vector of local weights fromAlwherew(i,l)∈w(Al)is the local weight of element i. The original eigenvector methodology is used to calculate the local element weights as follows:(19)w(Al)=∑j=1mlã1jm⋮∑j=1mlãmljm=w(1,l)w(2,l)⋮w(ml,l),l=1,2,⋯,kThis subsection describes the methodology to compute global weights of the elements of the decomposed PCM from the local subsets using a pivot element. Given values of k there will bem+k-1instances ofw(i,l). The local element weight in subset l is divided by the weight of pivot element in that subset and is repeated for all subsets. To illustrate this, letw̃(Al)be the vector of normalized weights where eachw̃(i,l)∈w̃(Al)is computed using Eq. (20).(20)w̃(i,l)=1w(i=cp,l)[w(i,l)],∀i∈sl,∀sl∈SGiven this, the normalized pivot element weight in each subset has a value equal to one. Since all normalized pivot element weights have a value equal to one, all the other elements in the other subsets can be compared to the pivot elements. For the computation of the global weights, letw′(A)be the vector of global weights wherew′(i)∈w′(A)is computed using Eq. (21).(21)w′(i)=1∑l=1k∑i∈slw̃(i,l)-k+1w̃(i,l),∀i∈[1,m]This section illustrates the application of the PDM on an AHP decision. The AHP assumes that the criteria and alternatives are independent and hence, we seek an alternative way to measure the interdependence of the elements. Specifically, the correlation of the alternative scoresrijis used to estimate the inner dependencies of the criteria. The correlation of the alternative scores could act as an alternative to estimate inner dependencies of the criteria. The alternative scoresrijrepresent the raw rating score of alternative j on criterion i. We formally define the correlation denoted byR(ci,ci′)as follows:Definition 4LetR(ci,ci′)be the correlation between criterionciand criterionci′which is calculated using (22) as follows(22)R(ci,ci′)=∑j=1n(rij-r¯ij)(ri′j-r¯i′j)∑j=1n(rij-r¯ij)2∑j=1n(ri′j-r¯i′j)2These correlation coefficients will be used in the proposed BIP to group uncorrelated criteria. A valueR(ci,ci′)=1means that the criterionciis positively or negatively correlated to criterionci′. Hence, the PDM can be applied to decompose the lowest level criteria PCM, directly above the alternatives within an AHP decision problem. Otherwise, we decompose all other AHP PCMs arbitrarily as is done in existing literature. Fig. 2illustrates the proposed PDM as applied to a 3-level AHP problem.In step 1, the DM decides on the m criteria and n alternatives and the three-level decision hierarchy (see Section 4.1). Step 2 is the alternative scores pairwise comparison elicitation stage and the corresponding correlation matrix is computed (see Section 4.2). The PDM is applied to decompose the criteria PCM and the global weights of the m criteria are calculated in step 3 (see Section 4.3). Lastly, step 4 computes the weighted scores of the n alternatives for decision making (see Section 4.4). A peer reviewed AHP dataset from existing literature is used to illustrate the application of the PDM for AHP. Önüt, Efendigil, and Kara (2010) use a fuzzy AHP model for shopping center site selection and is illustrated in this subsection.The m criteria and n alternatives are identified and arranged into a three-level decision hierarchy. In terms of the dataset from Önüt et al. (2010), the goal, eight criteria and six alternatives are setup as a hierarchy as is done in the traditional AHP methodology. Fig. 3illustrates the proposed three-level AHP hierarchy structure.Table 2presents the most likely scores of the six site alternatives over the eight selection criteria. Additionally, the corresponding8×8correlation matrix is computed and is presented in Table 3.This subsection illustrates the decomposition of the criteria PCM and the calculation of the global weights of the eight decision criteria. Specifically, the criteria PCM is decomposed into two subsets (k=2), then a pivot criterion is selected. Furthermore, the local pairwise comparisons are collected for each subset and the corresponding global criteria PCM weights are calculated.The proposed BIP methodology from Section 3.1 is applied to the criteria PCM using the correlation scores from Table 3. After executing the proposed BIP methodology, criteria 1, 4, 6 and 7 are assigned to subsets1while criteria 2, 3, 5 and 8 are assigned to subsets2.The optimal pivot criterion is selected by applying Eq. (12) and Table 4presents the results of the sum of the individual correlations of criterion i to all other criteria. It is evident from Table 4 that criterion 4 is the least independent criterion. And thus criterion 4 is assigned to all subsets. Hence, subsetss1ands2now have 1, 4, 6 and 7 and 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8 criteria respectively.To illustrate the eliciting of local pairwise comparisons, the original most likely fuzzy values are used from the original8×8fuzzy AHP criteria PCM. Tables 5 and 6summarize the local pairwise comparison matrices for the two subsets respectively.A total of4C2+5C2=16pairwise comparisons are elicited in this setup, which is a reduction ofD(Ak)=12, as compared to the original 28 required pairwise comparisons when the original AHP methodology is used. The average consistency of these two priority matrices is computed using Eq. (14) as follows:(23)ACR=1m+k-1∑l=1kmlCR(Al)=490.0547+590.119=0.0904The original8×8AHP matrix has a CR of 12.96% which is highly inconsistent while the decomposed matrix has an ACR of only 9.04%. Hence, in this setup, several inconsistent pairwise comparisons are excluded from the decision making. Furthermore the subset PCMs have a smaller dimensions (dim(s1)=4,dim(s2)=5) thus making the elicitation of pairwise comparisons less taxing for the DM.After calculating the priorities of the local criteria, the corresponding global priorities of the criteria need to be calculated. Using the local weights from subset 1 and subset 2 and Eq. (20), all local weights are divided by the local weight of pivot criterion 4. And as such, we obtain normalized weights for subset 1:w̃(A1)=[0.31,1.00,1.40,0.27]Tand subset 2:w̃(A2)=[0.31,1.00,1.00,1.44,0.29]T. Using the normalized weights and using Eq. (21) we sum the normalized weights and we obtain the following global weights as summarized in Table 7.Based on the results, the weights obtained from the proposed PDM is relatively similar to the value of the original weights with a lower average consistency ratio. We observe from Table 7 that we have saved 12 pairwise comparisons for the criteria PCM while having similar weights. This savings is attributed to the decomposition of the PCM into two subsets in which the pairwise comparisons of the criteria across subsets are not elicited. Furthermore, a reduction of the CR is observed from 12.96% to 9.63%. In this setup, lots of inconsistent pairwise comparisons are omitted. Furthermore, the PCMs for the subsets are smaller well below Saaty’s threshold of seven elements.However, the PDM can only be applied to the special case of a three-level AHP problem. Furthermore, by definition of the correlation, we only measure the linear interdependencies of the criteria from the alternatives. Hence, the application of the PDM for AHP problems is limited. Therefore, we illustrate the full potential of the PDM in terms of an ANP network in Section 5.After computing for the global weights of the eight criteria, we now compute the weights of the six alternatives. Table 8presents the results of the weighted scores by multiplying the scores from Table 2 with the obtained global weights from Table 7. Hence, alternative B is selected since it has the highest weighted score followed by alternative E, then A, C, D and E.This section illustrates the application of the PDM on an ANP problem. Since all PCMs that form clusters within the ANP network require inner dependencies to measure the interdependence of elements, these inner dependencies are then used to decompose all PCMs within the network. Hence, all PCMs in the network can be decomposed using the PDM which leads to larger pairwise comparison savings. We illustrate the decomposition of the eight decision criteria into three subsets using Fig. 4as follows.In step 1, the ANP network structure is developed with the n alternatives and m criteria (see Section 5.1). In Step 2, the inner dependencies of all the elements of each PCM are elicited (see Section 5.2). Furthermore, we apply the PDM to all PCMs of the network in step 3 (see Section 5.3). Finally, step 4, we calculate the limiting weights of the alternatives for decision making (see Section 5.4). A dataset from existing literature is used to demonstrate the application of the PDM for the ANP. Cheng and Li (2004) propose an ANP methodology for contractor selection. This dataset is selected since the eight decision criteria are considered simultaneously in a single cluster. Furthermore, the decision focuses on three alternatives.The goal, eight criteria and four alternatives are setup as a network as is done in the traditional ANP methodology. Fig. 5illustrates the proposed three-cluster ANP network structure.Inner dependencies are elicited from the DM to estimate the interdependencies of the criteria. Table 9summarizes the elicited inner dependency scores of all eight decision criteria which are elicited from the DM from Cheng and Li (2004). We then compute the corresponding symmetric matrix using Eq. (4). Table 10presents the symmetric matrix.This subsection illustrates the application of the PDM to decompose all PCMs. In our example, we illustrate the decomposition of the criteria cluster into three subsets. Furthermore, the optimal pivot criterion is selected and is used to link all three subsets. The local pairwise comparisons are then elicited and local weights are calculated. The corresponding global criteria PCM weights are computed from the local weights.The proposed BIP methodology is applied from Section 3.1 on the symmetric inner dependency scores from Table 10. Hence, criteria 2, 5, and 7 are assigned to subsets1while criteria 1, 6 and 8 are assigned to subsets2and lastly criteria 3 and 4 are assigned to subsets3.The optimal pivot criterion is selected by applying Eq. (12) and Table 11presents the results of the sum of the individual inner dependencies of criterion i to all other criteria.It is evident from Table 11 that criterion 7 is the least independent criterion. And thus criterion 7 is assigned to all subsets. Hence, subsets1has criteria 2, 5 and 7, subsets2has criteria 1, 6, 7 and 8 and subsets3has 3, 4 and 7.Local pairwise comparisons are elicited for all subsets of the criteria cluster. Tables 12–14show the local priorities of the decomposed AHP obtained from the dataset of Cheng and Li (2004).A total of3C2+4C2+3C2=10pairwise comparisons are elicited in this setup. A reduction ofD(Ak)=18pairwise comparisons is realized from the original 28 required pairwise comparisons. The average consistency of these three PCMs is computed using Eq. (14) as follows:(24)ACR=1m+k-1∑l=1kmlCR(Al)=3100.0042+4100.0847+3100.0607=0.05335The original8×8ANP cluster has a CR of 9.44% which is around the threshold of 10% while the decomposed matrix has an ACR of only 5.335%. Again we observe a reduction of the inconsistency of the PCMs. Several inconsistent pairwise comparisons are not elicited in this setup and the dimensions of the three subsets are considerably less than the original criteria PCM.Again using the local weights from subset 1, 2 and 3 and Eq. (20), all local weights are divided by the local weight of pivot criterion 7. And as such we obtain normalized weights for subset 1:w̃(A1)=[6.64,1.00,1.00]T, subset 2:w̃(A2)=[8.64,0.68,1.00,1.36]Tand subset 3:w̃(A3)=[3.70,1.58,1.00]TUsing the normalized weights and using Eq. (21) we sum the normalized weights and we obtain the following global weights as summarized in Table 15.The weights obtained from the proposed PDM is relatively similar to the value of the original weights with a lower average consistency ratio. Additionally, we observe from Table 15 that a reduction of 18 pairwise comparisons is realized for the criteria PCM while having similar weights. This savings is again attributed to the decomposition of the criteria PCM into three subsets in which the pairwise comparisons of the criteria across subsets are not elicited. Furthermore, a reduction of the CR is observed from 9.44% to 5.34%. In this setup, lots of inconsistent pairwise comparisons are omitted. Furthermore, the three subset PCMs are smaller which are within Saaty’s threshold of seven elements.We further test the PDM by changing the number of subsets. The same dataset from Cheng and Li (2004) is used in terms of the decomposition of the 8 criteria intok∈[2,7]subsets. The traditional ANP is used and the results are presented in Table 16.It is observed from Table 16 that as the value of k increases, we generally observe an increase in the number of pairwise comparisons saved. This is attributed to smaller subset PCMs when we increase the number of subsets. Furthermore, we observe a gradual decrease on the average CR of the PCMs. However, lots of pairwise comparisons are not elicited for values ofk⩾4hence, the redundancy advantage of PCMs is reduced and thus the preferences of the DM would be subject to more biases and judgement errors. A trade-off mechanism must be developed to address this which is the subject of our future research.After computing the weights of the criteria cluster for the eight decision criteria, we now calculate the weights of the three alternatives using the traditional ANP methodology. Table 17presents the results of the three alternatives. Hence, alternative A is selected since it has the highest limiting score followed by alternative B then alternative C.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A Pairwise Comparison Matrix (PCM) is an integral component of decision making methodologies: Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) and Analytic Network Process (ANP). These PCMs are used to determine relative weights of criteria and alternatives. However, a PCM suffers from the curse of dimensionality and hence the issue of inconsistent pairwise comparisons when elicited from a decision maker (DM). The proposed PCM Decomposition Methodology (PDM) addresses these disadvantages. The PDM decomposes a PCM into smaller manageable subsets using binary integer programming. As a result, the number and the inconsistency of pairwise comparisons elicited are reduced. Since the subsets are disjoint, the most independent pivot element is selected to connect all disjoint subsets. Hence the inner dependencies of the elements are minimized within each subset. Using local priorities and the pivot element, global priorities are then estimated for the elements of the PCM.The PDM is applied to a three-level AHP problem to decompose the criteria PCM. Correlation of the criteria from alternative scores is used as an alternative to estimate the interdependencies of the criteria. The proposed methodology does indeed reduce the number of pairwise comparisons and the consistency ratio. Nevertheless, more pairwise comparisons is saved when the PDM is applied to the ANP methodology. The PDM can be applied to all cluster PCMs within the network since inner dependencies of the elements are elicited for each PCM.The authors plan to extend the framework by determining the optimal number of subsets k for each ANP cluster by balancing the (1) time savings by reducing pairwise comparisons, (2) the amount of inner dependency among criteria and alternatives (3) the level of consistency, and (4) the accuracy of the global weights. Furthermore, multiple pivot elements are to be studied to further improve the estimation of the global weights.Maximizing the value ofd(Ak)is determined bymaxd(Ak)=∑l=1kml(ml-1)2subject to∑l=1kml⩽m+(k-1),l∈[1,k],ml⩾2,l∈[1,k]andml∈Zk,l∈[1,k]. It is obvious that the integer program tends to assign all elements to a single subset while minimizing the assignment to other subsets. Therefore,ml⩾2would be a binding lower bound. And thus, the solution isml=m+(k-1)forl∈Sandml′=2,∀l′∈S⧹{l}maximizesd(Ak)where:(A.1)d(Ak)=(m-k+1)(m-k)2+k-1The proof for Proposition 2 is similar to the proof of Proposition 1 but the IP problem is set to minimize and the other extreme point is obtained. However, by solving the IP problem, ifm+(k-1)k∈Z, then the solution of the IP problem would be equal to the LP relaxation problem whereml=m+(k-1)kin which all elements are equally distributed among the k subsets. However, whenm+(k-1)k∉Z, then the solution of the LP relation of the IP problem is different and thus the solution would require round off values ofml=m+(k-1)kfor somel∈Sandml′=m+(k-1)kfor alll′∈S⧹{l}.Part 1 (Lower Limit): Given that there arem(m-1)/2required pairwise comparisons for an original PCM, the minimum number of pairwise comparisons reduced is bounded by:(A.2)D(Ak)⩾m(m-1)2-maxd(Ak)Based on Proposition 1, by substituting the valuesml=m+(k-1)forl∈Sandml′=2,∀l′∈S⧹{l}that maximizesd(Ak), we have:(A.3)D(Ak)⩾m(m-1)2-(m-k+1)(m-k)2+k-1Simplifying Eq. (A.3) we have:(A.4)D(Ak)⩾(k-1)m-k+22Part 2 (Upper Limit): Given that there arem(m-1)/2required pairwise comparisons for the original PCM, the maximum number of pairwise comparisons reduced is bounded by:(A.5)D(Ak)⩾m(m-1)2-mind(Ak)Based on Proposition 1, by substituting the valuesml=m+(k-1)kifm+(k-1)k∈Z, we have:(A.6)D(Ak)⩽m(m-1)2-k2m+(k-1)km+(k-1)k-1Simplifying Eq. (A.6) we have:(A.7)D(Ak)⩽(k-1)(m-1)22k