@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A linearized value-at-risk model with transaction costs and short selling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A linearized VaR model (LP4) by applying the mixed 0-1 programing to advance Benati and Rizzi (2007) P2 and Lin (2009) P4 models is proposed.Short-sales and transaction costs are modeled.LP4 portfolios yield the global optimum and demonstrate the higher performance than P4.LP4 show the usefulness in the real world.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
VaR,Linearized model,Short-sales,Transaction costs,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Though value-at-risk (VaR) has been widely applied by finance industry, a possibility of multiple optimums that is caused by the nonlinearity in modeling can challenge its application. To deal with this technical issue, we propose a linearized VaR model that employs the mixed 0-1 programing in Lin (2009) P4 model. We further advance the previous models with considering various transaction costs and the optimization of short-selling weights. We compare the performance of buy-and-hold (BH) strategy, the mean-variance (MV) model, the original P4 model, and our linearized P4 (LP4) model by rebalancing a wide scale of international and alternative investments during a period between 2001 and 2012. The results of numerical tests show the superior performance of the VaR models to the BH and the MV portfolios. The LP4 model yields the global optimum and outperforms the corresponding P4 model in both return and risk. The stability of portfolio value generated from the LP4 model supports its higher effectiveness in risk management than the P4 model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
How to construct an optimal asset allocation is a critical issue to financial industry. The usefulness of Markowitz (1952) model in the real world has been questioned due to commonly found asymmetric distribution, risk clustering, and fat tail of security returns. The need of improvement of modeling to better manage risk and portfolio comes from financial institutions, regulators, and academia. Among the alternative models, value-at-risk (VaR) has become one of popular replacements for variance to measure downside risk (Jorion, 2001). But VaR is challenged by its computational complexity, particularly its non-linear property. To alleviate this issue, Benati and Rizzi (2007) propose a mixed integer linear model to form the optimal mean-VaR portfolio (P2 or P3 model). Lin (2009) points out that their argument is not completely accurate and further suggests an alternative (P4) model. These studies yet leave some challenges affecting feasibility of portfolio model: How to deal with the nonlinearity in calculating VaR? How to improve the feasibility of VaR model by synthesizing other techniques without sacrificing the desired natures of risk management? How to model transaction costs in rebalancing portfolio over time? In this paper, we propose a linearized VaR model by improving Lin (2009) and, further in the numerical tests, apply it in managing a portfolio of a wide scale of international equities and alternative investments. We also consider allowing short-sales in asset allocation to enhance flexibility of portfolio management.Our study responds the call of risk management in academia and on Wall Street. Though VaR model has been regarded as the international standards for financial industry and regulators, its non-linear and non-tractable properties challenge its application (Natarajan, Pachamanova, & Sim, 2008; Zymler, Kuhn, & Rustem, 2013). Benati and Rizzi (2007) suggest mixed integer linear programming VaR models. They argue that the decision maker can either seek to maximize the expected portfolio return (P2 model) or to minimize the confidence level, αVaR, given rVaRand required return r* (P3 model). Benati and Rizzi (2007) conclude that the two models are equivalent. However, Lin (2009) indicates that their claim may be questionable due to the discrete values of that are caused by a finite number of observed returns in the real world. Lin (2009) further develops the P4 model, which is nonlinear and may yield multiple optimums.Our paper contributes to the literature in three aspects. First, we propose a linearized P4 (LP4) model by applying the linearization method of mixed 0-1 polynomial programs suggested by Chang and Chang (2000). The P4 model by Lin (2009) may generate multiple optimums due to its non-linear property. Our modification in contrast ensures the solution is the global optimum and always yields an expected return not less than that of the P4 model. We provide an effective methodology in calculating the VaR of a portfolio.Second, our study incorporates the transaction costs that are based on the market practices. The strategies without considering transaction costs hinder the effectiveness of the portfolio models in the financial industry. Atkinson and Mokkhavesa (2004) suggest that the portfolio rebalancing frequencies and scale will be larger than what they should be if the transaction costs are ignored in modeling. Though overlooking trading costs can simplify an analysis, it overestimates the expected return and weakens the feasibility of the model. In this paper, we apply the methodology suggested by Fusai and Luciano (2001), Woodside-Oriakhi, Lucas, and Beasley (2013), and Kolm, Tütüncü, and Fabozzi (2014) in rebalancing portfolio with transaction costs. Our empirical findings can be useful to asset management.Third, our study also considers optimal asset short-sales in the analysis. From a perspective of practitioners, White (1990) and Angel, Christophe, and Ferri (2003) suggests that short-selling provide an opportunity of speculation and arbitrage to investors and also helps lower portfolio risks during market downturn. Yu and Lee (2011) suggest that the weights of short selling should be optimized to avoid high risks. A reasonable design of portfolio short-sales increases the effectiveness of diversification across assets and hedging over time. We model both the costs and the weights of asset short-sales and repurchase of short-sales to enhance the flexibility in portfolio decision.Recent studies have proposed some new methods regarding the VaR application but do not deal with its non-linearity. Fusai and Luciano (2001) find the estimate of loss using dynamic VaR is lower than that generated by the conventional VaR model. Engle and Manganelli (2004) and Ausín, Galeano, and Ghosh (2014) incorporate econometric method, such as conditional autoregressive models in assessing risk. Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011) measure the systemic risk of financial institutions by computing the difference of conditional VaR (ΔCoVaR) under different economic states. Goh, Lim, Sim, and Zhang (2014) propose a partitioned VaR (PVaR) model using half-space statistical information and find it outperforms the Markowitz model in the risk-return tradeoff. The interest of the above papers, however, is not to resolve the nonlinear issue of VaR models. In addition, the previous literature does not consider the factors that may impact feasibility of modeling, such as portfolio short-sale and trading costs. We model portfolio with incorporating the above factors to ensure the feasibility of the results.Our empirical results using the data of international and alternative assets support the superiority of our proposed LP4 model to other portfolio strategies, including the buy-and-hold (BH), the mean-variance (MV), and the original P4 models, in managing portfolio and risk. Specifically, the LP4 model yields a higher return (rVaR), higher mean-variance efficiency, and lower volatility. Though the LP4 model does not consistently realize higher market value, its realized return is less volatile than the P4 portfolio. This leads to a higher Sharpe ratio of realized return and higher effectiveness in portfolio risk management.The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the P2 and P4 models. Section 3 describes our proposed model. Section 4 reports the data. Section 5 demonstrates the empirical results and compares with several portfolio strategies. Section 6 concludes.The mean-variance (MV) model by Markowitz (1952) serves as the foundation for modern portfolio theory. In light of financial crises in the past two decades have challenged the use of variance from historical data, value-at-risk (VaR) has been adopted by financial industry and regulators to replace variance as a measure of risk. According to Jorion (2001), VaR can be expressed asPr(Wt≥VaR)≤1−αwhere Wtis the value of loss of the investments portfolio, VaR is the maximum loss, and α is the confidence level between 0 and 1.Benati and Rizzi (2007) replace VaR as the measure of portfolio risk in the MV framework. Assuming there are n assets in an investment set, the decision vectorw=(w1,…,wn)represents portfolio weights, which can be selected from all possible sets W in space ℜn. Let x the random variable of portfolio return, a random vector X represents profit of portfolio in a space ℜNwith N uncertain states, and F the distribution function of X. For the profit of investment portfolio at time t, the probability that the cumulative profit during a given period exceeds the VaR is α. Specifically,rαVaR(X)=inf{x|FX(x)≥α}We start by revisiting the P2 model and then extend the P4 model to the linearized P4 (LP4) model, which is an improvement of the P2 model, by linearizing its constraints to form the optimal portfolio. The proposed LP4 model further considers asset short-sales and trading costs in portfolio modeling and rebalancing to ensure its feasibility.Benati and Rizzi (2007) replace variance as VaR in the Markowitz model and apply a mixed integer nonlinear programming. They claim that the two counterpart models, Max Return/Fixed Risk problem (P2) and Min Risk/Fixed Return problem (P3), are equivalent. The P2 model suggested by Benati and Rizzi (2007) is:(1)max∑t=1T1Txt(2)s.t.xt=∑j=1nwjrjt,t=1,…,T,(3)xt≥rMin+(rVaR−rMin)yt,t=1,…,T,(4)∑t=1T1T(1−yt)≤αVaR,(5)∑j=1nwj=1,(6)wj≥0,j=1,…,n,(7)yt∈{0,1},t=1,…,T,and{yt=0,xt≥rMinyt=1,xt≥rVaR,where xtis the random variable of the portfolio return on day t; T is the ending day; rMinis the minimum return of all investments during a period of T days; wjis the portfolio weight of asset j; rVaRis the threshold return set by the investor; αVaRis the confidence level between 0 and 1. Constraint (2) sets xtas the linear combination of rjt, and (3) and (4) prevent to select the portfolios that yield VaR lower than the fixed threshold. Furthermore, (5) and (6) set the budget constraint and prohibit short selling, and (7) shows the binary variable ytindicating whether return on tth day is lower than rVaRat the probability αVaR.Lin (2009) indicates that the P2 and P3 models in Benati and Rizzi (2007) are partly equivalent since the P3 model is not to minimize VaR but to minimize the probability that the portfolio return lower the threshold. In addition, it is questionable to set the rVaR a priori and to assume continuity of returns in the real-world. Lin (2009) further develops the P4 model:(8)maxrVaR(9)s.t.∑t=1T1Txt≥E,and constraints (2)–(7), where E is the required return that is set by the decision maker. With maximizing the portfolio's return in objective (8), constraint (9) is to set the minimum portfolio expected return. Though Lin (2009) soundly overcomes the issues in Benati and Rizzi (2007) and models VaR according to the definition by Jorion (2001), the nonlinear property of the P4 model in constraint (3) may lead to multiple local optimums.In this section, we first introduce the linearized P4 (LP4) by applying the mixed 0-1 polynomial program to linearize constraints (Chang & Chang, 2000). We further apply a simple weighted method by Fliege and Werner (2014), which is a multiple-objective programming, to model short-sales and various trading costs in portfolio rebalancing.There is a possibility that one cannot find a global optimum in the P2 model due to its nonlinearity in constraint (3). Lin (2009) proves that the argument regarding the P2 and P3 models made by Benati and Rizzi (2007) is not completely correct, however, his P4 model (which is modified from the P2 model) may generate multiple local optimums. We follow Chang and Chang (2000) by applying the linearization method of mixed 0-1 polynomial programs. Differing from the P4 approach, we apply a simple weighted method for multiple objective programming. In constraint (3), rVaRand rVaRytcould be negative value, therefore we use a pair of variables to identify the signs of rVaRand rVaRyt. LetrVaR=rVaR+−rVaR−. If rVaR> 0, then rVaR+> 0 and rVaR−= 0. If rVaR< 0, then rVaR+= 0 and rVaR−> 0. If rVaR= 0, then rVaR+= 0 and rVaR−= 0. LetAt=rVaRyt=(rVaR+−rVaR−)yt=rVaR+yt−rVaR−yt=At+−At−. The P4 model can be linearized as the following:(10)maxλ1rVaR+λ2(−1T∑t=1T(At++At−))(11)s.t.xt≥rMin+At+−At−−rMinyt,t=1,…,T,(12)At+≤rVaR+,t=1,…,T,(13)At+≥rVaR+−U(1−yt),t=1,…,T,(14)At−≤rVaR−,t=1,…,T,(15)At−≥rVaR−−U(1−yt),t=1,…,T,(16)At+,At−≥0,t=1,…,T,(17)rVaR=rVaR+−rVaR−,(18)rVaR+,rVaR−≥0,and constraints (2) and (4)–(7) and (9), where λ1 and λ2 are the weights for the corresponding objectives in (10), U is a positive large number. One also can easily conclude that when yt= 0, according to constraints (11)–(15),At+=At−=0, that isAt=0; whenyt=1, we have eitherAt+=rVaR+andAt−=0, orAt+=0andAt−=rVaR−, that isAt=rVaR+orAt=−rVaR−.We further consider transaction costs in the linearized P4 model. Atkinson and Mokkhavesa (2004) suggest that the strategies without considering transaction costs may not be feasible. This is because it does not penalize significant change in portfolio weights when the investor rebalance portfolio if trading costs are ignored. The objective in our model considers maximizing threshold return and minimizing the trading costs. Specifically,(19)maxλ1rVaR+λ2(−1T∑t=1T(At++At−))+λ3(−∑j=1n(p1lj++p2lj−))(20)s.t.∑j=1n(wj+p1lj++p2lj−)=1,(21)wj=wj,0+lj+−lj−,j=1,…,n,(22)0.01uj≤wj≤uj,j=1,…,n,(23)uj∈{0,1},j=1,…,n,and constraints (2), (4), (6), (7), (9) and (11)–(18), where λ1, λ2, and λ3 are the weights for the corresponding objectives in (19). In constraints (20) and (21), wj, 0 is the initial long position weight of security j prior to portfolio rebalancing. With each rebalancing,lj+is the buying weight of security j;lj−is the selling weight of security j. In the objective function, we consider the total trading costs in rebalancing portfolio. We also set the percentage of transaction costs to trading asset value for long position p1 and the costs for selling position p2. Note that investors can adjust p1 and p2 according to their conditions and securities.11The parameters associated with trading costs and margins (such as various pivalues and k) can vary due to different brokers and securities. In this study, we use high-liquidity securities in empirical tests and set p1 and p2 as 50 basis points.With using the binary variable ujto indicate long position, we also consider the lower and upper bounds of the weight in constraints (22) and (23) to ensure the feasibility of the portfolios.We further consider a scenario in which asset short-sales are allowed. The benefit of allowing short-sales is to enhance flexibility and effectiveness of risk management in portfolio. The above issues are particularly important when international and alternative investments are considered in a portfolio and during market downturn period. The above model can be modified as:(24)maxλ1rVaR+λ2(−1T∑t=1T(At++At−))+λ3(−∑j=1nwj−)+λ4(−∑j=1n(p1lj++p2lj−+p3sj++p4sj−))(25)s.t.xt=∑j=1n(wj+−wj−)rjt,t=1,…,T,(26)∑j=1n(wj++kwj−+p1lj++p2lj−+p3sj++p4sj−)=1,(27)wj+=wj,0++lj+−lj−,j=1,…,n,(28)wj−=wj,0−+sj+−sj−,j=1,…,n,(29)0.01uj≤wj+≤uj,j=1,…,n,(30)0.01vj≤wj−≤vj,j=1,…,n,(31)uj+vj≤1,j=1,…,n,(32)uj,vj∈{0,1},j=1,…,n.and constraints (4), (7), (9) and (11)–(18), wherewj,0+is the initial weight of long position for security j;wj,0−is the initial weight of short-selling position for security j;wj+is the purchasing weight for stock j;wj−is the short-sales weight for stock j; p3 is the percentage of transaction costs to trading value for short position; p4 is the percentage of transaction costs to trading value for repurchasing the short-selling assets; k is the initial margin requirement for short-sales; vjis a binary variable indicating where security j is short sold;sj+is the short weight of security j; andsj−is the repurchasing weight of security j. In the objective function (24), we also optimize the total weight of short-sales position. This reflects the concern that short-selling can be risky due to speculation but can lower investment risks during market downturn. We apply Yu and Lee (2011) in minimizing the weight of short sales. In the above multiple-objective model, investors may decide the weight of each objective (λi) according preference among return, risk, short-selling tolerance, and transaction costs.We collect daily price data of (1) the Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) of Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) indices in twenty-one countries, (2) the prices or indices of various commodities, and (3) Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) index between October 10, 2001 and September 24, 2012. The selected ETFs represent more than 90 percent of the overall market capitalization in the world during the sample period. The other assets included are regarded as the most popular alternative investments. This ensures that the portfolio strategies presented in this research are feasible and are of high liquidity.Table 1 shows the summary statistics of the sample stocks, including their standard deviation (SD), Sharpe ratio (SR), skewness, and kurtosis during the sample period. Using the data, we rebalance portfolio by exercising the P4, the LP4, and the MV models under various conditions and compare their performance. To simplify our analysis, a simple-weighted method is applied and we adopt equally weighted method (Fliege and Werner, 2014) with the sum of all λi’s equals to one. We use the first 60 daily observations to form the initial optimal portfolio and we rebalance the portfolios every 20 trading days by rolling the sample to the next 60 daily observations. For our study, we assume the initial investments to be $1 million and rebalance each portfolio by using updated asset returns in each period. It should be indicated that the computation of market value when short-sales is prohibited differs from that when short-sales is allowed since the margin needs to be paid before the asset is short sold. The budget for the investment in the next period thus depends on the market value at the end of the previous period.We also consider asset short-sales and transaction costs in portfolio management. The trading costs can vary from broker to broker and from asset to asset. In this study, we include the fees that are generally accepted in the U.S. market and set all transaction costs (p1, p2, p3, and p4) at 50 basis points of the trading value and the trading margin (k) at 100 percent. The required return is −0.1 percent for the model with no short selling and 0.1 percent for the model with short selling.We apply four measures to evaluate the performance of rebalancing portfolios under various conditions: Sharpe ratio, the realized portfolio return, the return of value-at-risk (rVaR), and volatility of the portfolio.Table 2shows the results of rVaRof the P4 and LP4 models in the first 13 periods as we run each of these models four times. Since rVaRis to assess return, a higher rVaRrepresents lower risk and a higher effectiveness for risk management in the portfolio. The outcome for each trial of the LP4 is consistent and is of single optimum while the results of the P4 model may vary in each trial. The values of return yielded by the LP4 are always not lower than that generated by the P4, particularly for the case considering transaction costs and allowing short-sales. This finding holds for all αVaRvalues in different scenarios and suggests that our LP4 model yields tractable results (Natarajan et al., 2008). Lin (2009) attempts to resolve the issues in the models of Benati and Rizzi (2007) but does not soundly deal with possible multiple local optimums due to non-linearity in the P4 model. Our proposed models improve the feasibility of the P4 model.Table 3reports the summary statistics of the portfolio performance of BH, MV, P4 and LP4 models under different scenarios. For this study, each portfolio is rebalanced 136 times over the period. Both P4 and LP4 models yield portfolios of higher return, higher mean-variance efficiency, but not necessarily higher realized return, than the MV and BH portfolio. This is because the VaR models are to control portfolio downside risk but not to maximize its return.The results in Panels B and C show that the portfolio flexibility brought by allowing asset short-sales improves the ex ante expected return and mean-variance efficiency. A low αVaRmeans high risk aversion and leads to a low portfolio volatility. Given the same level of αVaR, the LP4 model yields higher rVaRand lower volatility than the P4 model for all scenarios. Even considering transaction costs and short-sales, Panel C shows higher return yielded by the LP4_TS model than the P4_TS model. Altogether the LP4 model generates higher Sharpe ratio than the P4 model. For instance, Panel C shows that when short-sales is allowed with considering transaction costs, the LP4_TS models of various α’s yield a Sharpe ratio about 0.21 and a volatility between 2.4 percent and 2.6 percent, comparing a Sharpe ratio of 0.077 and a volatility of 4.5 percent in the BH portfolio and a Sharpe ratio of 0.14 and a volatility of 0.7 percent in the MV portfolio.The results show that VaR model yields more desirable properties in managing portfolio than the MV model. The MV model though demonstrates a higher ex ante Sharpe ratio but yields a lower realized return than the passive BH strategy. The P4 and LP4 models consistently outperform the MV model in terms of Sharpe ratio, realized return, and volatility under various scenarios. Specifically, the LP4 model outperforms the BH, MV, and P4 portfolios though the trading costs may diminish the profit. The inclusion of trading costs in the P4_TS and LP4_TS models lead their realized profitability lower than the BH strategy. Panel C shows the mean of the realized return of BH portfolio is 8.66 percent, which is higher than the average return of the P4_TS and the LP4_TS models with various αVaRlevels. On the other hand, the over-time standard deviation for BH portfolio is 19.54 percent, which is higher than those of the P4_TS and the LP4_TS models. Since the two VaR models decrease the volatility of realized return, they form portfolios of higher ex post Sharpe ratio than BH passive diversification even transaction costs are considered.Our next question is whether LP4 yield higher performance than the corresponding P4 model under various scenarios. We compute the improvement of performance from using P4 model to LP4 model, including an increase in return of VaR (ΔrVaR=rLP4VaR−rP4VaR), an increase in realized return (rR=rLP4R−rP4R), an increase in Sharpe ratio (ΔSR=SRLP4−SRP4), and a decrease in volatility (Δσ=ΔσP4−ΔσLP4) under different αVaRlevels. The distributions of performance improvements are demonstrated in Table 4. For ΔrVaR, ΔSR, and Δσ, LP4 model shows superior portfolio management to the corresponding P4 model. In Panel A, when short-sales is prohibited and transaction costs are not considered, LP4 demonstrates lower Sharpe ratio than P4 given αVaR= 1 percent in 32 percent of sample periods. When the transaction costs are considered, LP4_T still demonstrate higher return and risk-adjusted return than P4_T. In Panel C, when short-sales are allowed and transaction costs are considered, the LP4 yields higher return in about 92–95 percent of the sample period, higher Sharpe ratio in about 66–72 percent of the sample period, and lower volatility in about 75–86 percent of the sample period. Similar to the other two scenarios, our proposed LP4 model with various conditions consistently outperforms the corresponding P4 model.Since the objective of VaR models is to manage portfolio risk but not to generate the maximum investment return, the proposed LP4 model does not consistently yield higher realized return than P4 model. The volatility of the realized return of LP4 model tends to be lower than the corresponding P4 portfolio, thus LP4 is likely to generate a higher Sharpe ratio of realized portfolio return. The stability of portfolio value generated from the LP4 model supports its higher effectiveness in risk management than the P4 model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Though VaR model has been widely applied in the financial industry, its usefulness is challenged by its non-linearity that leads to multiple local optimums. In this paper, we propose a linearized VaR model, LP4, by improving Benati and Rizzi (2007) and Lin (2009) and apply it in managing a portfolio including a wide range of international equities and alternative investments. Specifically, our model applies the mixed 0-1 programing method to linearize the P4 model to deal with the non-linearity in the VaR model. Therefore the solution must be the global optimum. To ensure the flexibility of the proposed strategies and the feasibility of our findings, the LP4 model incorporates the transaction costs and short-sales when we rebalance the portfolios. In this study, each portfolio is rebalanced every 20 trading days over the sample period from 2001 to 2012.Our empirical results show the superiority of our proposed LP4 model over the original P4 model in portfolio and risk management, even under consideration of trading cost and short selling. Specifically, the LP4 model yield higher expected return (rVaR), higher mean-variance efficiency, and lower volatility than the P4, buy-and-hold (BH), and the mean-variance (MV) portfolios. Though the proposed LP4 model does not necessarily realize higher market value, the volatility of its realized return is lower than the P4 portfolio. This leads to a higher Sharpe ratio of realized portfolio return and a higher effectiveness in risk management. Future research may apply the proposed linearized model to extend Zymler et al. (2013) in managing portfolios that include financial derivatives.