@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Selecting a supplier portfolio with value, development, and risk consideration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel supplier selection model with supplier value, development and risk is proposed.Consignee preference, supplier change and covariance of suppliers are considered.Approach is compared with literature and tested through extensive numerical tests.Lower risk of failure, analysis, change of suppliers, and higher value are achieved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supplier selection,Supplier portfolio,Multi-objective optimization,Supply chain management,,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a novel two-phase supplier selection procedure. Unlike most supplier selection researches, which are decisive based on supplier eligibility at the time of the decision making, the proposed method is based on the long term trend of value, stability, and relationship of potential suppliers. In the first phase, suppliers are evaluated and assigned a comparable value based on a set of criteria. This value is then analyzed in the long run, and fed into a multi-objective portfolio optimization model in the second phase. The model determines a supplier portfolio by maximizing the expected value and development of suppliers, and minimizing their correlated risk. The novelty of this procedure is introducing a new view toward the supplier selection problem. Numerical tests show that the proposed approach selects higher value suppliers with lower risk of failure, compared to available methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supplier selection is a strategic and long term decision. A long term relationship with suppliers is greatly beneficial to the buyer, and offers advantages such as stability in future plans and strategies, reliability of product quality and service time, better understanding of the supply chain, potential discounts, and superior inventory utilization. The importance of a long term supplier-buyer relationship is discussed in Kalwanin and Narayandas (1995). Choosing suppliers should not solely depend on their eligibility at the time of the decision making. It is essential to predict and analyze the past changes and future potentials of suppliers, as it lowers the need to periodically assess and replace existing contracts. The overall market condition has distinctive effects and consequences on different suppliers, and so it is important to assess the relationships of suppliers and their relative changes throughout time, to assure an optimized supply chain.The common approach taken toward the supplier selection problem is to select the best available suppliers to date, and evaluate them in periodic times. Based on evaluation results, it is determined whether superior suppliers have emerged, or the selected suppliers still remain the best choice. In the case that superior suppliers have emerged, management weighs the cost of keeping the current suppliers, and maintaining the buyer-supplier relationship, to the cost of choosing the superior emerged suppliers and starting need relationships. The focus of this paper is on improving the initial supplier selection, such that a lower need to evaluate and replace suppliers is required.The literature is rich with research on different ways to rank suppliers, or deal with uncertainty of service in the future. However, we emphasize that this paper does not focus on these stochastic aspects of supplier selection, or neither supplier development and nurturing. We rather investigate selecting suppliers based on optimization, using the portfolio theory. The focus lies in supplier selection based on the suppliers’ own trends of development or fall, and their correlation to other selected suppliers. We show that this approach may lead to the selection of more robust suppliers, compared to available methods. The supplier set is robust in the terms of maintaining a higher value throughout time, development to better fits, and incurring a lower risk of failure. The proposed approach would thus result in better initial selected supplier, that have a higher chance to remain the best choice throughout time. In other words, the proposed approach would lower the need to weigh the cost of supplier replacement, and could lead to easier supplier development efforts. To the best of our knowledge, this is a new view and approach, taken toward supplier selection.A popular approach toward supplier selection is to calculate a comparative value for suppliers under consideration. A high value supplier is able to provide the service the buyer needs, and perform as expected. Performance is assessed on a set of criteria, and an overall value is calculated. In addition to calculating supplier value, this paper investigates its possible change throughout time, by introducing the terms development and fall. A developing supplier is referred to a supplier with increasing value, and a falling supplier has decreasing value. There are many benefits to considering these aspects. As an example, consider two potential suppliers, one with a high overall value and the other with a lower overall value. Without investigating the change of these suppliers throughout time, any selection method chooses the first supplier. However, if supplier 1 constantly declines in value while the second supplier has an increasing trend of value, it is clear that supplier 1 remains as the best choice for long. Methods selecting supplier 1 due to its initial value, eventually fail as they have only considered a local optimal solution. We refer to such methods as static supplier selection procedures, as they only consider the characteristics of the suppliers at the time of the decision making.Another important characteristic that needs consideration in supplier selection is supplier stability. A stable supplier is able to constantly meet the buyer’s needs. An unstable supplier fluctuates in service throughout time, and cannot provide a steady supply by the buyer’s standards. Therefore, not only should a supplier be evaluated by its value, development, or fall, but it should also be investigated in terms of its stability in service. We show that any static selection method available in the literature benefits from considering such characteristics in its selection procedure.An essential aspect of supplier selection is defining and determining the selection criteria that form the evaluation basis of a supplier’s value. The multi-criteria decision making approach to supplier selection is shown to be efficient (Ho, Xu, and Dey, 2010), and defining these criteria is of great significance. Determining the worth of such criteria is itself another matter. Not all suppliers may be suited to any buyer, and it is the characteristics of the buyer which determine supplier suitability. Various suppliers may have very high credentials, and operate in high efficiencies, but prove to be overqualified by most firms. Therefore, it is important to truly validate suppliers according to the buyer’s current requirements, and future vision. Many of the existing methods evaluate suppliers based on overall value only, and disregard their suitability to the seeking buyer. We address this problem by introducing the term “fit” into the selection process. A supplier is said to best fit the buyer if it is well suited to satisfy the requirements of that buyer. In other words a good fit is neither unacceptable nor over-qualified, and falls into an interval the buyer seeks. The terms value and fit are interchangeably used throughout this paper.We introduce a two-phase supplier selection procedure. The first phase concerns itself with developing a value for each supplier. A function is developed which calculates a supplier’s value, by comparing its score in a set of defined criteria, to the scores the buyer specifies. Phase I alone may be used to select eligible suppliers (as in many researches), however this approach is static, and blind to many changes and possibilities. We apply the proposed function to historical data, and obtain a trend of value, in the form of a time series. This trend is used to derive the data needed to apply the MIP portfolio model in the second phase. The proposed portfolio optimization model enables the selection of the best group of suppliers, which have a greater chance to improve and develop, maintain a higher value throughout time, and considering the relationships of the suppliers, incur lower risks of failure. Risk of failure is defined as the possibility of the supplier failing to meet the buyer’s needs. An inconsistent supplier that occasionally falls short of the buyer’s requirements is also deemed as high risk. By applying the proposed model, better suppliers may be selected in the long run, that most likely lead to lower needs of analysis and replacement, in periodic evaluation times.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature on supplier selection, and supplier-portfolio relationship. Section 3 presents the two-stage supplier selection model, and solution procedure. Numerical tests are discussed in Section 4, and the paper is concluded in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
