@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Location and capacity allocations decisions to mitigate the impacts of unexpected disasters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Develop a modeling framework for improved preparedness of unexpected disasters.Setup a stochastic location/allocation optimization model to minimize total losses.Create a heuristic that yields time-efficient solutions for large-scale problems.Generate robust solutions given region-specific characteristics via decision analysis.Demonstrate approach via a case study of the Northridge, CA region.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in disaster relief,Facility location-allocation models,Decision analysis,Large scale optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper develops a stochastic modeling framework to determine the location and capacities of distribution centers for emergency stockpiles to improve preparedness in the event of a disaster for which there is little to no forewarning. The proposed framework is applicable to emergency planning that must incorporate multiple sources of uncertainty, including the timing and severity of a potential event, as well as the resulting impact, while taking into consideration both disaster and region specific characteristics. To demonstrate the modeling approach, we apply it to a region prone to earthquakes. The model incorporates various uncertainties such as facility damage and casualty losses, based upon their severity and remaining survivability time, as a function of the magnitude of the earthquake. Given the computational complexity of the problem of interest, we develop an evolutionary optimization heuristic aided by an innovative mixed integer programming model that generates time efficient high quality solutions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the heuristic via a case study featuring the HAZUS-MH software from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Finally, given the uncertainty associated with the magnitude of the earthquake, we use a decision analysis approach to develop robust solutions while taking into account the geological characteristics of the region.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Natural disasters have the potential to result in significant economic and societal losses. For instance, in 2012, natural disasters affected more than 100 million people, causing more than 900 deaths in 115 countries (CRED, 2013). The economic damages alone were estimated to be 113billion dollars. To complicate matters, these disasters often disrupt normal supply chains, making it challenging for treatment centers, such as hospitals, nursing homes and long-term care facilities, to obtain essential equipment, pharmaceuticals and other medical supplies. The resulting inability to provide the necessary care to those incapacitated as a result of the disaster could lead to long term health impacts and increased fatality rates. Therefore, the development of disaster preparedness and response plans that consider the public health consequences while incorporating the unique characteristics of a particular disaster within a robust decision making framework is of profound significance. One of the steps taken by the Federal government in this regard was the formation of the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS) (CDPH, 2013; NACCHO, 2013). As described by the CDC, the “SNS has large quantities of medicine and medical supplies to protect the American public if there is a public health emergency (terrorist attack, flu outbreak, earthquake) severe enough to cause local supplies to run out”. Specifically, once federal and state authorities come to a consensus that these supplies are needed, an immediate request is made to ensure they are deployed in a timely manner.While the current SNS configuration can significantly improve response efforts via prepositioning of supplies for disasters such as hurricanes for which there is forewarning, such a privilege does not exist for unanticipated disasters. Hence the delivery of supplies under the current framework may turn out to be too little too late for these types of events. This issue can in part be attributed to the gaps that exist within the current research in developing strategic plans based upon a risk assessment for a given region. For example, existing models pertaining to the planning of the locations and capacities of emergency supplies in the event of an earthquake, which we devote specific attention to, do not account for the uncertainty due to topographic and geological characteristics of the region, uncertainty related to facility damage, nor the number, severity and medical condition of the resulting casualties. Other factors that could impact the location-allocation decisions include budgetary constraints, uncertainty in transport times, as well as facility costs as a function of capacity and building structure. Such investigations in the extant literature have been notably lacking. These questions form the motivation for this research endeavor.To address this gap in the literature, we first propose a generic framework applicable to planning in the event of an unexpected disaster, particularly when the primary goal is to establish stockpiles of necessary medical supplies to minimize fatalities. We then demonstrate the proposed approach, developing a stochastic optimization model to determine the location and capacities of regional distribution centers (DC) for improved preparedness in the event of an earthquake. Our models incorporate facility and casualty losses as a function of the earthquake magnitude and its interaction with factors such as the population at demand nodes, building code (i.e. resistance to damage), transport time to a demand center, etc. We model the casualty numbers at the demand nodes as well as their mix in terms of severity and associated survivability time following Paul and Hariharan (2012). In addition, to address the issue of computational complexity associated with problems of realistic size, we develop a heuristic solution that builds on the principles of the Evolutionary Optimization (EV) algorithm. This is further aided by an innovative mixed integer programming (MIP) model that provides a high quality initial solution to the EV. Finally, we use a decision analysis model to generate solutions that are robust to the specific characteristics of the region. We then demonstrate the effectiveness of our modeling approach via a case study featuring the Northridge region in California.The remainder of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present a review of the current literature. Section 3 presents a description of our generic framework, followed by a statement of the problem of interest as well as the model notations and the mathematical formulation. In Section 4 we develop the evolutionary optimization based heuristic, including an innovative MIP model that generates a high quality starting solution for the heuristic when solving large-scale problems. Section 5 demonstrates the effectiveness of the heuristic in generating high quality time efficient solutions via a case study, in addition to discussing various key data considerations and the methodologies employed to derive them. We then employ decision analysis models to develop a solution that is robust to earthquake magnitude, taking into account the geological characteristics of the region. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions and provides directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
