@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The modular tool switching problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper introduces the modular tool switching problem.The problem is an extension of the traditional tool switching problem.The property that tools can be swapped individually or in group makes the problem difficult to solve.We show that the MTS problem is NP-hard in the general case.We also show that with a fixed number of online modules and a fixed capacity, the problem can be solved in polynomial time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Complexity theory,Flexible Manufacturing Systems,Tool loading,Set-up optimization,Printed circuit board,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article analyzes the complexity of the modular tool switching problem arising in flexible manufacturing environments. A single, numerically controlled placement machine is equipped with an online tool magazine consisting of several changeable tool feeder modules. The modules can hold a number of tools necessary for the jobs. In addition to the online modules, there is a set of offline modules which can be changed to the machine during a job change. A number of jobs are processed by the machine, each job requiring a certain set of tools. Tools between jobs can be switched individually, or by replacing a whole module containing multiple tools. or a whole module, containing multiple tools can be replaced. We consider the complexity of the problem of arranging tools into the modules, so that the work for module and tool loading is minimized. Tools are of uniform size and have unit loading costs. We show that the general problem is NP-hard, and in the case of fixed number of modules and fixed module capacity the problem is solvable in polynomial time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the assembly of printed circuit boards (PCB), flexible component placement machines are used to mount components onto a bare PCB. The placement machines are highly automatized, configurable and suitable for the assembly of a wide range of PCB product types. The flexibility and configurability of these machines results in various efficiency problems. The planning and control of PCB assembly machines is a task that consist of multiple interconnected problems (see Ayob and Kendall, 2008; Crama, 1997; Crama et al., 2002).One of these problems arises when several different PCB product types are manufactured on a single machine, with each product type requiring a specific set of component types to be placed on the boards. The component placement machines are equipped with a feeder unit that can hold a sufficient number of component input reels to manufacture a single product type. Due to the capacity constraints of the feeder unit, it is not possible to load at once all the component reels required for all the PCB jobs.In the case of multiple PCB types, as one PCB type batch ends, the content of the feeder unit must be reconfigured, by loading the component reels required for the next PCB type. This replacement can occur only between processing jobs, because the machine must be stopped. Replacing one component reel causes extra delay in production, and the total delay between two jobs is determined by the number of component reel swaps.The above discussion deals with the organization of job switching in the context of PCB assembly manufacturing. The same situation occurs in many other Flexible Manufacturing Systems (FMS), where tools (above component reels) are stored in tool magazines (feeder units). Minimizing the setup delay is known in literature as the Tool Switching Problem (TS) (see Tang and Denardo, 1988), in this more general context.Many variants of the tool switching problem have been extensively studied in literature. The order in which the jobs are processed may be fixed or arbitrary. If the job order is arbitrary, the tool switching cost can be further reduced by finding a better job sequence (this is also known as the job sequencing problem). The cost of switching tools may be uniform or tool specific. Further, the size of the tools may be uniform, or tool specific, causing fragmentation of the feeder unit in the latter case. The job sequencing problem is NP-hard even in the case of uniform tool sizes and equal switching costs (Crama et al., 1994).When the job sequence is fixed, the tool switching problem with uniform tool sizes and equal change costs can be solved optimally in polynomial time by the means of the KTNS procedure of Tang and Denardo (1988). When tool sizes are non-uniform, the problem is NP-hard even for the fixed job sequence (as shown in Crama et al., 2007, where the problem is called the tool loading problem).Over the past decade, component placement machines have increasingly employed modular feeder units to improve versatility, flexibility and efficiency of these equipments. Such examples are Fuzion from Universal, iFlex from Assemblon, and BM/NPM from Panasonic. These machines employ several feeder module units that are online at the same time. The modules contain component reels, and can be swapped with readily available offline modules, that have been prepared in parallel to the processing of the current assembly job.The present work focuses on the practical problem of switching component reels (tools) in a single placement machine containing multiple removable feeder modules of equal capacity. Each feeder module contains a number of component reels (typically 40), and one or more online modules can be replaced by another module which has been prepared to contain a different set of component reels. Swapping a feeder module with another one incurs a much smaller delay (cost) than swapping some individual component reels. Therefore, switching components in groups can reduce the overall setup time required when transitioning between PCB job types. Component reels can also be swapped individually in the online modules if that is preferred (in case of small setup changes), making the problem more difficult than the basic tool switching problem.The problem of switching tools in groups to improve production efficiency is not considered by the tool switching literature to our knowledge. Let us call this problem the modular tool switching (MTS) problem, where in the present context, tools are component reels required to manufacture PCB jobs (see Fig. 1). In the present work, the tools have uniform sizes and the delay caused by switching tools to online modules is also uniform across tool types. The delay of switching a feeder module is a constant, different from the tool switching delay. We show that by introducing online and offline modules into the tool switching problem, the problem becomes NP-hard even in the case of a fixed job sequence, uniform tool sizes and equal tool switching delays.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
