@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessing and hedging the cost of unseasonal weather: Case of the apparel sector

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New method to evaluate the impact of unseasonal weather in retail sales.Results are significant and are useful both for managers and future research.Results are significant for spring and autumn for all channels and apparel types.A method for assessing and hedging unseasonal weather risk is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Weather sensitivity,Weather risk management,Decision making,Statistical model,Retail sales,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Retail activities are increasingly exposed to unseasonal weather causing lost sales and profits, as climate change is aggravating climate variability. Although research has provided insights into the role of weather on consumption, little is known about the precise relationship between weather and sales for strategic and financial decision-making. Using apparel as an illustration, for all seasons, we estimate the impact on sales caused by unexpected deviations of daily temperature from seasonal patterns. We apply Seasonal Trend decomposition using Loess to isolate changes in sales volumes. We use a linear regression to find the relationship between temperature and sales anomalies and construct the historical distribution to determine sales-at-risk due to unseasonal weather. We show how to use weather derivatives to offset the potential loss. Our contribution is twofold. We provide a new general method for managers to understand how their performance is weather-related. We lay out a blueprint for tailor-made weather derivatives to mitigate this risk.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Weather can shift the timing of purchases, generate purchases that would not otherwise occur, or cause a permanent loss of demand (Linden, 1962). In industrialized countries, about 70 percent of firms are exposed to changes in everyday weather in a wide range of economic sectors such as agriculture, tourism, food, beverage, apparel, transportation and construction to name but just a few (Dutton, 2002; Larsen, 2006; Lazo, Lawson, Larsen, and Waidmann, 2011; Starr-McCluer, 2000). In recent years, weather and its potential impact on the economy have turned into a serious concern as climate change is exacerbating naturally occurring climate variability and thus adds to the uncertainty faced by weather-sensitive economic sectors (IPCC, 2014; WMO, 2013).In the retail sector in particular, there is evidence of the role of the weather on sales and unmet profit targets (Agnew and Thornes, 1995; Bertrand and Sinclair-Desgagné, 2012; Changnon, 1999; Schmidlin, 1993). In its March 2013 statistical bulletin, the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) blamed unusually cold temperatures for poor sales performance in the non-food retail sector. In August, Next, the UK clothing retailer was caught out by warmer-than-usual conditions which left its stores with a shortage of summer clothes, accounting for several million pounds of lost sales. In Germany, the Textilwirtschaft survey indicated that retailers quoted adverse weather (94 percent) and lower consumer traffic (71 percent) as the most often mentioned reasons for their poor performance. In France, clothing sales were also down in the first half of 2013.The role of weather on mood (Albert, Rosen, Alexander, and Rosenthal, 1991; Goldstein, 1972; Howarth and Hoffman, 1984; Jorgenson, 1981; Sanders and Brizzolara, 1982) and consumer behavior (Cunningham, 1979; Parsons, 2001; Schneider, Lesko, and Garrett, 1980) has been extensively studied but the impact of actual weather and the value of weather information to business and commercial activities has been largely ignored (see a survey of European corporate treasurers in Bertrand and Sinclair-Desgagné, 2012).The questions we address in this paper are the following: how much of the demand is weather-driven? How can managers profitably use weather information? How can they protect their firms against weather-related lost sales?While it is comparatively easy to make assessments of the general relationship between weather factors and production or consumption, or in some cases prices (Cammarota, 1989; Fergus, 1999; Maunder, 1968) the more precise relationships required for operational decision-making are difficult to formulate (Maunder, 1973). Many studies have focused on establishing a correlation between actual weather variables and sales (Bahng and Kincade, 2012; Engle, Granger, Rice, and Weiss, 1986; Gagne, 1997; Garcia and Sturzenegger, 2001; Linden, 1959; Marteau, Carle, Fourneaux, Holz, and Moreno, 2004) with a view to determine the level of sales for a given level of temperature or precipitation. On the back of this work, a number of retailers such as Tesco in the UK have been using weather information in an attempt to improve forecast on sales for some years (Choi, Kim, and Kim, 2011; Werdigier, 2009) with mixed success (see the case of Pepsico in Fustier, 2011).The use of weather forecasts to reduce demand uncertainty is restricted to companies that have the ability to adjust their supply chain within 2 weeks. Météo France, the French official weather service, considers that reliable temperature forecasts in Europe do not extend beyond 10 days, and any attempt to include weather information in demand forecast systems is likely to deteriorate current accuracy levels. Yet, while knowing the relationship between weather and sales is useful, very few businesses can in fact benefit from this work. In the clothing retail sector for instance, lead times range from 3–5 weeks for the most efficient companies (e.g., Inditex in Europe) to 3–5 months for companies sourcing in Asia which supplies 80 percent of the entire apparel sector (Créhalet, Bertrand, and Fortin, 2013).There are other limitations from previous research work. Many studies have focused on analyzing the impact of severe weather events (e.g., Schmidlin, 1993; Changnon, 1999; Agnew and Palutikof, 1999; Cachon, Gallino, and Olivares, 2012) whereas the weather does not need to be extreme to have serious financial consequences on sales and profits (Berlage, 2013). Also, in the specific case of apparel sales, researchers have analyzed the effect of weather on restricted samples, brands, or type of garments, for a limited period of time and in very restricted geographical areas. As sales strongly depend on ephemeral fashion trends as well as other idiosyncratic causes (Barnes and Lea-Greenwood, 2006; Cachon and Swinney, 2009; McIntyre, Achabal, and Miron, 1993), the results are potentially biased and cannot easily be generalized.Barsky and Miron (1989) suggest that the seasonal cycle has reasonably fixed attributes (such as the timing of holidays, seasons, factory shutdown periods, auto model production changeover schedules), and therefore the true macroeconomic effect of weather can be calculated by measuring the impact of abnormal weather on normal seasonal business. Building from their work, we model how seasonal sales are affected by unseasonal weather.To illustrate our case, we focus our analysis on the area of retailing where consumer demand response to a change in weather is most likely to be clear: the apparel sector (Agnew and Palutikof, 1999). The method we present yields stronger statistical weather influence than previous studies. One of the reasons is that we use volume instead of monetary sales. When using monetary figures such as GDP, real or nominal sales, a 1 percent decrease in quantity produced or consumed, even caused by changes in weather conditions, may be offset by a 1 percent rise in price. Therefore, no change in the underlying economic performance can be recorded and potential weather impacts remains undetected. In addition, we analyze monthly data, while most studies use quarterly or annual data, hereby capturing weather impacts that would otherwise have been overlooked using longer time intervals.We use an additive seasonal decomposition method to analyze sales volume data and isolate unexplained changes in sales from seasonal and trends data. We then applied linear regression to calculate and test the coefficient between a unit-change in temperature and change in sales expressed as a percentage of seasonal normal sales. We calculated what percentage of sales is explained by temperature anomalies by garment type and retail channel. We introduce 30 years of temperature observations to construct sales at risk and estimate potential average and maximum losses caused by unfavorable weather conditions. Finally, we provide an example showing how a retail chain in kids’ apparel can hedge its exposure to unseasonal temperatures using a weather derivative and calculate its cost based on burn analysis.Our study provides a methodology for calculating the cumulative impact over a quarter or a season of unexpected deviations of everyday weather from seasonal patterns. It contributes to a better understanding of weather effects on quarterly sales of retail firms by providing a way to isolate the performance due to weather from true organic performance. With this methodology, managers can now correct past sales data from the effect of the weather and mitigate the impact of the weather on their activity.The next section reviews the related literature. In Section 3, we describe data and methodology. The model is described in Section 4. We discuss the results in Section 5. Section 6 illustrates how to use weather derivatives to reduce exposure to weather risks and Section 7 discusses managerial implications and concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
