@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Joint-optimization of inventory policies on a multi-product multi-echelon pharmaceutical system with batching and ordering constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper considers the real case of a one-warehouse, n-retailer distribution system of infusion solutions in a hospital.A near-optimal joint inventory policy is found that considers stochastic demand and batching.We include health care aspects such as emergency deliveries, service level, and ordering constraint.The system is modeled as a Markov chain and the policy is shown analytically to have appealing structure.The methodology leads to a 45% reduction in stock-on-hand value while respecting the service level.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-echelon,Joint optimization,Health care logistics,Markov processes,Inventory/distribution problem,OR in health services,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a methodology to find near-optimal joint inventory control policies for the real case of a one-warehouse, n-retailer distribution system of infusion solutions at a University Medical Center in France. We consider stochastic demand, batching and order-up-to level policies as well as aspects particular to the healthcare setting such as emergency deliveries, required service level rates and a new constraint on the ordering policy that fits best the hospital’s interests instead of abstract ordering costs. The system is modeled as a Markov chain with an objective to minimize the stock-on-hand value for the overall system. We provide the analytical structure of the model to show that the optimal reorder point of the policy at both echelons is easily derived from a simple probability calculation. We also show that the optimal policy at the care units is to set the order-up-to level one unit higher than the reorder point. We further demonstrate that optimizing the care units in isolation is optimal for the joint multi-echelon, n-retailer problem. A heuristic algorithm is presented to find the near-optimal order-up-to level of the policy of each product at the central pharmacy; all other policy parameters are guaranteed optimal via the structure provided by the model. Comparison of our methodology versus that currently in place at the hospital showed a reduction of approximately 45% in the stock-on-hand value while still respecting the service level requirements.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healthcare spending has been continuously growing to more than 2.5 trillion USD in the United States in 2009 (CMS, 2011) and up to 234.1 billion euros in France in 2010 (DREES, 2011). Facing the increase of these expenditures, and under pressure from governments, insurance companies and communities, hospital administrators have begun to utilize operations research methodologies to improve service quality and reduce costs (Li & Benton, 1996). Aptel and Pourjalali (2001) provide insight into how hospitals in the US and France have improved their logistic activities and decreased costs.This article addresses the pharmacy inventory control problem for the supply chain network of hospitals of the University Medical Center in Nantes, France. We consider a one-warehouse, n-retailer inventory system with emergency replenishments and target service level constraints under stochastic demand. The objective is to optimize the inventory policy of the supply chain of infusion solutions including the special constraints and operational differences that the healthcare industry demands.To be precise, healthcare supply chain models are often service-oriented (Samuel, Gonapa, Chaudhary, & Mishra, 2010) in contrast to traditional approaches which include a penalty or monetary cost in the objective function for the chosen ordering policy. In our problem, imposing a subjective (and potentially biased) cost for ordering would result in suboptimal solutions. Instead, the limited and constant workforce restrains the ordering policy which is a distinguishing feature of this problem.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the current situation of the hospital is described, and in Section 3 a literature review on the topic is made. Section 4 presents the model. Section 5 presents special properties of our model and our near-optimal solution methodology. Results are presented in Section 6 followed by conclusions in Section 7.For the hospital pharmacy problem, we focus on infusion solutions as they are very common medicine for various treatments. Infusion solutions are also generally non-critical and have long expiration dates. Nevertheless, stockout events imply highly variable costs (some patients might be treated if similar products are available, other patients require specific products and replacement is forbidden. For such cases, stockout might lead to a patient’s death or other serious health consequences). As an alternative of monetizing the stockout costs of medicines, the hospital agrees that imposing a minimum service level constraint is more realistic and emergency deliveries are always available to fulfill the demand as a last resource on stockout events.In the current situation, the central warehouse (referred to as the CP for Central Pharmacy) of the hospital delivers infusion solutions along with a myriad of other pharmaceutical and medical supplies to the three hospital pharmacy depots (HP) that belong to the hospital’s network. They are then delivered to the corresponding Care Unit (CU) and to other periphery hospitals integrating a three-echelon system. Fig. 1shows the current supply chain in the hospital scheme. The hospital currently handles 74 infusion solution products that are delivered to 250 CUs.The CP has a periodic review, order-up-to level inventory control policy with batching that is known in the literature as the (nQ, r, T) policy, formally described first by Hadley and Whitin (1963). The review period happens once every T periods (once a week), where pharmacists place an order in multiples of Q (batches), if and only if the inventory position is less than or equal to the re-order point r (denoted as s from now on), to raise inventory to some value S. These values are currently set by “expert knowledge” according to the price and the average weekly demand of the product. There is also a limit on the number of product references that the CP is allowed to order each week due to staff limitations to process all of the orders and the associated paperwork. This constraint does not justify an eventual stockout situation, but if the limit on the number of product references is violated systematically, the payment to suppliers can be delayed. Therefore, what best fits the hospital’s interest is to limit the expected number of product references that the CP orders weekly rather than the “actual” number. Further, suppliers request a fixed-size batch-ordering policy and orders arrive one week after they are placed.Daily trucks deliver to the HPs from the CP according to fixed schedules to supply the hospitals with clothes, food and medicine. These transportation activities limit the use of vehicles for medicine transportation to once a week, so replenishment has to be coordinated to this schedule. The HPs follow a weekly (R, s, S) policy as defined by Scarf (1959). Every R time units (the review point is performed once a week), pharmacists check the stock-on-hand quantities using automated software and trigger orders to suppliers to take the quantity in stock up to a pre-established value S if there is less than a re-order point s. As with the CP, policy parameters are set by empirical methods with storage capacity and target service level constraints. Once the order is delivered to the HP, it is distributed to the CUs. Every CU also follows an (R, s, S) policy and is replenished weekly. CUs have very limited storage space and cannot generally store more than one week of inventory.If a stock out happens at any CU, emergency replenishments are made from the HP within a negligible lead time. If the product is not available at the HP, the common strategy is transshipment between CUs in the same facility, but this disturbs the supply chain network due to unregistered movements of products. The hospital would like to forbid transshipment actions between CUs except in case of emergency. In some cases, the CP might have to send an emergency replenishment directly to the CU within few hours on small compartments that vehicles have available for such cases. This is done while vehicles perform other transportation activities. Therefore, there is not an actual extra cost. In the rare case that the CP lacks the product, suppliers must make the emergency deliveries. Stock out at the suppliers is extremely unlikely. Over the course of 9months there have only been 2 shortage cases, neither of which were infusion solutions. It is important to note that in the health care setting there is no concept of “lost sales”; the demand must be filled in one way or another. However, in our model, if the demand is fulfilled by an outside supplier it is considered as lost within our model.Moving forward, the hospital wishes to redesign its supply chain network to distribute infusion solutions directly to each of the CUs from the CP, eliminating the individual hospital pharmacies. The goal for the medical center is to optimize the supply chain in this new distribution system without reducing the current service level and eliminating transshipments. We characterize this new problem as a two-echelon inventory distribution system with emergency replenishments, stochastic demand, target service level, limited storage capacity and restricted ordering policy on the first level of the supply chain by limiting the expected number of product references ordered to suppliers per week by the CP. Fig. 2shows the proposed configuration of the supply chain. In fact, Nicholson, Vakharia, and Erengüç (2004) address the issue of determining which distribution network is better. A two-echelon system and a three-echelon system were compared to evaluate the possibility of outsourcing the distribution of non-critical medical supply inventory items. The paper concluded that the two-echelon system is more cost efficient, even for an approximate solution. We present a different approach, different cost structure and constraint sets to test the hypothesis on a real case.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
