@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The financing of innovative SMEs: A multicriteria credit rating model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Innovative SMEs face many obstacles to access the credit market.We propose a multicriteria credit rating model to the aim of financing innovative SMEs.The multicriteria method is ELECTRE-TRI, outperformed within a SMAA-TRI analysis.Soft information is emphasized in the model proposed.We carry out a real case study to illustrate the multicriteria model proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple Criteria Decision Aiding,Qualitative criteria,SMAA-TRI,Innovative SMEs,Judgmental credit rating model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) face many obstacles when they try to access the credit market. These obstacles increase if the SMEs are innovative. In this case, financial data are insufficient or even unreliable. Thus, building a judgmental rating model, mainly based on qualitative criteria (soft information), is very important to finance SMEs’ activities. Till now, there has not been a multicriteria credit risk model based on soft information for innovative SMEs. In this paper, we try to fill this gap by presenting a multicriteria credit risk model named ELECTRE-TRI. A SMAA-TRI analysis is also implemented to obtain robust SMEs’ assignments to the risk classes. SMAA-TRI incorporates ELECTRE-TRI by considering different sets of preference parameters and uncertainty in the data via Monte Carlo simulations. Finally, we carry out a real case study with the aim of illustrating the multicriteria credit risk model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since Small and Medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the backbone of all economies, focus to their credit risk assessment has increased considerably.SMEs face many financial constraints to access the credit market (see for example Beck and Demirgürç-Kunt, 2006; Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein, 2005; and Canales and Nanda, 2012). Moreover, if the SMEs are newly created innovative companies, constraints have an higher impact (see Brown, Fazzari, and Petersen, 2009).Consequently, a finance gap exists within the SME’s sector. Such a condition is worsened when SMEs have to request credit from banks. Banks usually adopt different lending approaches that can be grouped into four categories: financial statement lending (based on the evaluation of information from balance-sheet data), asset-based lending (based on the provision of a collateral), credit scoring models (based on hard information), and relationship lending (see Moro and Fink, 2013).In particular, the credit scoring models can be grouped into four families: statistical, operational research and intelligent techniques (see Kumar and Ravi, 2007 and Crook, Edelman, and Thomas, 2007 for a review on this topic). In the case of financing SMEs, a recent research debate offers the best type of lending technique.On the one hand, there are several papers supporting the idea that banks prefer to finance SMEs adopting an intense relationship banking, a type of lending mainly based on non-financial information (soft information) (see, among others, Berger and Udell, 1996 and Moro and Fink, 2013).On the other hand, there is a recent stream of research that asserts that big banks lend more easily to SMEs if lending techniques based on hard information are applied (see for example Beck, Demirgürç-Kunt, and Martínez Pería, 2011 and Berger and Udell, 2006).Due to the SMEs’ lack of sufficient or reliable track records, the most useful approach for evaluating the SME’s creditworthiness seems to be a rating based on experts’ judgment (judgmental rating).The above statement is also supported by several research papers which highlight the significant role of non-financial criteria for the SME’s credit risk evaluation (see, among others, Altman, Sabato, and Wilson, 2010, Auken, Cánovas, and Guijarro, 2010, Berger et al., 2005, and Grunert, Norden, and Weber, 2005; and specifically for innovative SMEs, see for example Czarnitzki and Hottenrott, 2011 and Shefer and Frenkel, 2005).Due to the lack of analytic quantitative techniques for constructing judgmental credit assessment models for innovative SMEs, this paper aims to fill this gap by adopting a Multiple Criteria Decision Aid (MCDA) approach (Vincke, 1992). Since the financing of innovative SMEs is an uncertain problem due to several and conflicting aspects, the Multiple Criteria Decision Aid approach (also called the constructive approach Roy, 1993) provides a useful perspective to deal with the problem (see Greco, Matarazzo, and Słowiński, 2013 for some valuable comments on this topic).Several multicriteria approaches have been already adopted to predict business failures, which is a typical sorting problem (see Zopounidis and Doumpos, 2002). Most of them rely on a utility function to classify enterprises into two categories: defaulted and non-defaulted (see, among these, the multicriteria hierarchical discrimination approach proposed in Doumpos, Kosmidou, Baourakis, and Zopounidis, 2002). Moreover, some multicriteria approaches relying on a utility function have been proposed, with the aim of helping credit granting decisions: for example the multicriteria methodology MACBETH (introduced in Bana e Costa and Vansnick, 1997) has been implemented as a qualitative credit rating model in the banking sector (see Bana e Costa, Barroso, and Soares, 2002).Some recent papers have also developed some credit rating models based on an outranking relation; for example, ELECTRE TRI (introduced in Yu, 1992) was used for the first time as a quantitative credit rating model in Zopounidis and Doumpos, 2011 and PROMETHEE II (Brans and Vincke, 1985) applied for banks’ rating evaluation (Doumpos and Zopounidis, 2010). Moreover, an initial attempt to estimate SMEs’ performance, based on a financial ratio analysis, can be found in Voulgaris, Doumpos, and Zopounidis, 2000, where the multicriteria sorting approach, UTADIS (Jacquet-Lagrèze, 1995) was applied. Recently, in Nemery, Ishizaka, Camargo, and Morel (2012), the innovation performance of SMEs was assessed by the Flow-Sort method. However, none of these papers attempts to develop a judgemental rating model to assign innovative SMEs into risk classes.First of all, we propose ELECTRE TRI to evaluate the SMEs’ credit risk, mainly on the basis of qualitative criteria. A SMAA-TRI analysis (Tervonen, Lahdelma, Almeida Dias, Figueira, and Salminen, 2007) is also used to obtain robust SMEs’ assignments to the risk classes. SMAA-TRI incorporates ELECTRE-TRI by considering different sets of preference parameters and uncertainty in the data with Monte Carlo simulations.A real case study of four Italian innovative enterprises in the start-up phase was set up to illustrate the proposed multicriteria methodology. The whole multicriteria approach has been implemented by interviewing some loan officers from one of the main Italian banks.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief description of ELECTRE-TRI and SMAA-TRI, Section 3 describes the main phases of the multicriteria rating model proposed to evaluate the riskiness of innovative SMEs. A real case study is carried out in Section 4 to illustrate the judgmental multicriteria credit risk rating. Section 5 gives some useful managerial insights about the results obtained from the methodology used. Finally, some conclusions are presented in Section 6.In this paper, the multicriteria approach ELECTRE-TRI (Yu, 1992) is proposed as a credit rating model to assign innovative SMEs into risk categories.ELECTRE-TRI is implemented in the framework of SMAA-TRI to take into account uncertainty and imprecision in its preference parameters. In the following sections, we provide a brief description of ELECTRE-TRI and SMAA-TRI.Let A = {a1, a2, …ai, …, am} be a finite set of m alternatives to be assigned on the basis of a consistent family of n criteria G = {1, 2, …, n} to p risk ordered categories Cp≻⋅⋅⋅Ck⋅⋅⋅≻C1, where Ck + 1 consists of a group of alternatives, better than those in Ck.An alternative ai∈ A evaluated on the set of n criteria is denoted by:ai=(ai1,…aij,…ain),where aijindicates the evaluation of the alternative aion criterion j.Every group of alternatives is separated from the others by means of risk profiles:•bp − 1, …bk, …b1. Each profile bkis the upper limit of the group k and the lower limit of group k + 1. For example, considering two ordered classes, C2 could represent the financed enterprises, while C1 groups the not-funded ones. As a result, one risk profile b1 delimits two risk categories to which an enterprise has to be assigned. The alternatives are assigned to the risk classes on the basis of their comparisons with the risk profiles exploiting the two outranking relations aiSbkand bkSai, which mean, respectively, that alternative aiis at least as good as the profile bkand vice versa.The exploitation of each outranking relation consists of two phases: the concordance and discordance test. Roughly speaking, the concordance test evaluates if a sufficient majority of criteria supports the outranking relation aiSbk(or bkSai), while the discordance test indicates if a minority of criteria pose a veto to the outranking relation aiSbk(or bkSai).The concordance test is performed by the computation of the concordance index C(ai, bk):C(ai,bk)=∑j=1nwjcj(aij,bk),where wjindicates the weight of criterion j with the weights summing up to 1 and cj(ai, bk) is the partial concordance index with respect to criterion j of the assertion “aiis at least as good as the profile bk.” The partial concordance index cj(aij, bk) is computed as follows:cj(aij,bk)={0ifaij≤bkj−pj,aij−bkj+pjpj−qjifbkj−pj<aij<bkj−qj,1ifaij≥bkj−qj,where pjand qj(pj≥ qj≥ 0) indicate the preference and indifference thresholds, respectively. Such thresholds take into account the imprecise criteria evaluations.The preference threshold represents the smallest difference aij− bkcompatible with the preference of aion criterion j, while the indifference threshold indicates the largest indifference aij− bkthat preserves indifference between aiand bk. Similarly, the concordance index C(bk, ai) can also be defined.The second phase consists in the discordance test, that is carried out by the computation of the discordance index dj(aij, bk) with respect to criterion j. The discordance index is defined as follows:dj(aij,bk)={0ifaij≥bkj−pj,bkj−aij−pjvj−pjifbkj−vj<aij<bkj−pj,1ifaij≤bkj−vj,where vj≥ pjis a veto threshold expressing the smallest difference aij− bkwhich is incompatible with the statement aiSbk.Finally, the credibility index of the outranking relation is computed by:σ(ai,bk)=C(ai,bk)∏j∈T¯1−dj(aij,bk)1−C(ai,bk),whereT¯is the set of criteria for which dj(aij, bk) > C(ai, bk). The outranking relation aiSbkhas to be “defuzzyfied” on the the basis of a user-defined threshold λ ∈ [0.5, 1].The relation aiSbkis valid if and only if σ(ai, bk) > λ. Similarly, the outranking relation bkSaiis valid if, and only if, σ(bk, ai) > λ.Choosing a value λ ≥ 0.5 is equivalent to saying that at least 50 percent of the criteria considered are in favor of the assignment of aito class Ck.Then, two assignment procedures can be adopted: a pessimistic and an optimistic one.The above assignment rules are formulated as follows:•The pessimistic assignment (conjunctive logic): each alternative is compared successively to the profiles bp − 1, b2, …b1; if aiSbk, then aiis assigned to the category Ck + 1, otherwise aiis assigned to C1, i.e. the worst category;The optimistic assignment (disjunctive logic): each alternative is compared to the profiles b1, b2, …bp − 1; if bkSai∧ai¬Sbk, then aiis assigned to the category Ckand otherwise aiis assigned to the group Cp, i.e. the best category.Some troublesome situations of incomparability could arise if the two preference statements are verified: ai¬Sbkand bk¬Sai.In the present paper, we adopt the pessimistic rule that is most widely used in practice (Bouyssou and Marchant, 2007) and is more prudential in a risk assessment application (Tervonen et al., 2009). Such rule assigns every alternative aito the category Ck + 1 if the following inequalities are verified:(1)σ(ai,bk)≥λandσ(bk,ai)<λ.If there are no veto criteria, it is easy to verify thatσ(ai,bk)=C(ai,bk)=∑j=1nwjcj(ai,bk).As a consequence, the aforementioned decision rule (1) is simplified as follows:(2)∑j=1nwjcj(ai,bk)≥λand∑j=1nwjcj(bk,ai)<λ.In this section, we introduce SMAA-TRI, presented for the first time in Tervonen et al. (2007) (see also Tervonen, Figueira, Lahdelma, Juscelino, and Salminen, 2009). SMAA-TRI is a SMAA (Stochastic Multicriteria Acceptability Analysis) method that takes into account uncertainty and imprecision on the set of parameters and data required as input by ELECTRE-TRI.In this paper, SMAA-TRI is used to analyze the robustness of ELECTRE-TRI based on the parameter stability. By performing Monte Carlo simulations, such a method generates a set of weights on a cutting level λ within an ELECTRE-TRI model.The input for SMAA-TRI are the following:•the profiles;the feasible set of weights of criteria defined as:W={wj∈R+:∑j=1nwj=1};the cutting level λ;the data and the other parameters of ELECTRE-TRI are assumed to be deterministic.In SMAA-TRI, a categorization function is defined to evaluate the category k to which an alternative aiis assigned as follows:(3)k=F(i,Δ),where Δ is the set of parameters of ELECTRE-TRI.The following category membership function is also introduced:(4)mik={1ifF(i,Δ)=k,0otherwise.The category membership function is used to compute the category acceptability indexπik. From the numerical point of viewπikis a multidimensional integral over the preference parameter space.The category acceptability index evaluates the stability of the assignment of an alternative aito a category Ck. The index lies within the range [0, 1]; if it is equal to 0, then alternative aiis never assigned to category Ckon the basis of all the parameters randomly generated during the simulations; on the contrary, if it is equal to 1, then alternative aiis certainly assigned to category Ck, on the basis of all the parameters randomly generated during the procedure. In this paper, SMAA-TRI has been implemented using JSMAA, an open source software in Java (www.smaa.fi; see Tervonen, 2014), which runs 10,000 simulations.The starting point of an innovative SME’s risk evaluation process is the Business Plan (BP), in which financial and economic forecasts, timing of realization of investment projects, and the description of the main characteristics of the innovative idea are described.Since innovative SMEs are characterized by risks that are hardly comparable to those of existing firms, some financial and economic factors estimated in their BPs may be irrelevant.As a consequence, when sorting SMEs by their risk, multiple criteria can be detected, in particular the non-financial (qualitative) criteria that are the most relevant ones, as it was pointed out in the introduction.First of all, in a multicriteria problem it is very important to identify all the actors. The main actor involved in our decision problem is the credit officer of a bank, who is considered the Decision Maker (DM). The output of the model will be the sorting of each enterprise to a predefined risk category.In this paper, in order to evaluate the innovative SMEs’ riskiness, we adopt the multicriteria model, ELECTRE TRI(Yu, 1992), which belongs to the family of the ELECTRE methods, first introduced by Roy (1968). Specifically, ELECTRE TRI assigns an innovative SME to some predefined risk categories by comparing it with some reference profiles identifying the categories.ELECTRE TRI is implemented within the framework of a constructive approach (Roy, 1993) since its main operational phases are determined by an active participation of the DMs where the DMs’ preferences are not existing in their minds, but they are revealed during an interactive decision process to obtain a final recommendation.The main phases of the multicriteria judgmental rating model proposed, i.e. ELECTRE-TRI, are listed hereafter:•Phase (i): selection of the evaluation criteria;Phase (ii): definition of the risk classes;Phase (iii): elicitation of importance weights of criteria.First, a preliminary analysis on the investment’s profitability is performed by evaluating the cash-flows in the BP. Since there are several uncertainties in innovative projects (see for example, Blochlinger and Leippold, 2006 and Grenadier and Weiss, 1997), we consider two stress conditions in which the BP cash-flows are reduced by 20 percent and 40 percent. Within each scenario, the Net Present Value (NPV) is used to identify unprofitable projects (NPV < 0).Then, as it is usually done in a multicriteria problem, the alternatives have to be assessed on the basis of a family of criteria, which is consistent in the following sense (Roy, 1985):•two alternatives with the same criteria evaluations have to be assigned to the same risk class (exhaustiveness);an innovative alternative whose evaluation in terms of risk is better (i.e. its risk is reduced) cannot be assigned to a worse class (i.e. with higher risk) than it originally was (cohesiveness);each criterion is non-redundant, in the sense that the family of criteria obtained by removing it ceases to satisfy at least one between exhaustiveness and cohesiveness (non-redundancy).In the paper, we have considered both quantitative criteria and qualitative criteria (soft information) to detect the risk level of an innovative project and its financial sustainability.On one hand, among the quantitative criteria, we have selected two innovation indicators and three financial ratios. Among several innovation indicators available in the existing literature, we use the following ones: Intangible assets/fixed assets (see Brandolini and Bugamelli, 2009) andR&D/sales (see Kleinknecht, Van Montfort, and Brouwer, 2002). Both indicators are the most widely used in many empirical studies especially because they are easily measurable.As for the financial ratios, we consider ROA (profit before taxes/total assets), Short-term debt/equity, and cash/total asset, reflecting the areas of profitability, leverage and liquidity. The above ratios have been already used by Altman and Sabato (2007) to evaluate SMEs in the USA.On the other hand, the non-financial criteria selected in this paper have been structured hierarchically on the basis of the risk areas specific to an innovative firm: development, technological, market, and production (see Mazzù, 2008). Hereafter, the risk areas considered are described and related to the existing literature.•Development risk.Such a risk may be related to some mistakes made during the implementation of a process/product innovation. For example, Romijn and Albaladejo (2002) analyzed what determines innovation capability by considering internal and external factors, that can influence significantly the development of an innovation. Among the internal factors, the most important are scientific skills and previous work experience, while among the external ones (in addition to the proximity to customers, suppliers, and R&D) the most relevant ones are innovation awards. Moreover, Romijn and Albaladejo (2002) found out that the mere presence of managers with a high level of education is not a sufficient condition for the success of an innovation. On the other hand, the capacity of development improves whenever managers’ high academic background (e.g. a Ph.D) is related to a previous work experience. In the above mentioned paper, national and European awards have been considered as an important support for the innovation’s development, since they acknowledge its quality beyond the profitability of the project itself. Following Romijn and Albaladejo (2002), we consider the two aforementioned criteria evaluated on five ordinal levels (see Table 1). In relation to awards, the ordinal levels range from one point (assigned when a company has received no award) to five points (in case it has received an international award). Regarding the scientific skills, the ordinal levels vary from one point (assigned in case the co-founders of an innovative enterprise have no specific education) to five points (in case they have received a Ph.D, and have some previous job experience).Technological risk.The elements from which technological risks arise are concerned with different aspects which are related not only with the development and the production of the innovation, but also with the whole business’ organization (Chiesa, Coughlan, and Voss, 1996). For example, technological risks relate to the ability to systematically monitor trends in existing and future technologies, assess the technological capabilities of competitors, connect technology to business objectives and strategies, technology acquisition, leadership and resourcing. Jian Cheng Guan, Yam, Mok, and Ma (2006) analyzed the existing relation between technological innovation capability and competitiveness at the firm level and found that the main determinants of technological risk involve the learning, R&D, and resource allocating capability. Such elements are the basis of the process of innovative firms’ technological adequacy and allow to implement some strategies and techniques to adapt innovation to technological progress. In the evaluation of technological risk, we consider the technological capability comparing the level of competitiveness to the technology available. A five-point scale is adopted and one point is assigned if a firm’s technological innovation capability is irrelevant, two for weakly significant, three for significant, four for strongly significant and five for very significant (see Table 1).Market risk.The success of an innovation depends on the market features, and it requires a deep understanding of the market growth as well as the intensity of competition. In addition to the ability to predict consumer preferences, matching them with technological capabilities is the mean to face demand uncertainty (see Gatignon and Xuereb, 1997). Potential market is a key factor used in many studies (see for example O’Connor Colarelli, 1998, and Head and Mayer, 2004) with the following goals: (i) to identify customers’ needs, price sensitivities, and buyer’s behavior; (ii) to provide dynamic demand, size, and growth. If the potential market is high, it is easier to acquire and retain customers, and create business profitability conditions (see Narver and Slater, 1990). However, given that in a growing market the level of similarity of innovation with the competitors’ products is higher than normal, demand uncertainty has a significant impact on profitability. In this case, the degree of product differentiation and the techniques employed in the innovation are important aspects in order to assess the effective product competitiveness in the market. The level of competition that a firm faces within its industry sector is an important market indicator, because it allows one to figure out the barriers and opportunities of innovative firms (see Chesbrough, 2010). For example, if an innovative firm is a monopolist in a specific market, then it will most likely try to maintain its dominant position over its competitors as long as possible, in order to offset the initial disadvantage related to a large investment in R&D (Reinganum, 1983). In this case, the barriers to entry in the market are relevant, and high costs will arise. On the other hand, if the number of competitors is high, then the firm will be subject to the pressure of followers. The innovator must make significant investments in R&D and Marketing, in order to convince consumers of the quality of the new product compared to its competitors. When market demand increases, new competitors can easily enter the market, thus decreasing the profitability of a firm (see Narver and Slater, 1990). Instead, business profitability increases if the firm is the first one entering new market niches and becomes a pioneer. Robinson and Fornell (1985) found that pioneers develop better products over imitators and thus gain a competitive advantage. According to the literature, we use two indicators to assess market risk. The first is the potential market, modeled through a 5-point scale, defined on the basis of the market trend; one point when market is contracting, two for static, three for weakly rising, four for rising, and five when market trend is booming. The second indicator considers the innovative firm’s position in the market compared to key competitors. A five-point scale is adopted and one point is assigned if the market is a monopoly, two for numerous competitors, three for few competitors, four for one competitor, and five points if the innovative enterprise is a pioneer in the market (see Table 1).Production risk.The production of an innovation may be affected by the incapability of the company’s structure to be flexible to the changes of the technology and the market. Concerning this risk, the existence of testing and pilot units plays a key role in the evaluation of the production and market sustainability of an innovation. For example, Mascitelli (2000) found that the fabrication of prototypes and their updating allows to create interaction among various business unit executives, customer involvement and facilitates tacit knowledge sharing and lead to breakthrough innovation. Moreover, recent researches highlight that patents constitute an useful information source to evaluate the production risk of innovative SMEs. With reference to the patents, Holger (2001) showed that firms with a large patent portfolio are significantly more successful than other firms. In addition, Bloom and Van Reenen (2002) found that patents have a positive impact on firm-level productivity and market value. In the light of the aforementioned literature, we use two indicators for the production risk, namely the availability of testing and pilot units as well as the ownership of patents.Based on the criteria described above, the hierarchical structure of Fig. 1is employed. At the first level, the criteria are denoted by Gr, where r indicates, respectively, the criteria related to the development (G1), technological (G2), market (G3) and production (G4) risks, innovation indicators (G5) and financial criteria (G6), i.e. G = {G1, G2, G3, G4, G5, G6}. At the second level, the set of sub-criteria related to every group of criteria are considered and denoted byGr={g(1)r,g(2)r,…g(q)r…,g(nr)r}with q = 1, 2, …, nrand|G|=n=∑i=16ni.The whole family of criteria considered in the case study is displayed in Table 1. Note that all the criteria evaluations have an increasing direction of preference (i.e. the more, the better), except the short-term debt/equity ratio, which has a decreasing direction of preference.Within ELECTRE-TRI, the reference profile limiting the risk categories is given by the vector:bk={bk1,bk2,…bkj},whose components indicate the performance of the profile in each of its criteria. It bounds the lower limit of category Ck + 1 and the upper limit of category Ck(see Fig. 2). The definition of the risk classes is carried out by the DM. Defining the categories depends on how the DM perceives the different criteria on the basis of the alternatives under consideration. In the case study presented in Section 4, the loan officers of the Italian bank suggested the use of five rating classes, defined in a decreasing order of risk, from the highest level risk (risk class 1: bad enterprises) to the lowest (risk class 5: very good enterprises).One of the most important and difficult tasks in MCDA is the determination of the importance of the criteria. In the literature, several methods have been proposed to assess weights of criteria (see, for example Bana e Costa and Vansnick, 1994, Bana e Costa and Vansnick, 1997, Jacquet-Lagrèze and Siskos, 1982, and Mousseau, Figueira, and Naux, 2001).The concept of criterion weight has a different semantics according to the compensatoriness of the multiple criteria procedure (Bouyssou, 1986). In a totally compensatory methodology, such as the Multi-Attribute Utility Theory (MAUT) (Keeney and Raiffa, 1976), weights have to be interpreted as trade-offs, and they depend on both the scale and the range of the criteria at hand. Vice versa, in non-compensatory models such as ELECTRE (Roy, 1991) and PROMETHEE (Brans, Mareschal, and Vincke, 1984) weights have an intrinsic value, measuring the importance of criteria, and being independent of the used scales.Among the existing techniques to elicit the weights of criteria, in this study we use the revised Simos’ method (Roy and Figueira, 2002).Within the Simos’ procedure, the DM ranks the criteria from the least to the most important by using a set of cards (one for each criterion). The DM can also insert some blank cards to separate the relative importance between criteria. If the DM inserts no white cards between criteria, this means that these criteria do not have the same weights and their relative difference can be taken as a unit measure u for weights. With a similar reasoning, if the DM inserts one white card, two white cards, etc, this means respectively a difference of weights of two times u, three times u, etc.In the next section, where the case study is presented, the cards method is adopted to obtain ordinal information on the weights of the criteria and then to indirectly obtain the weights of criteria from the DM’s ranking.Within the case study, we consider different loan officers as it is supported by the literature that has investigated the role of the loan officers in lending decision making in banks (see for example Tronnberg and Hemlin, 2014 who examined the organizational factors that influence bank loan officers). We have interviewed five loan officers of one of the main Italian banks, which have given different rankings of the criteria (in terms of their relative importance) depending on their preference attitudes.For each DM, we applied SMAA-TRI by varying the cutting level λ represented by a stochastic variable uniformly distributed. Then, to take into account simultaneously all the DMs’ sets of weights, the evaluation of each criterion varies from the maximum to the minimum weight for all DMs. Since the sets of weights are imprecise, we have performed SMAA-TRI again, calculating the category acceptability indices for each alternative.In this section, we present a real case study involving four innovative SMEs, with headquarters in Italy. We contacted the SMEs asking them about their business plans and to fill out a questionnaire. The data collected from the questionnaire concerned some information about the company, distribution and customer networks, demand forecasting, supply chain information, the owners’ CVs and eventual awards received by the company. For the sake of privacy, we have renamed the companies as A, B, C and D. Moreover, we interviewed five loan officers of one of the main Italian banks to simulate the financing of such companies on the basis of the multicriteria rating model proposed in Section 3. In the following, a brief description of the companies under consideration is reported.Companies1.Company A is a biotechnological start-up operating in the field of the green economy. It has developed some biological systems based on plants and micro-organisms forming some eco-friendly barriers, to prevent soil from hydrological destruction and environmental pollution. The services provided by the company consist in realizing such biological barriers, an also in counseling. Furthermore, its services are offered at lower prices than the ones provided by the traditional techniques.Company B is a technological company with an expertise in digital communications. The innovative idea of the company is to develop a “Water-MeMo” that is a wireless sensor network to detect water leakages, based on energy harvesting. In particular, its technology can be applied not only in the water distribution field, but also in other energy applications, such as heating and gas, or environmental monitoring. Its main innovation is in the green technology FluE (Fluid Energy) that is based on some sensors auto-charged by the energy produced by the fluid itself through some piezoelectric foils.Company C is a high-technological start-up, a R&D mechanical design and service provider company with a focus on material recovery systems applied to thin-film deposition processes. Its mission is to provide breakthrough technology in order to increase the efficiency of PVD (Physical Vapour Deposition) processes used nowadays to produce microchips, MEMS (Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems), solar cells and other hi-tech devices.Company D is a high-technological start-up that aims at producing and marketing graphene and carbon nanotubes for industrial use and research. It also aims at developing new materials based on nano-particles and providing technical assistance and counseling to businesses willing to use these technologies. The company is mainly focused on producing nano-engineered epoxy resins used in the manufacture of sports equipment, for example sailing boats or kite boards.The starting point of the Net Present Value analysis presented in this section is the enterprises’ business plan, on which we have implemented a scenario analysis. From the BP’s cash-flows, we have developed two different worst-case scenarios reducing them by 20 percent and 40 percent. It is worth noting that the enterprises have different planning horizons; Company D presented a three year BP, Company A a four year BP, Company B considered a five year BP and Company C a six year BP.We evaluated the NPVs for each scenario since in the traditional lending practice, loans are granted if the projects have a positive NPV. The NPVs under the different scenarios are calculated using a risk free rate of 7.93 percent, commensurated with the performance of Italian public debt securities dated 30/09/2012 (Base informativa pubblica, Banca d’Italia, 2013). The results are reported for each enterprise in Table 11 of Appendix A. In all the enterprises under each scenario, all the NPVs are positive and consequently all the projects are profitable.Supported by the existing literature described in Phase (i) of Section 3, the family of criteria was discussed and elaborated by the credit officers interviewed with the help of experts (see Table 1 for an overview of the criteria considered). Moreover, on the basis of the BPs presented by the firms, the qualitative criteria evaluations were given by the credit officers in cooperation with the experts that can identify the specific risks for each firm.Criteria related to the development risk.[g(1)1] Awards.The idea of Company A has been certified by various awards. Among others, the D2T Start Cup awarded by Trentino Sviluppo and the top position in the competition AGRIstart Up. On the basis of such a criterion, the DMs recommended an evaluation of four points.Company B has obtained the following awards: the Working Capital 2011 research grant, seed fund eCapital 2011 and ItaliaCamp 2012. On the basis of such a criterion, four points have been awarded to Company B.Company C has also received several awards, both national and international. Among others Company C obtained the third place in the Innovact Campus Award 2012 in Reims (France). Therefore, five points were given to Company C.Company D won the Business Plan Competition eCapital in 2010, a competition aimed at creating innovative startups. In 2011, it was a finalist at the Italian National Innovation Award “PNI - Telecom Working Capital”. On the basis of these achievements, four points were given to Company C.] Scientific skills.Company A. The three main partners are agronomists and are specialized in microbiology and plant genetics. Company A was given three points on this criterion.Company B is made up of three young engineers, a university lecturer, a strategic marketing expert and ArieLab s.r.l., a spin-off of the University Politecnica delle Marche. Company B has received five points for this criterion.Company C. The management team is made up of well qualified staff. For example, the CEO has a Masters degree in Engineering, whereas the CTO has a Masters degree in Physics and NanoScience. The DMs gave three points for this aspect.Company D. All the five members are highly qualified; some of them have a degree in engineering, others are specialized in nanotechnology and one of them is specialized in sailing prototypes which are the main products of the company. The DMs gave three points to company D on the basis of this criterion.Criteria related to the technological risk.[g(3)2] The advantages of the techniques used in comparison to other similar techniques already existing.Company A received three points, due to the fact that other methods can be used to prevent soil from the hydrological destruction and the environmental pollution.On the basis of this criterion, Company B received five points since the only similar existing technique consists of putting a few Data Loggers in some points of the water pipelines to record the noise by using a microphone. Such products are too expensive and detect una tantum the efficiency of the water distribution.On the basis of this criterion, Company C received five points since other existing techniques need extremely complex chemical processes to recover precious materials.Company D received three point levels, because the retail prices of their epoxy resins are too high in comparison to others.Criteria related to the market risk.[g(4)3] The presence of key competitors.Company A has one competitor, which uses a much more expensive methodology with many different drawbacks, for example the plants used are not very suitable for the soil. Consequently, on this criterion Company A obtained an evaluation of four points.Company B does not have any competitors on the market. The only similar solution, (i.e. the Data Logger) has many drawbacks. Since company C is a pioneer, the DMs suggested an evaluation of five points on this criterion.Even if Company C has registered a patent, this does not limit other firms from entering the market, by slightly modifying the system developed by Company C. Some other solutions could be: vacuum ad hoc chambers, static monitors and mechanical removing. The above techniques need the support of complex chemical processes. On this criterion, the DMs suggested an evaluation of two points.Company D has different competitors in nanotechnology even if it operates with different prices and quality in their products. The DMs gave an evaluation of two points on this criterion.] The potential market.The potential market of company A is limited by traditional techniques, mainly based on chemical products, preferred to the innovative solution offered by Company A. There is a cultural resistance to accept this new type of method to prevent soil from the hydrological destruction and environmental pollution, even if nowadays there is much more attention to environmental problems. On the basis of this criterion, a prudential evaluation of three has been considered.With respect to this point, the DMs believe that the Company B’s market is contracting (1 point). More precisely, even if the private and public companies that are running water distribution in Italy need a system to monitor water leakage, they are not financially sound.Company C. The market of thin film deposition is booming, with an estimation of market value amounting to 22.4 billion USD in 2015. The use of precious materials is very common in optics and electronics. On this criterion, Company C received an evaluation of five points.Company D. Within the nanotechnology market, nanomaterials are a booming business with benefits for all other sectors. Carbon nanotubes are in this case, together with some materials connected to them (e.g. graphene and fullerenes), the most important products of the entire sector. On this criterion, Company D received an evaluation of five points.Criteria related to production risk.[g(6)4] The availability of testing and pilot units.Company A has not yet constructed any pilot installations that can be useful for showing potential clients the advantages of the technique proposed compared to the traditional ones.Company B has not produced any pilot units, even if it is one of its future projects.Company C has developed the first prototype and tested it in a vacuum chamber of a thermal evaporator at the laboratory of CNR.Company D has started a pilot plant for the supplement of nanocarbons filler to thermosetting epoxy resins.] Patent ownership.Company A has not applied for a patent although it is one of its projects.Company B has not registered its patent for the FluE sensor, although it is one of its objectives.Company C has an Italian patent and also an International application on material recovery systems applied to thin-film deposition processes.Company D has not applied for a patent, but it aims to record strategic patents on its core product and a series of multiple patents that will cover similar areas of research and development thus protecting future market segments.Innovation indicators[g(8)5] Intangible assets/fixed assets.]R&D/sales.Financial criteria[g(10)6] ROA.] Short-term debt/equity.] Cash/total asset.To sum up, for each enterprise the evaluations on the criteria under consideration are shown in Table 2.The limit profiles are built by DMs who determine the performance on each criterion in relation to each category. The DMs have considered four common limit profiles with respect to the qualitative criteria (see Table 3).Concerning the financial criteria, the DMs built a different set of limit profiles for each enterprise under consideration (see Table 4). Such a choice has been justified by considering that each firm belongs to a different sector. Every sector is characterized by different financial risks. In order to identify Italian companies in the same sector of the four enterprises under evaluation, we have considered their ATECO codes which are used to classify companies based on their activities.From the AIDA dataset, we collected the financial ratios of the balance-sheets of the sectors of companies A, B, C and D respectively, composed of 515, 13,735, 1,001, and 1,122 SMEs (enterprises with a number of employees lower than 250) over the period 2008–2012.Finally, from 2008 to 2012 we assessed the 20 percent-quantiles of each financial ratio for all the enterprises in the sample. The 20 percent-quantiles, with respect to each sector, were used as the limit profiles in performing ELECTRE-TRI (see Table 12).Only the reference profiles for R&D were elaborated by the DMs and are the same for all sectors.For simplicity, the preference and indifference thresholds are set equal to zero.Let us assume a total preorder ⪯, i.e., a reflexive binary relation on the set of criteria G satisfying two additional properties: transitivity and completeness. In this case, the preference relation can be decomposed into its symmetric part ∼, called indifference, and into its asymmetric part ≺, called strict preference, whose semantics are, in a multicriteria context, respectively:•gj1(r1)∼gj2(r2)⇔gj1(r1)isequallyimportanttogj2(r2),gj1(r1)≺gj2(r2)⇔gj1(r1)islessimportantthangj2(r2),wheregj1(r1)andgj2(r2)are two distinct criteria from the set G.Below, we report the preference orders of five credit officers of one of the main Italian banks interviewed in the case study.For the first DM (DM1), the most important criterion is the existence of a pilot unit and the second most important criterion is the patent.DM1 gave this preference information on the criteria:g(1)1∼g(2)1≺g(8)5∼g(9)5≺g(4)3∼g(5)3≺g(10)6∼g(11)6∼g(12)6≺g(3)2≺g(7)4≺g(6)4.The second DM (DM2) expressed these preference statements:g(7)4≺g(8)5∼g(9)5≺g(1)1∼g(2)1≺g(10)6∼g(11)6∼g(12)6≺g(3)2≺g(6)4≺g(4)3≺g(5)3.In this case, the prevailing criteria are the potential market and the presence of key competitors, i.e. the sub-criteria relative to the risk market.The DM3’s preference information was the following:g(4)3∼g(5)3≺g(8)5∼g(9)5≺g(7)4≺g(6)4≺g(1)1∼g(2)1≺g(10)6∼g(11)6∼g(12)6≺g(3)2.In this case, the most important weights considered by DM3 are the sub-criteria related to technological risk and those related to financial ratios.DM4’s preference information was given by:g(8)5∼g(9)5≺g(1)1∼g(2)1≺g(4)3≺g(6)4≺g(10)6∼g(11)6∼g(12)6≺g(3)2≺g(5)3≺g(7)4.In this case, the most important criterion is the ownership of a patent and the second most important one is the potential market. DM5’s preference information was:g(1)1∼g(2)1≺g(6)4≺g(4)3≺g(5)3≺g(7)4≺g(3)2≺g(8)5∼g(9)5≺g(10)6∼g(11)6∼g(12)6.In the last case, the most important criteria are the financial ones.For all the five DMs, the criteria(g(1)1,g(2)1),(g(8)5,g(9)5)and(g(10)6,g(11)6,g(12)6)were considered equally important.As explained in Section 3.2, the method adopted for assessing the criteria weights is the Simos’ procedure (the computations relative to the DM1’s weights are reported in Appendix B). For all the DMs, the criteria weights obtained are shown in Table 5.In this section, we have computed the category acceptability indices, according to the different DMs, by using the JSMAA software (the results are showed in Table 6). For all the computations, the cutting level λ has been represented by a stochastic variable uniformly distributed in the range [0.65, 0.85].In the context of the credit granting, the simulation of such parameter is useful since by, increasing (reducing) it, the credit officers could ask tighter (weaker) requirements to the firms on the basis of several factors, for example, to satisfy constraints on the capital requirements provided by the New Basel Accord (see Altman and Sabato, 2005 and Berger, 2006.)In Table 7, the highest category acceptability for each DM obtained during the simulations is shown. It can be noticed that the assignment of Company A to the category C4 is very stable asall the DMs agree with the same assignment. Company B is assigned to category C5 by three DMs except for DM1 and DM2. Alternative B has been sorted in category C5. Company C is assigned to category C5 by three DMs while the highest category acceptabilities for DM2 and DM5 are obtained respectively, for classes C4 and C3 even if DM2 and DM5 have a non-zero probability of assignment of Company C to C5 equal, respectively, to 25 percent and 7 percent (see Table 6(b) and (e)). Thus, company C is assigned to category C5.Company D is assigned to category C4 by three DMs. DM1 and DM4 slightly disagree on this assignment, but DM1 and DM4 assign company D to category C4 with very high probability (respectively, 37 percent and 45 percent) (see Table 6(a) and (e)). Therefore, DM1 and DM4 almost agree with the other DMs. Consequently, Company D is assigned to category C4.To avoid these conflicting situations among the DMs, we consider, as already done in the paper by Morais, de Almeida, and Figueira (2012), the minimum (minj) and the maximum weight (maxj) for each criterion for all DMs. In this way, the weight of each criterion varies in an interval reflecting all the DMs’ preference information on the criteria. Then, we take into account each criterion weight ranging in [minj− δ, maxj+ δ], where δ is a small positive quantity equal to 5 percent(maxj− minj).The results obtained are shown in Table 8.Looking at Table 8(b), the assignment of company A is the same given at an individual level (see Table 7). Instead, the category results of Companies B,C and D are not very stable at a group level. Looking at Table 8(b), one can notice that Company B has almost the same probabilities of assignment to classes C4 (48 percent) and C5 (51 percent), but the DMs decided to assign Company B to class C5 giving more relevance to the individual level. Looking at Table 8(b), Company C is assigned to class C4, even if a high category acceptability to class C5 has been observed. Finally, from Table 8(b) Company D is assigned to class C4 (57 percent), even if there is a high probability (41 percent) that it belongs to class C3.The elaboration of the category acceptabilities and the sorting results show some differences between the category acceptability results at the individual and group levels. In the following section, we will show how the proposed multicriteria model can be used as a risk assessment tool to reveal such behaviors. Furthermore, in the proposed credit model some useful indices can be evaluated.We can define a downward cumulative category acceptability index as follows:π↓(ai)=∑j=1kπij,evaluating the frequency of classification of aito a risk class less or equal to k. Since classes 4 and 5 in the case study are considered as low risk classes, it is meaningful to evaluateπ↓(ai)=∑j=13πij,giving the frequency of classification of aias a high risk company. Analogously, we can define an upward cumulative category acceptability index as follows:π↑(ai)=∑j=k5πij,computing the frequency of classification of aito a risk class more or equal to k.In the case study, since classes 1, 2 and 3 are considered as high risk classes, it is interesting to computeπ↑(ai)=∑k=45πik,expressing the frequency of classification of aias a low risk company.For example, in the case study at the group level one can observe that company D hasπ↑=∑k=45πk=59percent,i.e. company D is sorted to a risk class more or equal to 4 with probability 59 percent (see Table 8(b)). Besides, we can notice that for all DMs company C hasπ↑=∑k=45πk=91percent,meaning that company C is sorted to a risk class more or equal to 4 in a more stable way than company D.Recently, the above definitions have been similarly introduced in Angilella et al. (2014), although in the context of the rank acceptability within a multicriteria environmental application.In this section, we provide more insights into the results obtained in the case study.From Table 8, one can observe that some inconsistencies can be detected by comparing the results obtained from the aggregation process of all the DMs, based on a common set of intervals of the weights, to those of the individual DMs shown in Table 6. On the one hand, we notice that some acceptability indices at the group level are higher than the ones at the individual level. For example, for company B one can observe that at a group level π5 = 51 percent (see Table 8), whileπDM15=0percent(see Table 6).These results can be explained by observing that at the individual DM level, the weights are fixed (different for each DM) and the only parameter that is simulated is the cutting level λ, while at the group level, both the cutting level λ and the weights are simulated. The weights are uniformly distributed in ranges defined by all DMs. Therefore, the simulations related to the group of DMs actually cover a wider space for the parameters of the model. If XGdenotes the space of parameter values (the cutting level λ and the weights) simulated at the group level, and XDM1, XDM2, …XDM5 are the corresponding spaces for the simulations at the individual level (fixed weights and varying the cutting level λ), then all XDM1, XDM2, …XDM5 are subsets of XG. Therefore, it is possible to have some results at the group level not identified at the individual level (because at the group level, the weights are also simulated, in contrast to the individual level, where they are fixed). On the other hand, since the weights are uniformly distributed in ranges defined by all DMs, the ranges of the weights simply defined by the [minj, maxj] could lead to some troublesome situations, i.e. some acceptability indices may be zero at the group level, when for some DMs the corresponding indices are positive. By using the uniform distribution for each criterion, it is practically impossible to generate random weights exactly equal to the lower bound or/and the upper bound. For example, let us suppose that with respect to criterion j, minjis the weight corresponding to a single DM, say DM3. Then, it could happen that none of the simulations performed at the group level may be in accordance with DM3. For this reason, at the group level we have extended the interval [minj, maxj] by subtracting/adding a small positive quantity equal to 5 percent(maxj− minj).We improved the analysis by also considering imprecise evaluations on the criteria. In innovative projects the risks are mostly due to the uncertainties in the data. So, we considered the criteria expressed in terms of intervals. In the case study, since the evaluation criteria of the development risk and the ones expressed in a binary codes are weakly based on DM’s judgment, its scores were considered precise. For the other qualitative data, the evaluations of the alternatives under consideration on each criterion are integer numbers within an interval. For example, the evaluation of Company A on criteriong(3)2can be 3, 4 or 5. For the innovation indicators and financial criteria, to be prudential we have reduced their evaluations by 20 percent (see Table 9).The category acceptabilities obtained are shown in Table 10.Finally, it is important to emphasize that in the judgmental credit risk model considered, we never introduced any veto criterion. The introduction of veto criteria is expected to have a considerable impact on the decision procedure. For example if the criterion availability of testing and pilot units is considered as a veto criterion then when a firm has not implemented a pilot unit, such criterion will oppose the assignment of the firm to a low risk class. Such an enterprise will be assigned to class C1, even if it had a good evaluation on the majority of criteria. In the case study, for example only Company C has a good evaluation on this criterion. As a result, in many real credit granting problems, it may be important to impose some veto criteria.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Many recent studies have been dedicated to measure SMEs’ innovation, which is considered as a crucial factor for the development of a national economy (Brandolini and Bugamelli, 2009). The main obstacle that innovative SMEs face in achieving a high level of innovation is a non-straightforward access to credit. For example, in Italy such asymmetric information is due to the small size of most of the innovative SMEs (Bugamelli, Cannari, Lotti, and Magri, 2012). To help innovative enterprises, financial institutions could try to reduce such informative asymmetries. Presently, banks assess the credit risk of SMEs by evaluating their business plan and considering some non-financial information such as the market trend and the quality of the management team. Although financing innovation is not an easy task due to the lack of track records of innovative SMEs, we believe that a rating model based upon experts’ judgments could improve it. In financing innovative SMEs, the experts play a key role, since they can help credit officers in selecting the proper criteria, especially, in detecting risks.In this paper, we have presented a multicriteria approach to sort innovative enterprises into risk classes, mainly on the basis of soft information.Specifically, we have introduced a set of criteria hierarchically structured where the roots are the innovation risks: development, technological, market and production risks. Such risks have been considered together with some financial criteria and innovation indicators. The multicriteria approach proposed is ELECTRE-TRI based on an outranking preference relation which compares each innovation to some existing risk profiles. As explained in this paper, the multidimensional and complex decisional framework of financing innovation is well adapted to the aforementioned multicriteria method.Moreover, ELECTRE-TRI has been implemented within a SMAA methodology, i.e. SMAA-TRI, which takes into account uncertainty and imprecision in the criteria weights, the cutting level and also the data.In the context of the financing innovative SMEs, the relevance of the features of SMAA-TRI is twofold. On the one hand, uncertainty in the data is a common and frequent aspect in the evaluation of the innovative SMEs’ risk credit. On the other hand, in a group of credit officers the different points of view on the importance of criteria can be taken into account simultaneously by means of interval criteria weights.Finally, we envisage some possible research lines for the future:•it could be interesting to identify the most “critical” criteria governing the decision making process. What is meant by the term “critical” here is the smallest change that might occur to a certain criterion in order increase the category acceptability of the better risk class to which each enterprise has been assigned,ELECTRE-TRI is a non-compensatory method; maybe it may be useful to consider other multicriteria models including interaction between the criteria (see the Choquet integral preference model among the multicriteria approaches representing interaction between criteria e.g. in Angilella, Greco, Lamantia, and Matarazzo, 2004 and its recent extensions within a SMAA methodology in Angilella, Corrente, and Greco, 2012 and Angilella, Corrente, and Greco, 2015),since the criteria introduced in this paper are hierarchically structured, it may be useful to apply the recent approach of thehierarchal Choquet integral presented in Angilella, Corrente, Greco, and Słowiński (2013).