@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Core-based cost allocation in the cooperative traveling salesman problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A cooperative TSP model formulation is provided.Release dates are taken into account.A cost allocation for the salesmen is defined by means of a cooperative game theory solution concept, i.e. the (least) core.Mathematical programming is used to compute a (least) core element.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Traveling salesman problem,Cooperative game theory,Core,Cost allocation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a cost allocation scheme for a horizontal cooperation of traveling salesmen that is implemented a priori and provides expected costs for the coalition members. The cost allocation is determined using the core concept. To compute the value of the characteristic function over the whole planning horizon the TSP with release dates combined with simulation is used. The developed core computation algorithm, based on mathematical programming techniques, provides a core element or, in case of an empty core, a least-core element. To decrease the computational effort of core computation a row generation procedure is implemented. The developed computation study tests the computational performance of the solution procedure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For logistic service providers horizontal cooperation has a variety of potentials. It offers increase of profitability and competitiveness, capacity optimization, cost reduction and network improvement. The issue of profit distribution among the partners plays the crucial role on a way to the establishment of cooperation. As studies show (see Muir, 2009, 2011) there are multiple barriers on the way to practical implementation of horizontal cooperation among logistic service providers, and the lack of profit sharing models belongs to the common ones.In this paper we develop a cost allocation scheme for a horizontal cooperation of traveling salesmen using cooperative game theory. This cost allocation scheme can be implemented before the actual planning horizon (or before the establishment of cooperation agreement) and provides expected costs for coalition members, so they can value their savings and decide if they want to be a part of the partnership. Cooperative game theory offers several well-known allocation concepts: e.g. the core (introduced by Gilles (1959)), the Shapley value (proposed by Shapley (1953)) and the nucleolus (developed by Schmeidler (1969)). In a previous study (see Kimms & Kozeletskyi, 2013) the cost allocation for the cooperative traveling salesman problem was determined using the Shapley value. This paper focuses on the core concept and presents another modeling approach than in Kimms and Kozeletskyi (2013) where dynamic programming was used. Dynamic programming can be efficiently used for this problem only in combination with approximate dynamic programming techniques that give only an approximation of the total costs. This works well for the Shapley value, however for the core, where stability constraints should be proved (see Section 4 for a definition), approximation may lead to the distortion of results. For that reason we developed the mathematical programming model for computation of total costs, that is solved optimally.This paper has the following structure. In the next section we give a brief literature review on horizontal cooperation in transportation problems. In Section 3 the optimization model and the resulting exact solution procedure for the cooperative TSP are formulated. Section 4 presents the core computation algorithm for this problem. In Section 5 we show results of our computational study for the performance and the solution quality of the developed algorithm. Section 6 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The proposed solution procedure computes a core element for the cooperative traveling salesman a priori. A computational study made on randomly generated instances showed the efficiency of the proposed algorithm as well as significant cost savings compared to the non-cooperative case. The found instance with an empty core additionally proves the usage of the least-core as a cooperative TSP game can have an empty core and therefore is not balanced. The least-core can be also implemented for the instances with non-empty core due to fairness issues. For a further discussion on fairness of the core concept we refer to Drechsel and Kimms (2010). The developed optimization approach can also be applied for a priori calculation of cost allocations in problems with rolling horizon. One can simulate the appearance of customer orders and incorporate them in the optimization model through the release dates. Additionally the idea of the presented algorithm can also be extended for further modifications of transportation planning (e.g. vehicle routing problems).