@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An Activity-Based Costing decision model for life cycle assessment in green building projects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Incorporating LCA thinking into the cost measurement for green building.Incorporating capacity expansion and CO2 emission costs into an ABC decision model.Proposing a mathematical programming approach in selecting green building projects.Management must incorporate CO2 emission cost into overall green building project costs.Low-carbon construction methods do affect the decisions of green building project.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in service industries,Life cycle assessment,Activity-Based Costing (ABC),CO2 emission costs,Green building project,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Carbon emissions are an increasingly important consideration in sustainable environmental development. In the green building industry, green construction cost controls and low-carbon construction methods are considered to be the key barriers encountered. Based on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) policy, management of carbon emissions from green building projects contributes to the acquisition of accurate building cost information and to a reduction in the environmental impact of these projects. This study focuses on the CO2 emission costs and low-carbon construction methods, and proposes a 0–1 mixed integer programming (0–1 MIP) decision model for integrated green building projects, using an Activity-Based Cost (ABC) and life cycle assessment (LCA) approach. The major contributions of this study are as follows: (1) the integrated model can help construction company managers to more accurately understand how to allocate resources and funding for energy saving activities to each green building through appropriate cost drivers; (2) this model provides a pre-construction decision-making tool which will assist management in bidding on environmentally-friendly construction projects; and (3) this study contributes to the innovation operation research (OR) literature, especially in regard to incorporating the life cycle assessment measurement into construction cost management by utilizing a mixed decision model for green building projects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent natural disasters resulting from global climate change have caused significant damage to both life and property. Governments have proactively begun developing environmental pollution policies, and the protection of air quality has become a prime concern. In 2012, Taiwan passed the indoor air quality management act; it requires managers or employers to be responsible for managing and maintaining the indoor air quality of their premises in order to protect public health. Taiwan became the second country to implement these regulations, following South Korea. This act was promulgated because of the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which indicated that carbon dioxide (CO2) in greenhouse gases (GHGs) has increased as a result of human activities, such as the use of fossil fuels in transportation, manufacturing industries, and in the heating and cooling of buildings (IPCC, 2007). Construction of new buildings is responsible for significant greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs), particularly of CO2. Many countries are now attempting to promote Green Building development in order to reduce or at least slow down global climate warming due to CO2 emissions.A carbon tax is highly recommended by economists and international organizations as a cost-effective method (EEA, 1996) for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Many countries, including: Denmark, Sweden, Norway, the Netherlands and Finland have already adopted carbon taxes to reduce CO2 emissions. In addition, the carbon tax policy promotes the development of renewable energy (Lin & Li, 2011), encourages environmental management applications (Kunsch & Springael, 2008) and assists in creating a foundation for developing economies (Thomas, John, Laura, & Richard, 2013). On the other hand, the levying of carbon taxes also increases building costs for construction companies. With heightened awareness of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), construction companies must consider carbon emission costs to help accurately predict building costs and reduce a building project’s overall impact on the environment.Life-cycle assessment (LCA) is an evaluation of the environmental load and energy consumption of goods and services during their total life cycle (ISO, 2006). LCA has been applied in assessing construction costs, and has become an important technique for improving construction sustainability (Ortiz, Castells, & Sonnemann, 2009). As emphasis on the measurement of building costs and economic benefits is used to enhance operating profits within the construction industry, green building is often perceived as having high construction costs. However, Activity-Based Costing (ABC) could improve the accuracy of cost-related data and further control project costs (Rahman, Omar, & Abidin, 2003; Tsai & Hung, 2009a, 2009b). This approach results in a more accurate estimation of the constuction costs for each buildings compared to traditional cost systems since the former represents a closer reflection of the real construction cost. Many studies have applied a Mathematical Programming (MP) model to provide energy management solutions in order to minimize costs, such as: greenhouse gas studies, green airline fleet planning, energy saving selection, carbon emission constraint problems, optimizing airline network design and green manufacturing technologies (Abanda, Tah, & Cheung, 2013; Absi, Dauzère-Pérès, Kedad-Sidhoum, Penz, & Rapine, 2013; Antunes, Martins, & Brito, 2004; Derigs & Illing, 2013; George, Danae, Kostas, & Paraskevas, 2008; Liu, Pistikopoulos, & Li, 2010; Tsai, Chen, Leu, Chang, & Lin, 2013; Tsai et al., 2012a). From the viewpoint of construction building cost evaluation, little research to date has combined the MP and construction cost models in consideration of the environmental factors. Hoinka and Zie˛bik (2010) applied a mathematical method to assess the energy management of complex buildings, and pointed out that energy management is an essential aspect in the preliminary design of complex buildings. Favre and Citherlet (2008) presented the features of Eco-Bat, a computer program developed to assess the environmental impact of buildings, including construction materials and energy consumed, and to evaluate environmental impact based on the LCA approach. Yan, Shen, Fan, Wang, and Zhang (2010) identified the scope and sources of GHG emissions in building construction, including: the manufacture and transportation of building materials, and energy consumption of construction equipment, as well as in processing resources and disposing of construction waste. While previous relevant researches mainly focus on the energy management measurement of building construction, this paper employs the ABC approach to identify the construction process activities of a green building project life cycle, following which, a cost estimate is prepared for each activity individually.Differing from the previous researches introduced above, the aim of this study is to develop an integrated decision model for construction companies to use in selecting green building projects, without sacrificing profit margins. The relevant entire life cycle of green building construction resources and activities will be incorporated within an ABC decision model, and both low-carbon construction method and CO2 emission cost can be analyzed simultaneously. In addition, the features of capacity expansion features and price elasticity are incorporated into an ABC decision model by using a mathematical programming approach. The remainder of the study is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces LCA in green buildings, ABC concepts and CO2 emission costs. An illustration of integrated MP and ABC decision-making models follows in Section 3, while Section 4 contains a short description of a case study and a discussion of the results. Section 5 presents concluding remarks.The construction industry today is facing unprecedented and growing pressures from global economic problems, increasing natural disasters, rising material costs, and other political and environmental issues. The construction industry has been motivated to develop “green” building projects and to re-evaluate related construction costs (Kubba, 2010). This section presents recent relevant literature on the LCA of green buildings, CO2 emission costs and Activity-Based Costing concepts.Green building is a sustainable form of building that incorporates the life cycle concept, including green building plans and designs, production and transportation of building materials, construction, use and maintenance, and disposal processes, which minimize resource consumption and waste production. The LCA methodology has been widely applied in assessing the environmental burden of products and services during their life cycle; in particular, the construction industry has extended this concept to the selection of appropriate building materials and construction elements (Ortiz et al., 2009). Many previous studies have conducted an LCA of buildings in terms of energy management and environment impact issues (Chang, Ries, & Wang, 2010; Maria, Theophilus, & Peter, 2012). The life cycle point of view becomes increasingly important as green buildings use renewable building materials and efficient energy systems to achieve sustainable development. This study attempts to incorporate life cycle thinking into the cost measurement for green building projects; therefore it includes an assessment of the energy consumption of a building and the carbon emissions created during the construction process.According to ISO 14040, stage one of any LCA study is clearly defining its purpose, scope and system boundaries. This study includes four main stages in the life cycle of green building.(1)Green design phase: Green design strategies foster sustainability by considering occupant health and environmental resource depletion during construction. This phase includes green design consultant fees (e.g., construction site selection and renewable energy source adoption) (Arena & Rosa, 2003).Construction phase: Differing from the traditional construction process, an environmental impact assessment must be included in the green building construction process. This phase covers the transportation of building materials and low-carbon construction methods; it includes environment loads resulting from the use of heavy equipment or machines at the construction site (Li, Zhu, & Zhang, 2010).Operation phase: Energy consumption during the operation phase is separated into operational uses (cooking, electricity, heating and ventilating) and maintenance and building refurbishing (repair) activities (Blengini & Carlo, 2010).Decommissioning phase: This phase includes the dismantling of the building structure shell and the final disposal activities: landfill use, waste recycling and reuse (Zheng, Jing, Huang, Zhang, & Gao, 2009).With increasing concerns about global warming and climate change, it is imperative for world governments to impose effective policy instruments to promote energy saving and reduce carbon emissions. Johansson (2006) theoretically evaluated the policy instruments used to contribute to reduction of CO2 emissions, while preserving the competitiveness of the construction industry. Lee, Lin, and Lewis (2008) proposed that incorporating flexible price mechanisms into carbon tax rates was a useful policy tool for encouraging the reduction of carbon emissions.With construction activities covering both machine operation and maintenance activity, the construction industry has traditionally produced the highest carbon emissions of various industry sectors. As an incentive-based policy instrument aimed at reducing emissions of carbon dioxide, carbon and energy taxation have had economic effects on construction companies. Joshua (2010) and Lu, Zhu, and Cui (2012) indicated that carbon emission costs faced by the construction industry would increase the cost-effectiveness of energy efficiency improvements, while enhancing energy efficiency and encouraging continuing innovation in construction technology. Even though the carbon tax would be regarded as an additional cost borne by construction companies, enhancement of occupant health and comfort, and productivity as well as a reduction in pollution levels would provide long-term benefits to people and society.Green building strategies are mainly related to the selection of construction sites, green concept design, green construction methods, operation and decommissioning; together, these help to mitigate a building’s overall impact on the environment. It is therefore important that attention be paid to the impact of carbon emissions during a building’s life cycle. There is an imperative need for the construction industry to understand carbon emission cost policies, and to consider carbon emission costs as part of the cost planning process for green building projects.The main advantage of ABC developed by Cooper and Kaplan in 1988 was the improved accuracy of product cost data adopted from the traditional cost system, using activity-based assessment as the intermediary of cost assignment. From the perspective of construction companies, it is important to estimate the costs of the corresponding construction process activities for each green building project, in order to analyze total cost information. Accordingly, we regard green building projects as cost objects. The ABC analysis is divided into a two-stage procedure which assigns resource costs to cost objects. In the first stage, resource costs are assigned to various activities; using resource drivers, the factors are chosen to approximate the consumption of resources used in construction activities. Each type of resource traced to a building activity becomes one cost element within an activity cost pool. Thus, an activity cost pool provides the total costs associated with a particular activity. An activity centre is composed of related activities, usually clustered according to function or process. In the second stage, the costs in each activity cost pool are assigned to cost objects by an adequate activity driver used to measure the consumption of activities by the cost objects. For this purpose, decision makers can select suitable cost drivers that rely on measurement goals, costs of measurement and degree of correlation.In a green building project, costs are divided into direct and indirect construction costs. Direct costs are divided into direct material costs, direct labour costs, direct machine costs and land acquisition costs. Indirect costs are divided into four activity levels: unit, batch, environment and project. Unit level activities refer to activities that must be carried out for each unit of cost object. Batch level activity refers to each batch of cost objects (e.g., green building material transportation). Environment level activities include activities related to the environmental energy of a cost object (e.g., energy management). Project level activities are performed as needed to support all units of a cost object (e.g., green building design planning).On the other hand, Kee (2008) proposed the usefulness of products and the variable costs associated with pricing, product-mix and capacity expansion decisions when economies of scope were present. Further analysis of production-related decisions with hard constraints indicated that the usefulness of variable costing incorporating the effects of bottleneck activity also diminished when economies of scope were present. In this study, green building projects are regarded as products that require cost information for making optimal decisions.In order to achieve environmentally-sustainable development, construction companies should pay more attention to environmental and social costs during the entire life cycle of green building assessment, such as CO2 emission costs. This study combines LCA methodology and ABC in assessing the costs of both energy consumption and CO2 emissions in selecting green building projects.Dekker, Bloemhof, and Mallidis (2012) indicated that operations research contributes to green logistics and can pinpoint the trade-offs between cost and emissions. In general, optimal green building project targets are most often achieved when the project’s activities are integrated and costs are controlled collaboratively. The need to determine project costs is important in evaluating competitive bids (Wang, 2004); accordingly, construction owners must acquire accurate cost information to support bidding judgments on a particular building project. Differing from conventional construction projects, green building projects must consider environmental and energy costs in addition to green building costs. It could be argued that environmental impact and cost control are equally important as they are simultaneously applied in planning green building projects. Jadicke (1961) proposed a Linear Programming (LP) technique to determine the optimal product-mix, maximizing total profit under some constraints for production or sales in the case of multi-product companies. Li, Huang, Nie, and Nie (2008) proposed an integer programming approach for capacity planning of environmental management systems. Gaurav et al. (2012) described a model for capacity expansion planning integrated into the supply chain. Tsai, Kuo, Lin, Kuo, and Shen (2010) incorporated resource-limiting factors, including: capacity expansion, purchase discounts and change of product price into the decision-making model. Mathematical programming plays a key role in understanding environmental impact, and offers convenience and cost efficiency to obtain the required information about real world aspects, such as green building cost evaluation. In order to address problems associated with the selection of green building projects, this study focuses on the formulation of mathematical programming models for the computation of accurate construction cost information regarding green building life cycles. This study also incorporates the features of capacity expansion and price elasticity into the ABC decision model to maximize profits as part of the decision-making process.The current ABC decision model for green building projects does not explicitly consider the importance of capacity expansion. The feasibility or benefits of capacity expansion has usually been evaluated by using post-optimal (sensitivity) analysis. Especially, accurate information regarding green building project cost is necessary; making successive evaluations on expanding various building input resources is a tedious job. A construction company manager would probably end up with a sub-optimal solution because the expanded levels of various construction resources are decided by a trial-and-error method instead of a systematic technology. Furthermore, it is difficult to simultaneously consider two or more kinds of capacity expansions by using the current ABC decision models for green building projects. In view of this, we suppose a construction company planning to maximize profits as part of a green building project decision factors CO2 emission costs into the entire life cycle of a green building project, while simultaneously considering the different price elasticity of the green building materials, and capacity expansions, in regard to direct machine and labour costs. The following assumptions are incorporated in the ABC mathematical programming decision model:(1)The energy-saving activities in the life cycle of a green building project have been classified as unit-, batch-, project- and environment-level, and resource drivers and activity drivers have been chosen as part of the construction company’s ABC plan. The activity drivers for each activity with the detailed cost assignment are based on the ABC model modified from Tsai et al. (2012a), as shown in Fig. 1.The green building project’s bidding price and the direct material costs for existing projects remain fixed within a relevant range in the short term; for some materials, a purchase discount will be offered if the order exceeds a minimum quantity. According to governmental occupational safety policies, the direct labour costs for green building projects can be expanded using overtime work or additional night shifts, as well as hiring temporary workers at a higher wage rate for the short term. This model does not consider substitution of resources in the green building project, for instance the replacement of labour hours by machine hours.Low-carbon construction methods for green building projects can enhance building durability and result in less construction site waste; e.g., prefabrication of some building components (Tsai, Lin, Lee, Chang, & Hsu, 2013). The construction company has established good relationships with construction resource vendors, allowing for short-term rental of heavy equipment or machines. The construction company places emphasis on corporate responsibility and environmental consciousness; thus, CO2 emission costs will be calculated from the entire life cycle of a green building, and increasing CO2 emissions will increase taxation.Costs associated with the entire life cycle of a green building project include the costs of direct materials, direct labour, machines, land acquisition, activity costs and CO2 emissions; other costs are viewed as unchangeable fixed costs and are thus excluded from this study.Decision makers can acquire accurate construction cost information from the company’s financial department, allowing them to formulate policies which will maximize profits. Each construction company has its own customer segments and pricing strategies; therefore, bidding prices for green building projects by potential competitors are not sensitive to temporary or short-term price changes.According to the assumptions described above, costs associated with green building projects include: direct material costs, direct labour costs, machine costs, land acquisition costs, energy-saving activity costs and CO2 emissions costs. The cost characteristics cover capacity expansions and constraints, purchasing discounts and CO2 emission costs; these are factored into the 0–1 mixed integer programming (0–1 MIP) decision model, followed by an account of the model equations for selecting optimal green building projects.In the remainder of this section, the life cycle assessment for green building projects using the ABC decision-making model is described as follows:Maximizeπ=Total Revenue-Total green building material cost-Total direct labour cost-Total machine cost-Land acquisition cost-Total life cycle, green building activity costs(Unit-,Batch-,Environmental-,Project-Level)-Total life cycleCO2emission costs(1)π=∑i=1nPiXi-∑r∈d′IrRr+∑r∈d(IrRr+IDrRMr)-BC1+(BC2-BC1)w1+(BC3-BC1)w2-∑h=1tMChϑh-LAC-∑i=1n∑j∈BAsjkijBij-∑i=1n∑j∈ENsjρijVi-∑i=1n∑j∈PRsjσijHi-(COEP1ϕ1+COEP2ϕ2+COEP3ϕ3)where Piis the bidding price of green building project i; Xia 0/1 variable, Xi=1 means that the construction company executes ith green building project; otherwise, Xi=0; Irthe unit cost of the rth materials without a purchase discount used; IDrthe unit cost of the rth materials with a purchase discount used; Rrthe quantities of the rth materials without a purchase discount used; RMrthe quantities of the rth materials with a purchase discount used; Mirthe requirement of the rth materials for green building project i; BC1, BC2, BC3 the total direct labour cost in BO1, BO2 and BO3, respectively; sjthe actual running activity cost per activity driver for activity j;λijthe requirement of the activity driver of batch-level activity for project i; ρijthe number of units of environment-level activity j for project i; σijthe requirement of the activity driver of project-level activity j for project i; COEP1ϕ1 the total CO2 emissions cost in COEQ1ϕ1; COEP2ϕ2 the total CO2 emissions cost in COEQ2ϕ2; and COEP3ϕ3 is the total CO2 emissions cost in COEQ3ϕ3.For the objective function (1), π represents the construction company’s maximized profit;∑i=1nPiXirepresents the total revenue of the bidding prices for a green building project i. Five kinds of costs are calculated: total direct green building material costs∑r∈d′IrRr+∑r∈d(IrRr+IDrRMr), total direct labour costsBC1+(BC2-BC1)w1+(BC3-BC1)w2, total direct machine costs∑h=0kMChθh, land acquisition cost (LAC), green building activity cost and CO2 emission cost. The activity cost is divided into four levels: unit, batch (building material purchases and building dismantling and landfill activities), project (number of green drawings) and environmental (energy management activities and waste reuse and recycling activities) level. The CO2 emission cost here refers to the necessity to calculate according to the green building project life cycle. This model considers two types of construction method: conventional construction method and low-carbon construction method. The capacity can be expanded by overtime work, machine rentals, etc.ConstraintsThis model also has the following constraints:[Direct material constraints]:(2)∑i=1nMirXi⩽Rr,r∈d′(3)Rr⩽Qr,r∈d′(4)∑i=1nMirXi⩽Rr+RMr,r∈d(5)RMr⩾TDrSDr,r∈d(6)Rr⩽TDrNDr,r∈d(7)RMr⩽QrSDr,r∈d(8)NDr+SDr=1,r∈d(9)Rr⩾0where Qris the available quantity of the rth materials; TDrthe quantity of the rth materials that an order must satisfy to obtain a purchase discount; SDr: a 0/1 variable. SDr=1 means that the quantity of the rth materials satisfies the threshold of discount; otherwise, SDr=0; NDra 0/1 variable. NDr=1 means that the quantity of the rth materials dissatisfies the threshold of discount; otherwise, NDr=0.Eqs. (2)–(9) represent the constraint of green building materials (direct material). The green building projects have assumed the direct materials are purchased with (r∈d) and without (r∈d′) discount. The cost of green building materials is considered one of the key factors in regard to whether or not to adopt green building materials in the construction process. Hence, the suppliers of green building materials provide a purchase discount percentage when order quantities exceed TDr. From the point of view of capability expansion, the quantity of green building materials can be expanded to Qr, and the total green building cost is IDrQr. The total direct material cost function would be a piecewise linear function, as depicted in Fig. 2.In considering the material purchase discount, Eq. (4) represents that a green building material quantity should satisfy the building project’s demands. Eqs. (5) and (6) define the terms in which a purchase discount either did or did not qualify. Eq. (7) describes the limit condition of a maximum order quantity for purchase of green building materials with a purchase discount. Eventually, Eq. (8) ensures that one, and only one, of the terms described by Eqs. (5) and (6) is in effect for each material.[Unit-level direct labour cost constraints]:(10)TLC=[BO1+(BO2-BO1)w1+(BO3-BO1)w2](11)w0-η1⩽0(12)w1-η1-η2⩽0(13)w2-η2⩽0(14)w0+w1+w2=1(15)η1+η2=1where BO1 is the available normal direct labour hours; BO2 the total direct labour hours under overtime work situations (must add night shifts); BO3 the total direct labour hours under overtime work situations (must hire additional time-rate workers); η1, η2 an SOS1 (special ordered set of type 1) set of 0/1 variables, within which exactly one variable must be non-zero; w0, w1, w2 is an SOS2 (special ordered set of type 2) set of non-negative variables, within which at most two adjacent variables, in the order given to the set, can be non-zero.Assumptions concerning direct labour costs for green building projects can be expanded using overtime work, additional night shifts and the hiring of temporary time-rate workers. Detailed total labour cost conditions are shown in Fig. 3, with normal direct labour hours separated into non-discretionary and discretionary labour hours. The available normal direct labour hours are given as BO1, with the costs listed as a fixed amount at BC1 under non-discretionary conditions. Next, the labour resources can be expanded to BO2 and BO3, with the total labour costs given as BC2 and BC3, respectively. The total additional labour costs for discretionary conditions are represented by (BC2−BC1)w1+(BC3−BC1)w2.The total labour hours and costs with associated constraints are provided in Eqs. (10)–(15). TLC represents the total labour hours required for green building projects, shown as Eq. (10). In Eqs. (11)–(15), (η1,η2) is an SOS1 set of 0–1 variables within which exactly one variable must be non-zero; (w0,w1,w2) is an SOS2 set of non-negative variables within which at most two contiguous variables can be non-zero (Williams, 1985).For example, if η1=1, then η2=0,w0⩽1,w1⩽1,w2=0and w0+w1=1. Thus, the total labour hours needed is BO1+(BO2−BO1)w1; this means that the green building project will require overtime work. However, ifw0=1, thenw1=w2=0; it means that overtime work is not needed. In addition, if η1=0, then η2=1,w0=0,w1⩽1,w2⩽1and w1+w2=1. Thus, the total labour hours needed is: BO1+(BO2−BO1)w1+(BO3−BO1)w2. This indicates that completion of the green building project will require overtime work and additional labour requirements.[Unit-level direct machine cost constraints]:(16)∑i=1nβidXi-∑e=1tMAeϑe⩽1(17)∑e=1tϑe=1where MChis the total machine cost in MAh; MAhthe available direct machine hours; βidthe required machine hours for green building project i; ϑeis an SOS1 (special ordered set of type 1) set of 0/1 variables, within which exactly one variable must be non-zero; ϑe=1 indicates that the machine capacity demands are to be expanded to the eth level, such as MAemachine hours.As shown in Fig. 4, this study assumes that the machine costs associated with a green building project are regarded as common fixed costs with stepwise function characteristics associated with various machine hours. The total green building machine cost is MC1 under the current capacity of MA1 machine hours. If the green building project requires an expansion of machine hours MA2,MA3,…,MAi, the total machine cost will be increased to MC2,MC3,…,MCi, respectively.Regarding the direct machine cost-associated constraints set in Eqs. (16) and (17), let βidrepresent the required number of machine hours for green building project i, where (ϑ0,ϑ1,…,ϑe) is an SOS set of 0–1 variables within which exactly one variable must be non-zero (Williams, 1985). When ϑv=1(v≠1), the machine capacity must be expanded to the vth level, such as MAvmachine hours, by renting a machine(s).[Batch-level activity constraints]:(18)∑i=1nκijBij⩽Cj∀j∈BA(19)Xi⩽λijBij,i=1,2,…,n;∀j∈BAwhere Bijis the number of batches of batch-level activity j for project i; kijthe requirement of the activity driver of batch-level activity j for project i; and Cjis the capacity limit of the activity driver of batch-level activity j.Eqs. (18) and (19) represent the capacity constraints for various batch-level activities (∀j∈BA). This study uses “transport distance” as the activity driver for the building material purchases batch activity because each building project follows a different material purchase schedule and requires different material vendors. In this case, Cjis the available transport distance, kijrepresents the needed transport distance for green building project i, andλijindicates the number of materials transported for green building project i.[Environment-level activity constraints]:(20)Xi⩽Vi,i=1,2,…,n(21)∑i=1nρijVi⩽Ej∀j∈EN(22)Xi=0,1,i=1,2,…,nwhere ρijis the requirement of the activity driver of environment-level activity j for project i; and Ejis the capacity limit of the activity driver of environment-level activity j.Eqs. (20)–(22) represent the capacity constraints for various environment-level activities (∀j∈EN). For example, we may use “energy and waste control hours” as the activity driver for the building operation’s energy management activity because each green building project aims to pursue effective energy savings during the operation phase of its life cycle. In this case, Ejrepresents the available energy and waste control hours for the building requirement, ρijrepresents the required energy and waste control hours for green building project i.[Project-level activity constraints]:(23)Xi⩽Hi,i=1,2,…,n(24)∑i=1nσijHi⩽Fj,∀j∈PR(25)Xi=0,1,i=1,2,…,nwhereσijis the requirement of the activity driver of project-level activity j for project i; and Fjis the capacity limit of the activity driver of project-level activity j.Eqs. (23)–(25) indicate the capacity constraints for product-level activities (∀j∈PR). For example, we may use “number of green drawings” as the activity driver for the green building product-level activity “green design”. In this case, Fjrepresents the available number of green drawings for the construction company’s capacity, and σijis the number of green drawings demanded for green building project i.[Life cycle CO2 emission quantity constraints]:(26)LCCOE=COEQ1ϕ1+COEQ2ϕ2+COEQ3ϕ3(27)ϕ0-μ1⩽0(28)ϕ1-μ1-μ2⩽0(29)ϕ2-μ2-μ3⩽0(30)ϕ3-μ3⩽0(31)ϕ0+ϕ1+ϕ2+ϕ3=1(32)μ1+μ2+μ3=1where LCCOE is the total CO2 emissions quantity from all green building projects’ life cycle; μ1,μ2,μ3 an SOS1 (special ordered set of type 1) set of 0/1 variables, within which exactly one variable must be non-zero; and ϕ0,ϕ1,ϕ2,ϕ3 an SOS2 (special ordered set of type 2) set of non-negative variables, within which at most two adjacent variables, in the order given to the set, can be non-zero.According to the Corporate Society Responsibility concept, it is necessary that calculation of CO2 emissions be considered during the life cycle of a green building. Estimating the quantity of CO2 emissions from a green building project using the LCA method not only ensures that the analysis is conducted accurately, but also combines this result with the real building project operation conditions (Schmidt, 2009).Eqs (26)–(32) indicate the constraints associated with CO2 emission quantities. LCCOE, in Eq. (26) represents the quantity of CO2 emissions produced during the total life cycle of a green building. According to the assumptions made in this study, documenting the quantity of CO2 emissions for a green building project will support taxation policy and lower emission costs. Thus, the total life cycle CO2 emission quantities function will be a piecewise linear function composed of three segments with different tax rates, as shown in Fig. 5. In Eqs. (27)–(32), (μ1,μ2,μ3) is an SOS1 set of 0–1 variables within which exactly one variable must be non-zero; (ϕ0,ϕ1,ϕ2,ϕ3) is an SOS2 set of non-negative variables within which there are no more than two adjacent variables (Williams, 1985).The first segment: If μ1=1(μ2, μ3=0), thenϕ0⩽1;ϕ1⩽1;ϕ2⩽0;ϕ3⩽0and ϕ0+ϕ1=1. Thus, the total quantity of life cycle CO2 emissions from all green building projects and the total life cycle CO2 emission costs are COEQ1ϕ1 and COEP1ϕ1, respectively. This means that the point (COEQ1ϕ1, COEP1ϕ1) is the linear combination of (0, 0) and (COEQ1,COEP1), and that the green building project does not exceed the lowest tax rate of CO2 emissions.The second segment: If μ2=1 (μ1, μ3=0), thenϕ0⩽0;ϕ1⩽1;ϕ2⩽1;ϕ3⩽0and ϕ1+ϕ2=1. Thus the total quantity of life cycle CO2 emissions from all green building projects and the cost of total life cycle CO2 emissions are COEQ1ϕ1+COEQ2ϕ2 and COEP1ϕ1+COEP2ϕ2, respectively. This means that the point (COEQ1ϕ1+COEQ2ϕ2, COEP1ϕ1+COEP2ϕ2) is the linear combination of (COEQ1,COEP1) and (COEQ2,COEP2).The third segment: If μ3=1 (μ1, μ2=0), thenϕ0⩽0;ϕ1⩽0;ϕ2⩽1;ϕ3⩽1and ϕ2+ϕ3=1. Thus the total quantity of life cycle CO2 emissions from all green building project and the cost of total life cycle CO2 emissions are COEQ2ϕ2+COEQ3ϕ3 and COEP2ϕ2+COEP3ϕ3, respectively. This means that the point (COEQ2ϕ2+COEQ3ϕ3, COEP2ϕ2+COEP3ϕ3) is the linear combination of (COEQ2,COEP2) and (COEQ3,COEP3). In brief, if the green building life cycle produces excessive CO2 emission quantities, this will result in an increase in the carbon tax rate.A numerical example will best illustrate the application of the green building project decision-making models. Assume that a construction company is deciding whether or not to implement green building projects 1–6 (i=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6), in the form of Residential, Commercial, Library, Electrical, School, and Shopping Centre projects. The example data are shown in Table 1.Each project requires the processing of eight main activities, inclusive of two activities which are performed at the unit-level, batch-level and environment-level, and one performed at the project-level. These green building projects consume three types of direct materials, of which, the vendor of green building materials 1 and 3 allows a purchase discount if the amount exceeds a predetermined threshold (TD1=1,200,000 and TD3=2,200,000). In general, the construction company managers have full discretion to choose construction techniques with essential items based on the construction cost and quality requirements of green building projects. In this study, we assume that the construction techniques are divided into conventional construction techniques and low-carbon construction techniques. In Table 1, MA1 stands for the current machine capacity of 5,500,000 machine hours required for conventional construction, and EAC1 denotes the $1,100,000 cost at this capacity level. To increase the machine capacity from MA1 to MA2 or MA3, the company must lease machines from the vendor, thereby increasing the machine cost to $2,350,000 (EAC2) or $3,400,000 (EAC3). On the other hand, for low-carbon construction methods, MB1 denotes a current machine capacity of 3,000,000 machine hours, and EBC1 denotes the $900,000 cost at this capacity level. To increase the machine capacity from MB1 to MB2 or MB3, the company must rent machines from the vendor, which increases the cost to $1,350,000 (EBC2) or $2,400,000 (EBC3).In terms of normal direct labour hours, BO1 denotes 2,500,000 labour hours at a wage rate of $2 per hour. The construction company manager can, at his/her discretion, expand the number of labour hours to BO2=4,000,000 (the wage rate will be $3) or BO3=6,000,000 (the wage rate will be $4) using overtime work or additional nightshifts. The carbon taxes vary according to the energy consumption activity during the life cycle of the green building project. To increase the quantity of CO2 emissions from COEQ1 to COEQ2 or COEQ3, the construction company must assume the burden of a higher tax rate; this increases CO2 emission costs from $10,000,000 to $30,000,000 (COEP2) or $ 60,000,000 (COEP3).In this case, the quantity of total life cycle CO2 emissions (LCCOE) can be depicted by the following equation and the example data shown in Table 2:(33)LCCOE=∑i=1n[CODE+COCS+(COOR∗Years)+(CORE∗Frequency)+CODC+COWD]where LCCOE represents the total CO2 emissions quantity from all building projects’ life cycle. CODE,COCS,COORand CORE, and CODCand COWDare used to measure the quantity of CO2 emissions in the design phase, construction phase, operation phase and decommissioning phase, respectively. Furthermore, the CO2 emission quantities are evaluated by CO2 emission factors according to IPCC (2006). Thus, based on the CSR of the construction company, this study adopts Eq. (33) to measure CO2 emission costs as part of the bidding/planning for the green building project.In Model I, the construction company must decide on the optimal green building project mix that will maximize the company’s profit before factoring in the costs of low-carbon construction methods and CO2 emission costs. Table 3shows the mathematical programming of the objective function, related energy consumption activities, the constraints of ABC (material purchase discount, capacity expansions of overtime work, renting machines, energy saving activities, etc.), and the optimal solution reached without considering low-carbon construction methods and CO2 emission costs.Model I’s optimal decision solution is that green building projects 3, 4 and 5 will produce the highest incomes (π=136,776,800) based on the life cycle assessment and an accurate evaluation of construction costs. Hence, the construction company would elect to implement these green building projects with the objective of maximizing profits.In order to identify the influences of low-carbon construction methods and CO2 emission costs in the decision making related to green building projects, optimal results are shown in Table 4. Green building projects generally require more energy-efficient construction methods (low-carbon construction method) and more accurate cost considerations (CO2 emission costs). These projects therefore incur higher construction costs than conventionally-built structures do. Furthermore, this model uses Eqs. (1)–(33); in addition to the above constraint, it adds the constraints of capacity expansions for low-carbon machines and quantities of CO2 emissions.Model II’s optimal solution shows green building projects 1, 3 and 6 as having the highest incomes (π=85,562,600) based on the life cycle assessment and accurate evaluation of construction costs. Hence, the construction company would decide to implement these green building projects in order to maximize profits. Under this solution, management would use low-carbon construction methods and perhaps expand capacity by renting machines; neither discretionary labour hours, nor temporary workers would be required for these green building projects. In comparing Models I and II, it is obvious that consideration of low-carbon construction methods and costs related to CO2 emissions would lead to much different solutions. Thus, low-carbon construction methods and CO2 emission costs are major factors influencing whether or not a construction company would select and execute green building projects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In environmentally sustainable development, carbon emissions play an increasingly important role (Chen & Jim, 2011; Tsai et al., 2012b). Many countries have levied a carbon tax policy to address issues related to climate change. This study focuses on taxes and other costs associated with CO2 emissions, and proposes an Activity-Based Costing decision model for assessing the life cycle costs of green building projects. To extend the existing research literature, this study incorporates capacity expansion features (labour and conventional/low-carbon machine hours) and CO2 emission costs into an ABC decision model by proposing a mathematical programming approach. The major contribution of this study will be to help managers understand how to more accurately determine the cost of resources and energy saving activities of each green building through appropriate cost drivers. It also provides management with a pre-construction decision making tool to use in planning environmentally-friendly construction bids.Under the Corporate Social Responsibility policy, construction companies must consider the environmental costs of the entire life cycle of green buildings instead of considering only how to attain maximum profits. Therefore, management must factor CO2 emission costs into overall green building project costs, even though the results may negatively affect the profits of the construction company. This study determined that low-carbon construction methods and CO2 emission costs do affect the decisions of a company hoping to implement a green building project. Accordingly, construction companies must consider the costs of low-carbon construction methods and CO2 emission costs in planning for a successful bid that will still earn them appropriate profits. This study focused on the ABC method of construction cost measurement, taking into account relevant energy saving activities. Moreover, this study aimed only to analyze the decision-making process used by companies in the construction industry when deciding whether or not to implement building projects. Future research may also consider other environmental factors (i.e., the climate factor) and tax benefits (i.e., if the construction company is eligible for deductions as a result of green building). If these or other factors were incorporated into the ABC concept framework, the efficiency of the construction cost decision model for green building projects might be further enhanced.