@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A homothetic reference technology in data envelopment analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We can maintain homotheticity within a nonparametric DEA framework.We define a piecewise linear homothetic reference technology.Comparison of the BCC and the homothetic reference technology.One purpose of the new technology is to add structure to the BCC technology.Motivation for why such additional structure sometimes is warranted is provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data enveopment analysis,DEA based estimation of a homothetic production function,Convex hull,Homothetic hull,Isoquant estimation,Intersection and sum form,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The assumption of a homothetic production function is often maintained in production economics. In this paper we explore the possibility of maintaining homotheticity within a nonparametric DEA framework. The main contribution of this paper is to use the approach suggested by Hanoch and Rothschild (1972) to define a homothetic reference technology. We focus on the largest subset of data points that is consistent with such a homothetic production function. We use the HR-approach to define a piecewise linear homothetic convex reference technology. We propose this reference technology with the purpose of adding structure to the flexible non-parametric BCC DEA estimator. Motivation for why such additional structure sometimes is warranted is provided. An estimation procedure derived from the BCC-model and from a maintained assumption of homotheticity is proposed. The performance of the estimator is analyzed using simulation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Piecewise linear estimations in Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) envelops observed data based on an axiomatic approach. Specifically, using the axiom minimal extrapolation an estimator of the technology is defined as the intersection of all technologies that satisfies the included axioms. An often used estimator in DEA is the BCC-estimator (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984), which maintains variable returns to scale (VRS) in the form of convexity and strong disposability. The minimal extrapolation principle implies that the BCC technology is estimated as the smallest convex set that contains all observed data points, and enlarged by strong disposability. However, it is well known, that piecewise linear estimators have slow convergence (Kneip, Park, & Simar, 1998). Hence, we will not expect to see shapes of the estimated isoquants conforming to the true shapes unless the sample size is sufficiently large relative to the dimension of the input output space. As illustrated in the next section, the shapes of the estimated piecewise linear isoquants can be very different from the true shapes if we only have access to a small sample of data points.In this paper we propose a homothetic convex reference technology within the framework of DEA. This contribution is based on the classical nonparametric test of homotheticity proposed in Hanoch and Rothschild (1972). Below we will argue that one useful purpose of this “new” reference technology is to add structure to the flexible non-parametric BCC estimator. If this structure is in accordance with the true Data Generating Process (DGP) it is stipulated that the rate of convergence will increase. Starting from the BCC estimator1The proposed homothetic structure does not need the BCC-estimator as the starting point, but we will in this paper only focus on modifications of this specific estimator. Alternatively, a CRS, a NIRS or a NDRS model could be used, but the extraction of the homothetic reference technology based on the Hanoch-Rothschild test would be more complicated. Maintaining convexity of the production possibility set focuses on the BCC model, which is the most conservative starting point. This allows more data points to be part of the frontier.Notice, that the CRS CCR model is linear homogenous and hence homothetic. However, CRS is in many applications a very restrictive assumption.1we add structure to the shape of the estimated isoquants to “make up” for the problems of slow convergence and wrongly shaped isoquants estimated from small samples. Avoiding any a priori choice of a functional form is often stated as an important advantage of a non-parametric approach. However, fitting the observed data with the convex hull estimator could be seen as too conservative if we have some a priori information indicating a homothetic or near homothetic structure; it could e.g. be information on characteristics like (i) the marginal rate of technical substitution, (ii) the shapes of the expansion paths, (iii) input separability, and with multiple inputs and outputs (iv) input output separability (see Hasenkamp, 1976).There are at least three reasons why a homothetic reference technology is an interesting extension to the classical DEA reference technologies:Firstly, using a non-parametric approach for an efficiency analysis it is interesting in its own right to analyze how much the estimated efficiency residuals are affected by an enlargement of the BCC-estimated possibility set resulting from an assumption of homotheticity. An a priori assumption of homotheticity implying linear expansion paths is often used in research based on considerations on parsimony. An important task in setting up the model used in an empirical study is to simplify the structure of the parameters to be estimated. Simplifying assumptions are always necessary, and an assumption of a linear (or an almost linear) expansion path will often be a reasonable assumption. In such cases, it is stipulated that the true expansion path can reasonably well be approximated by a linear path. We show below that the possibility set based on the convex hull estimation (the BCC model) is contained within the possibility set based on the proposed piecewise linear convex homothetic estimator which again is a subset of the convex cone estimator (the CCR model). Comparing the BCC and the CCR efficiencies provides the often used distinction between technical and scale efficiency, (Banker et al., 1984). Defining a homothetic VRS technology in between these two reference technologies allows us to further decompose the structure of inefficiency by estimating the radial distance to the homothetic frontier of points projected to the BCC frontier and by estimating the radial distance to the CCR frontier of points projected to either the BCC frontier or to the homothetic VRS frontier.How restrictive is this homothetic VRS reference technology? Being in between the linear homogeneous CRS CCR-reference technology and the convex BCC-reference technology it is clear that the proposed homothetic reference technology is less restrictive compared to the CCR-model. Intuitively, the technology is less restrictive because the scaling law used in a homothetic specification can be any increasing monotonic function. However, in this paper we will only consider concave scaling laws because we aim at a comparison with the convex BCC reference technology. On the other hand the proposed technology is more restrictive than the BCC-model. Assuming input homotheticity implies that we imposed an assumption of identical shape of all input isoquants for varying output level. Using the proposed homothetic reference technology will provide a biased estimator if the shape of the isoquants changes significantly for increasing output level. Strong a priori assumptions provide structure to the estimation and improve convergence, but these improvements come at a cost: if the imposed assumptions violate the structure of the true DGP then biased estimators will be the consequence.Secondly, there are several empirical comparisons of nonparametric and parametric efficiency analyses, and the differences in reported rank correlations are remarkably large, see e.g. Ferrier and Lovell (1990), Resti (1997), Cummins and Zi (1998) and Bauer, Berger, Ferrier, and Humphrey (1998). The parametric approaches used in such comparisons almost exclusively focus on economic efficiency2As noted in Bauer et al. (1998) in most cases the parametric analyses focus on economic efficiency based on a cost function estimation using input prices, outputs and costs. In contrast DEA application often focus on radial contraction of input vectors, i.e. technical efficiency. There are exceptions like (Cummins & Zi, 1998; Eisenbeis, Ferrier, & Kwan, 1997; Ferrier & Lovell, 1990; Resti, 1997) all of which focus on cost efficiency in the DEA analyses.2based on a cost function estimation. At least in cases where rank correlations are low such discrepancies in the inefficiency structure could be a consequence of the chosen parametric functional form “picking up” some homothetic or near homothetic structure in data.3Unfortunately, only (Resti, 1997) includes a formal test for separability and homotheticity (both are rejected in this study). Looking closely at the estimated translog function in Ferrier and Lovell (1990) there seems to be some indication of at least near homotheticity, but no formal test is included in the paper. The nonparametric cost efficiency is estimated in a seven dimensional space (6 outputs and 1 input being cost) and twelve non-discretionary variables. Only 575 observations are available in this very large input output space, which could generate wrongly shaped isoquants caused by slow convergence.3The homothetic reference technology proposed in this paper can be used in the search for possible causes driving such low rank correlations. A homothetic reference technology allows for a comparison of a homothetic nonparametric cost efficiency estimation with the corresponding parametric cost function estimation. This clearly would be advantageous in cases where the parametric estimation cannot reject separability and homotheticity. But even in cases like (Resti, 1997) where separability and homotheticity are rejected, a low rank correlation could be further explored by a comparison of parametric estimated cost efficiency and nonparametric homothetic based cost efficiency. More generally, the proposed homothetic reference technology provides a valuable tool in a comparison of a specific function form based Stochastic Frontier Analysis (SFA) and DEA. It allows for a specific analysis of the special case where homotheticity is imposed both on the parametric form (see (Berndt & Christensen, 1973) or (Brown, Caves, & Christensen, 1979), p. 259 for the case of a translog functional form) and on a DEA convex hull technology by enlarging the convex hull to fit a homothetic structure.4As noted in Bauer et al. (1998), p. 98: “(Resti, 1997 found very high rank-order correlations between DEA and SFA of .73 to .89, and Eisenbeis et al. (1997)) found fairly high rank correlations ranging between .44 and .59, but (Ferrier & Lovell, 1990) found a rank-order correlation of only .02, which was not significantly different from zero”.4This clearly extends the possibility of refining such comparisons.To further motivate the relevance of this new homothetic reference technology we illustrate in the following figures the impact of the slow convergence of a non-parametric estimated homothetic input structure. In Section 5 we report simulation results from data generated from an input homothetic structure. The following Figs. 1a and 1billustrate how the sample size affects the shape of the BCC-estimators of isoquants and the derived expansion path for a specific vector of factor prices.5Figs. 1a and 1b show the part of the estimated BCC input isoquants at 50 different output levels that can be extracted from the strongly efficient part of the empirical BCC production possibility set. No weakly efficient vertical or horizontal segments of the isoquants are included. Notice however, that in Fig. 1a the points on the isoquants most to the left are actually weakly efficient (generated from exterior facets with the output component of the normal vector equal to zero). A specific factor price vector (w1,w2) is used in Figs. 1a and 1b to trace the expansion path for the case of a sample of 20 and 500 observations and to illustrate the distortion of this path for the small sample. The “true” linear expansion path corresponding to this specific factor price vector (w1,w2) is indicated as a dash-dotted line. For the large sample we notice that the traced expansion path is indeed reflecting the true path.The isoquant drawings are created from the BCC convex hull estimator based on samples generated by the production function used in the simulation study in Section 5. Using Qhull (see www.qhull.org, (Barber, Dobkin, & Huhdanpaa, 1996)) all facet inducing hyperplanes of the convex hull estimator are generated (the convex hull is expressed as the intersection of a finite number of halfspaces) and are supplemented with additional halfspaces {(x,y)∣y⩽yo} at 50 different values of yo. Finally, Qhull is used to bring this halfspace representation into a sum form where all vertices with y=yoare extracted to be used in the drawings.5With 20 observations we notice the distorted non-homothetic shapes of the isoquants and the non-linear zigzagged estimator of the expansion path caused by only few facets on the frontier. For the sample size of 500 the typical homothetic shape of the isoquants becomes more prominent and the estimated expansion path (at least above a certain output level) does indeed reflect the true linear homothetic path. Hence, in an analysis based on a relatively small sample size we would expect to see very different efficiency scores from a BCC envelopment of data compared to a parametric analysis based on a homothetic or near homothetic functional form.Thirdly, a homothetic reference technology would allow a statistical testing procedure for homotheticity within the non-parametric production modeling approach. Hanoch and Rothschild (1972) provide a test for homotheticity of a given data set. The test fails if the structure in data is inconsistent with a homothetic DGP. However, failing this test provides no inference, which implies that it is not possible to tell whether or not the deviation from a homothetic DGP is significant or not. Primont and Primont (1996) and Primont and Primont (1994) provide an extended testing procedure in relation to both input and output homotheticity, which does not assume that all observations are technical efficient. This test suffers from the same lack of inference. With an explicit homothetic reference technology we can either use the semi-parametric approach proposed in Banker and Natarajan (2004, chap. 11) or a bootstrapping approach proposed by Simar and Wilson (2002) to determine if the residuals from a BCC-envelopment are significantly different from the corresponding residuals from a homothetic extension of the BCC convex hull estimator. In addition the homothetic reference technology allows for an extension of the often used decomposition of overall efficiency into technical and scale efficiency. For a BCC inefficient DMU the overall inefficiency can be decomposed into a radial contraction to the BCC frontier, a further contraction to the homothetic frontier and finally a further contraction to the CCR-frontier.The approach proposed in this paper has one apparent shortcoming. To simplify the presentation we have assumed only one output. Generalizing the proposed input homothetic reference technology with one output to an output homothetic reference technology with one input is straight forward and is outlined in Appendix B. But extending the proposed approach to a multiple output (input) in an input (output) homothetic reference technology is more complicated and is left for future research.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we define the production technology from an input orientation using an input distance function. The assumption of homotheticity is presented and several implications are discussed. Hanoch and Rothschild’s test for homotheticity is presented in Section 3, and extended to allow for inefficient observations. In Section 4 we define the homothetic reference technology and show that it is a proper subset of the BCC reference technology. Unfortunately, many alternative solutions for a homothetic reference technologies are available and several procedures to choose “a tight” solution are discussed. A small sample simulation is presented in Section 5 based on a homothetic DGP. The last section concludes with directions for future research.To simplify the presentation of a homothetic reference technology we focus almost entirely on an input-homothetic production function, i.e. we focus on the situation with one output. In Appendix B we will, however, briefly indicate how the reference technology proposed easily can be extended to the situation with one input (e.g. cost) and multiple output. Homothetic production functions first proposed by Shephard (1953) have played an important role in production economics and several important features of such production functions are well known. A homothetic production function is equivalent to any expansion path being a ray from the origin. A homothetic production function is a monotonic transformation of a linear homogeneous production function which in geometric terms means that any input isoquant from a homothetic production function simply is a radial rescaling of the unit isoquant. Additional properties of a homothetic production function are mentioned below.Let us consider a production environment where a vector of m inputs X=(x1,…,xm) is used in the production of one output Y. We represent the production technology with the input setL(Y)={X∈R+m:Xcan produce Y} which has isoquant(1)IsoqL(Y)={X:X∈L(Y),λX∉L(Y),λ∈[0,1)}.Since we assume that only one output is produced, we can define a production function as f(X)=max{Y : X∈L(Y)}. The input distance function is then defined as(2)DI(Y,X)=max{γ:X/γ∈L(Y)},which provides an alternative characterization of the technology since DI(Y,X)⩾1⇔X∈L(Y). Finally, the index of technical efficiency proposed by Debreu (1959) and Farrell (1957) that serves as basis for DEA is given as FI(Y,X)=min{γ : γX∈L(Y)}, where FI(y,x)=DI(y,x)−1.Definition 1A production function f(X) is homotheticY=f(X)=F(g(X))whereF():R+→R+is monotonic and g(λX)=λg(X) i.e. g() is positive homogeneous of degree one and continuously differentiable (see Shephard, 1970). g() is denoted the core function.A homothetic production function provides several interesting economic properties, see (Chambers, 1988). Along any ray from the origin the marginal rate of technical substitution is constant. For a homothetic production function we have that the scale elasticity only is a function of the level of output.The following proposition (Olesen & Ruggiero, 2012) shows that a homothetic production function can be represented as a production process whereby the input vector X can be aggregated into a one dimensional input index g(X), i.e. output is determined from the level of aggregate input (see (Färe & Lovell, 1988) for a more general result).Proposition 1Assume a homothetic technology with one output. The distance function evaluated at (1,X) is equal to aggregate input defined from the core function in the homothetic production function multiplied by a constant, i.e.DI(1,X)=k×g(X),k∈R+In other words, under the assumption of homotheticity the dimensionality of DEA models can be reduced. In addition, homotheticity allows us to span the production technology from the input set associated with the unit isoquant L(1) (see (Shephard, 1970), p. 34).(3)L(Y)=H(Y)L(1),whereH(Y)=F-1(Y)F-1(1)is a scaling function. Hence, input sets can be theoretically generated from a base input set by the scaling function that depends only on the level of output and not the input mix. Similarly, we have from Proposition 1 that IsoqL(Y)=H(Y)IsoqL(1), i.e. we can in general generate any isoquant from the unit isoquant. More generally, we could choose any output level and its associated input isoquant to serve as the base.Let us consider a sample of n data points(Xj,Yj)∈R+m+1,j∈N≡{1,…,n}. Following (Hanoch & Rothschild, 1972) the main question is whether or not these data, or a subset of these data could have been generated from a homothetic production function, i.e. a homothetic Data Generating Process (DGP) with no inefficiency. If this is the case for a given subset then an estimator of the corresponding homothetic production function is warranted. The main contribution of this paper is to use the approach suggested by Hanoch and Rothschild to define a homothetic reference technology. However, we need explicitly to “allow” for inefficiency in data6Hanoch and Rothschild use a formulation of the test with one variable β where “β is an index of violation of homotheticity”, see (Hanoch & Rothschild, 1972) p. 272.6implying that we will not insist that all observations are consistent with a homothetic technology. We focus on the largest subset of data points that is consistent with such a production function. Secondly, focusing on homothetic production functions we will use the testing procedure to define a piecewise linear homothetic convex reference technology. If data is generated from a homothetic production technology a homothetic reference technology allows us to obtain more accurate efficiency scores which converge faster to the true efficiency.Following Hanoch and Rothschild (1972) we focus on a production functionf(x):R+m→R+that satisfies the following axioms:Axiom 1Consistency with observations: f(Xj)=Yj, j∈Nx⩾x′⇒f(x)⩾f(x′)The input requirement sets for y: L(y)={x: f(x)⩾y} are convex and closed for any real yThe production function f(x) satisfies Axiom 1 and there exists input prices vj⩾0, vj≠0, j∈N such thatf(Xj)⩽f(x)⇒(vj)TXj⩽(vj)TxFor the production function f(x) there is a positive increasing function λ(y) such that h(x)=λ[f(x)] is linear-homogeneous and concave.In this paper we focus on a convex homothetic reference technology (in the DEA tradition); hence, we maintain the following axiom as well:Axiom 6ConvexityThe production possibility set {(x,y): f(x)⩾y} is a convex set.The theorem used in Hanoch and Rothschild (1972) to formulate the test for a homothetic DGP is:Theorem 1Axioms 1–5are equivalent to the existence of vj⩾0, vj≠0 and λj>0, j∈N satisfying the followingvj⩾0,j∈N(vj)TXj=λj,j∈N(vi)TXj⩾λj,i≠j,i,j∈Nλj⩾λi,ifYj⩾Yi,i,j∈Nλ1=Y1See (Hanoch & Rothschild, 1972) p. 272.□The following program (denoted the HR-test) provides a test for the existence of a homothetic DGP:(4)minβs.t.λj-λi⩾0i,jwhereYj⩾Yi,i,j∈N(4.1)(vi)TXj-λj+β⩾0i≠j,i,j∈N(4.2)(vj)TXj-λj=0j∈N(4.3)(v1)TX1=Y1(4.4)vi∈R+m,i∈N,β⩾0λj∈R+,j∈Nwhere a homothetic production function exists if and only if β∗=0, with β∗ being the optimal solution to (4). Otherwise β∗>0 is a measure of the maximal violation of homotheticity. The constraint (4.4) is an arbitrary (but convenient) normalization.7If we ignore (4.4) then the feasible set in vj, j∈N space is clearly a pointed cone. We will utillize this fact below to generate all optimal solutions to (4).7Axiom 5 implies that[λ(f(x))]-1h(x)=hxλ(f(x))=1; hence, input vectors rescaled by [λ(f(x))]−1 all belong to the unit isoquant. If Axiom 5 holds and β∗=0 in (4) then the positive increasing function λ (•) evaluated at Yjcan be chosen as the estimatedλj∗>0from (4), implying from (4.3) thatvjXjλj=1,j∈N. In other words from a specific set of optimalλj∗>0the corresponding rescaled input vectorsXjλj,j∈N, all belong to the unit isoquant. This rescaling approach will be used below to span piecewise linear convex homothetic reference technologies as the convex hull of all input output vectors and all rescaled input output vectors. Notice thatviTXj⩾λj,i≠jin (4.2) (with β∗=0) implies thatviT[(λj)-1Xj]⩾1,i≠j, reflecting the assumption of convex unit isoquants.The contribution of this paper is to use the structure of the HR-test to define a piecewise linear convex homothetic reference technology. To allow for this purpose, we must allow for inefficiency in data. Minimizing a common β in the original test (4) provides an interpretation of β as the maximum deviation from homotheticity. We replace this single β with DMU specific corrections βj, j∈N which in optimum will measure the unit specific contraction of the input vectors necessary to bring the data set into a shape, which could have been generated from a homothetic technology. Secondly, the objective function is modified accordingly to be a minimization of the weighted sum of the DMU specific deviations βj. Thirdly, we need additional structure to make sure that the technology is convex.The convex homothetic reference technology will be defined such that it will contain the convex hull from the BCC model as a (proper) subset. Hence, a first step for any data set is to remove all observations that are BCC-inefficient. Such observations clearly belong to the interior of any convex homothetic estimator of the technology. The second step is to identify a subset of BCC efficient DMUs (possibly empty) that is causing the HR-test to fail. In this second step we solve the following modified version of the HR-test8To avoid that the denominator is zero inYj-Yi(λj-βj)-(λi-βi)we reformulate the constraints (5.4) as:. (Yj−Yi) ((λk−βk)−(λj−βj))−(Yk−Yj) ((λj−βj)−(λi−βi))⩾0, ∀i,j,k, whereYi⩽Yj⩽Yk,i,j,k∈E.8(5)min∑j∈Eejβjs.t.vjTXj-λj=0j∈E(5.1)(λj-βj)-(λi-βi)⩾0i,jwhereYj⩾Yi,i,j∈E(5.2)viTXj-λj⩾0i≠j,i,j∈E(5.3)Yj-Yi(λj-βj)-(λi-βi)-Yk-Yj(λk-βk)-(λj-βj)⩾0∀i,j,kwhereYi⩽Yj⩽Yk,i,j,k∈E(5.4)v1TX1=Y1(5.5)vj∈R+m,βj⩾0,λjR+,j∈Ewhere9As suggested by a referee, a minimization of the weighted sum with unequal weights of the DMU specific deviations βjwould provide an alternative estimator of the technology. However, in this paper we only use equal weights, i.e. e=[1,…,1]. Alternative weight vectors would require additional a priori information (see the discussion in the conclusion).9e=[1,…,1],E⊂Nis the set of all weakly or strongly BCC efficient DMUs.10A BCC efficient point(xo,yo),yo∈R+in the BCC production possibility set TBCCis weakly efficient if (θxo,yo)∉TBCC,∀θ∈(0,1) and ({(x,y): x⩽xo,y⩾yo}∩TBCC) ⧹{(xo,yo)}≠∅.(xo,yo),yo∈R+is strongly efficient if {(x,y): x⩽xo,y⩾yo}∩TBCC={(xo,yo)}.10All BCC efficient DMUs are consistent with a homothetic technology if and only ifβj∗=0,j∈E. Notice that an additional set of constraints has been included as (5.4) reflecting that we insist that the technology is convex. In general, many different subsets of BCC efficient DMUs could possibly be identified in an attempt to find a subset of DMUs suitable to span a piecewise linear convex homothetic reference technology. In (5) we follow the econometric tradition and choose an optimal solution that minimize the sum of “residuals” over all weakly or strongly BCC efficient DMUs.Let us focus on the homothetic reference technology that can be spanned from weakly or strongly BCC efficient DMUjwithj∈E′⊂E, where DMUjsatisfies the test (5), i.e.βj∗=0,j∈E′. To ease the presentation we will assume the following (nonrestrictive) regularity condition:Condition 1Letn1=#(E′)be the number of weakly or strongly BCC-efficient DMUs withβj∗=0in (5). The observed input output combinations(Xj,Yj),j∈E′have n1 strictly different output levels, i.e.Yi≠Yj,∀i,j∈E′,i≠j.Obtaining an optimal solution to (5) allows us to project each of these n1 observed input vectors to each of the n1−1 other isoquants,11We focus on n1 input sets L(Yj) and isoquants IsoqL(Yj), j=1,…,n1.11using the optimalλj∗,j∈E′. A convex piecewise linear technology Thomothetic can now be obtained using the convex hull estimation on the following set of n1×n1 either observed or rescaled observations(6)Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗=Convλj∗λi∗Xi,Yj,∀i,j∈E′+R+m×R-,where Conv() is the convex hull operator.12Conv(z1,…,zn)≡z|z=∑j=1nλjzj,∑j=1nλj=1,λj∈[0,1],∀j.12Notice, however that in general many different alternative optimal solutions are available from (5). Below we outline an approach where we choose among alternative solutions the one that minimizes the sum of the inefficiency residuals from the union of the set of BCC inefficient DMUs and the set of BCC efficient DMUs withβj∗>0in (5), i.e. fromN⧹E′.We have the following proposition:Proposition 2Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗⊃TBCC≡Conv{(Xj,Yj),∀j∈N}+R+m×R-We will show that(Xj,Yj)∈Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗,j∈N. If that is the case then clearlyThomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗⊃TBCC.Let us partition the DMUs into three sets: (i)E′, (ii)E⧹E′, and (iii)N⧹E.Clearly any(Xj,Yj)∈Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗,j∈E′.Consider(Xjo,Yjo),jo∈E⧹E′. We know that the optimal values from (5) will give us thatβj∗=0,j∈E′, andβjo∗>0. We may interpret the optimalβj∗>0,j∈E⧹E′as the necessary adjustment of the input vectors ofDMUj,j∈E⧹E′to bring the data set(Xj,Yj),j∈Einto a form consistent with a homothetic DGP. W.l.o.g. letE′={1,…,n1}and assume the regularity condition (Condition 1). This implies that ∃ j1,j2 such thatY1<Y2<…Yj1<Yj0<Yj2<…<Yj#(E′). Aβjo∗such thatλj1∗⩽λjo∗-βjo∗⩽λj2∗⇔λjo∗-λj1∗⩾βjo∗⩾λjo∗-λj2∗is feasible in (5.2) and (5.4) and since we minimize∑j∈Eβjin the objective function we getβjo∗=λjo∗-λj2∗⇔λjo∗-βjo∗=λj2∗⇔vjo∗TXjo-βjo∗vjo∗Temem=λj2∗,where em=[1,…,1]T.Hence, if we replaceXjowithX^jo≡Xjo-βjo∗vjo∗Tememthe set of observations{(X^jo,Yjo),(Xj,Yj),j∈E′}will pass the test of being consistent with a homothetic DGP. Let the new homothetic reference technology spanned by(Xj,Yj),j∈E′and(X^jo,Yjo)using (6) be denoted(Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗,λˆjo∗whereλˆjo∗=vjo∗TX^jo=vjo∗TXjo-βjo∗vjo∗Temem=λjo∗-βjo∗by construction. Sincevjo∗TXjo-βjo∗=λj2∗we haveλˆjo∗=λj2∗which means thatThomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗,λˆjo∗=Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗which implies that(Xjo,Yjo)∈Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗.Finally,(Xj,Yj)∈Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗,j∈E, and sinceThomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗is a convex set by construction then clearly any convex combination of(Xj,Yj),j∈Ebelongs toThomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗, which implies that(Xj,Yj)∈Thomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗,j∈N⧹E.□Fig. 2illustrates TBCCandThomotheticλ1∗,…,λn1∗with two inputs and one output and 22 BCC efficient DMUs.Next, let us characterize all alternative solutions to the homothetic reference technology in (6) generated from alternative solutions to (5). Consider the special situation where all BCC efficient DMUs are consistent with a homothetic DGP. In other words,E=E′and any alternative basic solution in (5) can be generated from one of the vertices in the following bounded polyhedral set13This set is the section of the feasible set in (5) where the auxiliary λ-vector is ignored, and Y1=1.13of(v1,…,vn1)∈R+m×n1:(7)A≡(v1,…,vn1)∈R+m×n1:viTXj-vjTXj⩾0,i≠j,i,j∈E′,Yj-YivjTXj-viTXi-Yk-YjvkTXk-vjTXj⩾0,∀i,j,k∈E′whereYi⩽Yj⩽Yk,vjTXj-viTXi⩾0,jwhereYj⩾Yi,i,j∈E′v1TX1=1Notice that the polyhedral set A is a bounded convex polyhedral set in intersection form, i.e. A is expressed as the intersection of a finite number of inequalities and one equality. It is well known that any polyhedral set can either be expressed in intersection form or in sum form. A polyhedral set in sum form is a set expressed as convex combinations of vertices plus non-negative linear combinations of extreme rays, see Appendix A for the Minkowski–Weyl’s Theorem. In the following alternative (non-necessarily basic) solutions will be generated using convex combinations of the vertices of A. Hence we need to transform A to its corresponding sum form.14It is well known that going from intersection form to sum form, or vice versa is a combinatorial NP-hard problem. In the simulation in Section 6 we have used the convex hull software Qhull to get the sum form from the intersection form.14Assume that the vertices of A areVk,k∈V. A can alternatively be expressed as:(8)A=v=(v1,…,vn1)∈R+m×n1|v=∑k∈VκkVk,∑k∈Vκk=1,κk⩾0,k∈VLet us use the kth vertex,v1k,…,vn1k,k∈Vin A to generate one particular convex homothetic estimator and use this estimator of the technology to estimate a radial efficiency score of(Xo,Yo)∈E⧹E′. Notice that each ofvjk,j=1,…,n1enters in the constraints (9.4) defining the axillary variables λj, j=1,…,n1. The following LP will estimate the efficiency score of (Xo,Yo) (if the LP is feasible):(9)minθks.t.∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijλiλjXj-θkXo⩽0(9.1)∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijYi⩾Yo(9.2)∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μij=1(9.3)vjkTXj=λjj=1,…,n1(9.4)θk⩽1(9.5)μ∈R+n1×n1,θk∈RIf we ignore the constraint θk⩽1 in (9.5) then this LP will always be feasible, but θkmight attain a value greater than one. This could happen if(Xo,Yo)∈E⧹E′which means that (Xo,Yo) is BCC efficient but is not on the boundary of the specific convex homothetic reference technology that was estimated using (5). In other words, an arbitrary vectorv1k,…,vn1k,k∈Vprovides a feasible solution (i.e. θk⩽1) only ifE=E′. IfE⧹E′≠∅, which is the general case then a specific vertex from A may violate the constraint θk⩽1in (9.5). To summarize, we have potentially as many alternative basic solutions as there are vertices in A. We can use the LP (9) to determine what subset of these vertices that provides feasible LPs in (9) and hence valid alternative homothetic reference technologies.A procedure is warranted to deal with the non-uniqueness of the homothetic convex reference technology given by all these vertices in A. Here we follow the DEA tradition and search for the most conservative reference technology. This means that we choose the specific alternative solution with the largest (input oriented) radial efficiency scoreθk∗,k∈Vfrom (9). This procedure is not entirely correct in the sense that searching for the specific homothetic reference technology providing the most conservative efficiency score should allow not only the#(V)alternative basic solutions in (8) but also any convex combination of these vertices. Hence, the correct estimation procedure would be to solve for eachl∈Vthe following non-linear programming problem:(10)minθs.t.∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijλiλjXj-θXo⩽0∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijYi⩾Yo∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μij=1∑l=1#(V)κlvjlTXj=λjj=1,…,n1∑l=1#(V)κl=1μ∈R+n1×n1,κ∈R+#(V),θ∈Rλ∈R+n1In (10) we minimize the radial contraction relative to an endogenous choice of(λ1,…,λn1)∈B, whereB=(λ1,…,λn1)|∑l=1n1κlλlk=λj,∑l=1n1κl=1,κl⩾0,∀l,λjk=vjkTXj,k∈V,j=1,…,n1is the corresponding set of feasible auxiliary λ-vectors. Unfortunately, (10) is much more difficult to solve compared to (9). In practical estimations we may have to rely on solving (9)#(V)times for each DMU. In Section 5 we will use the model (11) below derived from (9) to get estimators of homothetic reference technologies and to analyze the performance of these estimators in recovering the true efficiency scores. It is left for future research to explore the possibility of implementing/simplifying (10) and to analyze the potential performance benefits from this estimator.Solving each of the#(V)programs (9) for DMUo,o∈N and choosing the largest (most conservative) score or solving (10) for DMUo,o∈N will provide efficiency scores, where possibly different alternative solutions of the homothetic reference technologies are used to evaluate the different DMUs. This may not be acceptable. In many DEA analyses we insist that the radial efficiency is estimated relative to one common reference technology. In relation to the homothetic convex reference technology we can accommodate such a requirement by choosing the alternative solution that minimizes the sum of all radial efficiency scores. Focussing on (9) this would require that we solve simultaneously for #(N) scores using the following LP, for eachk∈V:(11)min∑p=1nθpks.t.∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijpλikλjkXj-θpkXp⩽0p∈N(11.1)∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijpYi⩾Ypp∈N(11.2)∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijp=1p∈N(11.3)vjkTXj=λjkj=1,…,n1(11.4)θpk⩽1p∈N(11.5)μp∈R+n1×n1,∀p,λk∈R+n1θpk∈R,∀pRecall, that in the input constraints (11.1) theXj×λjk-1is the projection to the unit isoquant andλik×Xj×λjk-1is the projection of this projection to the Yi-isoquant. Hence, in (11.2) we require that the corresponding convex combination of Yiis at least Yp. Letθpk∗be the optimal scores and defineθ̃k∗≡∑p=1nθpk∗fork∈V. The most conservative reference technology will be the technology spanned by the specific basic solution15We assume that maxkθ̃k∗is attained for only oneκ∈V.15v1kˆ,…,vn1kˆ,kˆ∈Vwhereθ̃k^∗⩾θ∼k∗,∀k. In other words such a particular estimators of a homothetic reference technology provides the overall largest sum of efficiency scores.Finally, focussing on (10) one common technology used to evaluate all #(N) DMUs would require that we solve, for eachl∈V:(12)min∑p=1nθps.t.∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijpλiλjXj-θpXp⩽0p∈N∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijpYi⩾Ypp∈N∑i=1n1∑j=1n1μijp=1p∈N∑l=1#(V)κlvjlTXj=λjj=1,…,n1∑l=1#(V)κl=1θp⩽1p∈Nμp∈R+n1×n1,∀p,λ∈R+n1,κ∈R+#(V),θp∈R,∀pIn (12) we insist on a common vector(λ1,…,λn1)in the estimation of all #(N) scores, which means that all #(N) scores are estimated relative to the same homothetic reference technology, where we in (11) insist on a common vector(λ1k,…,λn1k)for eachk∈V.In this section we focus on simulation results of the proposed approach. Data sets are generated from a known homothetic production function and the proposed reference technology’s ability to recover the technical inefficiency of this homothetic structure is illustrated. As indicated in Definition 1 the homothetic production function was proposed as a modification of a core production function g(X) being linear homogeneous. A simple choice of the core function is the classical Constant Elasticity of Substituting (CES) production function where the Cobb Douglas function is a special case. The homothetic production function follows as ϕ(X)=F(g(X)), whereF(z):R+→R+is a monotonic global scaling law.An additional focus of the simulation study16This additional focus was suggested by two referees.16is the performance of the proposed approach if data is generated from a more general production function where the homothetic function is a special case. To accomplish this task we need a simulation design where systematic deviations of the DGP from homotheticity are well defined. To accommodate this we will use the ray-homothetic production function proposed by Färe (1975).Definition 2A production function ϕ(X) is ray-homothetic if it satisfies the following functional equationϕ(λX)=FλHx‖x‖F-1(ϕ(X))where F(): R+→R+ is monotonic and g() is ray homogeneous, i.e. it satisfiesg(λX)=λHx‖x‖g(X)(see (Eichhorn, 1969; Eichhorn, 1970; Färe, 1975 or Färe, Jansson, & Lovell, 1985) for an application).As a general approach we will follow Zellner and Revankar (1969) defining a generalized production function ϕ(X)=F(g(X)). The homothetic/ray-homothetic production function ϕ(X) will be derived from a homogeneous/ray-homogeneous core and will have the same elasticity of substitution characteristics as the core function.Assuming one output, two inputs and homotheticity we generate data according to the following DGP. For the first part of the simulation we will use the CES production function:g(x1,x2)=βx1σ-1σ+(1-β)x2σ-1σσσ-1, with β=0.45 and σ=1.51. The Cobb Douglas function, used in Färe et al. (1985) is another simple choice, but in this simulation we use a slightly more general core function. The global scaling law is chosen as17See (Kuosmanen, 2008 & Kuosmanen & Johnson, 2010) for similar simulation design of the scaling law.17F(z)=ln (z)−ln (0.2). The concavity of this scaling law on (0.2,∞) is well suited for the BCC estimation procedure, which rely on the convex hull estimator.Data are generated as follows; inputs are generated in polar coordinates as angles η and modulus ω uniformly distributed on0.05,π2-0.05and [0.6,2.5], respectively. Output is generated from the generalized production function F (g(ωcosη,ωsinη)). Inefficiency is added to the input vectors with X=eθ×(ωcosη,ωsin η), where θ is a random variable from a truncated normal distribution with variance 0.2 or 0.4.In the second part of the simulation study data is generated from a similar production function, but in this part we use the following ray-homogeneous core function:gr(x1,x2)=βx1σ-1σ+(1-β)x2σ-1σσσ-1+γx1x12+x22It is straight forward to show18gr(τx1,τx2)=τ1+σ-1σγx1x12+x22gr(x1,x2).18that gr(x1,x2) is ray-homogeneous and is homogeneous if γ=0.We focus on small sample simulations for several reasons. First of all, with a large sample of data from a homothetic production function the BCC model will provide a good approximation to the true shape of the isoquants (see Fig. 1). Hence, we expect to see a greater impact of using the homothetic reference technology for smaller sample. Secondly, to estimate the technology we have to convert A in (8) into a sum form which is computational demanding. Hence, there is a limit to how large a data set we can handle with the current implementation based on Qhull (see www.qhull.org). Qhull employs the Quickhull algorithm for convex hulls, as suggested by Barber et al. (1996).In the first part we focus on twelve generated samples with 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 and 40 observations with two inputs and one output and with the variance of the inefficiency distribution being either 0.2 or 0.4. For each sample we remove the BCC inefficient DMUs and use the test (5) from Section 4 to get a subset of BCC efficient DMUs that is consistent with a homothetic reference technology. To illustrate, let us focus on the case with sample size 15 for the low variance case, where ten of the generated points are BCC efficient but only seven are consistent with a homothetic reference technology, see second column in Table 1. Qhull generates the setA⊂R+14in sum form with 1106 vertices. We transform these verticesv11k,v12k,…,v71k,v72k,k∈V≡{1,…,1106})into the corresponding auxiliary variablesλ1k,…,λkk=v1kTX1,…,v7kTX7,k∈V(≡{1,…,1106})and delete duplicates which leaves us with 648 unique λ-vectors. These 648 vectors are used to estimate 15 efficiency scores for each of the 648 alternative solutions to the homothetic reference technologies in (11). Removing the infeasible solutions (solutions of a homothetic reference technology violating (11.5)) leaves us with 199 optimal set of efficiency scores. Finally, we choose the most conservative homothetic reference technology by focussing only on the alternative basic solution providing the maximal sum of the scores. This provides us with the final 15 efficiency scores relative to the most conservative homothetic reference technology.To assess the deviation and correlation of scores based on the convex homothetic reference technology compared to the true technology the following four measures are estimated for the deviation between the true and the estimated efficiency scores: (i) mean square deviation, (ii) mean absolute deviation, (iii) the Pearson correlation, and (iv) the Spearman rank correlation. These measured are compared to similar measures obtained from the BCC reference technology compared to the true technology.As we expect the homothetic reference technology provides a tighter fit to the true DGP with both mean square deviation and mean absolute deviation well below the corresponding values for the BCC reference technology. In addition, we can observe a general increase in both the correlation and the rank correlation when using the proposed homothetic reference technology. In general this new reference technology does indeed recover more of the true homothetic structure from the DGP compared to the BCC model. For sample size 15 and high variance and sample size 25 and low variance we do however see a higher correlation but a lower rank correlation when we compare homothetic efficiency with BCC efficiency. A possible explanation could be that these particular data sets have few BCC efficient data points that pass the test of consistency with a homothetic DGP. Hence, the lower rank correlation could be a consequence of rather few data points being available to estimate the homothetic structure. Notice however, that we do have an exception to the general increases in both correlation and rank correlation when imposing the homothetic reference technology. With sample size 40 and high variance we see that both correlation and rank correlation are higher relative to the BCC reference technology. A closer look at the data reveals an “outlier” with a very low true efficiency of 0.36 being both efficient with the BCC and the homothetic reference technology. Deleting this “outlier” implies that the correlation (rank correlation) with the homothetic reference technology is larger (smaller) compared to the situation using the BCC technology.In the second part we focus on generated samples with various values of γand with either 20 or 30 observations with two inputs and one output and with the variance of the inefficiency distribution being 0.2. It is well known that ray-homothetic production functions are only valid within certain ranges of the input space. Outside these (substitution) regions the shapes of the isoquants are unacceptable from a micro-economic perspective, see (Goldman and Shephard, 1972 or Färe, 1988, chap. 4). To accommodate a comparison of the results from the second part with related results from the first part, the same basic DGP is used in both part.19The seed value used in the first and second part is identical, which means that the 20 or 30 input vectors that are generated in the first part (used in column 3 and 5 in Tables 1 and 2) are identical to the input vectors generated in the second part. The corresponding output values of course depend on the value of γin the second part.19However, since the basic DGP used in the first part covers a large range of input mixes, we cannot allow large and small values of γ. In other words, there are an upper and a lower limit on acceptable values of γ. Plotting the isoquants reveals that only γ∈[−1.0,1.8] is acceptable. Outside this interval the ray-homothetic production function generates wrongly shaped isoquant in the part of the input space where data is generated (see Tables 3–6).The general result from the second part of the simulation study is that the proposed homothetic reference technology for small samples provides a better estimation of the PPS even if there exists moderate deviations from the linear expansion path that characterizes the homothetic technology. The homothetic reference technology still provides a tighter fit to the true DGP compared to the BBC-estimator with both mean square deviation and mean absolute deviation well below the corresponding values for the BCC reference technology. In addition, we can again for almost all reported cases observe a general increase in both the correlation and the rank correlation when using the proposed homothetic reference technology. However, it is important to stress that non-homotheticity is in this study represented as ray-homotheticity with γ≠0, which means that the technology is characterized by smooth isoquants and smooth curved expansion paths. This implies that the indications from the simulation are only informative relative to this special family of non-homothetic technologies, and cannot be expected to prevail regardless of what other non-homothetic structure is considered.One particular aspect of the small sample properties of the BCC-estimator is how the facet structure affects the estimated expansion path. As illustrated in Fig. 1a we may see zigzagged expansion paths created by the movement from facet to facet for increasing size of the production when only relatively few facets are spanning the frontier. Since the “true” expansion path from a ray-homothetic DGP exhibits a smooth curved non-zigzagged expansion path it is perhaps not very surprising that the proposed homothetic reference technology performs relatively well compared to the BCC-estimator for data generated from this type of non-homothetic DGP.In this paper we have proposed a new reference technology within the DEA tradition based on a maintained hypothesis of input homotheticity. The approach focuses on the simplified situation with only one output and multiple inputs. We have argued that at least three reasons exist why a homothetic reference technology is interesting. Firstly, maintaining input homotheticity is interesting in its own right, since the use of a simplifying assumption of linear expansion paths often is used as a reasonable way to simplify the model. Secondly, several comparisons of nonparametric and parametric efficiency analyses report large differences inrank correlation. Such differences could be a consequence of small sample problems combined with the lack of structure in a nonparametric functional form. Adding functional structure in the form of a maintained hypothesis of input or output homotheticity would allow for additional diagnostics of such discrepancies. Thirdly, a homothetic reference technology would allow for a statistical testing procedure of the assumption of homotheticity.The proposed reference technology is defined using an extension of the test for homotheticity proposed by Hanoch and Rothschild (1972). An important information derived from this test is the set of optimal auxiliary variablesλk∗, for all observations k that pass this test, i.e.∀k∈E′. These auxiliary variables can be used to project each input vector to each of the input isoquants corresponding to the observed output levels. The convex homothetic reference technology is then defined from the convex hull of all these projections. Unfortunately, many alternative solutions for a homothetic reference technologies are available and we have discussed several procedures to choose “a tight” solution.Finally a small sample simulation has been conducted with the purpose of evaluating how much improvement in the estimation of efficiency scores we can obtain, if we impose this new reference technology, compared to the traditional convex hull BCC reference technology. In the first part of the simulation experiment the true technology is input homothetic and the results seem to be promising. We do see an increase in the rank correlation moving from BCC-estimates to the homothetic estimates of the efficiency scores. In the second part of the simulation experiment we analyze how systematic violations of the assumption of a homothetic data generation affect the performance of the proposed approach. Data is generated from a ray-homothetic structure, allowing the homothetic structure used in the first part of the simulation to be a special case. The results indicate that the proposed homothetic reference technology in general with small sample size (20 or 30 observations) provides a better estimator of the PPS compared to the BCC estimator (the convex hull estimator) even if there exist moderate deviations from the linear expansion path that characterizes the homothetic technology.It is well known that DEA suffers from slow convergence. Hence, even if the true DGP is homothetic we will need “many” efficient observations in our sample before the homothetic structure will show itself, see Fig. 1. In the small sample experiment we have presented we observe a few instances with lower rank correlation which could be a consequence of rather few data points being available to estimate the homothetic structure.The approach proposed in this paper has an important limitation: We have assumed only one output and multiple inputs. It is straightforward to generalize this result to the case of one input multiple outputs by modifying the test for input homotheticity to a corresponding test for output homotheticity. How to proceed is outlined in Appendix B. But the extension to multiple input multiple outputs is less straight forward and is an important area for future research. Another weakness of the proposed approach is the need for moving the feasible set in the HR-test from intersection form to sum form. As demonstrated in this paper it is a possible (feasible) procedure, at least for cases with smaller number of BCC efficient points - and notice that this is the situation where we would expect to see the best improvement in rank correlation. However the proposed approach would be feasible in a broader context if a more stable method for generating the frame of the feasible set in the HR test was available.Another limitation of the suggested approach relates to the estimation strategy from which we “span” a homothetic estimator based on the largest subset of BCC-efficient data points that is consistent with homotheticity (in the sense of the HR-test). This procedure will provide a biased estimator if the expansion path is non-linear. Strong a priori assumptions provide structure to the estimation and improve convergence, but these improvements come at a cost: if the imposed assumptions violate the structure of the true DGP then biased estimators will be the consequence. Notice, however, that if there exists a more firm indication of linearity (or a structure close to linearity) of the expansion path within a subset of the input space, this information could be used in a two stage procedure. The first phase would focus on the subset of BCC-efficient data points within this subset of the input space where (approximate) consistency with homotheticity presumably is present. Another possibility would be to give higher weights in the minimization of the weighted sum of the DMU specific deviations βjin (5) for this subset of BCC-efficient data points, see footnote 9. It is left for future research to develop other viable approaches allowing to incorporate a priori information on the shape of the expansion path.It is, however, important to underline, that the simulation results seem to indicate a good performance of the proposed homothetic reference technology even in the case of moderate deviations of the data generation from linear expansion paths. Hence, in the case of moderate violations of the assumption of homotheticity, basing the estimator of the proposed homothetic reference technology on the largest subset of BCC-efficient points being consistent with homotheticity, seems to provide an estimator that performs well compared to the approximation provided by the BCC-estimator. However, this area clearly needs additional research before any firm evidence can be extracted. The included simulation can of course only provide indications.Although the included simulation does show that the proposed homothetic estimator performs well, one could argue that the gain obtained is rather small compared to the increase in complexity of the estimation procedure. It is, however, well known that the slow convergence of the BCC estimator severely degrades the performance in higher dimensional input output spaces (the impact of the so-called curse of dimensionality). Hence, it is to be expected, that the gain in performance of the proposed homothetic reference technology compared to the BCC model will increase with increasing dimension of the input space. Unfortunately, it is not straight forward to predict the potential increase of the complexity of the estimation procedure involved in the estimation of the homothetic reference technology, with an increase of the dimension of the input space. Hence, this is another area that needs additional research before any firm evidence can be extracted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
