@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Dynamic Stochastic Programming model of crop rotation choice to test the adoption of long rotation under price and production risks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The adoption of long rotations in cash crop farms is exposed to yield uncertainty.A dynamic DSP model of crop rotation choice is built, under yield and market risks.Specific protein crop premium encourage the adoption of longer rotations.High risk aversion slow down adoption.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in agriculture,Risk analysis,Stochastic programming,Production,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article investigates the role played by both production and market risks on cash crop farmers’ decision to adopt long rotations considered as innovative cropping systems. We build a multi-period recursive farm model with Discrete Stochastic Programming. The model arbitrates each year between conventional and innovative, longer rotations. Yearly farming operations are declined according to a decision tree, so that production risk is an intra-year risk. Market risk is considered as an inter-year risk influencing crop successions. Simulations are performed on a specialized French cash crop farm. They show that when the long rotation is subsidized by an area premium, farmers are encouraged to remain in longer rotations. They also show that a high level of risk aversion tends to slow down the conversion towards longer rotations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Farm level modeling represents a huge share of literature in agricultural economics. Bio-economic farm models have been mainly developed to analyze and assess policy changes or technological innovations for different categories of farms with the aim of supporting policy decisions (Janssen, Ittersum, & K., 2007; Viaggi, Raggi, & Gomez y Paloma, 2010). In mathematical programming farm level models, acreage decisions generally address two types of decisions: tactic and strategic (Dury, Schaller, Garcia, Reynaud, & Bergez, 2012). Acreage decisions refer to the amount of area occupied by each crop every year. The acreage decision is more or less governed by a crop rotation long-term strategy. A crop rotation strategy is a cyclic period of several years over which an order of planting decision is made for each. Strategic decisions are long term decisions (crop rotation, investment decisions) that can be modified all along the year by tactical decisions since farming is exposed to many uncertainties (weather, market). Thus, the acreage choice and the sequence of technical operations (like date of sown, number of treatments, number of mechanical operations), decided during the year might vary according to state variables (weather, market). These decisions are qualified as revisable in response to climatic or sanitary uncertainty (Lien & Hardaker, 2001; Pannell, Malcolm, & Kingwell, 2000) (Kobayashi, Howitt, Jarvis, & Laca, 2007; Mosnier, Agabriel, Lherm, & Reynaud, 2009).When taking their production decisions, farmers are exposed to non-embedded risks, i.e. risks that are beyond control of the decision maker, and to embedded risks, i.e. risks that can be impacted by farmers’ decisions (Dorward, 1999; Hardaker, Pandey, & Patten, 1991). Under embedded risks, farmers adjust the timing and methods of their technical operations as the season progresses and, for instance, quantity and frequency of pesticide application can be revised. For instance, the number of pesticide operations can be revised according to the pest damage observed. These adjustments may change the yield risk exposure.In this article, the adoption of a long rotation is studied as an alternative to the wheat-sunflower short rotation in a specialized dryland crop farm. French agronomic research teams, jointly with farm extension services and groups of farmers seek to build up and spread among specialized crop farmers new crop rotation system that is expected to help reduce pollution at farm level (to diminish water, nitrogen and pesticide use). In many areas, farmers feel ready to change their practices because they face more disease-resistant crops and decreasing soil fertility resulting from intensive use of chemical inputs. As a result, crop yields are reaching a ceiling. Innovative Cropping Systems (ICSs) consisting in long rotations (up to seven years) enable to introduce intermediary crops with low level of inputs (legumes or nitrogen-catching crops), while farming practices are slightly rearranged (replacing chemical treatments by mechanical operations or delaying the sowing date for instance)11Different cropping systems of that sort have been built up inside two research and development projects in the Midi-Pyrénées region, south-western France. These ICSs are tested ‘in the field’ by volunteer farmers.. As a result, the average input usage is decreased over the whole rotation planning horizon. The adoption of ICSs is perceived by farmers as risk increasing because the expected yield of the new practices is more uncertain than for conventional practices. Thus, farmers have not experienced these new practices in their own farm yet. The yield risk can be considered as an embedded risk that can be adapted through tactical decisions. Another type of risk farmers are facing is the grain market risk. At the yearly decision (static) scale, the grain market price instability is a non-embedded risk because the price distribution is given to farmers each year. But on a dynamic point of view and at a multi-year (dynamic) scale, market risk can be considered as an embedded risk. The rotation plan can be modified at the beginning of each year, according to farmer's price anticipation, modifying farmer's exposure to price risk. As a non-embedded static risk, price instability should favor crop diversification when crops’ distributions are not or little correlated. But as a dynamic embedded risk, price instability could discourage the adoption of long rotations in case of high market prices. It is probable that in case of price upward trend, the most lucrative crops (wheat, maize) are preferred to diversification crops that are less lucrative (rapeseed, pea), even if beneficial in the long run in agronomic terms.The objective of this article is to build a dynamic model of crop rotation choice in order to test, under yield and market risk, farmer's decision to adopt long rotations. In Section 2 of the paper, a literature review on acreage decision models is proposed in order to explain the novelty of the proposed methodology. In Section 3, we expose the Dynamic Stochastic Programming (DSP) model. We detail the modeling assumptions on farmers’ beliefs and preferences. In Section 4, we explain how the farm data and the farmers’ behavioral parameters were obtained and tested in the model. These data come from three kinds of sources: (i) regional reference data on production costs, (ii) experts’ interviews to detail the intra-year farm operations and their possible revisions and (iii) field experiments to assess farmers’ perceptions and preferences22The detailed experimental protocol is not presented here as it is out of the scope of this paper that is focused on the presentation of a dynamic mathematical programming model.. In Section 4, we present the results of several simulations performed with the DSP model, testing the adoption of ICSs under a set of incentives, and leading a sensitivity analysis of different parameters.Many risk programming models have been developed in the agricultural economics literature; some are static, others are dynamic.Static stochastic mathematical programming models of non-embedded risks incorporate risk in the objective function or in the constraints through a risky-term of variance or semi-variance of income, assuming a quadratic utility function and a normal distribution (see for instance El-Nazer & McCarl, 1986; Hazell, 1971; McCarl & Önal, 1989; Tauer, 1983). Other models of risk programming directly assume a utility function, as an objective function, that is the weighted sum of utilities obtained in different states of nature and label it as utility-efficient-programming (Flaten & Lien, 2007).Dynamic stochastic mathematical programming models deal with embedded risks. They were initiated by (Cocks, 1968) and (Rae, 1971). They incorporate both risk anticipations and the adjustment behavior due to sequential decisions (Apland & Hauer, 1993). A stochastic sequential decision problem is symbolized by a decision tree, each node representing a decision, revisable or not. The number of branches represents the number of decision combinations and it can increase very quickly, making the model outputs difficult to interpret. The accounting of both embedded and non-embedded risks, and both dimensions of decision (strategic and tactic) seems relevant to address farmers' technical and rotational acreage decision over several years.The issue of farm acreage decision under risk can be handled with static stochastic models when historical empirical data on risk distributions is accessible (Acs, Berentsen, Huirne, & Van Asseldonk, 2009; Chavas, Posner, & Hedtcke, 2009; Martins & Marques, 2007; Stanger, Lauer, & Chavas, 2008). But the farm rotation choice with the possibility of revising decisions under risks pleads for dynamic approaches. The dynamic modeling of farm rotation choices is still subject to intensive research,El-Nazer and McCarl (1986) built a MOTAD model to account for the impact of the precedent crop without predetermined rotations. They use regression analysis on historical cropping records and incorporate these data in their model so that it determines freely the optimal long run rotation. While Hennessy (2006) is seeking if rotation choice has effective yield increasing and nitrogen saving effects and simulate price and subsidy levels that support alternation of soybeans on corns, Carpentier and Letort (2012) seek to theoretically and empirically assess the rotational benefit and thus optimize the rotation choice of rapeseed on wheat and barley. Doole and Pannell (2008) propose to test the value of incorporating pasture inside land-use rotations using an integrated bio-economic model. Abadi Ghadim, K., and Pannell (1999) propose a conceptual framework that enables the revision of decisions during the innovation process and that focusses on the role of information in such decisions using Bayesian learning rules.In this article, we aim at conducting an ex-ante study of the adoption of long rotations that are seen as innovative. Under both production and market risks and with few historical data, we propose to build a Dynamic Stochastic Programming (DSP) model which maximizes the expected utility of actual income over the planning horizon of the crop rotation (Apland & Hauer, 1993; Rae, 1971; Trebeck & Hardaker, 1972). A multiperiod recursive model is built. It accounts for farmer's adjustment behavior when facing both production (intra-year) and market (inter-year) risks during the multiyear crop rotation. The novel aspect of the model developed in this paper doesn't lie in the computational technique employed (Dynamic Stochastic Programming) but in the type of application. The use of a recursive model enables us to take adjustment decisions into account when facing both price and production risk. To overcome the problem of large scale models that are often met when simulating many periods and many decision nodes in DSP, we decided to model a recursive sequence of multi-periodic optimization models.The cropping system developed is a seven-year crop rotation. In the short rotation, wheat is alternating with sunflower, thus wheat is cropped four times on the same plot over seven years. In the long rotation, wheat is cropped only three times over seven years, with lower chemical inputs since two other precedents are used (sorghum and pea) that naturally bring mineral nitrogen and break pest biological cycle (see Table 1).A multi-period model of inter-temporal choice is built up. The planning horizon is assumed to last three years, which is coherent with the formulation of farmer's anticipations. Each year (denoted t hence forth), land use decisions are revisable inside a set of possible rotations, considering (i) the preceding crop and its possible impact on crop yield and (ii) the crop price situation anticipated for the coming three years. Each year, the farmer accounts for both anticipations on yields and prices to take his crop acreage decision for the coming three year planning horizon, and each year his decisions are revisable: the model is recursive and thus dynamic.The decision variable is the crop area sown in year t decided in year s: Xst. A cropping system refers to the crops, the crop sequences and the management techniques used. The model aims at considering these dimensions, and we need to note two sorts of crops depending on innovative (i.e. crop belonging to a long rotation scheme with adapted farming operations) or conventional technologies (i.e. crop belonging to a two-year-rotation with classical farming operations). Kiand Kcare respectively the set of innovative crops and the set of conventional ones withK=Ki∪Kc. For example, wheat grown using conventional practices has a set of properties (yield, cost, level of production risk) different from wheat grown under innovative practices. Especially, the level of expected yield is lower under innovative practices. This difference is due to both practices and the preceding crop. In order to represent this property in the decision-making problem, the decision variable in term of crop and preceding crop Xst(k, k′) represents the area of crop k with previous crop k′ (k, k′ ∈ K). The known impacts of precedent k’ on crop k are reported in Table 233This set has been identified based on scientific literature and opinions of experts (scientists, extension services). Rotations that are impossible in agronomical terms, such as sunflower after sunflower, are prohibited..Each year the farmer revises his/her decisions when the economic or climatic context is changing. In fact, each year t the acreage decision is associated with a set of operations, occurring at different stages, some of them being subject to uncertain events (see Fig. 1: fertilization, fungicide for instance…). The crop chosen in year t is characterized by a technical pattern, i.e., a set of technical operations carried out at different stages of the year. Different outcomes are possible at each stage, depending on the frequency and intensity of pest treatments and nitrogen applications. It is possible to change the frequency and level of pest and nitrogen applications at the different stages, according to the climatic and sanitary situation because these technical operations take place according to a decision rule based on observations and agronomical criteria (climactic forecasts, plant health…). The sequence of intra-year technical operations is depicted, each year, through a probability tree. For each crop, farmers are asked to assign a probability to the different operations. Finally, each branch represents a set of technical operations and a probability is associated to this branch44This probability is the product of the probabilities of all operations.(Fig. 1).Among the set of possible crops some are ‘conventional’ (index c) and others belong to ‘innovative’ cropping systems (index i). As mentioned before, the crop succession is partially controlled in the model: a set of possible preceding crops K′ is associated to each crop K. The crop acreage observed a given year results from the rotation choice of the previous years. Thus, each crop is part of a rotation alternating different crops in previous years and since rotation choice is revisable, the crop acreage is varying from one year to the other. After more than 3 years, the crop acreage converges more or less quickly to a stable acreage. Therefore, in Section 5.2, we will expose the crop acreage after a few years. The convergence rate (number of years) is a result in itself as it depends on incentives, market context, risk aversion, etc.Discrete Stochastic Programming allows choice of different technical and revisable options. A dynamic version of the model with a finite horizon is proposed. The planning horizon lasts three years, but, through recursive programming, the production plan for the planning horizon can be adjusted each year (System 1). In the equation system, the first constraint concerns the total area available, the second set of constraints corresponds to rotation constraints and the third one is a positivity constraint.maxXstEU(Ws(Xst))s.t.∑k,k′∈KXst(k′,k)≤TA,s=1,2,3t=s…s+2∑kXst(k′,k)≤∑lXs−1t(k′,l),s=1,2,3t=s…s+3,k′∈KXst≥0(System 1)Wsfarm discounted wealth calculated over a planning horizon beginning on period s.expected utility of the net present value of farm wealthtotal areaindex for cropindex for precedent crop of crop kindex for precedent crop of crop k’index for period of the three-year simulation horizonindex for period of the three-year planning-horizon beginning each year sSeries of static DSP models are solved but, for each model, initial conditions are reset according to the output of the first year of the former planning horizon and to the new economic context. By doing this we solve a recursive model (Fig. 2). Note that(Xss*,Xss+1*,Xss+2*)is the vector of optimal decisions in year s along the three-year horizon on a given plot of the farm.The dynamic DSP model determines a three-year rotation considering the (K, K′) sets of crop/ precedent crop. This choice depends on the price context, i.e. on the distribution of the embedded and non-embedded risks. The objective function of the recursive multi-period DSP model is the maximization of the utility of the net present value of total farm wealth (Ws) over the planning horizon beginning on s. Wsis the actual sum, fromt=stos+2, of annual incomes Zstwith ρ being the discount rate (Eq. 1)(1)Ws=∑t=ss+2ρs−tZstThe Utility function is defined as an Arrow-Pratt Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA) function, assuming that a change in initial wealth does not affect decisions and rabeing the constant absolute risk aversion coefficient (Eq. (2)). This type of negative exponential Utility function can be used with negative payoffs and can be used when losses occur. Considering CARA is appropriate for a low range of variation of payoffs relative to wealth as it is the case when changing the type of rotation55The discounted gross margin over six years varies between 5000 and 5900 Euro per hectare.(Hardaker & Lien, 2007).(2)U(Ws)=1−exp(−ra·Ws)In this DSP model, stochastic variables are; the cost of production, the yield and the price from which the gross margin distribution per crop k, Zst(k), is calculated (Eq. (3)).(3)Zst(k)=∑k∈K,k′∈K′[Xst(k′,k)(Ya˜s(k′,k)Pa˜s(k)−Ca˜s(k′,k))]In the Eq. (3), Xst(k′, k) is the area of crop k in period t, during the horizon which begins on s and considering the preceding crop k′, i.e.;Ya˜s(k′,k)is the yield of crop k anticipated in year s: it is the same for all the periods t of the planning horizon and only depends on the preceding crop k′;Pa˜s(k)is the price of crop k anticipated in year s which, as for yield anticipations, is the same for all the t periods of the planning horizon; andCa˜s(k′,k)is the cost of crop k anticipated in year s and depends on the preceding crop k′.The yield probability distributionYa˜s(k′,k)of crop k with preceding crop k′ is stochastic. The yield distribution was directly elicited in the field with farmers already involved in innovative rotations, using the visual impact method developed in (Hardaker, Huirne, Anderson, & Lien, 2004). Direct interviews enabled measurement of the probability judgments of the different crop yields involved in ‘conventional’ and ‘innovative’ rotations. For the modeling exercise, the two first moments of the distribution (which was assumed to be Normal66This assumption is coherent with the CARA type of utility function.) were kept from this elicitation. The probability distribution of crop yields was generated through Box-Muller method. In the elicitation of subjective probabilities, it was made sure that each farmer took the impact of the preceding crop in the rotation into account when evaluating the yield.Price anticipationsare not directly assessed. It is assumed that farmers perfectly anticipate crop prices at the beginning of each year and for the coming three years. These anticipations are made according to a normal distribution where the mean price and the standard deviation are based on empirical data observed quarterly between 2008 and 2010 (Eq. (4)).(4)Pa˜s(k)∼Normal(ps¯(k);σ2(k))In Eq. (4),ps¯(k)is the average price and σ2(k) is the variance of the price distribution for crop k.Cost per cropthe cost per crop and per hectareCa˜is stochastic (Eq. (6))(6)Ca˜(k′,k)=Ca˜op(k)+PproteincropThe definition ofCa˜includes two components. The first component,Ca˜op, is the probability distribution of crop direct cost. It is computed for the set of technical operations corresponding to the decision tree. It indirectly depends on time period because it takes the preceding crop into account. The second component, Pproteincrop, is a premium given to each hectare of protein crop. It aims at encouraging farmers to adopt long rotations, including protein crops, like pea77Depending on years, in France, the level of subsidy to protein crops varies between 150 and 200 Euro per hectare.. It compensates for the loss in gross margin due to the introduction of this low-input and less-lucrative protein crops.The model is applied to a regional farm-type specialized in arable crops with wheat and sunflower as major crops, in a non-irrigated land. The data concerning production costs per operation have been collected among a sample of 36 farms. The evaluation of individual risk probability distribution (probability distribution of yield and production cost) and the level of individual risk aversion has also been carried out on this sample88We do not provide details on this methodology but the main outputs of these experiments are introduced as parameters in the model.. In the following, we give details on the way the different components of gross margins have been obtained (Sections 4.1–4.4) and on the scenarios we have tested (Section 4.5).A probability tree was built for each crop. The different branches describe the possible management operations for each crop during a production cycle namely, one year. Each node corresponds to a revisable operation for which several options have been reported by both experts and farmers when they conceived the new cropping system all together. For each crop, a sequence of management operations has been described; some are certain, others are risky because their outcome depends on climatic state of nature (Fig. 1). Interviews enabled to measure the farmers’ probability judgment regarding the probability associated with each operation. The annual crop management is exposed in details to each participant, it is composed of all technical operations. In order to estimate farmers’ subjective probabilities linked to the different revisable operations, farmers are asked to rate, on a decade, the frequency of each operation. They have to choose, on a Likert scale, the frequency, from “never” to “always”, with 5 degrees. Thus, the probability distribution of production costs is obtained.The production costs consist of machinery costs (including fuel consumption, mending and depreciation costs) and input costs. Input costs are extracted from the French technological network on innovative cropping systems. Machinery costs and labour needs per operation depend on the type of equipment. According to the type of equipment, costs calculations are based on the database of the French Office for Coordination of Agricultural Machinery and to the reference costs documented from the national inventory of farming practices. The remaining data are collected from local extension services and in a specialized technical institute (Table 3).Farmer's probability judgments concerning the crop yield variability in the ‘conventional’ and in the ‘innovative’ technology are assessed following the visual impact method proposed in (Hardaker et al., 2004). This elicitation of subjective yield risk distribution is carried out as follows: several intervals of yield variability are proposed to the probability assessor between a minimum value and a maximum value, and he is asked to allocate tokens to each yield interval. At the beginning of the procedure, the assessor is provided with 25 tokens. However, he does not have to use all the tokens and he can also ask for more. The probability of each interval is the ratio of the number of tokens allocated to this interval on the total number of tokens used. To ensure a good understanding of the crop management, it is exposed in details to farmers next to the visual impact table. In addition to this, the assessor is asked to evaluate his own degree of confidence in his prediction. From these discrete distributions we keep the mean and variance and assume they follow a normal continuous distribution law.Risk preferences are obtained through a direct elicitation method based on lottery games, similar to the one used by (Holt & Laury, 2002), (Tanaka, Camerer, & Nguyen, 2010), (Bocquého, Jacquet, & Reynaud, 2013), namely a multiple price list. Individual coefficients of relative risk aversion are obtained. It derives from our estimations that the relative risk aversion coefficient relative to annual farm income rrranges from 0.69 to 0.85 in the sample. According to Holt and Laury classification table (Holt & Laury, 2002), this range refers to a very risk averse attitude (Ridier, Chaib, & Roussy, 2012).In the model, a CARA utility function relative to farm wealth is used. The net present value of total farm wealth (W) is the actual sum of annual incomes Z (Eq. (1)). In the CARA utility function, an absolute risk aversion coefficient rais used, so that ra= rr / W.For the modeling exercise a farm-type is chosen where behavioral parameters correspond to one type among those surveyed. From the survey data, individuals were classified according to their position towards the innovative long rotation. Among the 36 farmers, several types of perceptions are identified because all famers do not balance ‘negative’ and ‘positive’ events the same way (some are optimistic, others are pessimistic). For each farmer of the sample, the cumulated distribution function (CDF) of the gross margin of the cropping systems is computed considering the yield, price and cost probability distributions. According to the First Order and the Second Order Stochastic Dominance criteria (FOSD, SOSD), three types of individuals can be distinguished in the sample: (i) those who prefer the short rotation to the long one according to FOSD criteria (n =30); (ii) those who prefer the long rotation to the short one according to FOSD criteria (n = 3) and (iii) those for which neither the FOSD nor the SOSD criteria allow classification of both rotation types in order of preference (n = 3). The type that is used to apply the model is the third one for whom the choice between short and long rotation remains ambiguous (Table 3). For this individual type, the mean level of relative risk aversion is 0.70.The data in Table 3 show that under long rotation wheat is cropped in alternation with a greater variety of crops (sorghum, pea, rapeseed) than under short rotation., The average cumulated gross margin over seven years is Euro/hectare 4944 for the short rotation while Euro/hectare 5099 for the innovative long rotation The alternative crops of the long rotation include less lucrative crops such as pea which average yearly gross margin is equal to almost half of the gross margin of wheat. The decrease of yearly mean profitability is probably a huge obstacle to the adoption of this long rotation. Besides, the sunflower that is conducted under integrated management has a higher mean gross margin than under conventional management (778 Euro/hectare instead of 600 Euro/hectare). This is due a decrease in chemical treatments that decreases operational costs. This cost decrease overcompensates the mean decrease in yields. In return, the variability of yields is higher under integrated management (standard deviation 0.75) than under conventional management (standard deviation 0.5).In order to test the role of risk and profitability on the adoption of long rotations, several simulations are performed over 25 years (noted Y) of planning horizon. In the baseline scenario, the value of the protein crop premium is set to zero and the level of relative risk aversion is set to the one assessed during the survey for the farm type chosen (AV=0.70). In the scenario 1, different levels of protein crop premium (noted P) are tested, considering that the current level of protein crop premium in the CAP varies each year and is about 150 Euro/hectare. In the scenario 2, different levels of relative risk aversion (AV) are tested (Table 4).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
