@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The unrooted set covering connected subgraph problem differentiating between HIV envelope sequences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An innovative application of operations research to analyse HIV gene sequences.Present a sophisticated integer program to identify connected subgraphs.Demonstrate the effective use of decomposition techniques to reduce runtimes.Construct connected subgraphs that identify key features of HIV gene sequences.Identify key areas of HIV gene sequences for possible vaccine development.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in medicine,HIV Env sequence,Benders’ decomposition,Acceleration techniques,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel application of operations research techniques to the analysis of HIV Env gene sequences, aiming to identify key features that are possible vaccine targets. These targets are identified as being critical to the transmission of HIV by being present in early transmitted (founder) sequences and absent in later chronic sequences. Identifying the key features of Env involves two steps: first, calculating the covariance of amino acid combinations and positions to form a network of related and compensatory mutations; and second, developing an integer program to identify the smallest connected subgraph of the constructed covariance network that exhibits a set covering property. The integer program developed for this analysis, labelled the unrooted set covering connected subgraph problem (USCCSP), integrates a set covering problem and connectivity evaluation, the latter formulated as a network flow problem. The resulting integer program is very large and complex, requiring the use of Benders’ decomposition to develop an efficient solution approach. The results will demonstrate the necessity of applying acceleration techniques to the Benders’ decomposition solution approach and the effectiveness of these techniques and heuristic approaches for solving the USCCSP.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) currently infects approximately 40 million people worldwide and has resulted in over 20 million deaths. Although antiretroviral therapy has reduced mortality and morbidity from this disease in developed countries the large number of new infections each year demonstrates a need for more effective prevention programs. The most effective prevention will be provided by a vaccine, but to date no successful HIV vaccine has been developed. One of the difficulties of developing a vaccine is the high rate of mutation of HIV that results in shifting targets for the immune response. A feature of particular importance is the viral envelope gene Env that codes for the gp160 protein, which is cleaved into the gp120 and gp41 glycoproteins. gp120 buds from the virion surface and is responsible for binding to the CD4 receptor of immune cells, while gp41 is responsible for fusion with the target cell membrane and mediates the resulting infection of the cell.The most exposed regions of gp120 are susceptible to antibody binding and clearance and hence can be highly variable. An effective vaccine must stimulate the expansion of antibodies to regions of gp120 that are necessary for viable virus and are also amenable to antibody contact. The evolving nature over the course of infection of Env and its glycoproteins gp120 and gp41 is evidence that antibodies against HIV envelope are generated and force the Env gene to mutate to avoid viral clearance. However, antibody development is too slow to inhibit infection of an individual or to eliminate infection once established. A vaccine needs to prime an antibody response to very early stages of HIV. The targets for such a vaccine are currently unclear, but may be elucidated by studying how Env changes from the early (founder) stage of infection to the chronic stage (Gnanakaran et al., 2011). Features in the Env gene that are present in founder viruses but absent in chronic viruses may indicate aspects that are under eventual immune pressure, and are candidates for vaccine targets.Initial investigations to identify amino acid features of Env between the two virus groups, founder and chronic, followed the approach of Murray et al. (2013), which examined amino acid pairs in the hepatitis C virus (HCV) envelope that distinguished responders to antiviral therapy. The current investigation analyses 266 HIV Env protein sequences, 133 founder and 133 chronic, obtained from a previous study comparing glycosylation sites between founder and chronic individuals (Mota, Murray, Center, Purcell, & McCaw, 2012). Since a total of 266 Env sequences in the current investigation, and in other studies (Abrahams et al., 2009; Keele et al., 2008; Mota et al., 2012), is small in comparison to the 858 amino acids (AA) in HIV Env there can be many positions in the sequences that will express different AA for founders compared to chronics. Hence the underlying state space employed is not the individual AA, but rather covarying pairs of AA that achieve some minimal level of covariance. AA at a pair of positions are said to covary if the AA combinations observed at these positions are sufficiently different from random combinations. For example, considering the AA Phenylalanine (F), Lysine (K), Arginine (R) and Tyrosine (Y) if in 16 sequences at positions 223 and 432 there are 8 FK (F at 223 and K at 432) pairs and 8 YR pairs, then positions 223 and 432 covary since these observed pairs are sufficiently different to the random combinations of 4 FK, 4 FR, 4 YK and 4 YR pairs.The approach developed by Murray et al. (2013) identifies the fewest AA pairs that express particular amino acid combinations present in one group but not the other. The integer programming formulation and the resulting analysis identifies a set of separating pairs that are usually not connected. While these pairs identify important positions in Env  the lack of connectivity reduces how useful the positions and the identified AA are in the development of a vaccine against HIV. The current analysis attempts to identify a set of covarying pairs that form a connected subgraph. This connected subgraph is desirable for several reasons. First, a number of compensatory mutations will be needed for Env to sufficiently change its structure to evade the immune response, identified by covarying positions. Second, an antibody stimulated by a vaccine will bind to between 5 and 8 AA of its antigen. Finally, a network of target AA may better describe underlying mechanisms by which HIV evades immune system clearance.In this paper an integer programming model is developed that selects a set of covarying pairs with the following properties. First, the most important features of the sequence are identified. This is defined as the fewest number of pairs that express AA combinations that exist in some founder sequences but in no chronic sequences. Second, the selected covarying pairs and amino acid positions form a connected subnetwork of the original covariance network where feasible. The integer programming problem developed to achieve this is termed the unrooted set covering connected subgraph problem (USCCSP).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a novel application of operations research to the analysis of HIV Env sequences. The analysis attempts to construct a connected subgraph of covarying amino acid positions to identify key features related to the transmission of the virus. Two different mathematical models are presented, the second providing a more detailed view of the HIV Env sequences and related separating pairs networks. A critical feature of this analysis is the connectivity requirement between the selected covarying pairs. This requirement is modelled using a network flow problem, which is at the expense of producing very large problem formulations. The complexity of the resulting problem formulation is addressed by employing Benders’ decomposition, along with enhancement techniques, to efficiently solve the USCCSP and reduce runtimes for the USCCSP-AA.The results demonstrate the general performance of the Benders’ decomposition solution approach to solve the USCCSP and USCCSP-AA. The models presented in this paper may be applied to any application requiring the construction of a set covering connected subgraph, in particular those without any specified terminal or root nodes. As such, these results aim to demonstrate the general performance of the developed solution approach.This paper discusses the implication of identifying connected subgraphs in comparison to the set covering problem of Murray et al. (2013) and the different results achieved using various enhancement techniques. It is demonstrated that the solution to the USCCSP and USCCSP-AA may identify important features for further research in the operations research and microbiology context.There are two key areas for further research regarding the work presented in this paper. In the operations research context, identifying other application areas that require the construction of a set covering connected subgraph would aid the further development of the presented approaches. In addition, the results present the use of Benders’ decomposition as a heuristic approach to identify good upper bounds to the USCCSP-AA. This presents an area of further research to identify approaches that improve the solution process for the USCCSP-AA: Either through enhancements of the Benders’ decomposition approach or the development of alternative techniques. Finally, the separating pairs connected subgraph results attempt to identify key features of the HIV Env sequence as possible vaccine targets. Further analysis of these connected subgraphs may yield more important features to aid the development of a vaccine preventing the transmission of HIV.