@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supplier selection in the processed food industry under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a stochastic programming model for supplier selection.We incorporate uncertainty in the demand and in the supplier operation.We propose an enhanced Benders decomposition algorithm for this problem.Sourcing actions vary between using an integrated and a decoupled approach.Solving a single master problem in the Benders decomposition is more efficient.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supplier selection,Production-distribution planning,Perishability,Disjunctive programming,Benders decomposition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses an integrated framework for deciding about the supplier selection in the processed food industry under uncertainty. The relevance of including tactical production and distribution planning in this procurement decision is assessed. The contribution of this paper is three-fold. Firstly, we propose a new two-stage stochastic mixed-integer programming model for the supplier selection in the process food industry that maximizes profit and minimizes risk of low customer service. Secondly, we reiterate the importance of considering main complexities of food supply chain management such as: perishability of both raw materials and final products; uncertainty at both downstream and upstream parameters; and age dependent demand. Thirdly, we develop a solution method based on a multi-cut Benders decomposition and generalized disjunctive programming. Results indicate that sourcing and branding actions vary significantly between using an integrated and a decoupled approach. The proposed multi-cut Benders decomposition algorithm improved the solutions of the larger instances of this problem when compared with a classical Benders decomposition algorithm and with the solution of the monolithic model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The importance of food supply chain management has been growing both at the industrial and scientific levels. The challenges faced in food supply chains are at the intersection of several disciplines and go beyond the traditional cost minimization concern. Particularly, in the process food industry, companies have to deal with higher uncertainties both upstream and downstream of the supply chain. These uncertainties are related to an ever increasing product variety, more demanding customers and a highly interconnected distribution network. This implies that companies operating in the process food industry need to manage the risk/cost trade-off without disregarding freshness, sustainability and corporate social responsibility issues (Maloni & Brown, 2006).Effective and efficient decision support models and methods for supply chain planning are critical for this sector that is the largest manufacturing sector in Europe with a turnover of 1048 billion euros, employing over 4.2 million people (FoodDrink Europe, 2014). It is widely acknowledged that the standard tools for supply chain management perform poorly when applied to process food industries (Rajurkar & Jain, 2011). The characteristics of food supply chains are significantly different from other supply chains. The main difference is the continuous change in the quality of raw materials – from the time they are shipped from the grower to the time they are processed at the plant, and in the quality of final products – from the time they are shipped from the plant to the time they are consumed. Ahumada and Villalobos (2009) state that food supply chains are more complex and harder to manage than other supply chains. The shelf-lives of raw, intermediate and final goods together with the strong uncertainties in the whole chain challenge a good supply chain management and planning (Ahumada, Villalobos, & Mason, 2012). Despite the relevant specificities of process food industries, the consideration of perishability, customers’ willingness to pay and risk management at the strategic and planning levels has been seldom addressed in the literature.The present work addresses the joint decision of choosing which suppliers to select, and the planning of procurement, production and distribution in a medium-term planning horizon. We focus on companies that process a main perishable raw material and convert it into perishable final food products. These conditions happen for instance in the dairy, fresh juices and tomato sauce industries. Within this scope we integrate strategic and tactical decisions in a common framework. We consider a setting in which companies have their plants and distribution channels well established and, therefore, the supply chain strategic decisions address the supplier selection and the related product branding. We classify the suppliers and the product branding as local or mainstream. This differentiation has already been made for the agri-business (Ata, Lee, & Tongarlak, 2012), but never for the food processing industry. However, there are several practical examples of the leverage than can be achieved in the customers’ willingness to pay by branding a product as local, and correspondingly sourcing raw materials from local suppliers (Frash, DiPietro, & Smith, 2015; Martinez, 2010; Oberholtzer, Dimitri, & Jaenicke, 2014). Therefore, the demand and the list price is assumed higher for fresh products that are branded and produced with local raw materials. In contrast, a similar product with a low remaining shelf-life and produced with mainstream raw materials has a lower demand and a lower list price.Within this context, we propose a two-stage stochastic mixed-integer programming model to tackle this supplier selection problem. In the first-stage we decide the branding of products and the quantities to be procured in advance from each supplier. In the second-stage, we decide on the produced and transported quantities as well as on the quantities procured in the spot market. Uncertainties relate to the suppliers’ raw material availability, suppliers’ lead time, suppliers’ spot market prices and demand for final products.The different sources of uncertainty in this supplier selection problem render the corresponding stochastic programming model hard to solve as a considerable number of scenarios have to be considered. Therefore, to solve this problem we propose a multi-cut Benders decomposition method. Moreover, to improve its convergence we test several acceleration techniques.The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews relevant contributions in the supplier selection problem. Section 3 describes formally the problem and the proposed mathematical formulations. Section 4 is devoted to the model validation through an illustrative example. In particular, the importance of considering uncertainty, the integration of the supplier selection with tactical planning decisions, and the impact of a risk-averse strategy are discussed. Section 5 presents the implementation of a multi-cut Benders decomposition algorithm for this problem. Section 6 reports computational results for larger instances. Finally, Section 7 draws the main conclusions and indicates future lines of research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes a novel formulation to tackle the integrated decision of supplier selection and production-distribution planning for processed food supply chains. Uncertainty is present in the suppliers’ processes namely in lead time, availability and spot price, and in customers’ demand, which furthermore depends on the age of the sold product. Results show that only by taking such an integrated approach of tactical and strategic levels, it is possible to make better decisions regarding sourcing of perishable raw materials to produce processed food products. The advantages of the premium price customers are willing to pay is undervalued by decoupled approaches.Due to the difficulty in solving the problem, we explored a multi-cut Benders decomposition algorithm that leverages the different proposed formulations. This algorithm suits the structure of this supplier selection problem, however, in a short time span it is hard to obtain optimal solutions. Modern Benders decomposition was able to improve significantly the results in comparison with the classical Benders method and the monolithic model. Although acceleration techniques did not perform effectively, hull reformulation applied to the Benders master problem showed that it is potentially a promising method to improve the convergence of Benders, particularly in problems where one can take more advantage of disjunctive programming to tighten the master problem.Future research in terms of modeling should focus on improving the realistic aspects of the models, for example by considering setup costs and the quality decay of raw materials throughout the aging process. In terms of solution methods, it would be interesting to explore other possible decomposition algorithms, such as Lagrangian decomposition and cross decomposition strategies.