@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Contribution of individual judgments toward inconsistency in pairwise comparisons

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new measure is proposed for inconsistency in pair-wise comparison judgments.The measure finds the contribution of individual judgments toward overall inconsistency.To address ordinal inconsistency, another measure is proposed as a supplement.The two measures are shown to be useful to detect and correct inconsistent judgments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,Multi-criteria decision making,Pairwise comparison,Intuitionistic preference modeling,Analytic hierarchy process,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Pairwise comparison (PC) is a well-established method to assist decision makers in estimating their preferences. In PCs, the acquired judgments are used to construct a PC matrix (PCM) that is used to check whether the inconsistency in judgments is acceptable or requires revision. The use of Consistency Ratio (CR)—a widely used measure for inconsistency—has been widely debated and the literature survey has identified a need for a more appropriate measure. Considering this need, a new measure, termed congruence, is proposed in this paper. The measure is shown to be useful in finding the contribution of individual judgments toward overall inconsistency of a PCM and, therefore, can be used to detect and correct cardinally inconsistent judgments. The proposed measure is applicable to incomplete sets of PC judgments without modification, unlike CR which requires a complete set of PC judgments. To address ordinal inconsistency, another measure termed dissonance, is proposed as a supplement to the congruencemeasure. The two measures appear useful in detecting both outliersand the phenomenon of consistency deadlock where all judgments equally contribute toward the overall inconsistency.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The method of pairwise comparison (PC), introduced by Thurstone (1927), has been used in several decision making methods to assess the relative importance of criteria and alternatives, see Saaty (2008); Siskos et al. (2005); Figueira et al. (2004); Greco et al. (2010) for examples. The main benefit of using this approach is to convert both objective and subjective judgments into relative weights of importance. This paper focuses on the method of pairwise comparisons that is often used to help DM in describing his/her preferences. A new technique is proposed here to measure the level of inconsistency in a set of pairwise judgments.The pairwise judgments can be used to construct a matrix and a prioritization procedure can be applied to derive a corresponding priority vector. If the judgments are consistent then all prioritization methods give the same result. However, in the case of inconsistent judgments, different prioritization methods derive different priority vectors (Choo and Wedley, 2004). It is therefore important to measure consistency of judgments prior to the process of prioritization.Although widely used, current measures for consistency have been criticized for their shortcomings (see details in Section 2.2). We contend that the redundancy in PC judgments can be used to measure the contribution of each judgment toward the overall inconsistency. Based on this, two new measures for consistency are proposed here and are shown to be useful in measuring overall inconsistency in PC judgments. Moreover, these measures can also be used to suggest changes in the judgment values in order to improve overall consistency.The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 formulates the problem of prioritization and reviews the literature related to consistency in PC judgments; Section 3 collects an empirical evidence that existing measures are insufficient; the new measures are then proposed in Sections 4 and 5 respectively. Section 6 discusses the use of these measures for improving the overall consistency in PC judgments and then illustrated through examples in Section 7; finally, Section 8 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has investigated a number of widely used consistency measures with the help of Monte-Carlo simulations. This has shown that a single global value for measuring inconsistency, whether cardinal or ordinal, is insufficient to locate all the inconsistent judgments present in a PCM. Hence, it is proposed to measure inconsistency at a fine-grained level to quantify the contribution of each judgment toward the overall inconsistency. A graph-theoretic approach is suggested for measuring level of inconsistency in the individual judgments. First, a generalized model is proposed to measure individual inconsistencies; and then, two new measures have been introduced: congruence for CC and dissonance for OC. The proposed measures are also applicable to incomplete sets of PC judgments without modification, unlike CR which requires a complete set of PC judgments. In addition, the congruence measure is applicable to any scale in a straight-forward manner, unlike CR which is only suitable for the linear and geometric scales.The proposed measures are illustrated through examples, and it is concluded that the two matrices showing individual congruence and dissonance can be used to locate and (possibly) correct inconsistent (and/or outlying) judgments. The given examples have suggested measuring consistency as a pair of values i.e. (Θ, Ψ). It is suggested that the use of these matrices should form a useful addition to PC-based decision support tools. Further investigation is required to explore the properties of these two consistency measures. For example, the threshold of acceptance/rejection for (Θ, Ψ) should be investigated for different scales. A numerical comparison with other measures should be performed in order to compare these thresholds.