@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A two-stage classification technique for bankruptcy prediction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design single and ensemble-based models to forecast bankruptcy.We estimate a set of financial profiles that represent several archetypal situations.We build bankruptcy prediction models that fit each financial profile.We compare model performance using these two ways of designing models.Profile-based models perform better than single and ensemble-based models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,Finance,Bankruptcy,Forecasting,Financial profile,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ensemble techniques such as bagging or boosting, which are based on combinations of classifiers, make it possible to design models that are often more accurate than those that are made up of a unique prediction rule. However, the performance of an ensemble solely relies on the diversity of its different components and, ultimately, on the algorithm that is used to create this diversity. It means that such models, when they are designed to forecast corporate bankruptcy, do not incorporate or use any explicit knowledge about this phenomenon that might supplement or enrich the information they are likely to capture. This is the reason why we propose a method that is precisely based on some knowledge that governs bankruptcy, using the concept of “financial profiles”, and we show how the complementarity between this technique and ensemble techniques can improve forecasts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Most models that are designed by financial institutions or by scholars to forecast corporate bankruptcy, are usually built using a limited number of financial ratios that are measured once (Balcaen & Ooghe, 2006). Such models assume that all ratios that are likely to account for failure deteriorate in a systematic manner for all firms that may fail (Laitinen, 1991), and within a same time frame. This suggests that early warning signs of bankruptcy are embodied in the same variables and occur more or less at the same time and with the same magnitude. However, this is partly wrong. It is not uncommon that some firms that appear to be healthy fail unexpectedly, and that others that are likely to go bankrupt survive, and sometimes for a long time (D’Aveni, 1989).These assumptions represent the main weaknesses of traditional models: they make it possible to estimate an average distance between the financial situation of a given company and a predefined situation of bankruptcy, while a state of bankruptcy is not reducible to a single reference state. One knows that failure is the result of a protracted process that occurs over time (Dimitras, Zanakis, & Zopounidis, 1996), that firms do not follow the same process (Laitinen, 1991), and that quite a few patterns of decline exist (D’Aveni, 1989). Therefore one understands that patterns of failure, that is to say prototype situations that firms may experience before going bankrupt, have the same character of multiplicity, and that a single model, whatever its accuracy, is not likely to properly capture such a variety of situations.To overcome the limitations of traditional models, a first response was brought that was intended to take into account the diversity of situations that firms may face shortly before dying, but disregarding any a priori knowledge about bankruptcy. This response is embodied in techniques based on ensembles of models (bagging, boosting...): each component of an ensemble is specialized in discriminating a subset of firms, and the design of the ensemble relies on an algorithm, the aim of which is to ensure the complementarity of its different components. However, these techniques do not take into account any explicit characteristics about bankruptcy, and as a consequence the resulting models do not benefit from any knowledge one may have on this phenomenon. This is why we have designed a method that makes it possible to estimate the decision boundary between failed and non-failed firms using a priori knowledge about the different financial situations that firms may face at a given moment of their life, and for some of them, before going bankrupt. This method relies on the fact that different firm profiles exist, some of them typifying specific patterns of decline (D’Aveni, 1989) that lead to bankruptcy, and that one may take advantage of these profiles to design models. Thus, instead of building a single model, or an ensemble based on an algorithm that ignores everything that may lead firms to failure, we suggest designing a set of profiles that closely mirror the various situations firms may experience at a given moment of their existence, then to build as many models as there are profiles. These profiles are estimated using a vector quantization method (Kohonen map). So as to study the performance of this technique, we use several modeling methods to design, by profile, both single models (decision tree, discriminant analysis, logistic regression, neural network) and ensembles of models (bagging, boosting, random subspace). Then, we compare the results achieved with these models to those estimated using models that do not take into account profiles, and these comparisons are made with several samples so as to test the robustness of our method. The remainder of this paper is divided into five sections. Section 2 presents a literature review that explains our research question. Section 3 describes the data and modeling methods used in our study. Section 4 presents the way models are estimated and how model performance is calculated. Section 5presents and discusses the results and Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
