@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A bilevel formulation of the pediatric vaccine pricing problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The vaccine pricing decision faced by vaccine manufacturers is complicated.The customer’s subsequent vaccine selection decision problem must be considered.We model the pediatric vaccine pricing problem (PVPP) as a bilevel math program.PVPP is applied to the analysis of the 2014 United States pediatric vaccine market.We identify vaccine prices that improve current per child profit of three firms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pediatric vaccine pricing,Bilevel programming,Heuristic,Nelder–Mead search,Cyclic coordinate method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider the characterization of optimal pricing strategies for a pediatric vaccine manufacturing firm operating in an oligopolistic market. The pediatric vaccine pricing problem (PVPP) is formulated as a bilevel mathematical program wherein the upper level models a firm that selects profit-maximizing vaccine prices while the lower level models a representative customer’s vaccine purchasing decision to satisfy a given, recommended childhood immunization schedule (RCIS) at overall minimum cost. Complicating features of the bilevel program include the bilinear nature of the upper-level objective function and the binary nature of the lower-level decision variables. We develop and test variants of three heuristics to identify the pricing scheme that will maximize a manufacturer’s profit: a Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) of the upper-level feasible region, an LHS enhanced by a Nelder–Meade search from each price point, and an LHS enhanced by a custom implementation of the Cyclic Coordinate Method from each price point. The practicality of the PVPP is demonstrated via application to the analysis of the 2014 United States pediatric vaccine private sector market. Testing results indicate that a robust sampling method combined with local search is the superlative solution method among those examined and, in the current market, that a manufacturer acting unilaterally has the potential to increase profit per child completing the RCIS by 35 percent (from 231.84 to 312.55 dollars) for GlaxoSmithKline, 47 percent (from 63.96 to 93.70 dollars) for Merck, and 866 percent (from 25.99 to 251.04 dollars) for Sanofi Pasteur over that obtained via current pricing mechanisms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Routine administration of pediatric vaccines is one of the most effective means of preventing the spread of infectious diseases. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is the primary federal public health agency responsible for prescribing pediatric immunization policy. The CDC issues guidelines concerning the proper methods and scheduling for vaccinating a child. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practice (ACIP), an advisory body to the CDC, provides specific guidance regarding policies to effectively reduce incidents of vaccine-preventable infectious diseases. Based on the ACIP’s counsel, the CDC publishes the recommended childhood immunization schedule (RCIS), specifying appropriate periodicity and dosages for pediatric vaccines (Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014a). The American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family Physicians, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists provide input into the RCIS approval process as well. Public and private health care providers in the United States purchase and administer vaccines in accordance with the RCIS. This vaccine delivery system ensures proper coverage for a single child and provides public health protection for society at large.The pediatric vaccine purchasing decision faced by health care providers grows increasingly complicated as an increasing number of diseases are added to the RCIS and new vaccines are developed by manufacturers for immunization against those diseases. Indeed, the RCIS has grown increasingly complex in the past 25 years, requiring children to receive numerous vaccine injections over the first two years of life. Meeting the current RCIS (see Fig. 1from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2014a) may require up to 29 separate injections and, during a single clinical visit, a child may be required to receive up to six separate injections (e.g., at the two- or six-month well-child visit). The vaccine industry has responded to this increased complexity by designing and producing combination vaccines. A combination vaccine contains antigens for immunization against more than one infectious disease. The CDC recognizes a number of compelling reasons for using combination vaccines to reduce the number injections required to satisfy the RCIS (Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 1999). The reasons for using combination vaccines include simplifying the administration process, reducing the pain and discomfort experienced by children, and increasing vaccination compliance rates (Kuppermann et al., 2000; LeBaron, Rodewald, & Humiston, 1999; Meyerhoff, Weniger, & Jacobs, 2001; Pellissier, Coplan, Jackson, & May, 2000). The advent of these new vaccines results in a large, combinatorial number of possible vaccine formularies.The pediatric vaccine pricing decision faced by vaccine manufacturers grows increasingly complicated as well, as manufacturers must consider both the combinatorial nature of a health care provider’s purchasing decision and the vaccine prices of the competing manufacturers. A relatively small number of pharmaceutical companies participate in the research, development, manufacture, and distribution of pediatric vaccines in the United States market. Participation in the vaccine industry is a difficult and costly enterprise. Over the past few decades, the manufacture of pediatric vaccines has become less profitable due to rising costs and limited demand, causing many pharmaceutical companies to exit the market (Douglas & Samant, 2012; Offit, 2005; Shrestha, Wallace, & Meltzer, 2010). As of 2014, just five pharmaceutical companies manufacture vaccines for young children (not including influenza virus vaccines), two of which manufacture only one pediatric vaccine (Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014b; Food & Drug Administration, 2014). The contraction of the pediatric vaccine industry negatively impacts the provision of vaccines. A robust vaccine industry ensures that appropriate immunization coverage levels can be maintained and is very important to the nation’s public health and well being. Many public health experts suggest that vaccine manufacturers should earn higher returns on their investments in order to sustain and expand the production of vaccines (Hinman, 2005; Jacobson, 2012; McGuire, 2003; Orenstein, Douglas, Rodewald, & Hinman, 2005; Poland & Marcuse, 2004).Indeed, many public health policy studies examine the issue of pediatric vaccine pricing and purchasing in the United States vaccine market. Zhou et al. (2005) and Zhou et al. (2014) provide excellent context for the discussion by presenting an analysis concerning the economic benefit of vaccines to society. McGuire (2003) suggests an economic model to determine vaccine prices, arguing that, while vaccines have considerable value to society, vaccine manufacturers do not receive appropriate financial incentives for market participation. Hinman (2005) suggests pricing a vaccine in advance of its development based on its estimated value to society. Freed, Cowan, and Clark (2008) and Clark, Cowan, and Freed (2011) study generalities concerning private sector vaccine purchase costs using cross-sectional surveys. Adida, Dey, and Mamani (2013) investigate incentive mechanisms for both consumers and vaccine manufacturers to coordinate a vaccine market. Glazner, Beaty, Pearson, and Berman (2004) and Glazner, Beaty, and Berman (2009) conduct empirical analyses of actual variable costs of vaccine administration among private pediatric practices. The results obtained by Glazner et al. (2009) provide excellent information concerning the cost incurred by a health care provider to administer a single injection; we utilize their results in our numerical example, presented in a subsequent section of the paper.Operations research efforts in the area of vaccine economics study the purchase of an optimal set of vaccines from a purchaser’s (i.e., a health care provider’s) perspective as well as the determination of optimal vaccine prices from a manufacturer’s perspective. Weniger et al. (1998) and Jacobson, Sewell, Deuson, and Weniger (1999) introduce an integer program model to aid health care policy makers in determining a vaccine formulary (i.e., a set of vaccines) that minimizes the cost to fully immunize a child according to a given RCIS; such a set of vaccines is labeled a minimum cost formulary. Hall, Jacobson, and Sewell (2008) introduce the general vaccine formulary selection problem, providing fundamental insights into the structure of problems concerning minimum cost satisfaction of a RCIS. Sewell, Jacobson, and Weniger (2001) and Sewell and Jacobson (2003) adopt a reverse engineering scheme, using a bisection algorithm to compute a vaccine’s maximum inclusion price; a maximum inclusion price is the maximum price at which a vaccine is selected by a customer to be part of the minimum cost formulary. Jacobson and Sewell (2003) and Jacobson, Sewell, and Karnani (2005) conduct similar studies. Robbins, Jacobson, and Sewell (2010) present a method to optimally price a single pediatric vaccine so as to maximize a vaccine manufacturer’s expected revenue given an uncertain cost of injection parameter. Robbins and Jacobson (2011) formulate a mixed integer nonlinear program to examine the problem of setting vaccine prices to meet a minimum vaccine industry reservation profit level. Behzad, Jacobson, and Sewell (2012) discuss vaccine formularies with lowest overall cost across three years (2009–2012) for three cost of injection values. Robbins, Jacobson, Shanbhag, and Behzad (2014) and Behzad, Jacobson, and Robbins (2015) analyze vaccine pricing strategies in the pediatric vaccine market using game theory. See Robbins and Jacobson (2015) for further information concerning the application of operations research to the analysis of vaccine economics.The research presented in this paper examines how a single pediatric vaccine manufacturer should set prices in order to maximize profit earned per RCIS. We examine the pricing problem for a pediatric vaccine manufacturer producing more than one pediatric vaccine and consider the pricing of all of its vaccines simultaneously. The vaccine manufacturing firm competes in an oligopolistic market with at least one other competitor. The pediatric vaccine pricing problem is formulated as a discrete bilevel mathematical program wherein the upper-level problem models a firm seeking to set profit-maximizing vaccine prices and the lower-level problem models a rational, representative purchaser (e.g., large private practice or private healthcare network) seeking to select a minimum cost vaccine formulary that satisfies a given RCIS. Complicating features of the bilevel program include the bilinear nature of the upper-level objective function and the binary nature of the lower-level decision variables. The lower-level optimization problem is an adaption of the vaccine formulary selection problem introduced in Hall et al. (2008).Bilevel programming examines problems for which the outcomes are hierarchical in nature. The upper level models the leader’s decision problem, wherein the leader is assumed to have complete knowledge of the follower’s decision problem, as modeled by the lower level. When optimizing its own objective function, the leader must consider the follower’s response. The follower optimizes its objective function given the decision stipulated by the leader. Due to the possibility of the follower having multiple optimal solutions for a set of parameter values stipulated by the leader, a bilevel optimization problem must define a tie-breaking rule as well. If the follower has more than one optimal solution for the same set of parameter values, it is assumed that the follower always selects an optimal solution which is the most advantageous for the leader; this is the optimistic case. If the follower’s optimal solution is not unique for some parameter values, it is assumed that the follower always selects an optimal solution that is the least advantageous for the leader; this is the pessimistic case. In this paper, we assume the optimistic case.Dempe (2002) and Colson, Marcotte, and Savard (2007) discuss modeling and solution techniques used in bilevel programming; they also review various classes and applications of bilevel programs. It is interesting to note that very few problems appear in the literature in which the decision variables of the follower are discrete while those of the leader are continuous. See Gümüş and Floudas (2005), Fanghänel and Dempe (2009), Vicente, Savard, and Judice (1996), and Köppe, Queyranne, and Ryan (2010) for theoretical results and solution methodologies for these types of bilevel programs.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the pediatric vaccine pricing problem (PVPP) as a discrete bilevel mathematical program wherein the upper-level problem models a firm seeking to set profit-maximizing vaccine prices and the lower-level problem models a rational, representative purchaser seeking to select a minimum cost vaccine formulary to satisfy a given RCIS. Section 3 presents three heuristics to solve PVPP: a Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) of the feasible region for vaccine prices; an LHS complemented with an implementation of the Nelder–Meade Algorithm from each sample point; and an LHS complemented with an implementation of the Cyclic Coordinate Method from each sample point, using discrete-step searches of increasing granularity. Section 4 reports the computational results of applying the PVPP to the analysis of firms competing in the 2014 United States pediatric vaccine market. Section 5 provides concluding comments and directions for future research.This section presents the bilevel model formulation for PVPP. Several sets and parameter definitions are required to precisely describe the pediatric vaccine market. LetT={1,2,…,τ}: set of time periods for a given childhood immunization schedule.D={1,2,…,δ}: set of diseases requiring immunization.V={1,2,…,υ}: set of vaccines produced by the decision-making manufacturer and available to immunize against the diseases in D.V¯={1,2,…,υ¯}: set of vaccines produced by other manufacturers and available to immunize against the diseases in D.nd∈Z+: number of vaccine doses that must be administered for immunization against disease d ∈ D in a single schedule.Cv∈ℜ+: cost incurred by vaccine manufacturer to produce vaccine v ∈ V.K∈ℜ+: cost incurred by health care provider to administer an injection (i.e., cost of injection).Fv∈ℜ+: vaccine-specific cost incurred by health care provider to administer vaccine v ∈ V; used as a mechanism to differentiate vaccines (e.g., nurse preparation costs differ due to vaccine packaging).F¯v∈ℜ+: vaccine-specific cost incurred by health care provider to administer vaccinev∈V¯(i.e., differentiated administration costs of vaccines not sold by the decision-making manufacturer).P¯v∈ℜ+: price of vaccinev∈V¯(i.e., prices of vaccines not sold by the decision-making manufacturer).Ivd= 1 if vaccine v ∈ V immunizes against disease d ∈ D, 0 otherwise (i.e., a set of binary parameters that indicate which vaccines immunize against which diseases).I¯vd= 1 if vaccinev∈V¯immunizes against disease d ∈ D, 0 otherwise (i.e., a set of binary parameters that indicate which vaccines immunize against which diseases).Jtv= 1 if vaccine v ∈ V can be administered during time period t ∈ T, 0 otherwise.J¯tv= 1 if vaccinev∈V¯can be administered during time period t ∈ T, 0 otherwise.Sdjt= 1 if in time period t ∈ T, a vaccine may be administered to satisfy the jth dose requirement for disease d ∈ D,j=1,2,…,nd,0 otherwise (i.e., a set of binary parameters that indicate the set of time periods during which a particular vaccine dose could be administered to immunize against a disease).Qtv= 1 if a purchaser must pay for vaccine v ∈ V to be administered in time period t ∈ T, 0 otherwise (i.e., representing a free administration of the vaccine). Although typicallyQtv=1,we utilize this parameter to accurately address in our model a special type of side constraint specific to immunization, wherein different vaccines may require a different number of doses. For example, vaccination against Hib requires four doses for most vaccines (i.e.,nd=4) but only three for the Merck-manufactured PedvaxHib. More specifically, if a patient receives their first two vaccinations during time periodst=2andt=3against Hib using PedvaxHib, then a third vaccination duringt=4is not required (Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014a). To account for this Merck Effect, we may setQ4v=0for the v-index corresponding to PedvaxHib to indicate that it is notional (i.e., ‘free’ to the customer) but impose side constraints that collectively constrain its value based on whether a consumer received the PedvaxHib vaccine during the previous two time periods.Q¯tv= 1 if a purchaser must pay for vaccinev∈V¯to be administered in time period t ∈ T, 0 otherwise. Similar to the Qtv-parameters, we utilize this parameter to address side constraints for the competitors’ vaccines.These sets and parameters provide a robust framework for describing an arbitrary pediatric vaccine market. The PVPP notation is adapted in part from the analysis of pediatric vaccine formulary selection problems given by Hall et al. (2008); their extensive analysis of childhood immunization schedules applies to the lower-level problem of the PVPP due to the assumption that health care providers attempt to fully immunize children according to the current recommended childhood immunization schedule (RCIS) at an overall minimum cost. Using their terminology, satisfaction of the 2014 RCIS can be labeled as a GVFSP-MED problem instance, in which every disease has mutually exclusive doses with respect to periodicity.The following decision variables capture the pricing and purchasing policy decisions in PVPP. LetPv∈ℜ+: price of vaccine v ∈ V, (an upper-level, manufacturer decision variable).Xtv= 1 if vaccine v ∈ V is administered in time period t ∈ T, 0 otherwise, (a lower-level, customer decision variable).Ytv= 1 if vaccinev∈V¯is administered in time period t ∈ T, 0 otherwise, (a lower-level, customer decision variable).Based upon the above notation, we formulate PVPP as a bilevel program with an upper-level bilinear objective function, linear constraints, and lower-level binary decision variables. Accordingly, the bilevel mathematical programming model formulation for PVPP is(1)PP:aPVPP:maxP,X,Y∑t∈T∑v∈V(Pv−Cv)QtvXtv(2)subjectto:minX,Y∑t∈T(∑v∈V(Pv+Fv+K)QtvXtv+∑v∈V¯(P¯v+F¯v+K)Q¯tvYtv),(3)subjectto:1−∑t∈TSdjt(∑v∈VIvdJtvXtv+∑v∈V¯I¯vdJ¯tvYtv)≤0,∀d∈D,j=1,…,nd,(4)gi(X,Y)≤0,∀i∈N,(5)Xtv∈{0,1},∀t∈T,v∈V,(6)Ytv∈{0,1},∀t∈T,v∈V¯.The vaccine manufacturer’s objective (1) is to select vaccine prices Pvso as to maximize its total profit per child completing the RCIS, which is the sum of the marginal profits,Pv−Cv,obtained from the inclusion of vaccine v ∈ V (for time period t ∈ T) in the purchaser’s minimum cost formulary, as indicated by Xtv. The purchaser’s objective (2) is to select a vaccine formulary (as indicated by Xtvand Ytv) so as to minimize its total cost per RCIS, which is the sum of the vaccine purchase costs, PvandP¯v; packaging costs, FvandF¯v; and cost of injection, K, necessary to satisfy the RCIS. This decision includes the possible purchase of vaccines sold by the manufacturer’s competitors, as indicated by Ytv. Within the scope of the instances we examine, it is assumed that there exists as least one vaccine formulary consisting entirely of competing manufacturers’ vaccines. This assumption also prevents the upper-level manufacturer’s optimal profit from growing unbounded in the price of a vaccine. Constraint (3) ensures that at least one vaccine that immunizes against disease d ∈ D is administered in some time period when each dosej=1,2,…,ndmay be administered. Constraint (4) represents the set of possible side constraints specific to vaccine formulary combinations. As discussed in the definition of the Qtv-parameters, our specific use for this constraint is to restrict the purchaser from utilizing a notional, free vaccination to satisfy a dosage requirement for a disease unless both of a preceding sequence of two doses are administered using a given vaccine. For example, to account for the Merck Effect in our testing when Merck is the upper-level decision maker and PedvaxHiB corresponds tov=1,Constraint (4) is expressed simply as:(7)X41≤X31,(8)X41≤X21.Of course, if the upper-level decision maker is a different company and Merck is a fixed competitor, then (7)–(8) is suitably expressed in terms of the Y-variables with the appropriatev¯index. In addition to addressing the Merck Effect, Constraint (4) may alternatively be utilized with different specific functional forms to prevent the administration of contraindicated vaccine combinations during the same time period. Finally, constraints (5) and (6) are the binary restrictions on the selection of the manufacturer’s vaccines and the competing manufacturer’s vaccines, respectively.The computational complexity of PVPP suggests that the development of heuristics to obtain quality solutions using a reasonable amount of computational effort is warranted. Indeed, for a fixed set of prices stipulated by the upper-level decision maker, the lower-level decision maker faces an NP-hard purchasing problem. The following theorem indicates the computational complexity of PVPP-L, the lower-level decision maker’s purchasing problem. The proof uses a polynomial time Turing reduction from the weighted set covering problem to PVPP-L.Theorem 1PVPP-L is NP-hard.Let U,B={B1,B2,…,Bn},and (wj)j∈Bdenote an arbitrary instance of the weighted set covering optimization problem (WSC): Given U, a set of elements, and B, a set of weighted subsets of U, find a collection Z of subsets from B such that Z covers all elements in U at an overall minimum cost. Define the corresponding particular instance of PVPP-L as follows: LetT={1},D=U,V∪V¯=B; choose (Pv)v∈Vand(P¯v)v∈V¯so that(Pv)v∈V∪(P¯v)v∈V¯=(wj)j∈B; letnd=1for all d ∈ D,Cv=0andFv=0for all v ∈ V,F¯v=0for allv∈V¯,K=0,Ivd=1for all v ∈ V, d ∈ D,I¯vd=1for allv∈V¯,d ∈ D,Jtv=1for all t ∈ T, v ∈ V,J¯tv=1for all t ∈ T,v∈V¯,Sdjt=1,for all d ∈ D, wherej=1andt=1,Qtv=1for all t ∈ T, v ∈ V, andQ¯tv=1for all t ∈ T,v∈V¯. Furthermore, let constraint (4) be redundant to constraints (3), (5), and (6). Suppose that there exists a polynomial time algorithm to determine Xtvand Ytvfor PVPP-L for a fixed price point Pv. Then, by design, the arbitrary instance of WSC can be solved in polynomial time. In particular, given the polynomial time Turing reduction from WSC to PVPP-L,(Zj)j∈B=(Xtv)v∈V∪(Ytv)v∈V¯solves the arbitrary instance of WSC defined by U, B, and (wj)j∈B. Therefore, since WSC is NP-hard (see Garey & Johnson, 1979), then PVPP-L is NP-hard.□In this section, we set forth three heuristics to solve PVPP. For a bilevel programming problem (BPP) wherein the upper-level decision variables are restricted to a discrete domain, it is possible albeit computationally burdensome – if not practically intractable – to enumerate all upper-level feasible solutions and, for each one, to solve the corresponding lower-level optimization problem. The optimal solution to such a BPP is recoverable via backwards induction. Alternatively, for a BPP in which the lower-level decision variables are continuous and certain conditions are satisfied (i.e., convexity and constraint qualifications), one may either replace the lower-level optimization problem with its necessary and sufficient Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) optimality conditions (e.g., see Colson et al., 2007; Dempe, 2002; 2003) or, depending on the composition of the upper-level objective function, take the dual of the lower-level optimization problem, after which the resulting single-stage optimization problem may be solved directly. Also for bilevel problems for which the lower-level decision variables are continuous, recent works iteratively utilize, for a given upper-level feasible solution, the dual variables corresponding to the optimal solution to the lower level problem to further constrain the upper-level feasible region (e.g., see Zeng and Zhao, 2013 and Zhao and Zeng, 2012, the latter of which identifies certain conditions – that elude our formulation – for which constraint generation can be applied to address BPPs with mixed-integer programs as lower-level problems). In contrast, general solution methods are fewer and more specialized for problem structure when solving BPPs wherein the upper-level decision variables are defined over a continuous domain and the lower-level decision variables are restricted to a discrete domain. Categorical exceptions to this statement do exist, as in the case when all functions are linear (e.g., see Köppe et al., 2010; Vicente et al., 1996). Additionally, if an integer-optimal solution exists for the integer-relaxed lower-level problem (e.g., if the lower-level problem exhibits total unimodularity), one can relax the integrality constraints and apply one of the aforementioned procedures. Such is the case for problems in which the lower-level problem is equivalent to a network flow problem (e.g., see Brotcorne, Cirinei, Marcotte, & Savard, 2011; Brotcorne, Labbé, Marcotte, & Savard, 2000; 2001; Wood, 1993).However, in the case of the PVPP formulation wherein the objective functions are nonlinear, general solution methods remain elusive. For a given set of manufacturers’ prices, PvandP¯v,the lower-level problem within PVPP in the absence of constraint (4) is equivalent to a weighted set covering problem. As such, an integral-solution is not assured when the binary integer restrictions are relaxed, and a KKT-based procedure is not appropriate. (For each instance examined herein, we tested the lower-level constraint matrix for total unimodularity; each instance failed such a test, rendering a KKT-based approach moot.) Moreover, because the upper-level decision-maker’s objective function contains both lower-level decision variables, replacing the lower-level optimization problem with its dual is also not suitable. Given the nonconvexity of PVPP wherein we seek to maximize a (nonconcave) bilinear objective function, we instead propose three heuristic solution methods, and we test and compare them in the following section.In the absence of an exact algorithm, we apply and compare three heuristics to solve PVPP. The motivation for these approaches is game theoretic. Consider PVPP as a two-player, two-stage strategic form game with perfect information. A manufacturer sets vaccine prices, after which a purchaser selects the least-cost formulary. The first-stage decision space is continuous, i.e., the domain for Pv-variables is defined over a continuous domain, whereas the second-stage decision space is discrete. The optimal solution to PVPP is the subperfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE), the set of respective strategies (i.e., decision variable values) from which neither player’s utility (i.e., objective function value) will improve via a unilateral change in strategy. Were both decision spaces discrete, the combination of all strategies could be represented as a game tree and either be considered in their entirety or implicitly enumerated. Although they are not, we can determine the best response for the second-player for any given first player strategy, i.e., we can solve the lower-level optimization problem for any fixed set of upper-level Pv-values. As such, we resort to a robust sampling strategy for the first-player’s strategy, complemented for two of our heuristics with a search strategy to improve the first-player’s solution corresponding to a given second-player’s response. That is, given an initial feasible solution for Pv-variables and a corresponding best response in the Xtv- and Ytv-variables, we execute a local search to identify the Pv-variable values that maximize the upper-level objective function for that best response.Heuristic H1–Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS). The Latin hypercube design is a type of space-filling experimental design often used in computer experiments (Fang, Li, & Sudjianto, 2006). LHS distributes the design points (i.e., price points) nearly uniformly throughout the region of experimentation. This design characteristic is desirable since we are interested in efficiently examining many different regions of the experimental space. We define a hyperrectangle (Ω) to bound the sampling region for Pv-variables as follows:(9)Ω={Cv≤Pv≤2P˜v,∀v∈V},whereP˜vis the current market price of vaccine v ∈ V. Alternative sampling regions may be considered; herein, we restricted Ω to bound the Pv-variables below by their manufacturing cost and above by twice their current market price, with the latter bound informed by the assumption that current market prices are not far from optimal. (Although we found this assumption to hold during testing in Section 4, this is a potential shortcoming to Heuristic H1, and both Heuristics H2 and H3 seek to address it.) We select ψ points for the Pv-variables within Ω via an LHS design. In our testing in Section 4, we considerψ={10,100,1000}. The heuristic terminates by prescribing the best solution attained for implementation.Heuristic H2–LHS with local Nelder–Mead search. We conduct an LHS to identify ψ points, as in Heuristic H1. From each sampled point, we implement the Nelder–Mead Search Method (e.g., see Lagarias, Reeds, Wright, & Wright, 1998) as follows. We generate a simplex in |V| dimensions using the following|V|+1points: the sampled point and each of |V| additional points generated by lexicographically augmenting a single Pv-variable value from the sample point by a value of 1. For each of the resulting ψ simplexes, we apply the Nelder–Mead Search Method to iteratively replace the worst point in the simplex with a new point, terminating the search when there is no change in the objective function value for both the best- and worst-ranked points between successive iterations. Unlike Heuristic H1, this method allows the upper-level decision maker to consider Pv-values that lie outside of Ω. As with H1, this heuristic terminates by prescribing the best solution attained for implementation.Heuristic H3–LHS with local cyclic coordinate search. We conduct an LHS to identify ψ points, as in Heuristic H1. From each point, we implement the Cyclic Coordinate Method (e.g., see Bazaraa, Sherali, & Shetty, 2006) using discrete steps. We conduct a search along each Pv-variable axis in lexicographic order and, for each axial search within an iteration, we sequentially consider searches using discrete steps of 1, 0.10, and 0.01 dollar increments, respectively. The Cyclic Coordinate Method terminates for a search when no improvement is identified between iterations. Similar to Heuristic H2, this method allows for Pv-values outside of Ω, and it also terminates by prescribing the best solution attained for implementation.We note that, were PVPP a convex (or even quasiconvex) programming problem, a procedure such as a Nelder–Mead Search or a Cyclic Coordinate Search would be guaranteed to find a global optimal solution for any instance. Because PVPP is not convex, such procedures are relegated to serving as a heuristics when implemented for a given initial feasible solution. Enhanced by the LHS sampling strategy described in Heuristic H1 to improve the likelihood of finding the optimal solution to PVPP, both H2 and H3 are technically metaheuristics, but we retain the term ‘heuristic’ to describe each of our solution methods for the sake of readability and notational simplicity.This section reports computational results for executing the solution methods presented in the previous section by applying them to the 2014 United States private sector pediatric vaccine market. We provide results in which each of the three major pediatric vaccine manufacturers in the United States market, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, and Sanofi Pasteur, act as the upper-level decision maker. Computational results are reported using the 2014 Recommended Childhood Immunization Schedule (RCIS) (Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014a), 2014 private sector market prices (Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014b), and pediatric vaccines licensed for use in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration (Food & Drug Administration, 2014). The six time periods of interest in this study are: (1) birth, (2) 2-month, (3) 4-month, (4) 6-month, (5) 12–18 months, and (6) 4–6 years.The development and manufacture of pediatric vaccines by pharmaceutical firms is an expensive and time consuming enterprise, requiring proficient management of a number of different enduring processes, many of which require highly skilled scientists and engineers in order to successfully produce the products (Douglas & Samant, 2012). The estimated total unit production cost of a fully burdened liquid product vaccine (including the costs of filling, vialing, and packaging) is between 0.70 and 1.30 dollars (Douglas & Samant, 2012), with combination vaccines being more expensive to manufacture. In addition to production costs, a federal excise tax is associated with each vaccine dose sold and must be paid by the vaccine manufacturer. A tax of 0.75 dollar is charged for each antigen the vaccine contains (Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014a); combination vaccines contain more than one antigen per dose. Vaccines are slightly differentiated in that they may be packaged in either vials or syringes. This difference in packaging affects cost with respect to preparation time. Vaccine preparation costs for vials and syringes are assumed to be 0.75 and 0.25 dollar per dose, respectively. See Jacobson et al. (1999) or Weniger et al. (1998) for detailed descriptions. The vaccines of interest in this scenario are those that are licensed in the United States and available for purchase by private-sector immunization entities (Food & Drug Administration, 2014). Note that monopoly vaccine manufacturers and their products are not included in the analysis. Moreover, diseases for which no combination vaccines exist are not considered.Table 1 provides a summary of the information describing the private sector of the United States pediatric vaccine market. This information is used to construct the PVPP instances of interest. Column 1 indicates the set of pharmaceutical firms (from Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014a; Food & Drug Administration, 2014), column 2 indicates the set of pediatric vaccines sold by the firms (from Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014a; Food & Drug Administration, 2014), column 3 indicates the time periods in the RCIS for which the vaccines are licensed to immunize children (from Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014a; Food & Drug Administration, 2014), and columns 4–8 indicate unit costs per dose. Column 4 indicates the base unit production cost (from Douglas & Samant, 2012), column 5 indicates the federal excise tax associated with each vaccine (from Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014a), column 6 indicates the total unit cost for manufacturing the vaccine (i.e., Cv), which is the sum of columns 4 and 5. Column 7 indicates the product differentiation cost vector (i.e., FvorF¯v,as appropriate), which is the preparation cost of each vaccine based on its packaging. Column 8 indicates the current price of a vaccine (i.e.,P˜v), (from Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014b).Glazner et al. (2009) provide a detailed discussion regarding the costs to health care providers for delivering childhood vaccinations. They conduct an empirical analysis of actual variable costs of vaccine administration among private pediatric practices in the Denver metropolitan area using a microcosting approach, reporting an average cost of injection of 11.83 dollars with a standard deviation of 2.52 dollars. The cost of injection parameter in our model captures direct and indirect costs associated with delivering a single immunization injection. Immunization related activities include routine nursing activities that occur each time an injection is given, nonroutine activities that occur at times other than when an injection is given, billing activities, immunization registry activities, physician time, supplies, and medical waste disposal (Glazner et al., 2009; 2004). We apply the results from Glazner et al. (2009) to select a set of cost of injection values for investigation; the individual parameter values are meant to reflect different representative purchasers, each with different associated variable immunization costs. For our testing, we consider the discrete values ofK={6.79,9.31,11.83,14.35,16.87}.We coded heuristics H1, H2, and H3 in C++ and invoked the commercial solver CPLEX (Version 12.5) to solve the lower-level optimization problem for any set of Pv-variables, and we consideredψ={10,100,1000}for each heuristic. All runs were implemented on a computer having an AMD Athlon II X2 215 Processor (with a 2.70 gigahertz speed) and 4.00 gigabytes of RAM. Reported in Tables 2, 5, and 8 are the test results for GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, and Sanofi Pasteur, respectively. Each of Tables 2, 5, and 8 consists of five blocks of data, with one block corresponding to each of the cost of injection K-values considered. Within each block, the first column reports the per child profit for the manufacturer using the vaccine prices derived from Table 1, as well as the cost of the least cost formulary (LCF) for a purchaser. Subsequent columns report the best profit attained by Heuristics H1, H2, and H3 forψ={10,100,1000}in the first row within a block, as indicated. In subsequent rows for each heuristic within a block, the tables present the relative (percent) gap between the profit attained via a heuristic and the best profit (dollar) attained among the applied heuristics, the corresponding price (dollar) of the LCF, the number of lower-level integer programming optimization problems solved during the implementation of the heuristic, and the seconds of CPU time required for implementation.For the instances of PVPP with GlaxoSmithKline as the upper-level decision maker, the results in Table 2 indicate Heuristic H3 with eitherψ=100orψ=1000to be the superlative solution method examined with regard to solution quality; both such variants of H3 reported the same best solutions among the different solutionmethodologies. In contrast, for increasing values of ψ, Heuristic H1 respectively reported solutions that were, on average, only within 29.4, 25.4, and 12.8 percent of the best attained. The addition of the Nelder–Meade local search strategy from each sampled point via Heuristic H2 improved the results for the same ψ-values to, on average, within 28.6, 24.6, and 11.9 percent of the best reported. Meanwhile, Heuristic H3 withψ=10reported solutions within 3.5 percent of the best attained, on average, although its reported solution upon termination was 11.4 percent worse than the best reported forK=6.79. Regarding the nonconvexity of PVPP, Heuristic H3 withψ=1000identified a total of only 3, 0, 1, 4, and 3 alternative best solutions for each of the increasing values of K after applying the local search heuristic, validating the need to complement an effective search method with a robust sampling procedure to attain good solutions.Table 3 indicates the vaccine prices associated with the best reported profit per child for GlaxoSmithKline, and Table 4reports the corresponding optimal vaccine formularies and their cost. For each of the five K-values considered, GlaxoSmithKline should charge 26.48 dollars for Infarix and 23.70 dollars for Engerix B; and it should charge 61.45, 63.97, 66.49, 69.01, and 71.53 dollars for Kinrix and 91.09, 89.83, 88.57, 69.01, and 71.53 dollars for Pediarix as the K-values increase. Compared to the current pricing of Infanrix, Engerix B, Kinrix, and Pediarix at 21.44, 21.37, 48, and 70.72 dollars, the results also indicate that GlaxoSmithKline is underpricing each of these vaccines, given their competitors’ vaccine prices. Observable in the last column of Table 2, this yields in a profit per customer for GlaxoSmithKline that is initially constant as K increases and then improves for successively higher values of K. Moreover, as reported in Table 4 as K increases, the price of the least cost formulary initially increases for a given formulary, decreases forK=14.35when a consumer replaces Infarix and IPOL with Pediarix in Period 3, and then increases again asK=16.87. Considering the range of K-values examined, adopting these vaccine prices would yield for GlaxoSmithKline a minimum, average, and maximum relative increase in profit per child of 28.7, 30.3, and 34.8 percent over the range of K-values considered compared to the profits attained under current price mechanisms.We observe an intuitive general trend concerning cost of injection and the price for Kinrix; increasing the cost of injection results in higher prices for Kinrix, a combination vaccine that is already under-priced relative to its competitor vaccines, Daptacel and IPOL. Such a trend is intuitive because a purchaser with a high cost of injection places a premium on combination vaccines that enable delivery of more than one antigen in a single injection, representing cost avoidance for the purchaser. A manufacturer seeks to exploit this premium with higher prices. The trend on the price for the combination vaccine Pediarix is more nuanced. Its price decreases betweenK=6.79andK=11.83correspond to changes in the cost of the (same) least cost formulary and yields the same profit for the manufacturer. However, as we increase K to 14.35, the prescribed price for Pediarix drops significantly to a value of 69.01 dollars, which allows it to replace both Infarix and IPOL during Period 3 in the least cost formulary, as shown in Table 4. As K increases further to 16.87, the price of Pediarix rises because, as a combination vaccine (like Kinrix), it becomes more attractive to a purchaser as vaccination administration costs increase.For the instances of PVPP with Merck as the upper-level decision maker, the results in Table 5 indicate Heuristic H3 with eitherψ=100orψ=1000to be the best solution method, reporting identical best solutions for each instance. Heuristic H2 withψ=1000and Heuristic H3 withψ=10turned out the next best performances; H2 withψ=1000reported solutions that were within 1.5 percent of the best reported solution for each K-value, whereas H3 withψ=10reported solutions that were within 2.1 percent of the best reported, on average, with a worst-case solution being only within 10.7 percent of the best reported forK=14.35. For increasing values of ψ, Heuristic H1 respectively reported solutions that were, on average, within 19.8, 8.4, and 2.0 percent of the best attained, and the enhancement of it via Heuristic H2 using the Nelder–Mead search strategy improved the same results to, on average, within 16.6, 7.2, and 1.5 percent of the best reported. Of note, Heuristic H3 withψ=1000identified a total of only 3, 3, 3, 2, and 2 alternative best solutions for each of the increasing values of K after applying the local search heuristic, reinforcing the need for a robust sampling procedure.Table 6indicates the vaccine prices associated with the best reported profit per child for Merck, and Table 7reports the corresponding optimal vaccine formularies and their cost. H3 withψ=1000prescribed prices of 26.21 dollars for PedvaxHib and 20.87 dollars for Recombivax HB for all K-values considered. Herein, both the vaccine prices and the profit per customer are invariant over the K-values considered, whereas the price of the least cost formulary strictly increases with K. Of interest, these prices reflect a respective increase and decrease over the current respective prices of 22.769 and 23.204 dollars, resulting in a 46.5 percent increase in profit per child over current pricing over the range of K-values examined. The PedvaxHib price difference is attributed to the competitors’ current vaccine prices, notably the low pricing of GlaxoSmithKline’s Pediarix (a complementary combination vaccine in the 2-, 4-, and 6-month primary series) relative to Pentacel, the structure of the schedule, and the special status of Merck’s Hib vaccine that allows a child to be considered fully immunized for the primary Hib series using only two doses instead of the full three doses required when using other manufacturers’ Hib antigens. The Recombivax HB price difference is attributed to direct competition with GlaxoSmithKline’s Engerix B.For instances of PVPP with Sanofi Pasteur as the decision-making manufacturer, the results in Table 8 indicate Heuristic H3 withψ=1000to be superlative, reporting the best solution for every instance. As with the GlaxoSmithKline and Merck, Heuristic H1 exhibited the poorest performance, identifying solutions that were, on average, within 27.3, 19.9, and 17.8 percent of the best reported for increasing ψ-values, and Heuristic H2 improved upon these results with respective average gaps of 26.3, 18.7, and 16.6 percent. Of note, for the Sanofi Pasteur instances, Heuristic H3 forψ=10andψ=100reported average gaps of 10.3 and 2.5 percent of the profits identify by Heuristic H3 withψ=1000. Although the increase in ψ from 100 to 1000 for H3 required a ten-fold increase in the computational effort, it was necessary to attain higher quality solutions.Tables 9and 10respectively report the vaccine prices associated with the best reported profit per child for Sanofi Pasteur, and the corresponding optimal vaccine formularies and their cost. Prescribed prices are 20.94, 22.76, and 63.91 dollars for Daptacel, ActHiB, and Pentacel for any K-value, and 19.02, 16.50, 13.98, 11.46, and 8.94 dollars for IPOL as the K-values increase. Each of these prices is lower than the current market prices of 25.98, 26.21, 27.44, and 80.43 dollars, and reducing them as prescribed would yield a minimum, average, and maximum relative increase in profit per child of 827, 847, and 866 percent over the current profit per child attained with a fully-informed, rational purchaser. This can best be explained from the viewpoint of a fully informed purchaser. Consider that Sanofi Pasteur must decrease its vaccine prices to increase profit. At current prices, Sanofi Pasteur’s vaccines are not selected by the representative purchaser; the purchaser instead selects the competitors’ vaccines. After decreasing the prices of its vaccines to the levels indicated in Table 9, Sanofi Pasteur’s products are selected by the representative purchaser and an increased profit per child is attained. Of note, we observe a trend that increasing cost of injection values results in lower prices for IPOL, a monovalent vaccine manufactured by Sanofi Pasteur. This trend is intuitive because a purchaser with a high cost of injection values avoiding injections and only purchases monovalent vaccines at low prices. In fact, as the cost of injection increases, the profit per child for Sanofi Pasteur actually decreases, despite increases in the price of the (same) least cost formulary.The results indicate that Sanofi Pasteur’s suite of vaccines is currently overpriced relative to its competitors and that a rational, representative purchaser would construct a vaccine formulary from vaccines offered by its competitors. Such a purchaser could fully immunize more children according to the CDC’s published RCIS at the same total cost, thereby realizing higher profits. If Sanofi Pasteur were to use the PVPP bilevel model to inform its decisions regarding vaccine prices it would want to set the competitors’ vaccine prices at prices it believes would be observed. In the decision context modeled by the PVPP, the decision-making manufacturer seeks to slightly undercut its competitors with respect to vaccine prices so that its products are selected by the purchaser. Since Sanofi Pasteur’s vaccine prices are currently high relative to its competitors’ prices, it is placed in the position of having to lower its prices to be competitive. It is not unheard of to observe a price reduction for pediatric vaccines. The 2011 public sector price of Pentacel was actually lower than its 2010 public sector price due in part to analyzes suggesting Pentacel was overpriced relative to Pediarix (Behzad et al., 2012; Robbins et al., 2010; Robbins et al., 2014).Reported in Table 11 for each heuristic and ψ-value combination are the average and maximum relative (percent) gaps from the best profit attained among all heuristics considered, over all 15 instances examined with varying manufacturers and K-values. Results were strictly improving for increases in ψ. Moreover, for a given ψ-value, the results reported by Heuristic H2 represented an improvement over H1, and Heuristic H3 similarly improved upon the solutions attained by H2. Thus, a robust sampling of the feasible region is warranted to increase the likelihood of attaining the best solution via the best performing heuristic, a cyclic coordinate search. As such, we recommend Heuristic H3 withψ=1000for use, in general, to solve PVPP.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
