@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Developing compact course timetables with optimized student flows

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A course timetable has an impact on the student flows between consecutive lectures.Large flows lead to congestion and large travel times between lectures.Therefore, we look at minimizing the travel time between consecutive lectures.Flows are modeled in a detailed way, using insights from pedestrian traffic models.Using a decomposition approach, our model can be solved with a standard IP solver.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scheduling,Timetabling,University course timetabling problem,Student flow,Integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In university buildings with many rooms spread over different floors, large student flows between two consecutive lectures might cause congestion problems. These congestions result in long queues at elevators or at stairwells, which might lead to delays in lecture starts. The course timetable clearly has an important impact on these congestions. This paper presents a two-stage integer programming approach for building a university course timetable that aims at minimizing the resulting student flows. The first stage minimizes the violation of the teacher and educational preferences by assigning lectures to timeslots and rooms. The second stage reassigns classrooms to lectures of the timetable of the first stage and minimizes the student flow. The conceptual model is applied to the dataset of the Faculty of Economics and Business of the KU Leuven Campus Brussels and is tested and validated with 21 adapted instances from the literature. In contrast to a monolithic model, the two-stage model consistently succeeds in finding good quality feasible solutions. Moreover, the generated timetables entail significantly reduced student flows compared to the flows of the manually developed course timetable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The growing student numbers at colleges and universities have resulted in an enlarged complexity in terms of planning and organization. One of the tasks that becomes increasingly complex is the development of course timetables. Daskalaki, Birbas, and Housos (2004) define the University Course Timetabling Problems (UCTP) as the construction of a weekly timetable in which all operational rules and requirements of the academic institution are met and as many wishes as possible of the staff and students are satisfied. According to Carter and Laporte (1998) the UCTP can be formulated as a multi-dimensional assignment problem. Students and lecturers need to be assigned to lectures which are in turn assigned to rooms and timeslots such that no overlap occurs. Course timetables have to satisfy various requirements of different stakeholders including non-overlap of courses, free hours, lecturers’ preferences, student preferences, etc. Furthermore, the course timetable can have a huge impact on queues in stair halls and elevators, particularly for universities or colleges with many students that follow courses in a single building. The congestion problems in stair halls and elevators are caused by traveling students that all have to switch rooms at the same time between two consecutive lectures. Clearly, student flows can be controlled and monitored via the course timetables. For example, if the schedules are arranged so that consecutive lessons take place in rooms situated on the same floor (or on a floor as close as possible), there will be far fewer queues at the elevators and in the stairwells. Thus, next to the various constraints and preferences of different stakeholders, the resulting student flows should also be taken into account when building the course timetable.This research was motivated by the UCTP at the KU Leuven Faculty of Economics and Business (FEB) campus Brussels. As described in Mercy (2012) the FEB campus Brussels has gone through a process of campus consolidation in which several buildings at different locations in Brussels have been sold and the lectures of all economic programs have been concentrated at a single location in the center of Brussels. As a result, over 8000 students daily follow classes in a single building, which inevitably causes major congestion problems at the elevators and the stairwells during lecture transitions. This congestion is already alleviated by assigning different starting times for the academic and professional programmes. However, long waiting times and difficult passages remained to exist. Student flows could also be minimized by maximally spreading the lectures over the day and over the week. However, students and teachers are often dissatisfied with a timetable with free periods in-between. Being not able to attend or to teach lectures consecutively requires more time for traveling towards and away from classrooms. Commuting students especially often prefer to have a compact timetable instead of having free time between lectures. Particularly, days with only one scheduled lecture should be avoided.Despite the large complexity in building UCTPs, many educational institutes still develop their UCTP manually, which requires a lot of time and creativity of the planners. It is nearly impossible for human planners to solve the enormous puzzle taking into account the constraints and preferences of all stakeholders, let alone to incorporate the resulting student flows. After showing that a monolithic integer programming (IP) model is intractable for a state-of-the-art commercial solver for solving real-life UCTPs taking into account student flows, this paper presents a two-stage IP approach. In the first stage, lectures are assigned to timeslots taking into account the various constraints and maximizing the stakeholders’ preferences. The second stage uses the timetable of the previous stage as input and reassigns the classrooms with the objective of minimizing the resulting student flows. Through extensive computational tests, we show that, in contrast to a monolithic IP, this two-stage IP approach is capable of finding good quality solutions with minimized student flows for real-life UCTPs.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses related literature of different timetabling problems, modeling and solving techniques. Section 3 introduces the timetabling problem of the KU Leuven Campus Brussels. Next, a mathematical formulation for the problem is discussed in Section 4, followed by a discussion of the solution method used in Section 5. Section 6 subsequently applies the model to the data of the Faculty of E&B of the KU Leuven Campus Brussels. The latter section also reports on results from tests using data available from the literature. Section 7 concludes this paper and lists directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has presented a two-stage IP model for the UCTP with the aim of building compact timetables with minimized student flows. The first stage minimizes the violation of the teacher preferences by assigning lectures to timeslots and rooms. The second stage reassigns classrooms to lectures of the timetable of the first stage and minimizes the student flow. Student flows in the corridors and at the stairwells are modeled using a graph in which the arcs represent the corridors and stairs in the building. The total travel time of each series of students to go from their first classroom to their next classroom is calculated as the sum of the travel times through each arc on their route, which itself is a function of the total student flow through each arc. For series that attend daytime education, the timetables are subjected to compactness constraints: two-hour free time periods are avoided. The idea is to improve the compactness of timetables and reduce the free time between lectures for students. This is especially appreciated by students who travel by train or bus. However, more compactness constraints can be generated. An example is adequately spreading the lectures over the whole week (avoiding days with a high number of lectures or no lectures). Other preferences can also be taken into account by changing the penalty cost in the objective function of the first stage. This method can be applied to all types of education. A higher cost can be set for, for example, timeslots on Friday such that less lectures will be scheduled on Friday.Through extensive computational tests we have shown that, in contrast to a monolithic IP model, our two-stage IP approach is capable of finding good quality solutions with minimized student flows for real-life UCTPs. The model has been used to find a timetable with substantially smaller student flows as compared to the manually developed schedule at the KU Leuven FEB Campus Brussels. Moreover, our approach can find good quality solutions for all ITC2007 instances proving its applicability to a wide range of real-life problem dimensions.A possible direction for future research is the derivation of tighter bounds for the second stage model to reduce the computation time required to solve the model to optimality.