@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrated business continuity and disaster recovery planning: Towards organizational resilience

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing a new conceptual framework for IBCDRP.Formulating a novel resource allocation model for IBCDRP framework.Developing a novel interactive augmented ε-constraint method.Validating the proposed model and solution technique via a real case study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk management,Organizational resilience,Disaster operations management,Business continuity planning,Disaster recovery planning,Multi-objective mixed integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Businesses are increasingly subject to disruptions. It is almost impossible to predict their nature, time and extent. Therefore, organizations need a proactive approach equipped with a decision support framework to protect themselves against the outcomes of disruptive events. In this paper, a novel framework is proposed for integrated business continuity and disaster recovery planning for efficient and effective resuming and recovering of critical operations after being disrupted. The proposed model addresses decision problems at all strategic, tactical and operational levels. At the strategic level, the context of the organization is first explored and the main features of the organizational resilience are recognized. Then, a new multi-objective mixed integer linear programming model is formulated to allocate internal and external resources to both resuming and recovery plans simultaneously. The model aims to control the loss of resilience by maximizing recovery point and minimizing recovery time objectives. Finally, at the operational level, hypothetical disruptive events are examined to evaluate the applicability of the plans. We also develop a novel interactive augmented ε-constraint method to find the final preferred compromise solution. The proposed model and solution method are finally validated through a real case study.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Organizations are increasingly facing with various types of disruptions that could take place individually or simultaneously. Each disruption might have different effects on organizational resources. Traditionally, Business Continuity Planning (BCP) and Disaster Recovery Planning (DRP) as the main contingency plans are carried out separately in different time horizons within organizations (Wunnava, 2011). BCP aims to develop appropriate plans at pre-disaster in order to resume key business operations to a minimum acceptable predefined level (i.e., Minimum Business Continuity Objective (MBCO)) immediately after a disruptive event within the so-called Maximum Tolerable Period of Disruption (MTPD) through invoking appropriate BC plan(s). On the other hand, DRP strives to ensure the full recovery (restoration) of all disrupted operations to their normal business state at post-disaster (ISO:22310, 2012). The concept of organizational resilience is attracting growing attention among academicians and practitioners. In short, it enquires organizations to develop effective plans for both short-term resuming (i.e., BC plans) and long-term restoration (i.e., DR plans) of their disrupted operations following disruptive events (Riolli & Savicki, 2003). Being prepared for disruptive events requires proactive planning of internal and external resources of the organization so that it can cope with disasters effectively and efficiently. However, lack of proactive BC and DR planning may lead to loss of reputation and market share, customer service and business process failure, regulatory liability and increased resuming and restoring times (Herbane, Elliott, & Swartz, 2004; Hiles, 2010; Losada, Scaparra, & O'Hanley, 2012). There might be several alternate BC and/or DR plans for the same disruptive event (for example hot sites versus cold sites) each of which has its own resource requirements and utilization rates. Nevertheless, by taking into account different limitations such as available budget and shared resources, such contingency plans should be implemented in an integrated manner. Without such integral planning, managers would not have known when and how to switch from continuity phase to recovery phase, while making a trade-off between continuity and recovery plans, and arranging resources after happening disruptive incidents. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time in the literature that an integrated BC and DR planning model is proposed.In this paper, a novel Integrated Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery Planning (IBCDRP) framework is developed. Subsequently, an interactive Multi-Objective Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MOMILP) model is formulated to find efficient (i.e., Pareto-optimal) resource allocation patterns among candidate BC and DR plans while considering the main features of the organizational resilience. To solve the proposed model, a novel Interactive AUGmented ε-CONstraint method (named IAUGCON) is developed. Finally, the proposed IBCDRP model is validated through application to a real case study in a manufacturing company. The main contributions of this paper can be outlined as follows:•Proposing a new conceptual framework for IBCDRP.Formulating a novel MOMILP model to address the resource allocation problem within the IBCDRP framework while accounting for the main features of the organizational resilience.Developing a novel interactive augmented ε-constraint method to find compromise solutions.Validating the proposed model and solution technique through application in a real case study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
