@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Recent evidence on the effectiveness of group model building

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Group model building is a participatory approach to system dynamics.This paper reviews 45 published studies of group model building effectiveness.Different research designs report a wide range of beneficial outcomes.More emphasis is needed on comparative rather than exploratory research.Settings should shift from controlled experiments to applied problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavioural OR,Group model building,System dynamics,Evidence,Literature review,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Group model building (GMB) is a participatory approach to using system dynamics in group decision-making and problem structuring. This paper considers the published quantitative evidence base for GMB since the earlier literature review by Rouwette et al. (2002), to consider the level of understanding on three basic questions: what does it achieve, when should it be applied, and how should it be applied or improved? There have now been at least 45 such studies since 1987, utilising controlled experiments, field experiments, pretest/posttest, and observational research designs. There is evidence of GMB achieving a range of outcomes, particularly with regard to the behaviour of participants and their learning through the process. There is some evidence that GMB is more effective at supporting communication and consensus than traditional facilitation, however GMB has not been compared to other problem structuring methods. GMB has been successfully applied in a range of contexts, but there is little evidence on which to select between different GMB tools, or to understand when certain tools may be more appropriate. There is improving evidence on how GMB works, but this has not yet been translated into changing practice. Overall the evidence base for GMB has continued to improve, supporting its use for improving communication and agreement between participants in group decision processes. This paper argues that future research in group model building would benefit from three main shifts: from single cases to multiple cases; from controlled settings to applied settings; and by augmenting survey results with more objective measures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Participative and behavioural aspects of OR are important and underexplored (Hamalainen, Luoma, & Saarinen, 2013). One area with an emerging evidence-base is group model building (“GMB”, Vennix, 1996), a participatory approach to the development of system dynamics models. Recent GMB literature has given more prominence to participant behaviour and interpersonal dynamics, to explore how GMB supports persuasion (Rouwette, Korzilius, Vennix, & Jacobs, 2011a), trust (Black & Andersen, 2012), and agreement (Rouwette, 2011).The importance of involving the client in the modelling process has been acknowledged since the conception of system dynamics (Forrester, 1961). Practitioners observed that recommendations developed through system dynamics were not automatically adopted by the client (Greenberger, Crenson, & Crissey, 1976), and experimented with involving the client in the modelling process. This became known as “group model building” (Vennix, 1996). The term has been criticised as cosy, narrow and parochial (Andersen, Vennix, Richardson, & Rouwette, 2007), in that it fails to mention that the models in question are always system dynamics models. Authors have proposed that GMB should be considered as a sub-set of problem structuring methods (Andersen et al., 2007; Rouwette, Vennix, & Felling, 2009) or group decision support systems (Vennix, Andersen, Richardson, & Rohrbaugh, 1992). Nonetheless, the term and its limitation to system dynamics methods has been used in many publications (e.g. Akkermans & Vennix, 1997; Andersen & Richardson, 1997; Andersen, Richardson, & Vennix, 1997, 2007; Luna-Reyes et al., 2006; Richardson, 2013; Richardson & Andersen, 1995; Richardson, Andersen, Rohrbaugh, & Steinhurst, 1992; Rouwette & Vennix, 2006, 2011; Rouwette et al., 2009; Rouwette, Vennix, & Thijssen, 2000, 2002, 2011a, 2011b; Vennix, 1996, 1999; Vennix & Rouwette, 2000; Vennix, Scheper, & Willems, 1993, 1996; Zagonel, 2002, 2004). Maintaining this narrow definition allows this paper to build directly on an earlier literature review (Rouwette, Vennix, & Mullekom, 2002).Despite over 100 publications on GMB methods (seeSection 3), relatively few have described attempts at quantitative analysis. This paper collates the available evidence on group model building, including studies of how it is used, what it achieves, and why. This information is used to reflect on the quantitative evidence base for GMB, to synthesise the conclusions, to consider how this addresses fundamental research questions, and to identify key opportunities for the future. The analysis is arranged around three themes: what group model building achieves; when it should be applied; and how it should be applied or improved. This is likely to be of interest to GMB practitioners in understanding the state of empirical evidence for their craft, and for GMB researchers in identifying further research opportunities. The study is also likely to be of interest to the broader OR community, as many of the research challenges (particularly balancing experimental control with external validity) are likely to be applicable to other participative and behavioural approaches.This paper is arranged in four sections after this introduction. Section 2 summarises early research on GMB, as articulated by Rouwette et al. (2002). The methodology for augmenting and updating the literature review by Rouwette et al. (2002) is then explained in Section 3. Literature is presented and analysed in Section 4 to describe the quantitative evidence base for GMB. And finally in Section 5, there is a discussion of the implications of the research findings, and an exploration of research gaps and future research opportunities.The first empirical study was conducted in 1988, and in the following 13 years, there were 19 studies on GMB that collected quantitative evidence regarding its use. In 2002, Rouwette et al. reviewed 107 GMB studies, including the 19 that attempted some sort of quantitative assessment. The studies that included quantitative evidence were published between 1987 and 2000. The review considered five aspects of the studies: the source of the data; what data were collected; how they were collected; when they were collected; and what was found. The different studies related to a range of intervention contexts and tools, described in different and incomplete ways. The evaluations consisted of post-workshop surveys or pretest/posttest questionnaires, and mostly relied on participants’ own views of what the workshops had achieved. Of those using a pretest/posttest design, three used a single case study and two a field experiment. The authors expressed caution about biases introduced by measurement methods, and recommended direct comparison of different measurement methods to determine if they were associated with different results (Rouwette et al., 2002).The conclusions of this review were relatively modest: GMB literature included a number of small-scale evaluations that demonstrated that participants believe GMB contributes to improved communication quality, insight, consensus and commitment to conclusions. The reasons for this success were unclear, as was the relative effectiveness of GMB versus other techniques (Rouwette et al., 2002).Three papers at around this time contained recommendations on a research programme for the future of GMB. Andersen et al. (1997) proposed that more rigorous and consistent recording of the intervention context and tools was required, as well as evaluation of several explanatory hypotheses: systems thinking, group structure, chunking, gifted practitioner, group communication, or Hawthorn effect. While noting the barriers to effective research design, they recommended experiments to complement survey results, and the use of common survey methods to allow results from many studies to be aggregated. They also proposed: the inclusion of measurement methods that do not rely on participants reporting their own cognitive processes; that studies measure either mental models or their changes but not both in the same subjects; that some study of the enduring effects (if any) of GMB is conducted; and that mixed methods are used to improve the robustness of results. Coyle (2000) proposed an exploration into the wise balance between qualitative and quantitative GMB, through the development of a metric for measuring the presumed added understanding and confidence from quantitative modelling. Finally, Rouwette et al. (2002) echoed the earlier call from Andersen et al. (1997) to thoroughly record case research in a standardised format, while also calling for more reporting of unsuccessful case studies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Twelve years after Rouwette et al. (2002) considered the state of GMB research, much has changed, but many challenges remain. There has been greater use of more-objective measures that do not rely on participant recollection, new measurements methods have explored different outcomes, and several studies lift the lid on what happens during GMB sessions (rather than only evaluating change at the end). There are several interesting results from small studies that may warrant further attention: what clients want, the duration of participant change, persuasion, the model as boundary object, power-levelling, and the discovery of hidden knowledge. In almost all cases, GMB is reported to be effective in supporting individual and collective changes considered desirable in group-decision contexts.Although the overall picture is now much richer and more complex, it is far from comprehensive. Evidence is still based on small sample sizes or single case studies, although the use of common methods may allow a meta-analysis in the future. Research is usually lacking in either experimental control or external validity, and each design has been used to measure different things. Finally, there is considerable scope for comparison between GMB and other methods, or between different GMB tools. In many of the research questions, the current literature lacks objective measure, external validity and direct comparison.Continuing with the status quo seems unlikely to yield different results. More pilot studies will bring more loose ends (Andersen et al., 1997). Further controlled experiments in unrealistic conditions will be discounted by those who see group model building as a social process (Scott et al., 2014b). Additional survey-based studies will be challenged by research that suggests individuals are unreliably witnesses to their own learning processes (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977). Future research in group model building would therefore benefit from three main shifts: from single cases to multiple cases; from controlled settings to applied settings; and by augmenting survey results with more objective measures. Each of these shifts is explored below.GMB literature contains a large number of pilot studies with interesting and novel findings. These were useful for determining lines of enquiry that warrant further investigation, but despite an increasing number of promising leads, GMB literature is not making the logical step to increased research scale. The findings from these pilot studies should be explored with comparative research across multiple cases (Ragin, 1987, 2000).There are different views within the OR community on how to gather evidence regarding group processes. Some advocate for controlled experiments to understand analytical processes (Finlay, 1998), whereas others advocate the use of social science methods to understand group/social processes in applied contexts (Checkland, 1999). There has been a gradual change in emphasis in GMB literature from individual-level learning outcomes (e.g. Andersen et al., 1994; Richardson et al., 1994) to the study of group and social processes that build trust and agreement (e.g. Black & Andersen 2012; Rouwette et al., 2011a; Scott et al., 2014b), which suggests that empirical studies should shift their emphasis from unrealistic controlled experiments to field experiments on applied problems. There are limits to what we can learn about these social processes through research where participants are not invested in the outcomes, and where social dynamics do not mirror practical applications.It is on the basis of these two points that we conclude that the biggest opportunities to advance group model building literature lie in field experiments exploring multiple comparable case studies that differ by a small number of key variables. This can be achieved in two ways. Where resources allow, large research projects can compare multiple interventions (e.g. Huz, 1999). Alternately, multiple projects can be conducted in similar ways to allow for meaningful meta-analysis between different studies (e.g. Rouwette et al., 2011).This latter approach will require the use of consistent research methods, including providing detailed context (Andersen et al., 1997; Scott et al., 2015), consistent description of the intervention (e.g. “scripts” – Hovmand et al., 2012) and common measurement tools. The only tool that has been reported in multiple studies is the CICC survey tool (Vennix et al., 1993), and continued use of this tool will increase the sample size for meta-analysis. However, this tool relies on self-reporting and is therefore unreliable (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Orne, 1962; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973), and should be augmented or supplemented with repeated use of more objective measures.A number of more objective measurement tools have been described in the literature, including two promising categories: tools that track participants’ decision preferences over time (pretest–posttest – Rouwette et al., 2011a; pretest–posttest–delayed – Scott et al., 2013); or those that use session transcripts as a basis to analyse communication between participants (content analysis – McCardle-Keurentjes et al., 2008; sequential analysis – Franco & Rouwette, 2011; interaction analysis – van Nistelrooij et al., 2012). The analysis of decision preferences is useful for measuring effectiveness and requires only a small investment of time and effort. Analysis of session transcripts is more time consuming, but helps to lift the veil on what actually occurs during a group model building session. The use of these existing tools should be preferred where possible to the creation of new tools, as this will increase the available sample size for meta-analysis.Robust, comparative field experiments, using consistent research methods, provide an opportunity for GMB research to move beyond anecdote, experience, case studies and unrealistic controlled experiments. Such a research approach could be used to help inform practitioners on both when and how to use group model building approaches.