@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust bunker management for liner shipping networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Joint sailing speed and refueling optimization.Sailing speed variation captured.Close-form expression for worst-case bunker consumption.Application to real-case examples.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Container liner shipping,Bunker,Sailing speed,Refill port,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper examines the sailing speed of containerships and refueling of bunker in a liner shipping network while considering that the real speed may deviate from the planned one. It develops a mixed-integer nonlinear optimization model to minimize the total cost consisting of ship cost, bunker cost, and inventory cost, under the worst-case bunker consumption scenario. A close-form expression for the worst-case bunker consumption is derived and three linearization techniques are proposed to transform the nonlinear model to a mixed-integer linear programming formulation. A case study based on the Asia–Europe–Oceania network of a global liner shipping company demonstrates the applicability of the proposed model and interesting managerial insights are obtained.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Liner shipping mainly involves the transportation of containerized cargo (containers) such as manufactured products, food, and garment (Meng, Wang, Andersson, and Thun, 2014). The unit value of the containers is generally much higher than bulk cargo. Hence, the speed of containerships is higher (e.g., 20–25 knots) to deliver the containers to their destinations in a shorter time. In fact, short transit time is important especially for consumer goods with a short life cycle such as fashion and computers (Notteboom, 2006). At the same time, the daily fuel consumption of ships increases approximately proportional to the sailing speed cubed (Ronen, 2011). Therefore, containerships burn more fuel (bunker) than other types of ships in general and hence it is vital for liner shipping companies to efficiently manage the bunker. For example, Ronen (2011) estimated that when bunker fuel price is around 500 USD per ton the bunker cost constitutes about three quarters of the operating cost of a large containership.Bunker management has two aspects. The first one is optimizing the sailing speed. A higher speed implies a larger amount of bunker consumed; whereas it also leads to a shorter transit time and a smaller number of ships required to maintain a weekly service frequency. Hence, when the bunker price is high or when there is overcapacity of ships, liner shipping companies tend to deploy more ships to lower down the speed of all the ships plying to a service. Since 2007, many liner shipping companies have adopted the slow-steaming strategy to reduce bunker expenditure and curb the oversupply of shipping capacity (UNCTAD, 2011). It should be mentioned that containerships may not sail at a constant speed on a ship route. On legs with more containers to transport and legs where the bunker consumption is less sensitive to the speed, the sailing speed should be higher (Wang and Meng, 2012a).The second aspect is the choice of refill port. Containerships load bunker at the ports on their itinerary to avoid detour. Some ports do not provide bunkering services. At the ports where a ship could load bunker (refill ports), the prices may also vary (Kim and Kim, 2012). Moreover, the quality and availability of bunker will be better guaranteed if a shipping company purchases a large amount of bunker at the same port. Consequently, a natural problem faced by a liner shipping company is: how much bunker a ship should load at each refill port?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In view of the fact that the real sailing speed of containerships may be different from the planned speed, we proposed a robust bunker management (RBM) problem that designs the optimal (planned) speed and chooses the bunkering ports and the amount of bunker to load at each refill port, so as to minimize the worst-case total cost (ship cost, bunker cost, inventory cost) considering price discounts at refill ports. A model for computing the worst-case bunker consumption on a leg with a given planned speed and a mixed-integer nonlinear optimization model for the RBM problem are proposed. By exploiting the special structure of the problem, we derived the close-form expression for the worst-case bunker consumption. We subsequently developed three linearization techniques for the mixed-integer nonlinear RBM model. The proposed models are applied to a case study based on the Asia–Europe–Oceania network of a global liner shipping company. Results demonstrate that a larger variability of speed would lead to a higher total cost and more ships deployed. A larger unit inventory cost would lead to a higher total cost and fewer ships deployed. The choice of refill ports is very concentrated in liner shipping because a ship visits many ports and refill ports provide price discounts. Moreover, due to the structure of the liner shipping network, a lower price at a refill port does not necessarily mean an increase of the market share.This study has assumed that the bunker prices are known. To consider the uncertainty caused by the fluctuations of bunker prices, we can use stochastic optimization approaches to minimize the expected total cost while treating the bunker prices are random variables. Moreover, how to design the optimal bunker hedging plan to control the risk in bunker management is a worthwhile research topic.