@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Upgrade auctions in build-to-order manufacturing with loss-averse customers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Manufacturers always benefit from upgrading orders of low-valuation customers.Strategic behavior of high-valuation customers can impair the results.A gain-loss utility model explains different behavior of the two customer groups.Contribution margin can be improved while planning reliability is maintained.Highest improvement when loss aversion exceeds a critical value.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Revenue management,Behavioral operations management,Upgrades,Auctions,Make-to-order,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider the problem of matching capacity and demand in build-to-order manufacturing. Our objective is to assess the ability of upgrade auctions to efficiently allocate excess option capacity to customer orders. We model the Stackelberg game of one manufacturer and a set of loss-averse customers. The manufacturers’ decision of extending the existing fixed-price channel by applying upgrade auctions is evaluated in terms of contribution margin and planning reliability. When the manufacturer offers an option in the upgrade auction, customers seek to maximize utility by buying the option instantly at the fixed price or leaving a bid in hope of a better auction price. Their optimal participation and bidding strategy is explained by a gain-loss utility model with two-dimensional preferences and expectation-based reference levels. Due to missing information on capacity and bids, customers’ decisions are based on estimations of auction and winning probability. We conclude that applying upgrade auctions can significantly improve contribution margin while maintaining planning reliability. Particularly, loss aversion prevents potential fixed-price buyers from bidding in the auction. The results suggest that further effort of implementing upgrade auctions in build-to-order manufacturing will likely pay off.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We consider the problem of matching capacity and demand of product options in BTO manufacturing. Upgrade auctions are introduced as a new approach to allocate excess option capacity to upgradable customer orders. We study the potential and conditions of successfully applying upgrade auctions when customers are loss-averse.For this, we model the manufacturer's expected surplus from applying upgrade auctions by anticipating the optimal behavior of utility-maximizing customers. A two-dimensional gain-loss utility model allows for analyzing the different behavior of low- and high-valuation customers. There are three primary conclusions from this study.•While the manufacturer always benefits from upgrading orders of low-valuation customers, contribution margin and planning reliability deteriorate when strategic high-valuation customers bid in the auction.The surplus in contribution margin increases and the loss in planning reliability decreases when customers are loss-averse or have pessimistic estimates of auction and winning probability. In particular, when loss aversion or the pessimism in estimating auction and winning probability exceed a critical value, the manufacturer yields the highest surplus in contribution margin while maintaining planning reliability.The manufacturer's surplus in contribution margin cannot exceed 28 percent in case of stochastic excess capacity and uniformly distributed valuations. The surplus decreases with increasing total demand. Numerical examples aligned to realistic settings still exhibit substantial improvement rates.The results provide three main insights for BTO manufacturers. First, while BTO manufacturers, e.g. in the automotive industry, have been reluctant to innovate their sales channels, our analysis shows that upgrade auctions can be a starting point as they supply substantial potential of improving contribution margin and capacity utilization without radically changing existing sales channels. Second, manufacturers should only offer upgrade auctions to customers that cannot buy the option at the fixed price or prevent strategic behavior by emphasizing potential losses over gains. This can e.g. be achieved with subtractive option framing (Biswas & Grau, 2008) and scarcity marketing (Balachander, Liu, & Stock, 2009). Finally, manufacturers applying our results can improve their success rates by focusing on options or customer segments with inherently high levels of loss aversion and pessimistic estimates of auction and winning probabilities.To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first discussing upgrade auctions. Our results are based on several assumptions that are aligned to the setting of BTO manufacturing and provide many opportunities for future research.Concerning the manufacturer model, we assume exogenously given prices and capacity and therefore provide a conservative assessment of the hybrid sales mechanism. Integrated optimization of fixed-prices, capacity and auction parameters will tap the full potential of the approach. This will require to extend the manufacturer model significantly. Furthermore, we propose a customer gain-loss utility model including specific expectation-based reference levels. Should first applications of upgrade auctions reveal that customers adapt their expectations, e.g. due to learning, one could easily extend the customer model by following the framework of Köszegi and Rabin (2006). In addition, customers in the considered setting have no information on capacity and demand. While this is quite typical for BTO environments such as the automotive industry, it would be interesting to extend the analysis to capture more transparent markets like in the airline or hotel industry. This would additionally allow for analyzing the impact of biased auction and winning probability estimations.Furthermore, restricting the analysis to a single option requires independent option demand. In order to better understand the potential of upgrade auctions in general settings, it would be interesting to integrate the models and findings on multivariate customer choice and combinatorial auctions (e.g., Karabatı & Yalçin, 2014; Xia, Koehler, & Whinston, 2004). Finally, we assume that the sales channel consists of one rational manufacturer. In reality, heterogeneous decision makers in a multi-level distribution hierarchy, as well as retailer orders might affect the results. Hence, the implications of upgrade auctions on channel coordination (e.g., Li & Wang, 2007) and the effect of behavioral manufacturers or retailers (e.g., Wang & Webster, 2007) are promising fields of future research.