@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Estimating the hyperbolic distance function: A directional distance function approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We link the hyperbolic distance function to the directional distance function.We provide an algorithm for calculating the value of hyperbolic distance functions.We illustrate the computational efficiency of the algorithm using several data sets.The algorithm gives the value of the hyperbolic distance function in two iterations.Our approach is adaptable for hyperbolic-oriented measures on different technologies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Efficiency measurement,Data envelopment analysis,Hyperbolic distance function,Directional distance function,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Färe, Grosskopf, and Lovell (1985) merged Farrell’s input and output oriented technical efficiency measures into a new graph-type approach known as hyperbolic distance function (HDF). In spite of its appealing special structure in allowing for the simultaneous and equiproportionate reduction in inputs and increase in outputs, HDF is a non-linear optimization and it is hard to solve particularly when dealing with technologies operating under variable returns to scale. By connecting HDF to the directional distance function, we propose a linear programming based procedure for estimating the exact value of HDF within the non-parametric framework of data envelopment analysis. We illustrate the computational effectiveness of the algorithm on several real-world and simulated data sets, generating the optimal value of HDF through generally solving at most two linear programs. Moreover, our approach has several desirable properties such as: (1) introducing a computational dual formulation for the HDF and providing an economic interpretation in terms of shadow prices; (2) being readily adaptable to measure hyperbolic-oriented super-efficiency; and (3) being flexible to deal with HDF-based efficiency measures on environmental technologies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper, we develop a method for calculating the hyperbolic distance function of Färe, Grosskopf, and Lovell (1985) under variable returns to scale (VRS) technologies. Under constant returns to scale (CRS) it has been shown that this distance function may be estimated as the square root of the Farrell (1957) output efficiency score and similarly, as the square root of the reciprocal of the Farrell input efficiency score (see Färe, Grosskopf, and Zaim, 2002).Recall that the HDF is a merger of Farrell’s input and output oriented technical efficiency measures, i.e., it simultaneously contracts inputs and expands outputs using a single scaling factor. This distance function has been used in a variety of areas including:•Environmental technologies and performance measurement in the presence of undesirable outputs (Boyd & McClelland, 1999; Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, & Pasurka, 1989; Färe, Kirkley, & Walden, 2011; Hernandez-Sancho, Picazo-Tadeo, & Reig-Martinez, 2000; Yang, Yang, & Nie, 2013; Zaim & Taskin, 2000a; 2000b; Zofío & Prieto, 2001).Risk-adjusted efficiency measurement (Chang, 1999).Developing a dual counterpart to the concept of return to the dollar (Färe et al., 2002).Introducing a parametric hyperbolic distance function (Cuesta & Zofío, 2005).Investigating relationships between firm efficiency and leverage (Margaritis & Psillaki, 2007).Hyperbolic-oriented super-efficiency measurement (Johnson & McGinnis, 2009).Hyperbolic network DEA (Yu & Lee, 2009).Hyperbolic estimators of efficiency and productivity change (Wheelock & Wilson, 2008; 2009).Hyperbolic-based Malmquist productivity index (Zofío & Lovell, 2001).The HDF is the value function for a non-linear optimization problem and to merge it into a linear programming (LP) format such as DEA (Data Envelopment Analysis)11Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978).or Activity Analysis22Neumann von (1945).has proven to be a challenge when the technology is not constant returns to scale. Under variable returns to scale the optimization problem may not be written as an LP problem and hence it is hard to merge with DEA and Activity Analysis. An attempt to linearize the problem by introducing a linear approximation of the input scaling is found in Färe et al. (1985). However, Zofío & Lovell (2001) showed that this approximation is only acceptable close to the efficient frontier while the gap between the true and approximate efficiency scores increases the further the unit (DMU) is from the efficient frontier, i.e. the more a unit is inefficient the worse is the approximation.To resolve the linearization problem of the hyperbolic distance function under VRS we relate it to the technology directional distance function (DDF) proposed by Chambers, Chung, and Färe (1998)33This function was introduced by Luenberger (1992) as the shortage function.and we develop an LP-based computational algorithm to generate the exact value of the HDF.44A different type of relationship between the HDF and DDF is established and used by Simar and Vanhems (2012) and Daraio and Simar (2014) in a stochastic framework.Using several computational experiments on real and simulated large scale data sets, we illustrate that the algorithm is very fast and, for over 97 percent of DMUs, it gives the exact value of the HDF within the two initial iterations, i.e. by solving at most two LP problems. Apart from its effectiveness, the algorithm has several desirable features. First, it can be easily adapted to environmental technologies operating under various types of returns to scale (RTS) to measure the HDF-based efficiency of DMUs producing undesirable outputs. Second, the algorithm includes a computational dual counterpart for the HDF providing an economic interpretation in terms of shadow prices for inputs and outputs. Third, the algorithm can be used in Johnson and McGinnis (2009) approach to estimate the hyperbolic-oriented super-efficiency. Fourth, the final DDF model obtained upon termination of the algorithm can fit into the Roshdi, Van de Woestyne, & Davtalab-Olyaie (2014) or Mehdiloozad, Mirdehghan, Sahoo, & Roshdi (2015) procedures for identifying the maximal reference set (MRS).The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the HDF and presents our proposed approach for its estimation. Section 3 discusses the properties and advantages of our algorithm. Section 4 illustrates the algorithm using numerical, empirical and simulated data sets. Section 5 concludes.We start this section by introducing some notation and preliminary definitions. Throughout the paper we assume that there are n observed homogeneous decision making units (DMUs); eachDMUj,j∈J={1,…,n}uses a column vector of m inputs,xj=(x1j,…,xmj)′∈R≥0mto produce a column vector of s outputsyj=(y1j,…,ysj)′∈R≥0s. Note that the vectors are shown in bold and contain at least one non-zero elements. We further use the subscript o as the index for the DMU under evaluation.The graph of technology or production possibility set is the set of all technologically feasible input-output vectors defined byT={(x,y)∈R≥0m+s|xcanproducey}.Under the standard assumptions of free disposability and convexity (Färe et al., 1985; Färe & Primont, 1995), the non-parametric DEA representation of the VRS-based technology can be set up as:55This is known as the BCC model of Banker, Charnes, and Cooper (1984) but can also be found in Kemeny, Morgenstern, and Thompson (1956) and Färe, Grosskopf, and Logan (1983).Tv={(x,y)∈R≥0m+s|∑j∈Jλjxj≤x,∑j∈Jλjyj≥y,∑j∈Jλj=1,λj≥0,j∈J}where λj, j ∈ J are intensity (structural) variables used for connecting input and output vectors by a convex combination.The convexity constraint,∑j∈Jλj=1,allowing VRS, makes it possible to determine the type of RTS under which the unit operates, for example, increasing returns to scale (IRS) or decreasing returns to scale (DRS). CRS-based technology can be imposed by the exclusion of the convexity constraint.The formulation of HDF with reference to Tvcan be represented as follows:(1)ρoh=minθs.t.∑j∈Jλjxj≤θxo,∑j∈Jλjyj≥1θyo,∑j∈Jλj=1,λj≥0,j∈J.It is clear that Model (1) maps DMUoonto the frontier of Tvalong with a hyperbolic curve (see Fig. 1). One can picture this curve as a trip taken by a moving pointzoh(θ)where for each θ ∈ (0, 1] it is located atzoh(θ):=(xoh(θ),yoh(θ))=(θxo,1θyo)inRm+sspace. Thus, we can express (1) in a compact form as:(2)ρoh=minθs.t.zoh(θ)=(θxo,1θyo)∈Tv.Definition 1DMUois HDF-efficient (technically efficient) if and only ifρoh=θ*=1.We emphasize thatρohis a radial efficiency measure and hence it cannot guarantee full technical efficiency in the sense of Pareto–Koopmans. To fulfil full attainment of efficiency, one must implement a further stage by maximizing the sum of the input and output slacks with the θ in the constraints fixed at θ*. This allows inputs and outputs to change non-proportionally and consequently can help to identify all “mix inefficiencies” associated with non-zero slacks.Taking a different parameter, say β, we reparametrizezohaszod(β)=(e−βxo,eβyo)where e is the Neperian number and β lies in the interval [0,+∞). For each β ∈ [0, ∞) the new parametrized curve,zod,is at the pointzod(β)=zoh(eβ)reached byzohat eβin (0,1], e.g.zoh(1)=(xo,yo)=zod(1=e0). Since the exponential function is a one-to-one correspondence,zodrepresents the same trip over the path ofzohwhereby (2) can be rewritten as(3)ρoh=maxβs.t.zod(β)=(e−βxo,eβyo)∈TvApplying Taylor’s theorem, the linear approximation to the exponential function eξnear zero is estimated byeξ≐1+ξ. This can be represented here bye−βxo≐(1−β)xoandeβyo≐(1+β)yo. Therefore, the following model can be regarded as a linear approximation of the HDF:(4)doh=maxβs.t.∑j∈Jλjxj≤xo−βgx,∑j∈Jλjyj≥yo+βgy,∑j∈Jλj=1,λj≥0,j∈J,whereg→:=(gx,gy)=(xo,yo).Evidently, Model (4) is the DDF of Chambers et al. (1998) computed at the point (xo, yo). Let β* be an optimal solution to (4). Thene−β*can be regarded as a linear approximation of θ*; and the more β* is close to zero (or equivalently the closer θ* is to unity), the moree−β*is an accurate approximation of θ*. For an illustration of this fact see the projections points of DMUpand DMUqin Fig. 1. Using this linkage between HDF and DDF, we proceed to develop an LP-based computational algorithm for identifying the exact value of HDF.66It is worth mentioning that the measurement of HDF with reference to a log-convex technology can be directly computed via the DDF by using a log transformation. For a detailed account on efficiency measurement within the context of log-convex technologies see Mehdiloozad, Sahoo, and Roshdi (2014).The dual problem of the LP (4) can be formulated as follows:(5)πoh=maxp′yo−w′xo−u0s.t.p′yj−w′xj−u0≤0,j∈J,p′gy+w′gx=1,p≥0,w≥0.whereg→:=(gx,gy)=(xo,yo).Note that the vectorspandw,respectively, are associated with the input and output constraints of Model (4) and their optimal values characterize the gradient of a supporting hyperplane for Tv. The variable u0 corresponds to the convexity constraint, it is free in sign and its optimal values help to identify the type and magnitude of RTS. We emphasize that the optimal values of these variables are readily available as the shadow prices when the linear program (4) is solved. We elaborate on the details of the algorithm through a simple numerical example illustrated in Fig. 1 (see also Section 4.1). The algorithm performs the following procedure until the optimal value of HDF for DMUois determined.Main procedure. Let(λ1,β1)and(p1,w1,u01)be an optimal pair of solutions to Models (4) and (5) in evaluating DMUo. As can be seen from Fig. 1, the hyperplane connecting DMUaand DMUb,Ha,b=H1:p1′y−w1′x−u0=0is a supporting hyperplane for Tvat the projection pointzod(β1):=(xo−β1xo,yo+β1yo)77Moreover, if Model (4) is solved via the simplex method i.e. the optimal pair(λ1,β1)and(p1,w1,u01,t1)is a basic (extreme) optimal pair, then the hyperplane H1 would be the equation of a (strong or weak) defining hyperplane of Tv. For a detailed account, see Davtalab-Olyaie, Roshdi, Jahanshahloo, and Asgharian (2013); Davtalab-Olyaie, Roshdi, Partovi Nia, and Asgharian (2014).. The intersection point of H1 and the hyperbolic curvezoh(θ)is the pointzoh(θ1)=(θ1xo,1θ1yo). The value of θ1 is determined as follows: By substituting the coordinates of the pointzoh(θ)in the equation of H1, i.e.(6)p1′1θyo−w1′θxo−u01=0and multiplying by θ, we obtain a quadratic equation where the value of θ1 is obtained as a root via the Quadratic Formula88It is worth noting that the discriminant of this quadratic equation, i.e.(u01)2+4p1′yow1′xo,is always positive guaranteeing that the equation has two distinct real roots.:(7)θ1=−u01+(u01)2+4p1′yow1′xo2w1′xo.Remark 2If in the gradient of H1 some input or output multipliers are equal to zero, then this solution characterizes the gradient of a weak defining hyperplane of Tv. There are two special cases of weak hyperplanes:Case (1). All of the input multipliers are equal to zero, i.e.,wi1=0,i=1,…,m; then in (7) the denominator would be zero. However, by intersecting the equation of this hyperplane andzoh(θ),(6) reduces to a linear equation where θ1 can be simply computed as a solution to this equation, i.e.θ1=p1′yo/u01.Case (2). All of the output multipliers are equal to zero, i.e.pr1=0,r=1,…,s; then similar to Case (1), (6) reduces to a linear equation and θ1 can be computed asθ1=−u01/w1′xo.Clearly ifzoh(θ1)lies in Tv, thenθ*=θ1and the procedure terminates;99This is obviously true for both DMUpand DMUq.Generally, in order to check whether a given activity lies in Tvor not, one needs to solve an LP program. However, in our special case we can perform this task simply by noting thatzoh(θ1)lies in Tv, if and only if, it belongs to the facet constructed by the intersection of the hyperplane H1 and Tv, i.e., it belongs to the facetF1=H1∩Tv. According to Davtalab-Olyaie et al. (2013), each facet of Tvis a polyhedral set, i.e., every point in the set can be represented as a convex combination of its extreme points (i.e. extreme efficient DMUs lying on it), plus a non-negative linear combination of the extreme directions (i.e. extreme recession directions associated with zero weights). Here, in our example F1 is a bounded polyhedral set (polytope) spanned by the convex combinations of the two extreme efficient DMUs lying on it, i.e., DMUaand DMUb. Thus, the problem of checking ifzoh(θ1)belongs to Tvor not can be solved by examining whether the following linear system is consistent or not:(8)∑j∈R1λjxj≤θ1xo,∑j∈R1λjyj≥1θ1yo,∑j∈R1λj=1,λj≥0,j∈R1whereR1={j∈J:p1′yj−w1′xj−u01=0}i.e. R1 is the index set of all observed DMUs lying on H1.The size of the coefficient matrix of System (8) is(m+s+1)×|R1|where |R1| denotes the cardinal number of the reference set R1. Normally, the cardinal number of DMUs belonging to a reference set for an inefficient DMU is a small number relative to the sample size so that the size of System (8) is always small even for large scale data sets. Moreover, if in the gradient vector of H1 some of the weights (multipliers) are greater than zero then their respective constraint in System (8) can be set as an equality.Ifzoh(θ1)does not belong to Tv, or equivalently System (8) is inconsistent, which is the case for the current example (see Section 4.1), we reimplement the main procedure for DMUoas follows:Firstwe construct a new direction vector from DMUoto the pointzoh(θ1),namely,g→1:=(gx1,gy1)=(xo−θ1xo,1θ1yo−yo)and solve Model (4) with respect to this newly introduced direction vector. Let(λ2,β2)and(p2,w2,u02)be an optimal pair of solutions of Models (4) and (5) with the same direction vectorg→1.Secondwe determine the intersection point of the hyperplaneHb,c=H2:p2′y−w2′x−u02=0and the curvezoh(θ). We name this pointzoh(θ2)=(θ2xo,1θ2yo)where the value of θ2 is computed via (7) in a similar way. Note that in the current example,zoh(θ2)coincides with the optimal projectionzoh(θ*).Thirdwe check the termination criterion, i.e. is System (8) consistent? If the answer is positive the procedure terminates; otherwise we repeat the main procedure.Theorem 1The generated sequence of approximate efficiency scores by the above-mentioned procedure is strictly increasing and (finitely) convergent to the optimal objective of HDF.Suppose that the implementation of the procedure is repeated Iotimes for DMUo. Then Ioapproximate projection points,zod(βl),l=1,…,Io,with associated efficiency scores,θ˜l=e−βl,l=1,…,Io,are generated. Since the frontier of Tvis concave and the hyperbolic curvezoh(θ)is strictly increasing (decreasing) in outputs (inputs), the generated sequence of efficiency scores,θ˜l,l=1,…,Io,is strictly increasing. Without loss of generality, we can suppose that each efficiency score is produced through the intersection of the curvezoh(θ)with some defining hyperplane of Tv(see footnote 6). Since the number of this kind of hyperplanes is finite, the sequence of efficiency scores is finite and the procedure will generate the optimal value of HDF in finite steps.□The proposed approach in the previous section satisfies several desirable features:•Computational accuracy, efficiency and adaptabilityIn order to examine the computational efficiency of the algorithm, we executed several computational experiments on real world and simulated data sets. The algorithm yields the exact value of HDF as confirmed by using a non-linear solver and for over 97 percent of DMUs, the algorithm terminated within the two initial iterations.Furthermore, the use of LP (as opposed to non-linear) models enables the algorithm to be easily incorporated into available DEA software using their existing solvers.Generating a sequence of radially efficient targetsDuring the implementation of the main procedure, a number of HDF-efficient projection points together with their efficiency scores are generated that can be regarded as approximate benchmarks. This might be beneficial in practical situations. First, when dealing with a large scale data set, it is often computationally cheaper for the decision maker to accept a near optimal solution instead of the exact one, which might require a considerably higher volume of computations. Second, in some situations, some of the approximate projection points might be more suitable than the exact one. For example, in Fig. 1, DMUomight prefer a projection to the IRS segment of the frontier lying between DMUaand DMUb, than the DRS segment connecting DMUband DMUc.Dual prices and their economic interpretationThrough its connection with the DDF, our approach establishes a computational dual formulation for the HDF that provides useful information on the input and output weights and the status of RTS. In fact, our procedure identifies the right direction vector to be incorporated into the DDF framework to compute the HDF and its dual. This direction vector is the difference between the DMU under evaluation and its optimal HDF-projection. For example, one can employ this dual to estimate the shadow prices of any undesirable outputs. Moreover, similar to Färe et al. (2002), one can construct desirable relationships between the concept of profit maximization – or return to dollar – and HDF thereby providing new decompositions of HDF-based efficiency under variable returns to scale.Identification of the maximal reference set and the type of RTSThe RTS for an inefficient DMU is measured according to its efficient projection point. Thus, the type and magnitude of RTS are estimated via the position of the hyperplane supporting the technology at the HDF-projection. We can use the final DDF model with the direction vector constructed by the optimal HDF-projection and its dual to identify both the maximal reference set (MRS) and the type and magnitude of RTS. More precisely, we first find the MRS containing all the observed peer DMUs for the particular inefficient DMU. To do this, we fixβ=1at the optimal objective of the final HDF and maximize the number of positive lambdas, using the approach proposed by Roshdi et al. (2014). Having identified the MRS, we then use the dual formulation of the final DDF to determine the status and magnitude of RTS, employing the method of Banker, Cooper, Seiford, Thrall, and Zhu (2004).Remark 4Note that the HDF may give different results from the input and output oriented models in RTS identification because the RTS results directly depend on the distance function used. CRS may result from the hyperbolic model, for example, while an application of an input/output oriented model may produce an increasing or decreasing RTS characterization from the same data.Measurement of hyperbolic-oriented super-efficiencyThe super-efficiency technique proposed by Andersen and Petersen (1993) is a commonly used tool for ranking efficient DMUs. However, the conventional super-efficiency models can suffer from infeasibility problems. Johnson and McGinnis (2009) developed an alternative hyperbolic-oriented super-efficiency measure that overcomes the infeasibility problem for positive input/output data.1010Provided a hyperbolic measure is satisfactory. If an input or output oriented radial measure is required, then the method provided in Lovell and Rouse (2003) can be used.Our approach can be easily adapted to estimate the exact value of the HDF-based super-efficiency which is a non-linear optimization problem. This is also useful in computing the Malmquist productivity index suggested by Zofío and Lovell (2001), which requires measuring hyperbolic-oriented super-efficiency.Use with hyperbolic models of environmental technologiesThe algorithm proposed here is adaptable for the application of HDF to different technologies. For example, in the next section, it is employed to compute the exact value of “enhanced hyperbolic output efficiency measures” proposed by Färe et al. (1989) in the context of environmental technologies. Moreover, the sequence of radially efficient targets noted above can provide insights into potential trade-offs between “good” and “bad” outputs or inputs.Table 1reports the data used in Fig. 1 and the example discussed in Section 2, consisting of seven hypothetical DMUs with one input and one output. To further clarify the details of the proposed algorithm, we perform it step by step for this example. Since DMUa, DMUb, DMUcand DMUdare from the efficient frontier, the optimal objective value of Model (4) is zero. Thus, the procedure immediately terminates returning the optimal objective value of 1 for them.DMUois inefficient and the optimal objective of Model (4) is positive; this is also the case for DMUpand DMUq. The initial approximate values of HDF for the last three inefficient DMUs are shown in the first row of Table 2. Next, we proceed to perform the first iteration of the procedure for each inefficient DMU. For DMUpand DMUq, the procedure generates the optimal objective value of HDF at the end of the first iteration, and the algorithm terminates for them. For DMUowe must reimplement the main procedure as follows.From the first iteration, Model (4) in the evaluation of DMUogives the gradient of the hyperplaneHa,b:y−2x+1=0as shadow prices andR1={a,b}. To determine the intersection point of the hyperbolic curvezoh(θ)and the hyperplane Ha, bwe insertzoh(θ)with the coordinatesx=xoh(θ)=10θandy=yoh(θ)=4θinto the equation of Ha, bi.e.(9)4θ−2(10θ)+1=0⇒−20θ2+θ+4=0⇒θ1=−1+1+320−40=0.4729Ha, bintersects the hyperbolic curvezoh(θ)atθ1=0.4729. Having identified the pointzoh(θ1),we then check the consistency of System (8):1111The consistency can be easily checked via the phase one method of the Simplex method.(10)2λa+4λb=4.7290,3λa+7λb=8.4580,λa+λb=1,λa,λb≥0.This system has no solution thereby we construct the new direction vector from DMUoto the pointzoh(θ1),namelyg→1,asg→1:=(gx1,gy1)=(xo−θ1xo,1θ1yo−yo)=(10−4.7290,8.4580−4)=(5.2710,4.4580)to obtain the new model (4)(11)doh=maxβs.t.∑j∈Jλjxj≤10−β5.2710,∑j∈Jλjyj≥4+β4.4580,∑j∈Jλj=1,λj≥0,j∈J.The optimal objective of (11) isβ2=0.8661and the shadow prices provide the gradient of the hyperplaneHb,c:5y−3x−23=0withR2={b,c,d}. Following the same procedure as above, we obtain the intersection of Hb, candzoh(θ)with value ofθ2=0.5187. System (8) with R2 andzoh(θ2)is feasible indicating that the procedure terminates with the optimal value beingθ*=0.5187. Then, by fixing θ at θ* and maximizing the number of positive lambdas under Model (4), we find that the MRS consists of DMUb, DMUcand DMUd; and a relative interior point of the minimum face spanned by these DMUs is generated. Finally, using the two-stage method of Banker et al. (2004) and examining the sign of the intercept of the supporting hyperplane passing through the given relative interior point, reveals that DMUooperates under decreasing RTS. The results of the implementation of the algorithm for all DMUs are reported in Table 2.We used several empirical and simulated large scale data sets to assess the computational capability of our proposed algorithm. The empirical application data sets are taken from relevant papers in the DEA literature. The simulated data sets are obtained from Jose Dula’s web-page at http://www.people.vcu.edu/∼jdula/. We specifically selected data sets for which 99 percent of all DMUs are inefficient in order to check the computational effectiveness of the algorithm for estimating the value of HDF for inefficient DMUs. All computations of our algorithm are carried out through a computer code using the GAMS optimization software. The data summary and evaluation results are listed in Table 3. For almost all the empirical data sets, the algorithm generated the exact value of the HDF at the initial iteration. This is because the mean efficiency of the DMUs is high which implies that inefficient DMUs are located near the efficient frontier. Table 3 shows that the algorithm yields the optimal objective value of the HDF within at most three iterations. There is no DMU that needs a fourth iteration of the procedure, at least in our experiment. Moreover, the number of DMUs that require three iterations of the main procedure is extremely small, i.e. below 3 percent of all DMUs. Hence, one can conclude that, in most practical situations, the algorithm will generate the HDF optimal objectives by solving at most two LP problems.Following a referee’s suggestion, we implemented the algorithm for the case of environmental technologies using data from 92 U.S. power plants that utilise three inputs to produce one desired output and two undesired outputs.1212See Färe, Grosskopf, and Pasurka (2007) for more detailed information about the data set.More precisely, we computed the value of an “enhanced hyperbolic output efficiency measure” that maximises the desired outputs and minimize the undesired outputs keeping the same level of inputs. We provided detailed comparisons between efficiency scores obtained via three different methods: a non-linear programming (NLP) solver, the linear approximation model (16) of Färe et al. (1989) and our adjusted algorithm. The detailed efficiency results generated by the three methods are reported in Table 4 in Appendix B as supplementary material. The algorithm generated the true efficiency scores for 77 power plants in the first iteration, for 13 power plants within two iterations and only power plants number 67 and 11 needed three and four iterations, respectively. It is also worth mentioning that, for all power plants, the first efficiency scores generated by our algorithm are more accurate than those of Färe et al. (1989) approximation method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
