@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On-time delivery probabilistic models for the vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands and time windows

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands and time windows is investigated.Three probabilistic models are proposed to address on-time delivery from different perspectives.Preventive restocking policy is shown to be applicable in the proposed models.A numerical example illustrates the effect of the preventive restocking policy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Logistics,Stochastic vehicle routing,On-time delivery,Stochastic programming,Dynamic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Increasing attention is given to on-time delivery of goods in the distribution and logistics industry. Due to uncertainties in customer demands, on-time deliveries cannot be ensured frequently. The vehicle capacity may be exceeded along the planned delivery route, and then the vehicle has to return to the depot for reloading of the goods. In this paper, such on-time delivery issues are formulated as a vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands and time windows. Three probabilistic models are proposed to address on-time delivery from different perspectives. The first one aims to search delivery routes with minimum expected total cost. The second one is to maximize the sum of the on-time delivery probabilities to customers. The third one seeks to minimize the expected total cost, while ensuring a given on-time delivery probability to each customer. Having noted that solutions of the proposed models are affected by the recourse policy deployed in cases of route failures, a preventive restocking policy is examined and compared with a detour-to-depot recourse policy. A numerical example indicates that the preventive restocking policy can help obtain better solutions to the proposed models and its effectiveness depends on the solution structure. It is also shown that the third model can be used to determine the minimum number of vehicles required to satisfy customers’ on-time delivery requirements.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The vehicle routing problem (VRP), introduced by Dantzig and Ramser (1959), involves planning a set of minimum-cost delivery routes for the vehicles of a logistics company. Each vehicle must depart from the depot, serve a set of geographically spread customers having known demands, and finally return to the depot. Each customer can only be visited once by one single vehicle. The total demand of the customers on each delivery route cannot exceed the vehicle capacity. Due to its broad distribution and logistics applications, the VRP together with a number of VRP variants has been intensively studied in the literature (Beraldi, Bruni, Laganà, & Musmanno, 2015; Dayarian et al., 2015; Golden, Raghavan, & Wasil, 2008; Leung, Zheng, Zhang, & Zhou, 2010, 2013; Toth & Vigo, 2002).The vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW) is one VRP variant in which each customer requires to be served within a given time window. In the case of hard time windows, late arrival vehicles are not allowed (Savelsbergh, 1992; Solomon, 1987). In the case of soft time windows, customers accept the service of late arrival vehicles, but nonetheless tardiness penalties are incurred (Chiang & Russell, 2004; Taillard, Badeau, Gendreau, Guertin, & Potvin, 1997). In both cases, early arrival vehicles must wait until the customer's earliest acceptable service time (i.e. the lower bound of the time window) begins.The vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands and time windows (VRPSD-TW) extends the VRPTW by considering uncertainties in customer demands. In this problem, customer demands are only known with probability distributions when planning the delivery routes. A customer's actual demand could be revealed only when the vehicle arrives at the customer's location. A route failure is defined as occurring when the vehicle arrives at one customer location but the actual revealed demand of that customer exceeds the remaining vehicle capacity. In cases of such route failures, certain types of recourse actions must be taken. For example, the vehicle may return to the depot to reload before resuming the delivery service. Due to the additional travel times consumed by recourse actions, time windows of the remaining customers along the planned delivery route may be violated. On-time delivery to these customers thus cannot be ensured, which is a critical issue in the VRPSD-TW.In the literature, only a few researchers have studied the VRPSD-TW. Chang (2005) proposed a two-stage stochastic programming with recourse model (referred to as a recourse model) for the VRPSD-TW. In the first stage, a set of a priori delivery routes is planned. The actual customer demands are then revealed in the second stage. A detour-to-depot recourse policy was deployed in cases of route failures. The objective is to plan a set of a priori delivery routes that minimizes carrier's expected total cost, which is comprised of the deterministic cost of the first-stage solution, the expected cost of recourse actions in the second stage and the expected penalty cost for time-window violations. Lei, Laporte, and Guo (2011) also formulated a recourse model for the VRPSD-TW to minimize carrier's expected total cost.The above VRPSD-TW models mainly stemmed from the carrier's point of view and focused on reducing carrier's expected total cost. By this approach, the probability of late delivery to some customers may be quite high, because time windows could be violated due to the additional travel times consumed by recourse actions. In practice, however, on-time delivery is a key delivery service performance measure (Forslund & Jonsson, 2010; Karim, Samaranayake, Smith, & Halgamuge, 2010). On-time delivery directly influences inventory levels and customer service levels, and contributes to maintaining a competitive advantage in supply chain operations (Nakandala, Samaranayake, & Lau, 2013). Conversely, a high probability of late delivery would lead to customer dissatisfaction and consequently, reduced market share. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate on-time delivery in the study of the VRPSD-TW.This paper extends the previous work in the following two aspects. Firstly, on-time delivery is addressed by formulating the VRPSD-TW from the different perspectives of the carrier and customers. Three probabilistic models are proposed for the VRPSD-TW. The first one is a recourse model formulated from the carrier perspective to minimize the carrier's expected total cost (penalties for late deliveries included), given that a fixed-size fleet of vehicles is available. The second model aims to maximize the sum of the on-time delivery probabilities to customers. It stems from the customer's point of view and addresses the question of “how well is the on-time delivery performance of the carrier with a fixed-size fleet of vehicles?” The third one is a new stochastic programming model which embeds probabilistic customer service level constraints within a traditional recourse model. It aims to minimize the carrier's expected total cost, while ensuring a given on-time delivery probability to each customer.Secondly, the applicability of the preventive restocking (PR) policy on the three proposed models is examined. In the previous VRPSD-TW studies, the detour-to-depot (DTD) recourse policy was deployed in cases of route failures. Under this recourse policy, the vehicle returns to the depot to reload only when it runs out of stock. Inspired by Yang, Mathur, and Ballou (2000), a PR policy is developed for each of the three proposed models in this paper, under which the vehicle may return to the depot to reload before a stock-out occurs. The PR policy can help achieve better delivery solutions than those obtained by using the DTD recourse policy. It is also shown that the PR policy has a simple threshold-type structure and is easy to implement.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands (VRPSD), which is closely related to the VRPSD-TW. Section 3 presents the three models proposed for the VRPSD-TW. Section 4 examines the PR policy for each of the three proposed models. Section 5 reports the results of an illustrative example. Conclusions are drawn and presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the VRPSD-TW has been investigated with taking account of the on-time delivery issue and different recourse policies. Three probabilistic models have been proposed for the VRPSD-TW to address on-time delivery from different perspectives. RM and PM were formulated from the perspectives of the carrier and the customers, respectively. RMPC was proposed to minimize delivery cost, while satisfying customers’ on-time delivery requirements.The PR policy has been shown to be applicable in the three models proposed for the VRPSD-TW. Under the traditional DTD recourse policy, the vehicle returns to the depot to reload only when it runs out of stock. However, under the PR policy, the vehicle can return to the depot to reload after visiting one customer, if its remaining capacity is less than a threshold value. The threshold values can be determined based on the customer demand distributions and the customer visiting sequence. This threshold structure makes the PR policy easy to implement.To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed models and the RP policy, an illustrative example was conducted. The results of the illustrative example showed that the PR policy can help reduce the cost of the possible solutions of RM compared with the traditional DTD recourse policy, but it has a smaller impact on the possible solutions of PM. For both RM and PM, the effectiveness of the PR policy varies across different possible solutions and is affected by the solution structure. For RMPC, more vehicles may be required to meet customers’ on-time delivery requirements and the use of the PR policy may increase the number of feasible solutions and reduce the number of vehicles required.The introduction of customer demand uncertainties and the PR policy poses severe computational challenges for solving the proposed models in larger problem instances. Recently, several exact or heuristic algorithms (Baldacci, Mingozzi, & Roberti, 2011; Beraldi et al., 2015; Gauvin, Desaulniers, & Gendreau, 2014; Goodson et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2013) have been developed in the literature to solve problems that are closely related to the VRPSD-TW. How to extend these efficient solution algorithms for the proposed VRPSD-TW models is warranted for further study. In this study, a simple example was adopted to illustrate the essential ideas of this paper. Further studies are required to examine the performance of the proposed models and the effect of the PR policy in larger problem instances.