@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Better understanding of factors to achieve optimal educational outputs.We analyze teacher-based assessments in three different subjects using the multiobjective methodology.A reference point approach is used to determine the profile of the most “successfully-balanced” students.The profile of the most balanced-productive students in Andalusia depends on the students' gender.Parents’ education and students' effort are key to optimal and balanced educational performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple objective programming,Education,Students’ performance,Reference point,Econometric analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper sheds new light on the relationship between inputs and outputs in the framework of the educational production function. In particular, it is geared at gaining a better understanding of which factors may be affected in order to achieve an optimal educational output level. With this objective in mind, we analyze teacher-based assessments (actual marks) in three different subjects using a multiobjective schema. For much of the analysis we use data from a recent (2010) Survey – ESOC10, linked with the results from an educational assessment program conducted among 11 and 15 year-old students and with the administrative records on teacher-based scores. Following the statistical and econometric analysis of these data, they are used to build a multiobjective mixed integer model. A reference point approach is used to determine the profile of, potentially, the most “successful and balanced” students in terms of educational outcomes. This kind of methodology in multiobjective programming allows generating “very balanced” solutions in terms of the objective values (subjects). Finally, a sensitivity analysis is used to determine policies that can be carried out in order to improve the performance levels of primary and secondary education students. Particularly, policy makers should be more concerned with the need to promote some cultural habits – such as reading –, from both the students’ and parents’ side. Additionally, policy efforts should be focused on making the vocational pathways available to Spanish youth more appealing, with the aim of taking advantage of the particular skills of students not succeeding in the academic track.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Education is a cornerstone of the welfare state and has been under evaluation at the microeconomic level particularly since 1997, when the OECD launched the Program for International Students Assessment (PISA), designed to evaluate education systems worldwide every three years by assessing 15-year-olds' competencies in key subjects (reading, mathematics and science). One of the main conclusions of these studies with regard to Spain is the relatively low performance of Spanish teenagers as compared to most of the students from the EU-15. Within Spain, Andalusia – the region for which we are conducting the research in this paper– is of special interest since pupils in this region are among the lowest achievers compared to the rest of Spain (e.g. it is one of the three worst regions in Spain in terms of reading and mathematics, as measured by test scores from PISA).11According to this program, Spain is placed in the thirtieth position in reading (mean score of 481), thirty-first position in mathematics (483) and thirty-third in sciences (488), slightly under the mean of the OECD countries (score of 493).The policy background of this work relies on the fact that youth educational failure is a major problem in Andalusia and, in general, in Spain (together with the rest of the Mediterranean countries). In fact, leaving school early22Defined as the percentage of the population aged 18–24 with at most lower secondary education and not in further education or training.is higher in Spain than in other UE-27 countries, and this trend has been maintained during the last two decades, reaching a rate of 28.4 percent by 2010 (23.2 percent for female students and 33.5 percent for male students),33From Eurostat (2013): “Early leavers from education and training by sex”, http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/product_details/dataset?p_product_code=T2020_40.only surpassed by Turkey44The rate of early school leavers in Turkey is 47.9 percent for female students and 37.8 percent for male students (2010). On the contrary Slovenia is the country which exhibits the lowest percentage, with only 3.3 percent for female students and 6.4 percent for male students.; the figures for Andalusia are even worse, as 40.3 percent of male and 28.7 percent of female youngsters leave school with, at most, a lower secondary education.Despite the dramatic size of these figures, they have shown a decreasing trend during the last five years, particularly since 2008, mainly because the economic crisis has drastically limited employment opportunities, reducing the opportunity cost of staying within the educational system. Consequently, there is a high degree of concern about the relatively low performance of students and the difficulties faced by young people in securing a good quality job as a consequence of the lack of an appropriate mix of skills required for the labor market.It should be noted that given the high cost of education investments made by families, firms and the government, there exists a special policy interest in the extent to which different factors may affect the educational performance exhibited by students at different stages of their compulsory education and the degree to which these outcomes might be affected to achieve an “optimal” performance level.Most of the previous literature on educational production functions has been mainly concerned with the difficulties to measure educational inputs and outputs, particularly in connection with the effect of some students’ socio-economic background, and the impact of some specific factors, such as study time, gender or parents’ highest formal education level (or social class),55See, e.g. Dolton, Marcenaro, and Navarro (2003).on some measure of educational output (mainly test based assessment),66Predominantly those reported by the International Assessment Programs (PISA, TIMSS, PIRSL, etc.).such as exam scores in a particular subject (or the mean of the scores for the whole set of subjects) controlling personal characteristics, thus failing to consider the joint balance in performance among different subjects. The latter is the main issue under scrutiny in this paper which focuses on investigating which factors, among a wide set, might be affected to achieve that optimum balance, assessing first of all the extent to which some of these factors are clearly correlated with educational performance in “reading”, “mathematics” and “English” of primary and secondary education students and, secondly, analyzing how these inputs should be combined to achieve an “optimally balanced” performance of students in the three subjects mentioned, no neglecting any of the three subjects and obtaining similar values for the three subjects. This means that we conceptualize education as a process in which a variety of inputs are used to determine a multidimensional output since we are considering the three subjects at the same time and not the global score.Additionally, this paper aims to provide new methodological tools, combining econometric and multiobjective programming techniques, to help researchers and politicians to have a more precise view of how to improve the efficiency of the educational system. To the best of our knowledge this is the first time this methodology is deployed to evaluate the distance to an “optimal” performance level among Spanish students, although there is some previous evidence of this mixed methodology. Particularly, Wallenius, Wallenius, and Vartia (1978) proposed a multiobjective optimization model for formulating macroeconomics policy decisions in Finland through econometric models. Recently, in Marcenaro, Luque, and Rúa (2010) a multiobjective approach is used as a supplement to an econometric study regarding the satisfaction levels of Spanish workers.In brief, we propose analyzing this problem with a two-step procedure. Firstly, we will proceed with econometric estimates to obtain a causal relationship between students’ performance and an individual/contextual set of features. In order to address this issue we use survey and administrative data containing records on a rich set of variables – potentially-closely related to students’ performance: immigrant condition, type of school, holding or not a grant, the educational level of the father and the mother, living or not with their parents, family events, parents control of manners, parents control of time devoted to internet, videogames and homework, attending private lessons/academies, days absent from school, students’ and parents’ reading habits, assessment of teaching methods and whether or not the student is repeating a school year. These are all argued to be key correlates of a good student's performance. At a second stage, we will make use of multiobjective programming techniques to disentangle the extent to which those correlations may be affected in order to achieve a satisfactory solution to the problem.Multiobjective programming problems involve several multiple criteria to be optimized (maximized in our case) simultaneously. In such problems, the criteria and the constraints that determine the feasible set of alternatives can be mathematically expressed by functions. Since the criteria, also known as objective functions, are usually conflicting, there is no solution where all the objectives can reach their individual optima. Instead, it is possible to identify some compromise solutions, known as Pareto optimal solutions, non-dominated objective vectors or efficient solutions, where none of the objectives can improve without deteriorating at least another one.In the last decades, many methods have been proposed to generate efficient solutions in multiobjective programming problems. One group of techniques is based on the reference point methodology, where some reference values (reference point) constitute the preferential information considered in the multiobjective programming model. Minimizing the achievement scalarizing function allows us to generate efficient solutions taking into account the reference point considered (Wierzbicki, 1980). The popularity of this methodology in recent years is unquestionable: Steuer and Choo (1983), Steuer (1986), Korhonen and Laakso (1986), Korhonen and Wallenius (1988), Sun, Stam, and Steuer (2000), Buchanan and Gardiner (2003), Miettinen and Mäkelä (2002, 2006), Luque, Miettinen, Eskelinen, and Ruiz (2009), Luque, Ruiz, and Steuer (2010), Marcenaro, Luque, and Rúa (2010). In our case, this methodology will be used to describe the profile of the highest performance of an Andalusian student in the current educational system, according to the survey data.The paper thus offers a new and crucial contribution to the debate on education policies, particularly relevant in a context of economic crisis when cuts have been made to the budget assigned to education.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data used in our analysis, provides some descriptive statistics of the sample under scrutiny and presents information on the key outcome measures, namely exam scores at ages 11 and 15 in three different subjects. Additionally, inSection 2we also report the results of the econometric analysis. The multiobjective programming models are formulated and solved inSection 3. Finally, the main conclusions are drawn inSection 4.The final model of this problem has been built following a series of steps. First, a set of data concerning Andalusian students’ performance levels, as well as some of their personal characteristics, was collected from the ESOC10-SEN survey. Then, an econometric analysis was carried out in order to find a set of variables significantly affecting the students’ educational outcomes in primary and secondary education in three different subjects; several conclusions were obtained from this econometric analysis. Based on these results, the significant decision variables of the problem were identified, and the objective functions and constraints built. Finally, a referencepoint scheme was used to work out the resulting multiobjective problem.The information analyzed in this paper comes largely from the Andalusian Social Survey, Education and Households (ESOC10) for 2010, in which families and students provide information on a wide range of personal characteristics, parents–school interactions and learning attributes. This survey was conducted by the Statistical and Cartography Institute of Andalusia across the eight provinces of Andalusia. It was directed to all family households with children born in 1994 and in 1998, in order to determine the factors that influence the academic performance of students attending primary and secondary education schools. To achieve this, face to face interviews were conducted in pupils’ homes with parents and children. In addition to this, for all respondents in the ESOC10 survey, the educational regional authorities provided us with their administrative records,77The data base containing these records is called “Seneca”; this why we call the linked data ESOC10-SEN.which include teacher-based assessments of students and some further information on recorded student behavior problems.The information for each child was collected in 2009 through three questionnaires: one completed by the household members, with general household information such as the structure of the family, income level, occupation of the head of family, etc.; a second completed by the parents about parents–children interaction in educational terms and parents expectations about their children at school, as well as other social behavior characteristics and the degree of participation of the parents in meetings; and a third filled in by children about their expectations, favorite subjects, out-of-school activities, etc.The original sample for the ESOC10-SEN survey comprises 5461 observations taken from a random sample of final year primary and secondary school students. To prevent intentional misreporting information, at the time of the survey students and parents did not know that the information would be linked to administrative records of teacher assessments of their children. We excluded from our analysis observations on any respondent who was not enrolled in school at the time of the survey (429 youngsters), students recorded as being disabled (122) and students enrolled in private schools (47). This reduced the sample to 4452 students, 2309 from the cohort born in 1994 and 2243 from the cohort born in 1998. The sample was further reduced in the analysis due to missing data on teacher-based assessment; consequently most regressions have a sample size of approximately 1800 observations from the cohort born in 1994 and 2000 from the cohort born in 1998.The outputs of an educational process are not that obvious, insofar as they are multidimensional. Bowles (1970) suggests that the educational system performs two primary economic functions: socialization and selection. The first function, socialization, involves the indoctrination of values and beliefs. The second function, selection, involves the direct effects of schooling on worker productivity.88The relationship between education and productivity has been broadly developed by the “Human Capital Theory” and the “Screening Hypothesis”.Unfortunately, neither the social nor the economic dimensions are directly quantifiable from our data. Our measurement of educational output is based on the scores obtained by students during the 2009–2010 academic year. These achievement scores must be considered as proxies for productive performance because of the unobservable stochastic elements99Some studies of the educational system's productivity have used achievement test scores as an output measure; Hanushek (1986) has discussed the shortcomings of this measure.outlined previously.Full descriptive statistics for the sample used, by cohort and gender, are provided in Tables A2.a and A2.b (Appendix A). Additionally, Tables A3.a and A3.b report the mean and standard deviation values for the exam scores in reading, mathematics and English for the whole set of variables under scrutiny. Broadly speaking, with respect to the differences between male and female students, it is remarkable that in most cases the average grades of female students are higher than those of male students. This also holds when migration status is taken into account: native male students exhibit lower average grades than females in all subjects for both cohorts of students. This trend is also reflected among immigrant students, whose average performance is lower than in the case of natives, particularly for those born in 1994.With respect to the type of school students are enrolled in, for both male and female, those who attend a semi-private school (funded only partly by the government) present slightly higher average grades in all subjects. In the case of students born in 1998, this is not observed for reading.Although on average girls show higher performance, there are some exceptions to this trend in the cohort of students born in 1994. Male students have higher mean grades in mathematics than female students in the case of students living only with their father. This pattern can also be observed for students who devote between 30 minutes and 1 hour to homework, receive private tutoring and attend private academies (both of them and for all subjects) and the ones reporting lower values for the assessment of teaching methods. In the same vein, in this cohort, those receiving private lessons and attending private academies present some differences in their standard deviations as compared to the rest. The same is observed for those with lower values of assessment of teaching methods. This can be explained by the low number of observations.On the other hand, in the cohort of students born in 1998, the mean values for female students are mostly surpassed by the ones for male students in mathematics in the case of students with a scholarship, living only with their mother or father, having a family event – as divorce, job change or unemployment–, devoting between 30 minutes and 1 hour or 2 and 3 hours to homework, and reading because they like it. Lower values of the assessment of teaching methods also seem to be correlated with higher average grades for male students in all subjects. In addition, abnormal differences in standard deviations are only found in students who do not have homework or who do not do it and in lower values of teaching assessment methods, due to the same reason as for the cohort born at 1994.All in all the descriptive statistics show substantial differences by gender and cohort for the whole set of variables; thus in the next section we carry out separate econometric analysis by cohort and gender.Simple linear regression models have been estimated in which students’ performance in three subjects (reading, mathematics and English) are regressed on the set of explanatory variables reported above. Students’ performance is a discrete, ordered variable categorized from 1 to 10. Thus we first run ordered probit models, obtaining results very close to those shown by ordinary least squared estimations (OLS). For this reason, and in order to make the implementation of the Multiobjective Programming approach more consistent, we decided to use the coefficients obtained from the linear regression model.As previously outlined, we can proxy the output of the educational process through different categories of students’ performance. The level for each of these performance targets results from the combination of a set of individual and contextual features, unobservable factors and a random disturbance (ε). The idea behind the OLS estimator is to minimize the latter term in order to get rid of the so-called “statistical noise” as much as possible. If individuals are indexed as i, and students' performance for each subject is indexed as j, this model can be represented by the following set of equations1010This technique for modelling the educational process of exam performance is the educational production function.:Pj(i)=α^j+β^1jimm(i)+β^2jsemipriv(i)+⋯+β^40jrepeat09(i)+ɛj(i)i=1,…,n(numberofobservations);j=reading,mathematics,English.where Pj(i) is a measure of the students’ performance in subject j of individual i, and imm(i), semipriv(i), …, repeat09(i), a set of explanatory variables; εj(i) is a random disturbance;β^ja vector of slope coefficients andα^ja fixed but unknown population intercept. The size of the sample is represented by the value n. Therefore, we are assuming that each individual's exam performance is affected by random factors which are inherently unobservable and distributed normally. This parsimonious model is characterized by the parametric nature of its specification; the estimated parameters represent average educational production functions, i.e. the average combination of a set of educational inputs transformed to obtain an average output level.Tables B1.a and B1.b show the estimated coefficients of the key variables of interest; it also reports the standard deviations and the significance levels for each coefficient.1111The corresponding tables for students born in 1998 have not been reported to save space. Nevertheless they can be obtained from the authors on request.With respect to the estimation results, on average students born abroad exhibit similar results to natives except in the case of male students born in 1994, whose performance in reading is significantly lower than natives, which seems to be, to some degree, a counter-intuitive result; there are plenty of studies showing that immigrant students have a lower performance at school (for example, Chiswick and Miller (2005), Entorf and Minoiu (2005), or Ammermueller (2007)).1212See Meunier, de Coulon, Marcenaro, and Vignoles (2013) for an extended literature review on this issue.They emphasize the relative importance of being an immigrant student against the potential influence of differential characteristics that they usually show, such as the occupation of their parents or household cultural and wealth level. Nevertheless, most of this literature refers to countries with a high proportion of immigrant students and employ as explained variable the student's performance in external test-based assessments. In the sample we evaluate, only 4.2 percent of children are immigrants; thus this sample size means we should be cautious in reading too much into this result. Additionally, we rely on actual teacher assessment as recorded in schools' administrative records – not on external test-based assessments.The indicator variable representing whether a student attends a semi-private school has a negative impact on reading, mathematics and English scores, particularly for male students and those from the youngest cohort. This means that students who are more likely to be wealthier and attend schools with wealthier peers get lower teacher assessments than those enrolled in fully publicly funded schools. This might be explained by teachers in semi-private schools being more demanding (possible grade inflation in public schools) or simply that students from these educational centers devote less effort to education. Gutiérrez and Adserá (2012), focusing on actual exam scores of students from Catalonia, observed a comparable result, i.e. students in state schools actually have higher grades1313Specifically in the areas of: general knowledge, Catalan knowledge and school abilities.as compared to those in semi-private schools.There is no a clear positive correlation between holding a grant and academic results, although at these educational levels the amount of state financial support is limited because education is "free", which might explain the lack of significance of this coefficient.For both cohorts, a mother with – at least– compulsory education raises the performance of students – in comparison with students whose mother reports below primary education level– in all subjects, mainly for female students. There is extensive literature which highlights these results. For example, Altonji and Dunn (1996) observed a positive and significant connection between parents’ schooling levels and school success of their children. In the same way, Hanushek (1997) andBlundell, Dearden, Goodman, and Reed (2000) conclude that students’ achievement level positively depends on their parents’ accumulated years of education. Plug and Oosterbeek (1999) estimate that increasing the father's or mother's academic training by five years translates into an additional year of studies for the child. They found a positive and significant relation between the intellectual coefficient (IQ) of parents and the educational achievement of their descendants. Well before, Kagan and Moss (1959) and Wolfe (1982) stated that the educational achievement of mothers has a higher influence on the intellectual capacity of their children than the achievement of fathers.Female students aged 11 living only with their mother show lower educational performance than those living with both parents. Similarly, starting to speak very early has a negative coefficient in female students born in 1994 and 1998, but for male students it has a positive coefficient in mathematics.The coefficients picking up the potential effect of negative family events that occurred in the last two years (divorce, job change, unemployment) are not significant at the standard confidence levels.Unsurprisingly, self-study time (i.e. time devoted to homework) is positive and significant as a determinant of performance. This holds mainly for older students (those born in 1994) who obtain an average increase between 1.5 and 2 points in reading, mathematics and English when they spend 3 or more hours per day as compared to those not doing homework. In the same vein, students' reading habits maintain a positive correlation with exam scores in the three subjects under scrutiny, particularly students who read on their own, because they achieve around 0.5 more on exam scores than those not reading at all, or those who read as an obligatory task.The negative sign of the variables measuring whether the student receives private lessons clearly shows that students who need private tutoring are those who are less capable, i.e. with low ability or low motivation, or both. This negative result disappears when we estimate the model for the 1998 cohort, which could be interpreted by saying that higher pressure for low achievers, as they get older, pushes them to spend relatively longer hours in private tutoring.Similarly absenteeism, as a proxy for the students' lack of motivation or inadequate learning environment at home, has a harmful impact on academic performance.Finally, two more inputs are recorded: firstly, the assessment of teaching methods by parents shows a positive correlation with exam performance, with the only exception of the sample of female students born in 1998; conversely, repeating a course has a depressing effect on students' performance, particularly important for those aged 15 in 2009. This issue has been well established in the literature on the economics of education. See e.g. Jimerson, Anderson, and Whipple (2002), Dolton, Marcenaro, and Navarro (2003), Benito (2007) and Calero, Choi, and Waisgrais (2010).In this section, the basic definitions and notations regarding multiobjective programming are provided. We consider the following general multiobjective problem:(1)maximizef(x)=(f1(x),f2(x),…,fk(x))subjecttox∈Xinvolving k (≥2) conflicting objective functions fi: X → R, which must be maximized simultaneously and wherex=(x1,…,xn)Tare the decision variables. This vector x belongs to the feasible region X⊂Rn, which is a nonempty compact set. The image of X⊂Rn, Z = f(X) is called feasible objective region.In multiobjective programming, objective vectors are optimal if none of their coordinates can be improved without making at least one of the others worse. That is, a decision vector x' ∈ X is said to be efficient for problem (1) if no other vector x ∈ X exists, such that fi(x') ≤ fi(x) for all i = 1, …, k, and fj(x') < fj(x) for at least one index j. On the other hand, a decision vector x' ∈ X is said to be weakly efficient for problem (1) if no other vector x ∈ X exists, such that fi(x') < fi(x) for all i = 1, …, k. The corresponding objective vectors f(x') are called (weakly) nondominated objective vectors. Observe that the set of efficient solutions is a subset of the weakly efficient solutions.The vector formed by the optimal individuals of each objective function is called the ideal vector, denoted byz*=(z1*,…,zk*)Twherezi*=maxx∈Xfi(x)for all i = 1, 2, …, k. These values are upper bounds for all non-dominated objective vectors. The lower bounds are set by the nadir vectorznad=(z1nad,…,zknad)T, wherezinad=minx∈Efi(x)for all i = 1, 2, …, k. While the ideal vector can be obtained by means of an appropriate single objective optimization technique, the nadir vector is difficult to obtain. Its components can be approximated using a pay-off table, but in general this kind of estimation is not that good (for details, see e.g. Miettinen, 1999, and references therein). Some additional approaches for more reliable nadir vector generation have been proposed in Korhonen, Salo, and Steuer (1997). Nadir is also often used to normalize the objective functions, but in our case, since the values of our three objectives are between 0 and 10, there is no need to normalize.A very common way to express preferences about efficient solutions is given by the so-called reference pointq=(q1,…,qk)T, which consists of reference values for the objective functions. Given these values and a vector of weights μ = (μ1, …, μk)T, the so-called achievement scalarizing function is built and minimized over the feasible set. One of the most commonly used achievement scalarizing functions was proposed by Wierzbicki (1980):(2)s(q,f(x),μ)=maxi=1,…,k{μi(qi−fi(x))}+ρ∑i=1kμi(qi−fi(x))which must be minimized in the feasible region:(3)minimizes(q,f(x),μ)subjecttox∈XThe parameter ρ > 0 is the so-called augmentation term, which must be a small value, and which assures the efficiency of the solutions generated. If the second term is not used, then only the weak efficiency of the solution is assured. The vector μ = (μ1, …, μk)Twith μi> 0 for all i = 1, …, k is formed by the weights assigned to reach the reference values.A possible inconvenience of the achievement scalarizing function (2) to be solved in (3) is that it is generally non-differentiable, even if the objective functions of the problem (1) are all differentiable. However, this drawback can be overcome by considering the following equivalent formulation to the problem (3):(4)minimizeα+ρ∑i=1kμi(qi−fi(x))subjecttoμi(qi−fi(x))≤αi=1,..,kx∈XTaking into account that our resulting multiobjective problem is a linear mixed integer multiobjective problem (all the variables are binary except one of them) and considering the differentiable formulation (4), the resulting single objective optimization problem will be solved using the optimization toolbox function for Matlab 2012.1414Specifically, we use a function developed by Sherif Tawfik, designed to solve single objective mixed-integer linear programming problems.This kind of problem has already been treated in the scientific literature. For example, Alves and Climaco (2004) proposed a decision support system to solve multiobjective integer and mixed-integer programming problems using interactive reference point approaches.Although not all the variables considered in the econometric study described above are controllable by a decision maker, we will consider all of them as decision variables for the multiobjective model. Therefore, the decision variables of the model are the 40 variables described in Table A1. As previously highlighted, one of these variables is continuous (tma), while the rest are binary.We now define the set of constraints of the model. There is a set of technical constraints which ensure that certain binary variables do not take the value 1 simultaneously. Let us recall that the reference value of each group (which is assumed to be equal to 1 if the rest are equal to 0) is not considered a variable, which is why the constraints reported in Tables 1are inequalities.Finally, other constraints have been derived from clear dependencies observed in the linear regression analysis. In other words, we have chosen those pairs of variables whose dependencies are statistically significant according to this analysis, and thus it is not realistic to give them independent values. One of them is the variable tma, the only continuous variable of our model. We have checked all the dependencies between this variable and the rest included in our model. In order to build these two-sided constraints, we have used 99 percent confidence intervals. Tables 2.aand 2.b show the bounds for α and β. The first row in these tables corresponds to the lower and upper bound of β; the second row corresponds to α. For the sake of clarity, an example of dependency between semiprivate schools and tma for male students born in 1994 is shown next:Dependency between tma and semipriv. The linear regression is given by:tma=a·semipriv+bwhere the confidence intervals of the coefficients are (99 percent):a∈[al,au]=[0.123,0.860]b∈[bl,bu]=[6.727,7.053]which implies:al·sempriv+bl≤tma≤au·sempriv+buand two new constraints are incorporated into the model:(C12a)tma−(0.860·sempriv+7.053)≤0(C13a)tma−(0.123·semipriv+6.727)≥0The objective to be considered in this study is students’ performance in reading, mathematics and English. The econometric study has allowed us to express these outcomes as functions of a set of variables, with the linear coefficients shown in Tables B1.a and B1.b. Therefore, if we rename the variables as xk, k = 1, …, 40 (only in this subsection, for the sake of clarity),β^kjis the regression coefficient of variable K for performance level j, andα^jis the independent term of performance level j, then we have the following three objectives:EPj(x)=∑k=140β^kjxk+α^j,j=1,2,3which measure the expected performance levels with respect to reading, mathematics and English, respectively. The problem has to be solved four times: (a) male students born in 1994; (b) female students born in 1994; (c) male students born in 1998 and (d) female students born in 1998.1515The corresponding tables have not been shown for the sake of brevity, bearing in mind that the main contribution is the solution of the multiobjective problem.The resulting multiobjective problem to be solved in each case is the following:Max(EP1(x),EP2(x),EP3(x))=(∑k=140β^k1·xk+α^1,∑k=140β^k2·xk+α^2+∑k=140β^k3·xk+α^3)Subject to: (C1) – (C11)(C12a)−(C25a)(onlyformalestudentsbornin1994)(C12b)−(C25b)(onlyforfemalestudentsbornin1994)(C12c)−(C23c)(onlyformalestudentsbornin1998)(C12d)−(C37d)(onlyforfemalestudentsbornin1998)The coefficients of the objective functions are different for each case but, for the sake of clarity, we did not want to introduce more additional notation. Thus, the model under scrutiny is a mixed integer linear multiobjective model with 3 objectives, 40 variables, 11 technical constraints and several simple bounds and integrality constraints. For each case, we have calculated their ideal values:2.a.Formalestudentsbornin1994:z*,a=(8.96,8.15,9.09)2.b.Forfemalestudentsbornin1994:z*,b=(8.52,7.89,9.57)2.c.Formalestudentsbornin1998:z*,c=(9.41,8.42,7.51)2.d.Forfemalestudentsbornin1998:z*,d=(9.33,7.67,8.10)As previously mentioned, the multiobjective problem has been solved in order to detect the profile of Andalusian students who could, potentially, achieve balanced maximum scores in terms of the three different subjects. To this end, we have used a reference point approach, using a score of 8 as the reference level for each subject, although resolutions for 7 and 9 have also been obtained (not reported for space reasons):q1=8,q2=8,q3=8Consequently the reference point problem solved is:Minimizeα+ρ∑j=13(qi−(∑i=140β^ij·xi+α^j))Subjectto:qj−(∑i=140β^ij·xi+α^j)≤αj=1,2,3(C1)−(C11)(C12a)−(C25a)(onlyformalestudentsbornin1994)(C12b)−(C25b)(onlyforfemalestudentsbornin1994)(C12c)−(C23c)(onlyformalestudentsbornin1998)(C12d)−(C37d)(onlyforfemalestudentsbornin1998)In this formulation, all the criteria are equally weighted. Besides, note that, given that all the performance levels are specified in the same scale, no normalization is needed in this formulation. Therefore, it is implicitly assumed that the achievements of all the reference levels are equally important for the decision maker.The solutions obtained for both male and female students are shown in Tables 3.aand 3.bfor students born in 1994 and 1998, respectively.1616The computational time spent to solve this model was 1.2 seconds per problem.In our case, without the second term of the achievement scalarizing function, the resulting problems would have more than one solution and some solutions would not be efficient.The results presented in these tables provide the profile of male and female students who, potentially, could get a balanced maximum achievement in terms of the scores for the three subjects, based on the available data. Analyzing the solutions generated in each case, multiobjective programming is able to detect some issues that are difficult to obtain with only econometric analysis.Concretely, if we look at the solution obtained for male students born in 1994, the variable ac (attending academies) is equal to 0. One may wonder why this variable is set to 1, since the three coefficients of the objective functions (reading, mathematics and English) are positive, being representative for the last two subjects. However, there is an explanation based on multiobjective programming. If this variable is equal to 1, the constraints C18A and C19a would force the variable tma (teaching methods assessment) to take a maximum value of 6.674, which in turn influences other restrictions such as C14a, C20a and C24a, so the variables h1, cda1019 and repeat09 would have to be set to 1, which would entail greater worsening of the objective functions that improvement would be achieved by the initial change. The interdependence reflected in our model makes it possible to detect such situations.In the case of the solution for female students 1994, the variable cm1 (parents control manners: a lot) is equal to 1, allowing the variable tma to take a higher value and to obtain better values in the three targets included in mathematics, which cannot reach the reference value. Similarly, we might wonder why this variable is not equal to 0 and then cm3 could be set to 1 since the coefficients of cm3 are larger than those of cm1 for the three objective functions. In this case, as the coefficient for English is the only representative and taking into account that it reaches the reference value (8.508 >8), the improvement would only occur in this area yet, what would force the variable tma to take a smaller value for the restriction C19b and, therefore, worsening the value of the three objective functions, including the worst (mathematics) that does not reach the reference value (8) and that gives us the optimal value of the achievement scalarizing function.In the case of male students 1998, one might wonder why the variable civ1 (parents control of internet and games: a lot) is not equal to 0 and then civ2 could take the value 1, since the coefficients of the objective functions in civ2 are greater than those of civ1. Since the coefficients of those two variables are only representative for mathematics, and considering that the reference value is reached in the solution for this subject (8.387 >8), the only improvement would occur in mathematics, resulting in a decrease in the value of tma by restricting C17c. This would lead to a reduction of the values of the three objective functions, including English, which has the worst value (7.506), giving us the optimal value of alpha (optimal value of the achievement scalarizing function).For the solution of female students (1998 cohort), the interdependence between the variables is greater because there are more constraints stemming from a greater number of dependencies between variables. In these cases the change in value of a variable can influence one or more variables, which in turn may influence another one, and so on.In summary, with respect to the results in these tables, we conclude that attending a semi-private school only helps female students to achieve a higher and balanced optimum achievement level in secondary education; in contrast, having a scholarship is only profitable for boys. On the other hand, a higher education level of the mother and father contributes, in general, to making it feasible to improve the performance in the three subjects and, likewise, a greater effort by the student, proxied by time devoted to homework, significantly contributes to reaching an optimum and balanced achievement level. As expected, those repeating the year depart from the optimum performance level regardless of the gender and birth cohort; on the contrary, reading habits clearly contribute to better student results.We have analyzed the robustness of the solutions from two points of view: weights of the reference values and confidence level of the constraint intervals.Considering the weights, the solution does not change for each of the four cases (Male94, Female94, Male98, Female98) when each weight at the time is increased by one unit. This means that the four solutions are robust with respect to these parameters.1717The corresponding table is not presented to save space; it may be obtained from the authors upon request.Regarding the confidence intervals of the constraints, the values of the objective functions change only slightly. In particular, in the case of male students born in 1994, the new values of the objective functions are 8.51 for reading, 8.15 for mathematics and 8.33 for English; for female students born in 1994, the values are 8.52, 7.89, and 8.51; 9.41, 8.39 and 7.50 for male students born in 1998 and, 8.86, 7.67 and 8.10 for female students born in 1998. In all of the four cases, the biggest difference in the values of the objective functions with respect to confidence intervals of 98 percent is less than four thousandths, thus meaningless.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a multiobjective analysis has been carried out to supplement an econometric study regarding students’ achievement in primary and secondary education. Once the econometric analysis has allowed us to determine the significant parameters of the educational production function, the ulterior multiobjective approach contributes to further consideration of the conflicts between the grades in different subjects and the impact of the most significant variables on those levels. This combination of methodologies proves to be useful in order to identify the desirable profiles of students who obtain good and similar scores in reading, mathematics and English, and to determine policies that may be carried out to improve educational performance. Furthermore, from a methodological point of view, the use of a reference point approach has helped to allow generating efficient solutions and, at the same time, to obtain compensated solutions through the consideration of the same reference levels. The multiobjective programming methodology allowed us to detect some issues that are difficult to see only with an econometric analysis. In addition, a sensitivity analysis shows us the robustness of the solutions obtained. In consequence, the success of these techniques in multiobjective programming is expected to enrich the literature in this field.Regarding the results obtained, it can be concluded that the profile of the most balanced-productive students in Andalusia depends on the students' gender, and subject to this condition, there is not a substantial degree of conflict in the performance in the three subjects evaluated. As a consequence, the solutions for the multiobjective problem are in line with those obtained from the estimation of the educational production function and clearly reveal the importance of some variables such as parents’ education, students' efforts and reading habits to achieve an optimal and balanced performance level in both primary and secondary education.The paper thus offers a contribution to the debate on education policies, particularly relevant in a context of economic crisis when cuts have been made to the budget assigned to education. Our results reinforce the arguments upheld in the previous literature to boost the stock of human capital. More precisely, it is important to make it clear that self-study time contributes to achieving higher levels of balanced performance; thus the “effort” is much more efficient than having parents expending on private tuition. Additionally, policy makers should be more concerned with the need to promote some cultural habits: promoting reading habits through advertising campaigns and convincing parents regarding the importance of this matter would be priceless. Needless to say, the contribution of teachers to promote cultural habits among students is essential, but they too could help in this respect by interacting with parents and indoctrinating them on these issues. Of particular concern is the result obtained for the variable reflecting students with a scholarship, as it is only profitable for boys who, on average, achieve a lower performance. This could be taken as a sign of the extra “motivation” that getting a grant may promote among students with lower performance. Nevertheless, policy makers should be aware that we probably do not achieve a higherimpact from this variable to the extent that education in Spain is “free”. In other words, extra funding through grants makes no meaningful contribution when the system is already upheld by public funding.Finally, to the extent that students repeating also exhibit lower later performance, policy efforts should be focused on making the vocational pathways available to Spanish youth more appealing, with the aim of taking advantage of the particular skills that students not succeeding in the academic track may have.