@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fast solution method for the time-dependent orienteering problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We define and mathematically model the time-dependent orienteering problem (TD-OP).We developed a large set of realistic test instances with known optimal solutions.We present an efficient local search procedure to deal with time-dependency.We design an efficient and effective metaheuristic to tackle the TD-OP.The performance concerning quality and computation time is verified

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metaheuristics,Vehicle routing,Orienteering problem,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a fast solution procedure to solve 100-node instances of the time-dependent orienteering problem (TD-OP) within a few seconds of computation time. Orienteering problems occur in logistic situations were an optimal combination of locations needs to be selected and the routing between the selected locations needs to be optimized. In the time-dependent variant, the travel time between two locations depends on the departure time at the first location. Next to a mathematical formulation of the TD-OP, the main contribution of this paper is the design of a fast and effective algorithm to tackle this problem. This algorithm combines the principles of an ant colony system (ACS) with a time-dependent local search procedure equipped with a local evaluation metric. Additionally, realistic benchmark instances with varying size and properties are constructed. The average score gap with the known optimal solution on these test instances is only 1.4% with an average computation time of 0.5seconds. An extensive sensitivity analysis shows that the performance of the algorithm is insensitive to small changes in its parameter settings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The orienteering problem (OP) is defined on a graph in which scores are assigned to the vertices and a travel time is assigned to each edge linking two vertices. The objective of the OP is to select a subset of vertices and determine the order in which they are visited so that the total collected score is maximized while the maximum total travel time is not exceeded. In addition, a feasible OP solution should start and end at a predetermined vertex. The OP integrates the knapsack problem (KP) and the traveling salesperson problem (TSP). In contrast to the TSP, not all vertices can be visited in an OP due to the maximum travel time constraint. However, determining the shortest path visiting the selected vertices helps to visit more vertices and might increase the collected score.OPs are typically used in logistic planning tools where each vertex represents a customer and the score reflects the profit margin achieved by visiting this customer. The aim of a logistic company is to select the combination and sequence of customers that maximizes the total profit (Golden, Levy, & Vohra, 1987; Kantor & Rosenwein, 1992; Tsiligirides, 1984). Furthermore, OPs serve as the basic problem formulation for personalized touristic trip planners (Schilde, Doerner, Hartl, & Kiechle, 2009; Souffriau, Vansteenwegen, Vertommen, Vanden Berghe, & Van Oudheusden, 2008; Vansteenwegen, Souffriau, Vanden Berghe, & Van Oudheusden, 2011; Wang, Golden, & Wasil, 2008). In this case, each vertex is a point of interest (POI) and the score of a POI indicates the personal interest that the tourist attaches to it. Since a tourist generally does not have the time to visit all possible POIs, personalized trip planners can use an OP to propose the highest scoring combination of POIs that can be visited within the time limit set forth by the tourist. For a longer list of practical and real-life applications of the OP and its variants, we refer to the recent survey by Vansteenwegen, Souffriau, and Van Oudheusden (2011).This research focuses on time-dependent orienteering problems (TD-OP) in which the travel time between two vertices depends on the departure time at the first vertex. This specific problem formulation allows to tackle congestion related issues in routing problems such as morning and evening peaks on the highways or crowded city center traffic situations. Also, multi-modal applications for logistic or touristic trip planners rely on TD-OP solution methods. The most common example is the combination of walking and using public transport, where the waiting time at a bus station and the time table of the bus result in time-dependent travel times (Garcia, Vansteenwegen, Arbelaitz, Souffriau, & Linaza, 2013). In general, we can state that taking into account time-dependent travel times in routing problems makes them more realistic. Furthermore, due to the rise in congestion problems on the one hand and the acceptance of smartphones and PDA’s with GPS and internet connection on the other, the construction and update of routes, based on new congestion information increasingly becomes a necessity for a number of business applications. More importantly this construction and update needs to be done in a very short time span (Kritzinger et al., 2012) and therefore fast algorithms are required to update previously scheduled routes when new traffic information becomes available. To conclude: taking into account time-dependent travel times becomes necessary for an implementation of the algorithms in practice. Moreover, the time-dependent vehicle routing problem, a related problem, has received a lot of attention lately (Chen, Hsueh, & Chang, 2006; Donati, Montemanni, Casagrande, Rizzoli, & Gambardella, 2008; Haghani & Jung, 2005; Ichoua, Gendreau, & Potvin, 2003; Kok, Hans, & Schutten, 2012; Lecluyse, Van Woensel, & Peremans, 2009; Potvin, Xu, & Benyahia, 2006; Van Woensel, Kerbache, Peremans, & Vandaele, 2008). For all these reasons, the addition of time-dependent travel times to the basic OP is an obvious step in the direction of modeling and solving realistic routing problems.Following a literature review in Section 2, the TD-OP is defined mathematically in Section 3. Then, a local-search based metaheuristic is proposed in Section 4, and experimentally tested in Section 5. Section 6 concludes this paper and introduces possible future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents the time-dependent orienteering problem, an extension to the orienteering problem in which the travel time between two vertices depends on the departure time at the first vertex. In the considered tourist and logistical applications, this modification models multi-modal transport functionalities, as well as congestion troubled vehicle routing planning.Apart from a practical mathematical formulation for this problem that obtains optimal solutions for small problem instances, the main contribution of this paper is a fast local search based metaheuristic, inspired by an ant colony system. The local search mechanism itself is a time-dependent insertion procedure, sped up by a local evaluation metric. Moreover, realistic time-dependent test instances with known optimal solution are developed based on the original time-independent OP instances in combination with a well performing speed model for TD-VRP, a closely related problem.The algorithm obtains high-quality results on these instances requiring very small computation times, even for instances with around 100 nodes. An average run obtains solutions with a score gap of only 1.4% using 0.5seconds of computation time. For 44% of the test instances, the known optimal solution is found. A sensitivity analysis demonstrates that the performance of the algorithm is not sensitive to small changes in the parameter settings. This indicates that robust behavior might therefore be expected when incorporating this algorithm into real-life applications. The fast execution time of this algorithm enables some interesting business applications where it is necessary to update routes when new traffic information becomes available and to provide proper guidance to drivers/tourists on the road.Further research could focus on developing exact solution methods that are able to solve small time-dependent OPs within a reasonable amount of time. Advanced cuts will need to be developed and applied in order to successfully complete this line of research.Obviously, the performance of our metaheuristic depends crucially on the problem-specific operators that we have developed, and that are specifically geared towards solving the TD-OP (construction procedure, insert move, and memory structure). The specific framework within which these operators have been embedded (ACS), on the other hand, carries much less weight and could most likely be replaced by another suitable metaheuristic framework without severely affecting the performance of the overall method. More specifically, since Tabu Search appears to be a successful framework to deal with the TD-VRP (Ichoua et al., 2003; Lecluyse et al., 2009; Van Woensel et al., 2008), it might be worthwhile to consider it as a framework to deal with the TD-OP as well. Furthermore, solving realistic extensions of the TD-OP also seems an interesting research opportunity. More specifically, the time-dependent variant of the team orienteering problem (TD-TOP) is very interesting as it allows to optimize the routing of a fleet of vehicles, instead of one vehicle only, which is certainly useful for logistic companies. Adding time windows to this problem formulation will add to the practical relevance of the developed solution methods since opening hours are very common in most practical situations.