@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Inter-temporal price discrimination and satiety-driven repeat purchases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine customers’ repeat-purchasing behavior driven by transitory satiety.We characterize the monopoly seller's optimal cyclic pricing policy.We reveal the contingency of the optimal pricing policy on the satiety dynamics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Repeat purchase,Transitory satiety,Inter-temporal price discrimination,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We discuss customers’ inter-temporal repeat-purchasing behavior when their valuations for a product are subject to transitory satiety. The satiety can be increased by purchases and gradually decays in between. Repeat-purchasing customers optimize their inter-temporal purchasing schedules, including the purchasing time and the purchasing quantity, to maximize their time-average payoffs, and the monopoly seller chooses the optimal cyclic pricing policy to maximize its time-average profit. We derive the conditions under which firms earn the same profit under the cyclic pricing policy as under the fixed-price pricing policy. When the inter-temporal price discrimination is more profitable, we show that the optimal pricing policy depends on the relation between customer valuation and customer satiety. Our results imply that overlooking the effect of transitory satiety tends to cause firms to underprice. We also consider extensions in which there exists a fixed purchasing cost or in which purchasing and consumption decisions are separate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is well acknowledged that customers’ valuation (reservation price) for a product or service does not necessarily remain constant over time. This could be caused by fluctuating exogenous factors such as weather conditions. Perhaps less recognized, however, is that in some cases, the temporal fluctuation in the customer valuation could also be due to endogenous causes. Examples include visceral influences in the literature on utility theory (Loewenstein, 1996; 2000), which correspond to drive states such as hunger, thirst, moods and emotions. The defining characteristics of visceral influences have a direct hedonic effect on the relative desirability of different goods and actions. As put by Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’donoghue (2002), visceral influences are “endogenous”, can generate “transient fluctuations in tastes”, and “therefore lead to consumption interdependence”. The consumption interdependence, as has been noted in the literature (e.g., see Ailawadi & Neslin, 1998; Caminal, 2005; Hartmann, 2006), is largely due to the fact that consumption could generate a transitory satiety which subsequently leads to a temporary drop in the customer valuation. The interdependence therefore can affect how customers make inter-temporal decisions, as is the case with repeat purchases.Repeat purchase is a common phenomenon, often seen on services and consumable goods. In contrast with one-time purchases, repeat purchases are usually made within a much longer time window, and given the existence of the consumption interdependence described above, customers follow a much different decision-making process. To be specific, repeat-purchasing customers arrange their inter-temporal purchasing schedules by choosing purchasing times and purchasing quantities to maximize the long-term payoff. The optimal inter-temporal purchasing schedule can be determined by accounting for customers’ own needs as well as the price path. For example, when customers deem the prevailing price too high and are not in an urgent need of the product, they can choose to postpone their purchases. Customers could also accelerate/decelerate purchases to strategically stockpile when the product is on sale. Furthermore, the determination of the purchasing schedule is subject to the evolution of the customer valuation, which is affected by both exogenous factors and endogenous decisions as described previously.Aware of customers’ aforedescribed satiety-driven repeat-purchasing behavior, how should firms design their inter-temporal pricing strategy in response? As noted in the vast literature on inter-temporal pricing (Conlisk, Gerstner, & Sobel, 1984; Stokey, 1979; 1981; Varian, 1980), one basic role of inter-temporal price discrimination is to segment high- and low-margin customers temporally so that firms can still earn a higher profit from high-margin customers while not losing the demands of low-margin customers. However, because repeat-purchasing customers can strategically choose their purchasing schedules (e.g., they can accelerate/decelerate and combine their purchases), the effectiveness of the inter-temporal pricing policy, which is often designed to deal with one-time purchases, needs to be reviewed. For instance, periodic promotions are a common means for firms to dispose of inventory at a discounted price to low-margin yet patient customers; however, the performance of this strategy also relies on the response of high-margin customers. If high-margin customers are aware of the promotions and willing to advance/delay their purchases to align with the promotions, the periodic-promotion strategy necessarily becomes less effective. This issue has already caught the attention in the literature, but mostly in the context of one-time purchases (Conlisk et al., 1984; Hendel & Nevo, 2012; Stokey, 1979; Su, 2010). In the repeat-purchasing setting, the satiety-driven customer valuation introduces an additional layer of sophistication. An appropriate pricing policy should not only serve the purpose of segmenting different cohorts of customers, but also synchronize with customers’ satiety evolution. For example, when the customer satiety is incorporated, overfeeding a customer (i.e., selling too many units to the customer at one time) may prolong his/her purchasing cycle, reduce the average profit from each unit of the product, and thus lead to a lower total profit.This paper serves two main goals. First, we develop an analytical framework that characterizes customers’ repeat-purchasing behavior. Customers’ repeat-purchases are driven by their evolving valuations which are subject to transitory satiety. The satiety is increased by purchases and gradually decays in between. Customers are strategic and optimize their inter-temporal purchasing schedules to maximize the time-average payoff. For each purchase, the payoff is calculated as the difference between the customer valuation at the time of purchase and the prevailing price. The above endogenous process therefore embodies the interdependence between inter-temporal purchases for repeat-purchasing customers, i.e., “a person’s current hunger depends on how much she has consumed in previous periods” (Frederick et al., 2002). Second, the analytical framework facilitates discussions of the pricing policy on the firm side. A monopoly seller price discriminates heterogeneous repeat-purchasing customers inter-temporally. We construct a stylized deterministic model in which there exist two classes of customers with different valuations and the seller employs a cyclic pricing strategy. We derive the optimal purchasing schedules for the two customer classes, including when and how much to purchase within a pricing cycle, and the optimal pricing policy for the seller. We demonstrate that the seller’s cyclic pricing policy, including the cycle length and the prices used in the cycle, are contingent on the market composition and the mapping function between the customer satiety and customer valuation. Our results indicate that for a class of mapping functions, the seller earns the same profit as under the fixed-price pricing policy. Our findings imply that to implement an efficient inter-temporal price discrimination policy, it is necessary for firms to develop a good understanding of customers’ satiety-driven repeat-purchasing behavior.Our work contributes to the line of research on repeat purchases, which has received wide attention in the economics and marketing context. Previous work has focused on examining the relation between repeat-purchasing patterns (often involving brand choice) and customer characteristics (Ailawadi & Neslin, 1998; Brockett, Golden, & Panjer, 1996; Ehrenberg, 1959; 1972; Erdem, Imai, & Keane, 2003; Morrison & Schmittlein, 1981; Nadarajah & Kotz, 2009; Shoemaker, Staelin, Kadane, & Shoaf, 1977; Sun, 2005; Uncles, Ehrenberg, & Hammond, 1995) through empirical studies. However, little attention has been paid to the driving force behind repeat purchases and, correspondingly, how customers and firms should optimize their own decisions. This paper aims to fill the gap by building an analytical model of the repeat-purchasing behavior and carrying out further analysis. The modeling work in this paper adds to the growing analytical literature in this research line. Crémer (1984) considers a specific case of repeat buying, in which a monopolist sells an experience good over two periods and offers coupons to first-period buyers valid for their next purchases. Customers consume either zero or one unit of the good in each period. He derives the seller’s optimal prices for both cases in which the seller is able and unable to discriminate between first-time and repeat buyers. Ho, Tang, and Bell (1998) consider the shopping behavior of rational customers and how it affects the seller’s choice between Every Day Low Price (EDLP) and Promotional Pricing (HILO). Under the objective of shopping-cost minimization, they derive the closed-form expression of the optimal purchasing policy for customers. They find that rational shoppers shop more often but buy fewer units per trip with higher price variability, which is also supported by panel data. Caminal (2005) models customers’ cyclical preference. He assumes that the preference of customers falls discontinuously after consumption (due to transitory satiety) and then increases monotonically until the next consumption. Customers are forward-looking and maximize their long-term discounted expected payoffs. In a game-theoretical setting, he derives the equilibrium prices under various price-commitment schemes. He further shows that a loyalty-rewarding scheme (i.e., designate a sequence of prices corresponding to the order of purchase) benefits both buyers and sellers and restrictions on the timing of purchases might hurt customers while improving the total welfare. Hartmann (2006) also notes the depressing effect of previous consumption on the marginal utility of future consumption. Using the empirical data of purchases of rounds of golf, he shows that the depressing effect generates an inter-temporal substitution of consumption that leads to an overestimating of the own-price elasticity of demand. He further points out that due to the inter-temporal substitution, pricing may help shift demand across different periods, which is important for firms with constrained capacity. Besbes and Lobel (2012) consider the inter-temporal pricing problem for a monopoly seller that faces a flow of heterogeneous customers who differ in the valuation and willingness-to-wait. They first prove the optimality of cyclic pricing policies with bounded cycle length for the general problem and propose a geometrical approach to solve the problem. In their set up, the optimal sequence of prices within a pricing cycle is not necessarily monotone. They then go on to study the problem in which customers repeat purchase and can stockpile, and show that the problem of repeat purchase is equivalent to that of one-time purchase under some assumptions on the customer consumption behavior.We follow the literature in assuming that purchases can generate transitory satiety and thus lead to a temporary drop in the customer valuation. Between consecutive purchases, the satiety gradually decays and the valuation recovers. The fluctuating customer valuation subsequently drives customers’ inter-temporal purchasing behavior. We characterize customers’ optimal purchasing schedule under a cyclic pricing setting. We then derive the seller’s optimal pricing policy taking into consideration the customer heterogeneity in the valuation dynamics.This paper also extends the research on inter-temporal price discrimination by deriving the optimal pricing policy in the presence of satiety-driven repeat purchases. Stokey (1979) considers a monopoly seller selling a new product over a finite period of time and explores the incentive for the seller to implement inter-temporal price discrimination. Customers are aware of the seller’s pricing path. She finds that whether inter-temporal price discrimination is profitable is closely related to the production cost and the relation between consumers’ patience and their reservation price. Stokey (1981) furthers the discussion under a rational expectations equilibrium (REE) framework. Varian (1980) considers a model with temporal price dispersion. He shows that it is optimal for stores to adopt a randomized pricing strategy in a competitive setting and derives its explicit form. Conlisk et al. (1984) consider the cyclic pricing policy for a monopoly seller who serves two types of customers with different reservation prices. They show that inter-temporal price discrimination, implemented in the form of periodic sales, can be profitable by capturing consumers with low reservation prices while still earning a higher margin from consumers with high reservation prices. Sobel (1984) extends the discussion to the oligopolistic case and discusses the optimal timing of sales. Landsberger and Meilijson (1985) show that inter-temporal price discrimination constitutes an optimal policy for a seller if consumers have a higher time discount rate than producers. Lazear (1986) explores how the heterogeneity in the goods, the buyer preference and search cost may lead to a decreasing price path. Pesendorfer (2002) identifies the existence of a demand accumulation effect, i.e., the number of units purchased at low prices increases in the duration since the last sale, based on the descriptive data analysis. He also finds that the demand accumulation effect only exists for low-price demand and is affected by competition. Villas-Boas (2004) shows that when a monopoly seller can recognize previous buyers, the equilibrium involves cycles in the price being offered to new customers. The seller earns less profit in this case because strategic customers are also aware of the overcharge due to customer recognition. Nocke and Peitz (2007) develop a simple model of inter-temporal monopoly pricing under demand uncertainty. With rationing at the low sale price, they show that clearance sales may be the optimal inter-temporal selling policy. Recent work by Hendel and Nevo (2012) studies the inter-temporal price discrimination problem with the possibility of customer stockpiling. Su (2010) addresses a similar problem with inventory concerns. Heidhues and Kőszegi (2012) discuss how a monopolist seller should adopt variable sale prices to take advantage of consumer loss aversion. The loss aversion induces consumers to purchase at the high regular price to avoid uncertainty.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 3, we present the setup of the base model, in which there exist two classes of customers and the seller employs a cyclic pricing strategy. We derive customers’ optimal purchasing schedules and the seller’s corresponding optimal pricing policy. In Section 4, we consider two generalizations of the base model. We conclude the paper with a discussion of future research directions in Section 5.In what follows, we first present some basic definitions that are used throughout our analysis. We then introduce the two-class model for analysis of customers’ optimal purchasing behavior and the seller’s optimal cyclic pricing policy. The results that are obtained in the base model serve as a benchmark in the subsequent discussion of possible extensions.Consider a monopoly firm that sells a product over an infinite period of time. The monopolist seeks to maximize its time-average profit through pricing. Denote the price at time t by pt. We formulate the problem as a Stackelberg game, in which the seller acts as the Stackelberg leader. The seller commits to a pricing policy at the beginning. Customers know with certainty the future price path of the seller and optimize their purchasing schedules accordingly. For analytical convenience, we ignore the inventory decisions of the seller and assume that the seller is always able to satisfy the demand immediately and incurs no cost for carrying the inventory.There are a total of N customers in the market, who are present from the beginning. Their objectives are to maximize their time-average payoffs by arranging their inter-temporal purchases. A key assumption here is that customers’ consumption coincides with their purchases; that is, customers consume when they purchase and thus hold no physical inventory. This assumption merges two otherwise separate decisions, purchasing and consuming, into one unified purchasing decision and simplifies the analysis. It is later relaxed in Section 4 to allow the discussion of a more general case of separate decisions. Upon purchasing (i.e., consumption), customers yield a payoff which is calculated as the difference between the current customer valuation and the prevailing price. We assume that the customer valuation is dynamic and determined by the evolution of the customer satiety. The satiety, which is represented by a non-negative real number and denoted by xi, tfor customer i at time t, is increased by purchases and decays in between, namely the recovery period. The satiety can be understood as a kind of mental inventory of customers. Let vi( · ) be the non-negative real-valued mapping function between the customer satiety and the customer valuation. The vi( · ) is monotone such that the higher the degree of satiety, the lower the valuation. Hence, the evolution of the customer satiety moves in the opposite direction to that of the customer valuation.Assumption 1vi(x) is decreasing in x.Assumption 1 can be understood as a generalization of the law of diminishing marginal utility to the time domain. Together with the recovery period between consecutive purchases, the dynamic evolution of the customer valuation can be characterized. We assume that there exists a minimal satiety level which is simply zero. The satiety stops decaying after reaching zero; correspondingly, the maximal customer valuation is vi(0).The purchase is discrete and denominated in units of product. To facilitate the analysis, we assume that the customer satiety is isometric to the purchasing quantity. That is, the purchases of one unit of product results in an increase of customer satiety by one unit. In addition, we assume that the decay of customer satiety during the recovery period is characterized by a positive constant decay rate λi.11The linear-decay assumption facilitates the analysis and allows us to use the decay rate as a variable. However, our analysis applies to the case where the decay of customer satiety follows a general form.Hence, the consumption affects the satiety in a discrete way, whereas the recovery is carried out in a continuous way. Fig. 1 depicts examples of how purchases change the customer valuation and a possible scenario of the temporal evolution of the customer valuation.22In the following analysis, we only use the customer subscript i when necessary.In Fig. 1(a), if a customer starts with zero satiety and purchases one unit of product, his/her satiety is increased by one and his/her valuation is reduced to v(1); and so forth. The inverse function,v−1(·),can be used to determine the purchasing quantity under a given price. For instance, for a myopic customer with zero satiety at time t, if pt∈ (v(1), v(0)], the customer purchases one unit of product; two units if pt∈ (v(2), v(1)], and so forth. However, note that this procedure does not apply to repeat-purchasing customers because they are able to optimize their inter-temporal purchasing schedules. Fig. 1(b) further shows a possible temporal evolution of the customer valuation with recovery periods. The customer makes purchases at t1, t2, t3 and t4. Each purchase reduces the customer valuation immediately in the way as in Fig. 1(a). Between consecutive purchases, the customer valuation gradually recovers due to the decay of transitory satiety.Some observations can be made out of these illustrations: When the customer valuation is driven by the satiety, the seller not only needs to decide how to sell to customers, but also when to sell to them. Given a constant decay rate, it is clear that the maximal time-average revenue that the seller can obtain from a customer i is λivi(0). This maximum can be achieved by selling one unit of product to the customer at the price of vi(0) exactly when his/her satiety reaches zero. In other words, maximizing the revenue is equivalent to maximizing the return that the seller can make out of the decaying satiety. On the customer side, given a fixed price, it is also optimal for customers to purchase when the satiety reaches zero and their valuations peak; however, when the seller employs a dynamic pricing policy, customers may be better off to purchase at low price points even if they are not at maximal valuations, as will be shown in our later analysis.In the following analysis, we simplify the problem by considering only two classes of customers: high-valuation and low-valuation. We denote the customer valuation functions for the high- and low-valuation classes as vH( · ) and vL( · ), respectively.33Note that although L and H represent two customer classes, customers within in the same class behave the same. We thus can use L and H in the subscript as the customer index.Given that the customer valuation is determined by the dynamically evolving satiety, we define the customer class by the maximal customer valuation. We thus have that vH(0) > vL(0). We assume that the two classes have the same satiety-decay rate during the recovery period, denoted by λ, and customers within the same class are always synchronized in terms of the evolution of their satiety. High- and low-valuation customers have population NHand NL, respectively. The simplifications in the two-class model permit a clean analysis of the relationship between the seller’s pricing policy and customers’ purchasing behavior but do not significantly affect the general nature of the results.We assume that the seller employs a two-price cyclic pricing strategy, a commonly adopted form for inter-temporal price discrimination.44Note that we take the cyclic pricing strategy as given. This contrasts with the work of Nocke and Peitz (2007), which proves the optimality of the cyclic pricing strategy.The two-price cyclic pricing strategy is implemented as follows: The seller first sets the length of the pricing cycle. During each cycle, the seller applies a regular price, denoted by pH. At the end of each cycle, the seller marks down to a discounted price, denoted by pL. Given that there is no inventory consideration in the base model, the main benefit for the seller to adopt the two-price cyclic pricing strategy is to segment heterogeneous customers temporally to approximate the performance of the first-degree price discrimination. However, as noted in the literature (Conlisk et al., 1984; Stokey, 1979), when strategic customers can anticipate the future price path, they can adjust their purchases to maximize their payoffs accordingly. More specifically, the efficiency of the cyclic pricing strategy with respect to customer segmentation depends on how well customers are able to align their purchases with the sales at the end of each pricing cycle. In the worst case, the cyclic pricing strategy may be degenerated to a fixed-price strategy. For example, Stokey (1979) shows that a monopoly seller loses its ability to price discriminate when the cycle length decreases. The satiety-driven customer valuation in our model introduces an additional layer of complexity: the evolution of the customer valuation is determined by the purchasing history, the idiosyncratic customer valuation function and the satiety-decay process.The seller adjusts the parameters of its cyclic pricing strategy to maximize the time-average profit, denoted by π. First, consider the upper bound for the revenue that the seller can earn from the aforedescribed two classes of customers. We know that the upper bound is achieved when the seller can sell to both high-valuation and low-valuation customers in the optimal way. That is, to sell one unit of product to customers at a price that equals to their maximal valuation when their satiety reaches zero. Hence, the upper bound should beλ[NLvL(0)+NHvH(0)].However, similar to the temporal segmentation discussed in the literature under a fixed-valuation setting, the upper bound may not be feasible if the seller fails to synchronize the evolution of the two classes of customers. To be specific, there are two possible sources of revenue loss: selling to a customer at a price that is lower than his/her maximal valuation, or keeping a customer who already reaches his/her maximal valuation waiting further. Either way, the seller would fail to extract the most from customers.For comparative purposes, consider two fixed-price pricing policies that set the price to vH(0) (henceforth called the high-priced fixed-price pricing policy) and vL(0) (henceforth called the low-priced fixed-price pricing policy). The seller can achieve profits that equal to λNHvH(0) and λNLvL(0), respectively. Clearly, these two policies dominate other fixed-price pricing policies in terms of profit earned and thus can be used as benchmarks to measure the profit improvement by adopting a two-price cyclic pricing policy.It is obvious that the performance of the cyclic pricing policy must be superior to the fixed-price policy that sets the price to vL(0) because the seller might be able to sell to high-valuation customers at a price higher than vL(0); however, it is unclear whether it necessarily outperforms the high-priced fixed-price policy. First, we can obtain the following result to narrow down the feasible set of the optimal cyclic pricing policy.Proposition 1For the seller, there exist two non-dominant strategies: a fixed-price pricing policy that equals to vH(0) and a cyclic pricing policy that features (pL, pH), with pL∈ (0, vL(0)] and pH∈ [vL(0), vH(0)].The first fixed-price pricing policy maximizes the profit that the seller earns from high-valuation customers. This pricing policy is superior to any (fixed-price or cyclic) pricing strategy that features prices higher than vL(0). Similarly, any cyclic pricing policy with both prices equal to or lower than vL(0) is dominated by the fixed-price pricing strategy that sets the price to vL(0) and thus dominated by the cyclic pricing policy described in the proposition.□The cycle length also influences the performance of the cyclic pricing policy. Intuitively, when the seller prolongs the pricing cycle, it approximates the high-priced fixed-price pricing policy. This reduces the possible revenue loss on high-valuation customers at the cost of sacrificing the revenue from low-valuation customers. To facilitate analysis, we assume that the cycle length is a multiple of 1/λ. We begin with the following result.Proposition 2When the cycle length equals 1/λ, the cyclic pricing policy is equivalent to the low-priced fixed-price pricing policy.We know that under a fixed-price pricing policy, customers purchase one unit of product each time when their satiety falls to zero. Suppose that the fixed price is p. The seller can earn a profit of pλ using a fixed-price pricing policy. When the seller adopts a cyclic pricing policy and the cycle length equals 1/λ, the optimal purchasing behavior of both classes of customers is to align their purchasing cycles with the pricing cycle; that is, they only purchase one unit of product at pLin each cycle. This purchasing schedule gives customers the maximal time-average payoff. Suppose that the high price is pHand the low price is pL. The seller earns a profit of pLλ in this case. By simply lettingp=pL,the cyclic pricing policy is degenerated to an equivalent fixed-price pricing policy.□When the cycle length is prolonged to j/λ(j=2,3,…),high-valuation customers need to choose whether to purchase more at pLor instead to purchase at pHduring the price cycle. Instead of solving the maximization problem of the time-average payoff, this can be resolved by comparing the marginal payoffs that high-valuation customers obtain from the two options in a given cycle. Note that if high-valuation customers purchase at pHduring the price cycle, they should purchase one unit of product each time when they fall to zero satiety (i.e., when they reach their maximal valuation). Define κHas follows:κH=max{κ∈N:vH(κ−1)−pL≥vH(0)−pH},where N is the set of positive integers. κHrepresents the satiety level below which high-valuation customers are better off to continue to purchase at pLat the end of the cycle instead of purchasing at pHduring the cycle. The optimal purchasing schedule of high-valuation customers can be characterized as follows.Proposition 3Under a cyclic pricing strategy, when the cycle length is j/λ where j ∈ N,1.If j ≤ κH, high-valuation customers purchase j units of product at pL at the end of each pricing cycle.If j > κH, high-valuation customers purchase κH units of product at pL at the end of the pricing cycle and purchasej−κHunits of product during the pricing cycle (purchasing one unit of product each time when falling to zero satiety).The proof is based on the ranking of the marginal payoffs associated with purchases at pLat the end of the pricing cycle and at pHduring the cycle. When j ≤ κH, the marginal payoff from purchasing at pLis larger than that from purchasing during the cycle. Hence, customers make all the purchases at pLat the end of the cycle. When j > κH, high-valuation customers would first purchase κHunits at pLat the end of the pricing cycle. They are then better off to switch to purchasing at pHduring the pricing cycle. Moreover, it is optimal for them to purchase exactly one unit of product each time and repeat this purchasing process for all of the leftj−κHunits. It is easy to show that customers can obtain the highest payoffs by following this purchasing procedure.□We illustrate Proposition 3 with the following numerical example. Suppose that high-valuation customers havevH(0)=30,vH(1)=28,vH(2)=21,andvH(3)=10. Let pHand pLbe 20 and 10, respectively. Note thatvH(0)−pH=10. BecausevH(2)−pL>vH(0)−pHandvH(3)−pL<vH(0)−pH,κH=3. Consider two different cycle lengths, 2/λ and 5/λ. When the cycle length is 2/λ, the optimal purchasing schedule of high-valuation customers is to purchase 2 units of product at pL. They obtain a time-average payoff of 19. When the cycle is prolonged to 5/λ, the optimal purchasing schedule of high-valuation customers is to purchase 3 units of product at pLand purchase one unit of product twice during the pricing cycle when their satiety falls to zero. They now obtain a time-average payoff of 13.75.Given the purchasing behavior characterized in Proposition 3, the revenue that the seller can obtain from high-valuation customers, denoted by πH, can be derived.πH=NHλj[pLmin{j,κH}+pH(j−κH)+].If j ≤ κH,πH=NHλpL.If j > κH,πH=NHλj[pHj−κH(pH−pL)].When j ≤ κH, πHis a constant because high-valuation customers only purchase at pLand the purchase can sustain over the whole pricing cycle. When j > κH, πHis increasing in the cycle length j/λ. This is because as the cycle length increases, the cyclic pricing policy approximates the high-priced fixed-price pricing policy, which is optimal in terms of revenue extraction from high-valuation customers alone.We now turn to low-valuation customers, who only purchase at pLat the end of each pricing cycle. However, unlike under the low-priced fixed-price pricing policy, because the pricing cycle prevents low-valuation customers from continuously purchasing, they no longer only purchase one unit of product when falling to zero satiety. Instead, they may purchase additional units as the reserve inventory.Similar to the analysis of high-valuation customers, we define κLas given below.κL=max{κ∈N:vL(κ−1)−pL≥0}.Proposition 4Under a cyclic pricing strategy, when the cycle length is j/λ where j ∈ N,1.If j ≤ κL, low-valuation customers purchase j units of product at pL at the end of each pricing cycle.If j > κL, low-valuation customers purchase κL units of product at pL at the end of each pricing cycle.We illustrate Proposition 4 with the following numerical example. Suppose that low-valuation customers havevL(0)=20,vL(1)=15andvL(2)=9. Let pHand pLbe 20 and 10, respectively. BecausevL(1)−pL>0andvL(2)−pL<0,κL=2. Let the cycle length be 2/λ or 5/λ. When the cycle length is 2/λ, the optimal purchasing schedule of low-valuation customers is to purchase 2 units of product at pL. They obtain a time-average payoff of 7.5. When the cycle length is prolonged to 5/λ, the optimal purchasing schedule of low-valuation customers is still to purchase 2 units of product at pL. However, they now obtain a time-average payoff of 3.Correspondingly, the revenue that the seller can obtain from low-valuation customers, denoted by πL, can be written asπL=NLλjpLmin{j,κL}.If j ≤ κL,πL=NLλpL.If j > κL,πL=NLλpLκLj.When j ≤ κL, πLis a constant because low-valuation customers only purchase a quantity that is enough to sustain over the pricing cycle. When j > κH, πLis decreasing in the cycle length, which is opposite to the case of high-valuation customers. This is because as the cycle length increases, low-valuation customers stop purchasing more in a pricing cycle and thus contribute less revenue to the seller.The dotted curves in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) show the possible purchasing behaviors and the valuation temporal evolutions of high- and low-valuation customers, respectively. Note that pLis only applied at the end of each pricing cycle and pHis applied during the pricing cycle. In the scenario depicted in Fig. 2(a), high-valuation customers make a batch purchase at pLand then purchase one unit of product each time when falling to zero satiety during the pricing cycle. In the scenario depicted in Fig. 2(b), low-valuation customers only purchase at pLand cease purchasing during the pricing cycle.As we have shown in the preceding analysis, the length of the pricing cycle has opposite effects on the revenues from high- and low-valuation customers. Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) illustrates how πHand πLchange with j, respectively.Based on the relative values of κH, κL, NH, NL, pHand pL, the total profitπ=πH+πLcan show a variety of forms. Fig. 4lists the six possible forms of π. In Table 1, we summarize the conditions that correspond to the six forms. Take Fig. 4(a) for example. Because κL< κH, the total profit first decreases in [κL, κH]. When j > κH, the total profit begins to increase becauseNHκH(pH−pL)>NLκLpL. As j increases, the total profit converges to NHλpH. The other forms in Fig. 4 can be explained in a similar way.Accordingly, for given pHand pL, the optimal cycle length varies according to the values of NH, NL, κHand κL.Proposition 5The optimal value of the cycle length parameter j, denoted by j*, is1.any value within [1, κL] when κH≥ κL andNH(pH−pL)<NLpL;κL when κH< κL andNH(pH−pL)κH<NLpLκL;∞ when κH≥ κL andNH(pH−pL)≥NLpL,or, κH< κL andNH(pH−pL)κH≥NLpLκL.The results can be proved by simple calculations.□In Examples 1 and 2, we derive thatκH=3andκL=2. Because κH> κL, the total profit may take one of three forms: 4(a), 4(b), or 4(c). Furthermore, we can obtain the following results by a straightforward calculation. When NH> NL, the total profit takes the form of Fig. 4(a) andj*=∞. When 2NL/3 < NH< NL, the total profit takes the form of Fig. 4(b) andj*=1or 2. When NH< 2NL/3, the total profit takes the form of Fig. 4(c) andj*=1or 2.In Case 1 in Proposition 5 where j* takes any value within [1, κL] as shown in Figs. 4(b) and 4(c), the optimal profit equals to(NH+NL)λpL,which is identical to the profit earned under the low-priced fixed-price policy. Similarly, in Case 2 where j* is achieved at infinity as shown in Figs. 4(a) and 4(f), the profit earned equals to that earned under the high-priced fixed-price policy. Hence, the only non-trivial case is whenj*=κLas shown in Figs. 4(d) and 4(e), which requires κH< κLandNH(pH−pL)κH<NLpLκL. For example, the first inequality could be satisfied if high-valuation customers are easier to satiate than low-valuation customers. The second inequality indicates that the revenue contribution of low-valuation customers outweighs the revenue improvement from high-valuation customers by further prolonging the cycle length.Whenj*=κL,it can be derived thatπ*=NLλpL+NHλpH−NHλ(pH−pL)κHκL.Given thatNH(pH−pL)κH<NLpLκLand κH< κL, it is easy to show thatπ*>NHλpH,π*>(NH+NL)λpL.The inequalities above guarantee that the profit earned under the optimal cyclic pricing policy is higher than those earned under the two fixed-price pricing policies.We now briefly examine how the satiety decay process affects the efficiency of the inter-temporal price discrimination under a cyclic pricing policy. Consider the two parameters: κLand κH. When κLincreases, low-valuation customers purchase more at pL. The seller’s profit also increases in this case. When κHincreases, it implies that high-valuation customers are better off to align their purchases with the discounted price pL. This jeopardizes the efficiency of the cyclic pricing policy and thus lowers the seller’s profit.We now analyze a simple yet meaningful case in which all of the customers have the same maximal customer valuation. We assume that customers have a common valuation of the product at zero satiety, denoted by v(0), but may have different satiety decay rates. This could be the case with products or services of daily use.Consider a customer i with satiety decay rate λi. As we have shown in the preceding analysis, regarding an individual customer, it is optimal for the seller to adopt a fixed-price strategy and set the price to the customer’s maximal valuation v(0). In this case, customer i purchases exactly one unit of product at zero satiety each time, and the seller can earn a profit of λiv(0). Because all of the customers in the market have the same maximal customer valuation, the fixed-pricing strategy that sets the price to v(0) is also the optimal pricing strategy for the seller with respect to the whole market. The seller can earn an optimal profit that equals tov(0)∑i=1Nλi.The conventional wisdom in the optimal pricing literature is that the seller should set its price to a level somewhere within the range of the customer valuation for all customers in the market. However, the aforedescribed special case demonstrates that when there exists dynamic customer satiety and it subsequently affects the customer valuation, this pricing rule tends to lead to underpricing. The seller should ignore customers’ transitory satiety and wait for the recovery instead of marking down to cater to the temporary drop in the customer valuation.Our preceding analysis of the base model can be used to address the problem in a more general setting with appropriate modifications.55We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting the following discussions.For example, we can incorporate a budget constraint into the base model. When the budget constraint is in play, customers tend to purchase less during a pricing cycle. For low-valuation customers, they simply buy less each time they purchase. For high-valuation customers, the situation is more complex. They need to decide which purchases to discard. The general rules are the following: given the same purchasing price, purchases with higher payoffs have higher priority. If purchasing prices are different, purchases at the lower price have higher priority. Using an analysis similar to that of the base model, we can delineate customers’ purchasing behaviors based on the preceding rules. We can also extend the monopolistic base model by adding an outside alternative. We assume that the alternative is a perfect substitute and its price, denoted by pA, is between pLand pH. The existence of the outside alternative changes customers’ purchasing behavior as follows. For high-valuation customers, they give up purchasing at pHand purchase the alternative instead. Their purchasing quantity at pLmay also be reduced. For low-valuation customers, depending on the value of pA, they may also choose to purchase the alternative and then exhibit a purchase pattern similar to that of high-valuation customers. We omit a detailed discussion here.However, the analysis requires more serious modification for some other extensions. In this section, we consider two extensions to the base model: the incorporation of a fixed purchasing cost and separate purchasing and consumption decisions. We will show the effects of these changes on the preceding results.Recall that under a fixed-price policy, the optimal purchasing behavior of customers in the base model is to purchase the minimum quantity of product when they fall to zero satiety. This purchasing pattern maximizes their payoffs from inter-temporal purchases. However, this purchasing behavior does not remain optimal when some of the model assumptions are relaxed, e.g., when a fixed purchasing cost is incorporated. Fixed purchasing cost is a practical concern commonly seen in the real world. For instance, it could be understood as the traveling cost incurred for visiting stores or service providers. The literature (Bell, Ho, & Tang, 1998; Bell & Lattin, 1998; Erdem et al., 2003; Ho et al., 1998; Tang, Bell, & Ho, 2001) has revealed the relation between the fixed cost and shopping frequency. One observation is that a higher purchasing cost “would induce one (customer) to reduce the frequency of purchases, and to buy large quantities when one does buy” (Erdem et al., 2003). In this section, we revisit this issue in the repeat-purchasing setting. Intuitively, the incorporation of a fixed purchasing cost should enhance the benefit of batch purchasing and thus in general, induces customers to aggregate their purchases and to purchase less frequently but in larger quantities each time.We still follow the same procedure as in our preceding analysis of the base model. Denote the purchasing costs for low- and high-valuation customers as kLand kH, respectively. For low-valuation customers, they only purchase at pLat the end of each pricing cycle. However, when the purchasing cost is involved, their purchasing behavior can no longer be determined by simply ranking the marginal payoffs from different purchasing options. The time-average payoff, denoted by wL, is now calculated by the following equation. Suppose that the cycle length is j/λ and low-valuation customers purchase qLunits of product each time. When qL≤ j, we have thatwL=λ[∑r=0qL−1vL(r)−qLpL−kL]j.The term∑r=0qL−1vL(r)−qLpL−kLrepresents the total payoff that low-valuation customers get in a pricing cycle. Dividing the total payoff by the cycle length j/λ, we obtain the time-average payoff. Because the purchasing cost is incurred as long as qLis positive, the time-average payoff wLis not necessarily positive for any value of qL. Given the assumption of diminishing marginal utility, we know that wLis concave in qLin this case. Recall the definition of κLin Section 2.3. κLrepresents the maximal satiety level, beyond which low-valuation customers stop to purchase even without a purchasing cost. If the maximal total payoff without counting the purchasing cost, which is∑r=0min{κL,qL}−1vL(r)−min{κL,qL}pL,exceeds the purchasing cost kL, low-valuation customers should make the purchases; otherwise, they should simply quit purchasing. Note that due to the purchasing cost, low-valuation customers may purchase a quantity which can sustain over a period longer than a pricing cycle. This is not possible in the base model.When qL> j and qLis an exact multiple of j,wL=λ[∑r=0qL−1vL(r)−qLpL−kL]qL.When wLis in the form as shown in the above equation, the structural property of wLin the purchasing quantity qLcan be derived using the tools of fractional programming (Avriel, Diewert, Schaible, & Zang, 1988).Lemma 1(Avriel et al., 1988) The functionh=f/gis semistrictly quasiconcave if f is nonnegative and concave and g is positive and convex.(Karamardian, 1967) If f is an upper semicontinuous semistrictly quasiconcave function defined on the convex set C ⊂ Rn, then it is also quasiconcave.Note that vL(x) is decreasing in the satiety level x. Hence,λ[∑r=0qL−1vL(r)−qLpL−kL]is concave in qL, and wLis quasiconcave in qL. There thus exists an optimal purchasing quantity.However, when qLis not an exact multiple of j, there arises the problem of asynchronization, which exists between a customer’s purchasing cycle and the seller’s pricing cycle. (Note that this is closely related to the assumption that the consumption and purchasing decisions are coupled.) That is, each purchase of qLunits of product may span over multiple pricing cycles, and when qLis not an exact multiple of j, there exists a period of idle time whose length equals toj−(qLmodj)in the last pricing cycle. This idle time necessarily drags down the time-average payoff which is now calculated aswL=λ[∑r=0qL−1vL(r)−qLpL−kL]qL+j−(qLmodj).Furthermore, the asynchronization may invalidate the quasiconcavity that we derive in the case in which qLis an exact multiple of j, as illustrated in the following numerical example.Example 4Suppose that low-valuation customers havevL(0)=20,vL(1)=19,vL(2)=18,vL(3)=12,andvL(4)=9. The discounted pricepL=10,and the purchasing costkL=9. Set the cycle length to 1/λ. It can be calculated that the time-average payoffs that correspond to a purchasing quantity of 1, 2, 3 and 4 are:wL(1)=1,wL(2)=5,wL(3)=6,andwL(4)=5. It is optimal for low-valuation customers to purchase 3 units of product each time at pL. However, when the cycle length increases to 2/λ, although wL(1), wL(2) and wL(4) remain unchanged, wL(3) now decreases to 4.5 because asynchronization generates a period of idle time which lasts for 1/λ. The optimal purchasing quantity is either 2 or 4 in this case.For the seller, regarding low-valuation customers alone, it is still optimal to set the cycle length as short as possible, i.e., to 1/λ.66Suppose that the optimal cycle length is some value j/λ where j > 1. When the cycle length is set to 1/λ, low-valuation customers purchase more frequently (in the weak sense), and their total purchasing quantity during the same period of time is larger. The seller thus is at least not worse off by setting the cycle length to 1/λ.However, unlike in the base model, the time-average profit, πL, now is not necessarily monotone in the cycle length parameter j, due to the asynchronization phenomenon described above.Example 5Consider the numerical example discussed in Example 4. We increase the purchasing cost kLto 13 while keeping other parameters the same. When the seller sets the cycle length to 2/λ or 3/λ, in both cases, it is optimal for low-valuation customers to purchase 3 units of product. However, when the cycle length is 2/λ, there exists a period of idle time. The seller thus earns a time-average profit which equals to 3NLλpL/4, whereas the profit under the cycle length of 3/λ is NLλpL.We now turn to the analysis of the purchasing schedule of high-valuation customers. In general, high-valuation customers still follow a purchasing pattern similar to that we derive in the base model. That is, they start the planning of their purchasing schedule with the purchase at pLat the end of each pricing cycle. As the cycle length increases, they resume purchasing at pHduring the pricing cycle. However, due to the existence of the purchasing cost kH, the detailed optimal purchasing schedule is different from the counterpart in the base model. The purchasing cost may affect the allocation of purchasing quantity between pLand pH. In addition, the asynchronization phenomenon as we have discussed for low-valuation customers also exists.Example 6For high-valuation customers, we assume thatvH(0)=12,vH(1)=8,vH(2)=7,andvH(3)=3. The regular pricepH=3,and the discounted pricepL=2. The purchasing costkH=8. Assume that the cycle length is j/λ where j ∈ N. The optimal purchasing schedule of high-valuation customers is summarized in Table 2.As shown in Table 2, when j ≤ 3, high-valuation customers only purchase at pL, and the seller earns a profit that equals to NHλpL. Whenj=4,however, customers’ optimal purchasing schedule is to purchase 2 units of product at pLat the end of each pricing cycle and purchase 2 more units at pHwhen falling to zero satiety during the pricing cycle. The seller thus earns a profit that equals toNH(λpL+λpH)/2. Compared with the purchasing behavior in the base model, the increase of the cycle length not only induces high-valuation customers to resume the purchasing in the middle of the pricing cycle, but also reallocates some of the purchase at pLto purchases at pHduring the pricing cycle.In the preceding analysis, we show that the incorporation of a fixed purchasing cost induce customers to purchase less frequently but in larger quantities each time. For instance, customers now may purchase a quantity that can sustain over several pricing cycles. Also, the purchasing cost causes high-valuation customers more likely to stockpile at pLrather than to split their purchases. However, due to the co-existence of asynchronization and the reallocation phenomenon for high-valuation customers mentioned above, it is not straightforward to obtain the explicit forms of the optimal purchasing schedules for the two classes of customers and the profit of the seller. Nevertheless, we can derive the following result regarding the impact of the purchasing cost on the seller’s profit.Proposition 6The seller’s optimal profit is decreasing in the purchasing cost kL or kH.We prove the result by proving that for given pL, pHand the cycle length, the seller’s profit decreases when either purchasing cost increases.When kLincreases, low-valuation customers purchase less frequently. This happens in two ways. First, customers stop purchasing in some cases when the purchasing cost exceeds the valuation. Second, customers purchase less frequently under a higher purchasing cost. Either way, the seller earns a lower profit. When kHincreases, it has a similar effect on high-valuation customers. In addition, as we show in Example 6, high-valuation customers allocate their purchases more at pLand less at pH, which further lowers down the seller’s profit□We use an example to illustrate the impact of kHon high-valuation customers’ purchasing behavior. Let all parameters be as in Example 6, with the exception that kHnow takes three different values: 0, 4 and 8. Consider the case in which the cycle length is 4/λ. The optimal purchasing schedule of high-valuation customers is summarized in Table 3. The seller’s profits in the three scenarios are 9.25NHλ, 3.5NHλ and 2.5NHλ, respectively.A key assumption in the base model is that customers’ purchasing and consumption decisions are temporally coupled. Customers thus do not carry physical inventory. This assumption merges the two decisions into one unified purchasing decision and greatly simplifies the analysis. Examples of this kind of coupled purchasing and consumption decisions include some services such as dining and entertainment. However, for a large category of products such as consumable goods, the purchasing and consumption decisions are usually separate. This means that customers can strategically stockpile at low prices for later consumption. Hence, there now exist two kinds of inventory: a physical inventory that corresponds to customers’ stock of the product and a mental inventory that corresponds to customers’ satiety level. The physical inventory is increased by customers’ purchases and reduced by consumption, whereas the mental inventory is increased by consumption and gradually decays in between. The connection between the two inventories is that the consumption quantity is constrained by the physical inventory level. In what follows, we examine how separate purchasing and consumption decisions change the preceding results we derive in the base model.Customers still aim to maximize their time-average payoffs through optimizing their purchasing and consumption decisions. They now have greater flexibility when the two decisions are separate because they can optimize both the purchasing and the consumption schedules. The two schedules are connected through the physical inventory, such that the consumption quantity cannot exceed the physical inventory level and the purchasing quantity depends on the consumption history. Consider a simple case in which no inventory related costs (on the customer side) are involved. Both low- and high-valuation customers can stockpile all of their needs at pLat the end of each pricing cycle and follow the optimal consumption pattern subsequently, i.e., to consume one unit of product whenever their satiety falls to zero.To avoid the above trivial case, we introduce an inventory holding cost. Assume that the physical inventory incurs a holding cost which is h for each unit of product per unit of time (measured by 1/λ). An obvious effect of the holding cost is that it induces customers to arrange purchases as close to the corresponding consumption as possible.For low-valuation customers, they only purchase at pLat the end of the pricing cycle. They then plan the optimal consumption schedule over the next pricing cycle. Due to the holding cost, customers should prefer early consumption over late consumption in a pricing cycle. Hence, it may not be optimal for low-valuation customers to stick to the previous optimal consumption pattern, i.e., to consume one unit of product when falling to zero satiety. Suppose that the purchasing quantity equals to l units of product and the pricing cycle length is j/λ. It is obvious that l ≤ j. Consider the consumption of the l units of product. During a pricing cycle, the consumption should happen at time points m/λ wherem=0,1,…,j−1. In Fig. 5, we provide a simple illustration of the consumption paths. The horizontal axis represents the time within a pricing cycle, and the vertical axis represents the satiety level. A point on the plane, represented by a vector (t, x) where t is the time within the pricing cycle and x is the satiety level, is called a state. The solid dots correspond to the possible states immediately after customers’ last consumption in the pricing cycle (henceforth, called last states), and the hollow dots correspond to the ending states when the satiety falls to zero. If the consumption level is l units of product, there are l possible last states. Furthermore, for a given consumption level, the corresponding last and ending states are on the same diagonal dashed line. For example, if the consumption level is 2, the corresponding last states are (0, 2) and (1/λ, 1), and the ending state is (2/λ, 0). Customers’ consumption path can be fully characterized by the transition between the states. Suppose that the current time is m/λ within a pricing cycle and the satiety level is x ≥ 1. If customers do not consume, the state will change to((m+1)/λ,x−1). If customers consume y units, the state will jump upward to(m/λ,x+y)first and then decay to((m+1)/λ,x+y−1). For example, if the consumption level is 2, customers can choose to consume both units at time 0 or consume one unit at time 0 and 1/λ, respectively. The state transition for the former is (0, 0) → (0, 2) → (1/λ, 1) → (2/λ, 0), and that for the latter is (0, 0) → (0, 1) → (1/λ, 0) → (1/λ, 1) → (2/λ, 0).However, the stepwise method to rank the marginal payoffs with alternative consumption options that we used in the base model does not apply here because the “greedy” method may lead to a local optimum rather than a global optimum, as can be seen from the following example.Example 8Consider an example with the following parameter values:vL(0)=10,vL(1)=6,andvL(2)=6. The discounted pricepL=0,and the holding costh=3. When low-valuation customers consume 1 unit of product, it is optimal to consume the unit at time 0. When the consumption level increases to 2 units, it is optimal to consume one unit at time 0 and 1/λ, respectively. When the consumption level is 3 units, however, the optimal consumption schedule is to consume all the 3 units of product at time 0.To obtain the optimal consumption schedule for a given consumption level, a general solution is to derive the optimal total consumption utility for each corresponding last state and then choose the highest one. This can be done in a dynamic programming way. That is, for the consumption level of l units of product, the consumption utilities at its l last states can be calculated based on the values at thel−1last states for the consumption level ofl−1. We provide an illustration in the following stepwise algorithm. Denote the optimal consumption utility at state (t, x) by u(t, x).Step 1:Start with the consumption of one unit of product at the beginning of a pricing cycle, denoted as time 0. The consumption utility corresponding to state (0, 1) is thusu(0,1)=vL(0).For the consumption level of l units of product, the set of its last states is{((l−n)/λ,n)}wheren=0,…,l−1. The consumption utilities at those last states are calculated based on the values for the consumption level ofl−1.{u(l−nλ,n)=maxm∈[n−1,l−1]{u(l−1−mλ,m)+vL(m)−(l−1−m)h},whenn>1;u(l−1λ,1)=maxm∈[1,l−1]{u(l−1−mλ,m)+vL(m)−(l−1−m)h}.IfvL(m)−(l−1−m)h≤pLfor∀m∈[1,l−1],end the procedure; otherwise, repeat Step 2 forl+1.The above algorithm gives the optimal consumption utilities at the last states. In addition, we can derive the optimal purchasing quantity and the corresponding consumption schedule as follows: for each consumption level, we can find the last state with the highest total consumption utility. Letu*(l)=maxn∈[1,l−1]u(l−nλ,n).The utility u*(l) is neither concave nor increasing in l. This means that the global optimum should be obtained by comparing all u*(l) and choosing the one that maximizesu*(l)−lpL. The optimal consumption schedule is then derived by connecting the optimal last states.Example 9In Fig. 6, we illustrate how to use the stepwise algorithm to calculate the consumption utilities for the numerical example as in Example 8 (we further letvL(3)=6). The number beside an edge represents the utility net of holding cost for the corresponding consumption, and the number beside a solid point represents the corresponding optimal consumption utility. We first show how to derive the edge numbers. At time 0, the number beside an edge is simply the customer valuation for the corresponding satiety level. At time 1/λ, the numbers are obtained by deducting the holding cost from the customer valuations. All of the edge numbers can be derived in this way. We use a similar procedure to derive the point numbers. We calculate the point numbers for a certain consumption level each time based on the edge numbers and the point numbers for the previous consumption level. For example, when the consumption level is 2, the numbers associated with points (0, 2) and (1/λ, 1) can be calculated as10+6=16and10+7=17,respectively. So the optimal total consumption utility is 17 when the consumption level is 2. For a given consumption level, the consumption utilities at its last states also do not exhibit concavity, as seen in this example for a consumption level of 3.The optimal consumption schedule can be elaborated when the function vLis further characterized. For example,Proposition 7IfvL(j−1)−h≥vL(j)for ∀j ∈ N, the optimal consumption schedule for low-valuation customers is to consume one unit of product when the satiety falls to zero.The above proposition is intuitive to understand. When the marginal utility of consumption decreases faster than the holding cost, the holding cost becomes trivial and low-valuation customers should always consume at zero satiety.The purchasing and consumption schedules of high-valuation customers can be obtained using a similar yet more complicated procedure because they can purchase at pHin the middle of a pricing cycle if necessary. The following result is straightforward under the objective of minimizing holding cost.Lemma 3If high-valuation customers purchase at pH during the pricing cycle, they only purchase one unit of product each time and consume immediately after the purchase.In other words, high-valuation customers only purchase at pHfor immediate consumption. Hence, the payoff from this purchase-and-consume behavior, which equals tovH(0)−pH,can serve as a benchmark to determine the purchasing behavior of high-valuation customers at pL. Note the holding cost does not show up in the calculation because the consumption is immediate.The procedure that high-valuation customers use to determine their optimal purchasing quantity and consumption schedule is similar to that for low-valuation customers, except that now the ending criterion in Step 2 is changed tovH(m)−(l−1−m)h≤vH(0)−pH+pL.Although the purchasing schedules of the two customer classes are different from those in the base model, the following monotonicity results still hold. The total profit, however, is not straightforward to be derived explicitly as in the base model.Proposition 8The revenue that the seller earns from low-valuation customers, πL, is decreasing in the cycle length parameter j, whereas the revenue from high-valuation customers, πH, is increasing in j.Fig. 7 depicts examples of the purchasing and consumption behaviors of the two classes of customers. Denote the physical inventory as It. For better visibility, we use a pulse to represent the case when customers consume immediately after they purchase. In the scenario depicted in Fig. 7(a), consumption occurs three times in a pricing cycle, as can be seen from the three drops in the customer valuation characterized by the dotted curves. Correspondingly, high-valuation customers stockpile at pLfor what they consume in the first two consumption activities and then purchase at pHduring the pricing cycle for what they consume in the last consumption activity. In the scenario depicted in Fig. 7(b), consumption occurs twice in a pricing cycle, as can be seen from the dotted curves. However, low-valuation customers purchase all of what they consume at pL.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
