@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On a class of solidarity values

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new family of solidarity values is suggested and characterized.Shapley value and equal division value are its boundary members.The solidarity value is its center.Almost all of these values are asymptotically equivalent to the equal division value.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Solidarity,Null player out,Desirability,Positivity,Asymptotic equivalence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We suggest a new one-parameter family of solidarity values for TU-games. The members of this class are distinguished by the type of player whose removal from a game does not affect the remaining players’ payoffs. While the Shapley value and the equal division value are the boundary members of this family, the solidarity value is its center. With exception of the Shapley value, all members of this family are asymptotically equivalent to the equal division value in the sense of Radzik (2013).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A cooperative game with transferable utility (TU-game) consists of a non-empty and finite set of players, N, and a coalition function,v:2N→R,v(∅)=0, which for each coalitionS⊆Ndescribes the worthv(S)that can be generated by its members. Assuming that the grand coalition eventually is formed, the question arises how to distribute the grand coalition’s worth,v(N). The most prominent single-point solution concept that answers this question probably is the Shapley value (Shapley, 1953).While almost all modern societies reveal some degree of solidarity, the Shapley value does not allow for solidarity among the players. Unproductive players (null players) are not only assigned zero payoffs, but may even leave the game without affecting the other players’ payoffs. Moreover, a player’s payoff depends only on his own marginal contributions. In contrast, the equal division value distributes the worth generated by the grand coalition equally among the players. This can be interpreted as an extreme kind of solidarity. Clearly, the payoffs according to the equal division value are almost insensitive to a player’s own marginal contributions.Several attempts have been made to provide solution concepts that live in between these two extremes. Sprumont (1990) suggests an example of a population monotonic allocation scheme, later on characterized by Nowak and Radzik (1994) as the solidarity value. Nowak and Radzik (1996) study the convex mixtures of the Shapley value and their solidarity value. The class of egalitarian Shapley values, i.e., convex mixtures of the Shapley value and the equal division value is suggested by Joosten (1996). Joosten (1996) and Driessen and Radzik (2002) come up with the discounted Shapley values. The whole class of efficient, linear, and symmetric values is described by Chameni Nembua (2012), for example.Kamijo and Kongo (2010, 2012) show that the difference between the Shapley value, the equal division value, and the solidarity value can be pinpointed to just one axiom. The aforementioned values differ in an axiom that specifies the type of player that can be removed from the player set without affecting the remaining players’ payoffs. For the Shapley value, null players can be excluded. Proportional players can be eliminated for the equal division value, where a proportional player is a player whose entrance to a coalition does not change the per capita worth. Closely related is the notion of a quasi-proportional player, which can be removed for the solidarity value.In this paper, we suggest a family of player types—theξ-players—that contains the null players, the proportional players, and quasi-proportional players. Aξ-player is a player whose marginal contribution to a coalition isξtimes the per capita worth of the coalition he enters. The value ofξmay depend on the size of the coalition entered, i.e.,ξactually is sequence of real numbers. For example, a null player is aξ-player ifξis constantly zero and a proportional player is aξ-player ifξis constantly one. The notion of aξ-player gives rise to the correspondingξ-player out axiom. As our first result, we determine those sequencesξfor which there exists a value that satisfies efficiency and theξ-player out axiom. Further, we show that for these sequences there exits a unique value that satisfies efficiency, linearity, symmetry, and theξ-player out axiom.The family of these values, parametrized byξ, contains values that are not economically sound. In particular, these values may fail desirability (Maschler & Peleg, 1966) or positivity (Kalai & Samet, 1987). Desirability ensures that a player who is more productive than another one does not end up with a lower payoff. Positivity requires that all players obtain non-negative payoffs in monotonic games, i.e., in games, where all marginal contributions are non-negative. Radzik and Driessen (2013) give necessary and sufficient conditions for a general value to satisfy these two properties. As our second result, we employ these conditions to identify the sequencesξfor which the values in our family meet desirability and positivity. The values in this subfamily are called the “generalized solidarity values”. Except the Shapley value and the equal division value, all other egalitarian Shapley values are not members of this subfamily. The solidarity value is the center of the family of generalized solidarity values, which indicates that the name of this class is appropriate.Radzik (2013) establishes that the solidarity value and the equal division value are asymptotically equivalent in two respects. Let us explain the weaker one. Consider a sequence of games such that the set of players strictly increases, but the worth generated by any coalition of the these games is bounded. Fix a player in some of these games. Then, the difference of this player’s payoff for the solidarity value and for the equal division values converges to zero as the size of the player set goes to infinity. Our third result says that the generalized solidarity values with exception of the Shapley value, also are asymptotically equivalent to the equal division value in the sense of Radzik (2013).The plan of this paper is as follows: In Section 2, basic definitions and notation are given. In Section 3, we analyze the player out properties and introduce the generalized solidarity values. In Section 4, we establish the asymptotic equivalence of the generalized solidarity values and the equal division value. Some remarks conclude the paper. Appendix A contains all the proofs.Fix a countably infinite setU, the universe of players, and letNdenote the set of non-empty and finite subsets ofU. ForR,S,T,N∈N,r,s,t, and n denote their cardinalities, respectively. A (TU)-game is a pair(N,v)consisting of a set of playersN∈Nand a coalition functionv∈V(N)≔{f:2N→R|f(∅)=0}, where2Ndenotes the power set of N. Sometimes, for notational parsimony, we will writevNinstead ofv∈V(N). Also for notational convenience, we will write the singleton{i}as i.Subsets of N are called coalitions, andvN(S)is called the worth of coalition S. Forv,w∈V(N),ρ∈R, the coalition functionsv+w∈V(N)andρ·v∈V(N)are given by(v+w)(S)=v(S)+w(S)and(ρ·v)(S)=ρ·v(S)for allS⊆N. ForS⊆Nandv∈V(N),v|S∈V(S)denotes the restriction of v to2S. ForT⊆N,T≠∅, the gameuTN,uTN(S)=1ifT⊆SanduTN(S)=0otherwise, is called a unanimity game; the gameeTN,eTN(S)=1ifT=SandeTN(S)=0otherwise, is called a standard game; the game0N,0N(S)=0for allS⊆N, is called a null game. Anyv∈V(N)can be uniquely represented by unanimity games,(1)v=∑T⊆N:T≠∅λT(v)·uTN,λT(v)≔∑S⊆T:S≠∅(-1)t-s·v(S).Playeri∈Nis called a null player inv∈V(N)ifv(S∪i)=v(S)for allS⊆N⧹i; playersi,j∈Nare called symmetric inv∈V(N)ifv(S∪i)=v(S∪j)for allS⊆N⧹i,j.A value onNis an operatorφthat assigns a payoff vectorφ(v)∈RNto anyN∈Nandv∈V(N). The equal division value is given by(2)EDi(v)=v(N)n,for allN∈N,v∈V(N), andi∈N. The Shapley value (Shapley, 1953) is given by(3)Shi(v)=∑S⊆N⧹ipn,s·(v(S∪i)-v(S))for allN∈N,v∈V(N), andi∈N, where(4)pn,s≔1n·n-1s-1.The solidarity value (Nowak & Radzik, 1994) is given by(5)Soi(v)=∑S⊆N:i∈Spn,s-1s·∑j∈S(v(S)-v(S⧹j))for allN∈N,v∈V(N), andi∈N.Below, we list the axioms that are referred to later on.Efficiency, E. For allN∈N,v∈V(N),∑i∈Nφi(v)=v(N).Linearity, L. For allN∈N,v,w∈V(N)andρ∈R,φ(v+w)=φ(v)+φ(w)andφ(ρ·v)=ρ·φ(v).Null player, N. For allN∈N,v∈V(N)and alli∈Nsuch that i is a null player in v,φi(v)=0.Symmetry, S. For allN∈N,v∈V(N)and alli,j∈Nsuch that i and j are symmetric in v,φi(v)=φj(v).There is a multitude of values for TU-games on the market. A major purpose of axiomatic characterizations of values is to facilitate the decision which value to apply in a specific situation. Hence, it is of particular interest to pinpoint the difference between values to a single axiom in their characterizations.Recently, Kamijo and Kongo (2010, 2012) provide characterizations of the Shapley value, the equal division value, and the solidarity value that differ in one axiom only. All characterizations employ the standards axioms efficiency, linearity, and symmetry.1Actually, they employ the balanced cycle contributions axiom instead of linearity and symmetry. Since the mentioned values satisfy linearity and symmetry, and since by Kamijo and Kongo (2012, Theorem 1), all symmetric and linear values already satisfy balanced cycle contributions, the claim follows.1The fourth axiom in these characterizations are properties that specify which type of player can leave a game without affecting the remaining players’ payoffs. For the Shapley value, this is the null player.Null player out (Derks & Haller, 1999), NPO. For allN∈N,v∈V(N),i∈N, andj∈N⧹isuch that i is a null player inv,φj(v|N⧹i)=φj(v).For the equal division value and the solidarity value, they introduce the notion of a proportional player and a quasi-proportional player, respectively. Playeri∈Nis called a proportional player inv∈V(N)ifv(i)=0andv(S∪i)s+1=v(S)sforallS⊆N⧹i,S≠∅;playeri∈Nis called a quasi-proportional player inv∈V(N)ifv(S∪i)s+2=v(S)s+1forallS⊆N⧹i.Proportional player out, PPO. For allN∈N,v∈V(N),i∈N, andj∈N⧹isuch that i is a proportional player inv,φj(v|N⧹i)=φj(v).Quasi-proportional player out, QPO. For allN∈N,v∈V(N),i∈N, andj∈N⧹isuch that i is a quasi-proportional player in v,φj(v|N⧹i)=φj(v).Theorem 1Kamijo and Kongo, 2012(i)The Shapley value is the unique value that satisfies efficiency (E), linearity (L), symmetry (S), and the null player out axiom (NPO).The equal division value is the unique value that satisfies efficiency (E), linearity (L), symmetry (S), and the proportional player out axiom (PPO).The solidarity value is the unique value that satisfies efficiency (E), linearity (L), symmetry (S), and the quasi-proportional player out axiom (QPO).Null players, proportional players, and quasi-proportional players are examples of the following class of player types. For any sequenceξ≔(ξℓ)ℓ∈N∈RN, a playeri∈N,N∈Nis called aξ-player inv∈V(N), ifv(i)=0andv(S∪i)-v(S)=ξs·v(S)sfor allS⊆N⧹i,S≠∅. The sequenceξspecifies for any coalition size by which share of its per-capita worth a coalition’s worth is changed when aξ-player enters a coalition. We employ the notion of aξ-player in order to introduce theξ-player out axiom below.ξ-player out,ξ-PO. For allN∈N,v∈V(N),i∈N, andj∈N⧹isuch that i is aξ-player in v,φj(v|N⧹i)=φj(v).Indeed, this class of axioms contains the player out properties above. Let the sequencesξN,ξP, andξQbe given byξℓN=0,ξℓP=1, andξℓQ=ℓ·(ℓ+1)-1for allℓ∈N. One easily checks that aξN-player is a null player, aξP-player is a proportional player, and aξQ-player is a quasi-proportional player, entailing the respective player out properties.Now, one might be curious which such sequences induce a property that can be satisfied by an efficient value. A sequenceξ∈RNis called admissible if there exists a value that obeys theξ-player out axiom and efficiency. The following theorem identifies the admissible sequences. All proofs are referred to Appendix A.Theorem 2There exists a value that satisfies efficiency (E) and theξ-player out property (ξ-PO) if and only if(6)ξ1∈R⧹-1q|q∈Nandξℓ=ℓ·ξ1(ℓ-1)·ξ1+1for allℓ∈N.The theorem implies that the admissible sequences are already determined by their first member. In the following, we restrict attention to admissible sequences. Any admissible sequenceξ∈RNis identified by an admissibleξ≔ξ1∈R⧹-1q|q∈N. From now on, we speak ofξ-players andξ-player out axioms (ξ-PO). The next theorem shows that any admissibleξcorresponds to a specific value.Theorem 3For every admissibleξ,Soξis the unique value satisfying efficiency (E), linearity (L), symmetry (S), and theξ-player out property (ξ-PO). It is given by(7)Soiξ(v)=ξn·v(N)n+∑S⊆N⧹ipn,s·[(1-ξs+1)·v(S∪i)-(1-ξs)·v(S)]for allN∈N,v∈V(N), andi∈N, whereξℓ=ℓ·ξ(ℓ-1)·ξ+1forℓ∈N.2One easily checks that linearity can be weakened into additivity: For allN∈N,v,w∈V(N), we haveφ(v+w)=φ(v)+φ(w).2Note that Theorem 3 provides a separate characterization for every single valueSoξ. In contrast, for example, Weber (1988, chap. 7) suggests characterizations for the whole classes both of semivalues and of probabilistic values.An alternative formula forSoξin the spirit of Chameni Nembua (2012) is provided in the following corollary. This formula shows that a player’s payoff depends on both his own marginal contributions and the other players’ marginal contributions. We will use it later in one of the proofs.Corollary 4For every admissibleξ, we have(8)Soiξ(v)=v(i)n+∑S⊆N:i∈S,s>1pn,s-1·(1-ξs-1)·[v(S)-v(S⧹i)]+ξs-1·1s-1∑j∈S⧹i[v(S)-v(S⧹j)]for allN∈N,v∈V(N), andi∈N, whereξℓ=ℓ·ξ(ℓ-1)·ξ+1forℓ∈N.In Theorem 3, linearity and symmetry can be replaced by balanced cycle contributions, which is a weakening of the balanced contributions property3Balanced contributions: For allN∈N,v∈V(N), andi,j∈N,i≠j,φi(v)-φi(v|N⧹j)=φj(v)-φj(v|N⧹i).3due to Myerson (1980), or by differential marginality, which is a differential version of marginality4Marginality: For allN∈N,v,w∈V(N), andi∈Nsuch thatv(S∪i)-v(S)=w(S∪i)-w(S)for allS⊆N⧹i,φi(v)=φi(w).4due to Young (1985).Balanced cycle contributions, BCC (Kamijo & Kongo, 2010).5Kamijo and Kongo (2010) show that balanced cycle contributions is equivalent to balanced cycle contributions for three player cycles.5Let(Zn,+)denote the cyclic group of ordern∈N. For allN∈N,v∈V(N), and all bijectionsı:Z|N|→N,t↦ı(t)≕ıt, we have∑t=1n[φıt(v)-φıt(v|N⧹ıt+1)]=∑t=1n[φıt(v)-φıt(v|N⧹ıt-1)].Differential marginality, DM (Casajus, 2011). For allN∈N,v,w∈V(N), andi,j∈Nsuch thatv(S∪i)-v(S∪j)=w(S∪i)-w(S∪j)for allS⊆N⧹{i,j},φi(v)-φj(v)=φi(w)-φj(w).6Note that differential marginality is equivalent to the fairness property due to van den Brink (2001).6Theorem 5Letξ∈RNbe admissible.(i)Soξis the unique value satisfying efficiency (E), theξ-player out property (ξ-PO), and balanced cycle contributions (BCC).Soξis the unique value satisfying efficiency (E), theξ-player out property (ξ-PO), and differential marginality (DM).The family of valuesSoξdoes not only contain values that express sound solidarity considerations. In particular, these values may not satisfy the following two axioms.Desirability, D (Maschler & Peleg, 1966). For allN∈N,v∈V(N), andi,j∈Nsuch thatv(S∪i)-v(S)⩾v(S∪j)-v(S)for allS⊆N⧹{i,j},φi(v)⩾φj(v).7Isbell (1958) introduced the desirabilty relation between players in the hypothesis of this axiom for simple games. Desirability is also known as local monotonicity (e.g. Levinsk & Silrsky, 2004) or fair treatment (e.g. Radzik & Driessen, 2013).7Positivity, P (Kalai & Samet, 1987). For allN∈N,v∈V(N), andi∈Nsuch that v is monotonic,φi(v)⩾0.8Positivity is also known as monotonicity (e.g. Radzik & Driessen, 2013).8Even if players express solidarity among themselves, the payoffs should reflect their individual productivity to some extent. At least, payoff differentials should not be opposite to their productivities. This idea is expressed by the desirability axiom. In monotonic games, no player ever is destructive, i.e., all players always have a non-negative productivity. Hence, even if players show solidarity to less productive ones, nobody should end up with a sub-zero payoff. This idea is expressed by the positivity axiom.The next theorem identifies those valuesSoξthat meet desirability and positivity. It is an immediate consequence of (7) and Theorem 2 in Radzik and Driessen (2013).Theorem 6The valueSoξsatisfies desirability (D) and positivity (P) if and only ifξ∈[0,1].Forξ∈[0,1], we callSoξa generalized solidarity value. One easily checks thatSo0=Shand thatSo1=ED. By Theorem 1 and since an12-player is a quasi-proportional player,So12=So.This already indicates thatξmay determine the degree of solidarity among the players expressed bySoξ, the smallest whenξ=0and the greatest whenξ=1. For example, by (7), we haveSoiξeiN=1-ξn=(1-ξ)·ShieiNfor allN∈N,|N|>1, andi∈N. Hence,ξ∈[0,1]can be interpreted as the rate by which player i’s Shapley payoff is taxed ineiNin order make the other players better off.Aξ-player out axiom postulates that the removal of aξ-player does not affect the other players’ payoffs. Another approach in the literature deals with types of players that receive zero payoffs. In particular, Chameni Nembua (2012) generalizes the null player property by introducingα-A-null players. For every(αs)s=2,…,n, the correspondingα-A-null player exhibits zero generalized marginal contributions, i.e., i is anα-A-null player inv∈V(N)ifv(i)=0andAiα(v,S)=0for allS⊆N,S∋iwhereAiα(v,S)≔αs·[v(S)-v(S⧹i)]+1-αs|S|-1·∑j∈S⧹i[v(S)-v(S⧹j)].Anα-A-null player axiom requires anα-A-null player to obtain zero payoff. Chameni Nembua shows that for a fixed player set N, every efficient, linear, and symmetric value is characterized by the aforementioned axioms and a particularα-A-null player axiom.This leads to the question, whichα-A-null player axiom characterizes a generalized solidarity valueSoξfor a particularξ. For a givenξ∈[0,1]and a fixed player set N, playeri∈Nis said to be aξ-null player inv∈V(N)ifv(i)=0and(1-ξ)·[v(S)-v(S⧹i)]+ξ·∑j∈S⧹i[v(S)-v(S⧹j)]=0for allS⊆N⧹i. Theξ-null player axiom requires aξ-null player to obtain a zero payoff. By Chameni Nembua (2012, Theorem) and Corollary 4,Soξ,ξ∈[0,1]is the unique value on N that satisfies efficiency, linearity, symmetry, and theξ-null player axiom. Clearly, the notions of aξ-player and aξ-null player coincide only forξ=0. Therefore, the Shapley value is the only efficient, linear, and symmetric value for which the player that receives a zero payoff is the player whose removal leaves the remaining player’s payoffs unaffected, namely, the null player.Radzik (2013) shows that the solidarity value is asymptotically equivalent to the equal division value in two regards. In this section, we show that these equivalences also hold for the generalized solidarity valuesSoξforξ∈(0,1], i.e., whenever a generalized solidarity value is not the Shapley value. This indicates that the name “generalized solidarity value”for the valuesSoξis justified.Let us start with several definitions introduced in Radzik (2013). In this section, we assumeU=Nand setNn≔{1,2,…,n},Vn=V(Nn), andV≔⋃n∈NVn. In what follows, all classes of gamesV⊆Vare such thatV∩Vn≠∅for alln∈N. Further, all values onNconsidered are linear and efficient. Two valuesφandψare called asymptotically weakly-equivalent in a class of gamesV⊆V, if for any sequence(vn)n∈N,vn∈V∩Vn, we havelimn→∞[φi(vn)-ψi(vn)]=0foralli∈U.Two valuesφandψare called asymptotically strongly-equivalent in a class of gamesV⊆V, if for any sequence(vn)n∈N,vn∈V∩Vnand any sequence(Tn)n∈N,Tn⊆Nn, we havelimn→∞∑i∈Tnφi(vn)-∑i∈Tnψi(vn)=0.A class of gamesV⊆Vis called uniformly bounded, if there is a constantc∈Rsuch that|vn(S)|⩽cfor alln∈N,vn∈V∩Vn, andS⊆Nn. LetVug⊆Vdenote the class of all unanimity games inV.In particular, Radzik (2013) establishes that (i) the solidarity value and the equal division value are asymptotically weakly-equivalent in any uniformly bounded classV⊆Vand that (ii) the solidarity value and the equal division value are asymptotically strongly-equivalent in the classVug⊆Vof unanimity games. We extend this result to the generalized solidarity values and partly to the discounted Shapley values (Driessen & Radzik, 2002; Joosten, 1996). The discounted Shapley values,Shdδ,δ∈[0,1], are given by(9)Shdiδ(v)=∑S⊆N⧹ipn,s·[δn-s-1·(v(S∪i)-δ·v(S))]for allN∈N,i∈N,v∈V(N). Note thatSo1=Shd0=EDandSo0=Shd1=Sh.Theorem 7(i)Forξ∈(0,1]andδ∈[0,1), the generalized solidarity valueSoξ, the discounted Shapley valueShdδ, and the equal division value are pairwise asymptotically weakly-equivalent in any uniformly bounded classV⊆V.Forξ∈(0,1], the generalized solidarity valueSoξand the equal division value are asymptotically strongly-equivalent in the classVug⊆Vof unanimity games.Forδ∈(0,1], the discounted Shapley valueShdδand the equal division value are not asymptotically strongly-equivalent in the classVug⊆Vof unanimity games.Note that the Shapley value fails both claims. The same holds true for the egalitarian Shapley valuesShα,α∈(0,1]introduced by Joosten (1996) given by(10)Sheα(v)=α·Sh(v)+(1-α)·ED(v)for allN∈N,v∈V(N). This can be seen as follows:limn→∞She1α(u1Nn)=(10)limn→∞α+1-αn=α>0=(2)limn→∞ED1u1Nn.While the egalitarian Shapley values fail equivalence even when they are close to the equal division value, the generalized solidarity values exhibits equivalence even when they are close to the Shapley value.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
