@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Handling uncertainty in agricultural supply chain management: A state of the art

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study provides a state of the art of OR use in agriculture under uncertainty.It offers an overview of the commonly used OR approaches for handling uncertainty.Main review findings are pointed out.Future research directions are derived and suggested.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in agriculture,State of the art,Uncertainty modeling,Supply chain management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Given the evolution in the agricultural sector and the new challenges it faces, managing agricultural supply chains efficiently has become an attractive topic for researchers and practitioners. Against this background, the integration of uncertain aspects has continuously gained importance for managerial decision making since it can lead to an increase in efficiency, responsiveness, business integration, and ultimately in market competitiveness. In order to capture appropriately the uncertain conjuncture of most agricultural real-life applications, an increasing amount of research effort is especially dedicated to treating uncertainty. In particular, quantitative modeling approaches have found extensive use in agricultural supply chain management. This paper provides an overview of the latest advances and developments in the application of operations research methodologies to handling uncertainty occurring in the agricultural supply chain management problems. It seeks to: (i) offer a representative overview of the predominant research topics, (ii) highlight the most pertinent and widely used frameworks, and (iii) discuss the emergence of new operations research advances in the agricultural sector. The broad spectrum of reviewed contributions is classified and presented with respect to three most relevant discerned features: uncertainty modeling types, programming approaches, and functional application areas. Ultimately, main review findings are pointed out and future research directions which emerge are suggested.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Agriculture is the broadest term employed to denote the many ways in which crop plants and domestic animals sustain the global human population by providing food, feed, bio-energy and industrial material products. This sector encompasses a very wide spectrum of activities such as cultivation, domestication, horticulture, arboriculture, and vegeculture, as well as forms of livestock management, like mixed crop-livestock farming, pastoralism, and transhumance (Harris & Fuller, 2014).On the other hand, the agricultural sector is currently under increasing twofold pressure: (i) to be sustainably run, i.e. to be able to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to achieve their own ends, and (ii) to provide food, energy and industrial resources to satisfy the demand of a rising world population (Hall, Matos, & Silvestre, 2012; Yakovleva, Joseph, & Thomas, 2012). Under the growing complexity of the agricultural managerial problems, operations research (OR) presents an alternative and powerful tool to support decisions in the agricultural area, where traditionally, empirical judgement resulting from experiments and experience, represents the basis for agricultural management (Thornley & France, 2007; Weintraub & Romero, 2006).Decision under uncertainty is one of the main issues of the agricultural sector. In upstream operations, the management of agricultural production is both qualitatively and quantitatively confronted with weather conditions, interregional disparities in climate, quality of soil, seasonal factors over time, capital availability, etc. (Weintraub & Romero, 2006). Further down the production chain, the agricultural market is particularly volatile, heterogeneous, and extremely sensitive to economic and financial fluctuations. Some of these factors are measurable and can be quantified from available historical information, experienced by producers, or forecast by agricultural managers. The consideration of available information may give valuable suggestions and help to support the adaptation to the global competitive pressures, imposed by stringent regulations, globalization, changing market demands, prices instability, climate change, etc. Accordingly, as it appears from literature, the integration of uncertain aspects has continuously gained relevance for managerial decision making in the agricultural sector at operational, tactical and strategical levels of planning (cf. Tables 1–4and Sections 6.1–6.3). In this sense, operations research has increasingly engaged with the agricultural field in the quest of powerful decision making support tools.Operations research has been applied to agriculture since the late 1940s and the literature is now rich with OR applications (Higgins et al., 2010). Nevertheless, the uncertain components of agri-supply chain have received academic attention only in the last two decades. In the light of the above observations, this paper is an attempt to provide an overall picture of the state of operations research implementation in handling different types of uncertainty for efficient agri-supply chain management.The present review concentrates on papers indexed by SCOPUS, which include agriculture and uncertainty in their Title, Abstract or Keywords. This gave us a total of 2904 contributions encountered in various categories. After that, we restricted our choice to the articles written in English by subject area, retaining only those published in Mathematics, Computer Sciences and Decision Sciences categories. The focus is on these fields, since the area of Operations Research (OR) is targeted. After this procedure, a total of 101 articles and 7 reviews were included when this paper was revised (i.e. in March 2015). Next, no OR-oriented 77 articles have been eliminated and some others have been identified as follows:•we continued our search process by finding 44 articles in Mathematics, Computer Sciences and Decision Sciences categories, which had agriculture and (stochastic or robust or fuzzy) and programming in their Title, Abstract or Keyword, and thus, selecting another 11 OR-oriented articles.in the next stage, we checked the reference lists of all previously retrieved papers and which articles cited them. Hence, we completed our review list with another 63 contributions.Finally, a collection of 111 publications is reviewed in this paper (including 3 agricultural oriented books and 2 OR-oriented books). Although many additional research efforts deserved consideration, we argue that the selected list of contributions offers an informative and relevant state of the art about uncertainty consideration in agri-supply chains, using models and methods belonging to the area of operations research. Fig. 1depicts the distribution of published papers by journal. Note that five journals (European Journal of Operational Research, International Journal of Production Economics, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, International Journal of Production Research, and Journal of the Operational Research Society) account for about 50% of the total reviewed publications.In fact, the purpose of this paper is to: (i) conduct a comprehensive state of the art on how are handled uncertainty in agri-supply chain management, (ii) analyze it from the perspective of modeling and used methodology, as well as (iii) to identify the gaps in the literature and suggest potential directions for future research.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section positions the current review in the framework of the related literature background. Section 3 presents the topics and methodologies found in the literature, that are in depth discussed in the following four sections. Section 8 discusses the findings of this work and derives a number of opportunities for future research based on the identified gaps. Finally, Section 9 concludes this review paper.In order to derive germane support for this study, as well as to place it in the context of the existing scientific research, some relevant former reviews related to agri-supply chain management are summarized in this section.Before the consumption of final products, agricultural supply chain includes several operations, the main of which are: production, storage, processing, and distribution (cf. Fig. 2). Its efficient coordination requires activities management from strategical to operational level. Thus, it is not surprising that one of the most addressed and discussed topic in the agricultural sector targets planning problems. Ahumada and Villalobos (2009) performed an assessment of the state of the art in the area of production and distribution planning models for different commodities of agri-food supply chains. The authors proposed and discussed a classification based on the most relevant features, such as the optimization approach used (linear and stochastic programming), the type of agri-food commodity addressed, and the research objective aimed. Again, referring to agriculture-oriented planning models, another critical survey has already been proposed by Hayashi (2000), concerning multi-criteria analysis.Agricultural supply chains have evolved dramatically, over last decades, by affecting each of its partners (cf. Fig. 2). Several reviews are specifically dedicated to discussing research contributions at the farm level. In this regard, based on a literature review and the authors experience, Woodward, Romera, Beskow, and Lovatt (2008) discussed simulation based approaches used to support farming systems innovations. Previously, applied to both the crop and livestock sectors, Glen (1987) provided an operations research oriented survey on problems involved in agricultural planning, notably at the farm level. The crop production sector has been discussed through the prism of four main topics: cropping policy, harvesting operations, capital investment for crop production, pest, and disease control. Respectively, the livestock production has been reviewed in terms of: diet formulation, ration formulation, feeding policy for intensive livestock production, livestock production on pasture, livestock breeding/replacement, waste disposal, and planning in a livestock production unit.Applications of operations research-based techniques to location problems are reviewed by Lucas and Chhajed (2004). Further to the location decision making as well as land-use planning, Witlox (2005) presented an overview of different types of computer-based systems and tried to assess the usefulness of each system for the urban planner. Applied in the so-called special crop industry (fruits, vegetables, grapes and wine, ornamentals nurseries and floriculture, tree nuts, berries, and dried fruits), another interesting review on decision support OR models has been given by Zhang and Wilhelm (2011).Under pressure from globalization, growing human population, changing marketing techniques, consumption trends, climate warming and modern technology, not only the economical aspect is under scrutiny, but also the societal and environmental aspects. All three dimensions, the economical, social and ecological are encompassed in the framework of sustainable agriculture, currently being a topic of interest in the international policy arena. Given its scope and importance, one of the most outstanding research field in agri-supply chain management represents the sustainability perspective in the decision-making process involving at the same time: economic profitability, environmental health, social and economic equity (Hall et al., 2012; Yakovleva et al., 2012, etc.). Related to this subject, as claimed in Beske, Land, and Seuring (2014), both research and practical applications have been considerably growing in the last decade. In order to describe how sustainable supply chain management practices allow companies to supervise their supply chain and achieve a competitive advantage with the implementation of dynamic capabilities, Beske et al. (2014) conducted a literature review focused on the food industry. Moreover, quantitative operations management approaches to food distribution management have been pointed out by Akkerman, Farahani, and Grunow (2010). Earlier, Schweigman, Bakker, and Snijders (1990) discussed operations research in analyzing food security problems of farmers in developing countries.From a general point of view, Higgins et al. (2010) provided a critical stock take of operation research applications and emphasized their ability to address the inherent complexity in agriculture value chains, particularly where resilience and sustainability are key system goals. Also, it is worth mentioning the book written by Thornley and France (2007), which contains a review of the mathematical models available to agriculturalists, tailored to solving real-life problems faced by decision-managers handling crops and animals, including the influence of digestion on animal growth rates and levels of photosynthesis on crop yield.Stemming from the previously described research background, a number of different OR research tools have been proposed for application in agri-supply chain management at different decisional levels, from growers to consumers, including the main operations: (i) location and production; (ii) storage and processing; (iii) distribution. Hovelaque, Duvaleix-Tréguer, and Cordier (2009) used the prefix constrained to highlight that the decisional conjuncture in which agricultural supply chains are managed is very complex, being subject of numerous constraints. These later must be efficient and competitive in their downstream market in order to remain profitable (individual growers), or to offer the most interesting price of raw materials to their partners (cooperatives). A valuable coordination of agricultural supply chains presupposes the production planning under both downstream and upstream flow conditions, a considerable part of which is stochastic (cf. Fig. 3). On the other hand, contracts imposed by retailers often involve a number of requirements (e.g. a specific quantity to be delivered or a certain quality specification), which are sometimes difficult to be met by farmers. The degradation from differentiated production (the value-added production having specific characteristics because of the market policy or the processing technology) to basic one (the low-added production having standard characteristics) has harmful economic consequences. Hence, both supply and procurement systems are subject to miscellaneous sources of uncertainty, the neglecting of which may cause substantial prejudices.Although various reviews related to agri-supply chain management exist in the literature, the stochastic aspect of agri-supply chain is only tangentially broached after 1993 (Yinsheng & Dejun, 1993). In this regard, we endeavour to fill this lack and contribute to the agri-supply chain literature by putting the spotlight on operations research use for handling uncertainty.Firstly, let us identify and classify the main agricultural fields discussed. Food is one of the major economic sectors in Europe (CIAA, 2007) and beyond. It is comprised of: (i) agriculture itself; (ii) the supply industry, especially the chemical industry that provides inputs for agricultural production; (iii) food processing and trade; (iv) retail as the final link with consumers, the ultimate customers of the food value chain (Fritz & Schiefer, 2009). Effectively, this is the food field, which pays the greatest attention to handling uncertainty (Bohle, Maturana, & Vera, 2010; Cholette, 2009; Leung, Lai, Ng, & Wu, 2007; Miller, Leung, Azhar, & Sargent, 1997; Paraskevopoulos & Singels, 2014; Sharma & Jana, 2009; Van der Vorst, Tromp, & Zee, 2009, etc.). Note that feed is not considered food because it is not considered safe for human consumption (Flaten & Lien, 2007; Moghaddam & DePuy, 2011; Peña, Lara, & Castrodeza, 2009, etc.).An increasing interest in biomass crops as an alternative farm activity can be observed, but great uncertainty about the business profitability can lead to a slowdown in the industry expansion (Mansoornejad, Pistikopoulos, & Stuart, 2013; Tan, Aviso, Barilea, Culaba, & Cruz Jr., 2012; Yue, You, & Snyder, 2014, etc.). Moreover, several sources of uncertainty have been also handled for industrial agricultural material use for example fiber (Golenko-Ginzburg, Sinuany-Stern, & Kats, 1996), paper (Mirzapour Al-e hashem, Malekly, & Aryanezhad, 2011), etc.The consideration of inherent agricultural circumstances presupposes dealing with miscellaneous types of uncertainty. Basically, three different formats can be distinguished to express uncertain data (Beyer & Sendhoff, 2007):•deterministic-based: uncertainties are defined by parameter domains in which they can vary, i.e. by intervals (also called gray numbers) or crisp sets.probabilistic: uncertainties are described via probability distributions (i.e. known probabilistic measures), describing the likelihood of a certain event occurring.possibilistic: uncertainties are represented by fuzzy elements/sets (i.e. fuzzy measures), describing the possibility or membership grade of whether a certain event can be plausible or believable.While being suitable to manipulate with imperfect knowledge of data, various operations research techniques have been implemented to assist decision-making problems derived from the agricultural sector, namely: stochastic programming, robust programming, and/or simulation-based programming. In the following four sections, an extensive body of application studies is discussed through the prism of different identified manners of handling uncertainty in agri-supply chains, i.e. stochastic programming (Section 4), robust optimization (Section 5), simulation-based approaches (Section 6), as well as combined and other approaches (Section 7).Stochastic programming is becoming an increasingly popular tool for modeling decisions under uncertainty with known probability information (cf. Tables 1 and 2). The popular stochastic programming paradigms, for which equivalent linear programming counterparts can be formulated, are: (I) chance-constrained programming (or probabilistic) problems (CCP); (II) stochastic programming problems: without recourse (SP) or with recourse (a type of two-stage programming, TSP) (Kall & Wallace, 1994; Shapiro, Dentcheva, & Ruszczynski, 2009). Note that, under the assumption that the stochastic parameters are independently distributed, two-stage stochastic programming problems are known to be NP-hard, which can however be solved with a reasonable accuracy. Meanwhile, multi-stage stochastic programs, in general, are intractable (Dyer & Stougie, 2006; Shapiro et al., 2009).The most common approach appears to be the stochastic programming without recourse, which consists of optimizing the expected objective function subject to some expected constraints. For instance, in Flaten and Lien (2007), Tan and Çömden (2012) and Burer, Jones, and Lowe (2008) random parameters are replaced by their expected value; based on the average values, in Golenko-Ginzburg et al. (1996) a probabilistic objective is substituted by deterministic homologue one; in Lodree Jr. and Uzochukwu (2008) the expected profit objective function is optimized. Likewise, different programming variations are made to address studied problems better. As presented in Heikkinen and Pietola (2009), by modifying the classical expected value of perfect information (a standard metric of the value of information in decision theory) to a dynamic setting, it is possible to study the dynamic uncertain cost for an investment farm decision problem. Janová (2012) proposed a SP optimization model based on mean variance theory for a crop planning optimization problem.Several applications have made two-stage stochastic programming a powerful optimization tool for agricultural decision-making under uncertainty (Ahumada, Villalobos, & Mason, 2012; Borodina et al., 2012; Cholette, 2009; Costa, dos Santos, Alem, & Santos, 2014; Darby-Dowman, Barker, Audsley, & Parsons, 2000; Dono & Mazzapicchio, 2010; Flaten & Lien, 2007; Huh & Lall, 2013; Maatman, Schweigman, Ruijs, & Van Der Vlerk, 2002; Wiedenmann & Geldermann, 2015). In this framework, the first-stage, or here-and-now, decisions are taken before the uncertainty is revealed, while the second-stage, or wait-and-see, decisions are taken after the realization of uncertain parameters.When no explicit recourse can be considered or qualitative uncertainty expression is required, chance-constrained programming is used. This approach allows users to trade conservatism against performance by choosing a confidence (reliability) level. In the framework of joint (or integrated) chance-constrained programming (JCCP), all soft constraints are satisfied simultaneously with a given confidence level (Borodin, Bourtembourg, Hnaien, & Labadie, 2014; Peña Haro, Pulido-Velazquez, & Llopis-Albert, 2011; Kampas & White, 2003). In turn, separable (or individual) chance-constrained programming aims to satisfy each soft inequality with a high enough probability, but taken separately (Moghaddam & DePuy, 2011; Peña et al., 2009; Vizvári, Lakner, Csizmadia, & Kovács, 2011).An agricultural production supply chain is moreover a process characterized by dynamic linkages and evolution often taking place in a stochastic operating environment. In the quest for best practices and effectiveness, two powerful and competing frameworks are well-known for addressing uncertain environment and dynamic behavior of agricultural activities: multi-stage (MSP), and stochastic dynamic (SDP) programming. Even if the use of these two paradigms is showing increasing promise, there are still very few real-world implementations, notably in the agricultural area. As follows from the list of articles in Tables 1 and 2, there are only a few models devoted to handling simultaneously dynamic and stochastic aspects (Guan & Philpott, 2011; Heumesser, Fuss, Szolgayova, Strauss, & Schimd, 2012; Nielsen, Jørgensen, & Hø jsgaard, 2011; Yoshimoto & Shoji, 1998).On this topic, it is worth mentioning the implementation of other variants of stochastic programming in the agricultural sector as stochastic goal programming (SGP) and recursive stochastic programming (RSP). SGP is a multi-criteria decision support model which provides satisfying solutions to a linear system of weighted goal equations given by uncertainty. Besides, Rehman and Romero (2006) illustrated the use of a goal programming game-against-nature approach for agricultural decision making under uncertainty in agriculture. As well, SGP is successfully applied to help public water agencies allocating surface water among farmers and authorizing the use of groundwater for irrigation (Bravo & Gonzalez, 2009).By using the recursive stochastic programming approach (RSP), Baum, Richardson, and Schertz (1984) performed some farm firm policy analysis, whereas Belhouchette, Blanco, Wery, and Flichman (2012) investigated the sustainability of farming systems, which used recycled urban waste water to irrigate forage and cereal crops. The main difference between RSP and SDP is the manner in which decisions feed back into the model. As part of the RSP approach, optimization is performed over a discounted flow of returns, and decisions are taken sequentially then adjusted when additional information is available. In fact, since the stochastic dynamic problem is solved by a sequence of inter-temporal optimizations, the RSP approach allows both short and long term decisions to be made simultaneously (Belhouchette et al., 2012).While the stochastic programming may be regarded as a basic approach to facing uncertainty treating robustness as a side effect only (Beyer & Sendhoff, 2007), recently, robust programming has gained considerable popularity as a modeling methodology for immunizing against parametric uncertainties, even when probabilistic knowledge of these is incomplete or unknown. More precisely, in the robust optimization framework, uncertainty modeling may not necessarily be stochastic. Generally, the robust counterpart of a tractable optimization problem may not itself be tractable. In fact, its complexity depends on the structure of the problem per se, as well as, the nature of uncertainty set (Bertsimas, Brown, & Caramanis, 2011). For the sake of clarity, note that in this paper the robust optimization paradigm is considered in its broad sense, covering possibilistically, deterministically and/or partial probabilistically defined uncertainties (Beyer & Sendhoff, 2007). An extensive list of robust programming applications in the agricultural sector is given in Tables 3 and 4, which presents the leading authors, their contributions, while highlighting the uncertainty nature and its type of modeling.The robust programming incorporating fuzzy elements has received much attention. Specifically, fuzzy optimization is presented in the literature as an alternative method for dealing with uncertainties, when these are represented through fuzzy elements, whose membership to a given set is imprecise. In contrast to a deterministic based robust programming approach, which focuses only on parametric uncertainty, fuzzy programming allows the intercalation of uncertainty in problem structure (objective coefficients, right-hand side values, inequality conditions, etc.). Albeit that the identification of relevant membership functions for input data is onerous and quite difficult, various fuzzy programming implementations, notably in the agricultural sector, can be mentioned (Choudhari & Anand Raj, 2010; Gupta, Harboe, & Tabucanon, 2000; Miller et al., 1997; Nie, Wen, Li, Tang, & Huang, 2012; Paksoy, Pehlivan, & Özceylan, 2012; Qin, Huang, Zeng, Chakma, & Huang, 2007; Tan et al., 2012; Xu, Huang, & Shao, 2014; Zhang, Huang, Nie, & Lin, 2011; Zhang & Huang, 2011). Real-world problems, where both bounds of the intervals possess features of fuzziness and randomness are also presented in the literature (Hu, Huang, Liu, Fan, & Li, 2012; Itoh, Ishii, & Nanseki, 2003; Toyonaga, Itoh, & Ishii, 2005). Likewise, the vagueness in conventional optimization methodologies has been also transposed and examined, e.g. Sharma and Jana (2009) handled fuzzy parameters in the context of goal programming, Houshyar, Azadi, Almassi, Davoodi, and Witlox (2012) used both fuzzy and interval features to deal with ambiguous data in the framework of traditional data envelopment analysis.In last two decades, many theoretical studies have been focused on solving interval (also called grey) programming problems, in which only the uncertain data bounds are required, without insisting on their probability distributions or membership functions. Some practical applications of these theoretical advances have been tackled by Hasani, Zegordi, and Nikbakhsh (2012) and Shi, Lu, Ren, and He (2014). Maqsood, Huang, Huang, and Chen (2005) improved an initial proposed stochastic programming model by applying an interval-parameter programming approach. Based on both the interval and fuzzy uncertainty modelings, Zhang et al. (2011) developed a decision support system for assisting water quality management under hybrid (fuzzy and interval) uncertainties. In addition, motivated by an agricultural case study application, Lu, Huang, and He (2011) introduced the concept of rough interval in the fuzzy modeling problem framework to represent dual uncertain parameters. Inter alia, a rough interval is defined as an interval with known lower and upper bounds, but unknown distribution information between them.Besides that, several robust optimization based frameworks can be also encountered in agricultural applications, when probabilistic knowledge of uncertain phenomena, is incomplete. In this view, the robust optimization framework proposed by Bertsimas and Sim (2004) has found wide use in agricultural applications (Bohle et al., 2010; Doole, 2012; Munhoz & Morabito, 2014). More precisely, Bertsimas and Sim (2004) proposed an alternative manner to represent uncertainty, i.e.: to bound the number of data parameters subject to variability and the amount of variability via a trade-off parameter (called, uncertainty budget), which represents the decision maker preference for the objective function value versus the robustness of the optimal plan. Let us mention another robust optimization framework introduced by Mulvey, Vanderbei, and Zenios (1995), which has been successfully applied by Mirzapour Al-e hashem et al. (2011) to a real-world wood and paper industrial case study.Simulation modeling proves to be a highly convenient methodology for use in farming systems management and/or innovation, which enables us to handle and generate various types of uncertainty easily. Moreover, simulation can offer concrete solutions for carrying out an assessment of sensitivity and performance responses of the studied system (Lurette, Aubron, & Moulin, 2013). In what follows in this section, simulation-based works are categorized and described according to three main functional areas identified in the literature: (i) in-field, irrigation, harvest and transportation activities; (ii) prices and profits; and (iii) agri-supply chain coordination and (re)design.Since harvest organization represents the pivotal stage in the crop production circuit, it is not striking that there are a wide range of contributions related to harvest and its inherent activities, such as in-field, irrigation and transportation. One of the first contributions on this topic is presented by Sorensen and Gilheany (1970), in which a simulation model is provided to test different harvesting strategies and rules on sugar cane production, under rainfall and equipment breakdown uncertainties. Parsons et al. (2009) showed the usefulness of simulation use in agriculture via three models pertaining to the conversion process of on-farm ethanol production, maize production including harvest and drying operations, and evaluating the design of glued-laminated wood beams. Let us also mention the work of Semenzato, Lozano, and Valero (1995) related to exactly the same topic as Sorensen and Gilheany (1970), but this time with random resource breakdowns and reparation times.More recently, Arjona, Bueno, and Salazar (2001), also motivated by a case study on a sugar cane plantation, proposed a simulation-based analysis on harvesting and transportation activities, where loading, mechanical harvesting times are supposed random variables. Still for the same crop production, Iannoni and Morabito (2006) dealt only with supply system logistics, by handling several types of uncertainty: waiting times of trucks, unloading rates of sugar cane at the mills, etc.As far as in-field operations are concerned, Castellazzi et al. (2010) manifested interest for spatial-temporal arrangements of crops at the landscape scale realized via a scenario-based approach. Note that crop rotations are represented by transition probabilities complemented by other temporal constraints, such as return period or prohibited sequences. Guan, Nakamura, Shikanai, and Okazaki (2008) constructed a model for designing practical daily farm work planning for agriculture production corporations, while taking into account weather, machinery, and labour uncertainties. By handling uncertainty on maturity dates and crop yield, De Toro and Hansson (2004) developed a simulation model for field machinery operations using a discrete event simulation modeling to both: (i) analyze machinery performance based on daily status of soil workability for a series of years, and (ii) compare the results with those obtained from a simpler method based-on average probability values of available workdays for operations and seasons.Both individual farmers and agricultural cooperatives seek to meet uncertainty in order to enhance, in particular, the economic performance of their agri-supply chains. Hovelaque et al. (2009) examined the economic repercussions of constrained supply in agricultural cooperatives, and also dealt with the effects of adding price contracts to the current cooperative contract. The model proposed by Hovelaque et al. (2009) combines an inventory policy approach and a Monte-Carlo simulation to take into account price uncertainties.In order to investigate the efficiency of auction markets for selling farmland, Arsenault, Nolan, Schoney, and Gilchrist (2012) developed a multi-agent simulation of farm-land auction markets in a Canadian context. The model has been used to generate data on land transactions between farm agents, and to determine if a particular auction design or type is better suited to farmland transactions, while considering uncertainty in the common-value element of prices.With regard to overcome the new challenges facing the agricultural sector, crop production supply chains particularly should be very reactive, flexible, with a high yield at low cost. Its improvement and eventual re-configuration can lead to an upgrade in efficiency, responsiveness, business integration and enable them to be competitive in the market. In line with this, Chaturvedi, Armstrong, and Chaturvedi (2014) dealt with food industry vulnerability in its supply chain and proposed an agent-based simulation for food defense training and analysis. Another agent-based simulation model of an agri-supply chain is developed by Ge, Gray, and Nolan (2015) for identifying effective wheat varietal quality testing policies in an operational and regulatory conjuncture.Van der Vorst et al. (2009) introduced a new discrete event simulation tool (called ALADIN), which embeds food quality models and sustainability indicators. The latter is devoted to improving decision-making with respect to food supply chain (re)design. In order to support farmers in configuring agricultural production systems under various inherent uncertainties, Chaturvedi et al. (2014) proposed a conceptual framework based on three sub-systems: biophysical, technical, and decisional.Over the last years, there has been produced a global redefinition of the conventional way to conceive the energy supply problem. In this vein, an increased interest in the potential of biomass as an alternative to fossil fuels as oil and gas, is recorded (Yue et al., 2014). Therefore, biomass production activities, viewed as an alternative farm activity, gain ground progressively. In view of this trend, Mansoornejad et al. (2013) presented a scenario-based approach to strategic supply chain design for a forest bio-refinery. More precisely, company constraints and policies have been addressed by imagining supply network alternatives under market uncertainty obtained via beforehand generated scenarios. To verify the climatic impact on the strategies of farmers related to forage autonomy, Lurette et al. (2013) developed a simulator for exploring the incidence of several biomass production variability scenarios on forage purchases. One of the challenges for the emerging bio-refineries industry is the high level of uncertainties in supply amounts, market demands, market prices, and processing technologies. Under such precarious circumstances, a global sensitivity analysis of biomass supply chain networks has been provided by Kim, Realff, and Lee (2011) using a Monte Carlo simulation over the hypercube formed from the parameter ranges.In order to address large scale decision making problems, simulation models are often used jointly with optimization methods, even if combined simulation-optimization is catalogued as a hard problem. An eloquent example in this sense represents the work presented by Tong and Guo (2013), in which an interval quadratic regression analysis is introduced for subsequent research of the uncertainty on the crop water production function and its application on the optimization of irrigation water distribution. Still on the subject of water management, earlier Margeta (1984) proposed a combined simulation-optimization approach to plan new pollution control facilities and upgrade existing systems.In Margeta (1984) combined simulation-optimization modeling has been undertaken in order to predict the maximum permissible groundwater pumpage from the command area under hydrological uncertainty. Since reservoir operation is one of the challenging problems for water resources planners and managers, one can refer the overview of simulation, optimization and their coupling used to resolve critical issues with regard to reservoir systems, done by Fayaed, El-Shafie, and Jaafar (2013) under different source of uncertainty. Calija, Higgins, Jackson, Bielig, and Coomans (2001) proposed a combined approach of dynamic programming and branch-and-bound procedures using the simulation to optimize sugar-cane varieties selection.Risk constitutes an integral part of the agricultural production environment (Skevas, Stefanou, & Lansink, 2014), which can be viewed as a source of uncertainty. Several risk management approaches are available in the literature. In this regard, Diabat, Govindan, and Panicker (2012) identified and ranked the risks involved in food supply chains (product/service management risk, macro level risk, demand management risk, supply management risk, and information management risk), as well as determined the interactions among them. For the sake of food safety improvement, Wang, Li, and O’Brien (2009) proposed an integrated optimization and risk assessment model.Fischer, Ermolieva, Ermoliev, and Sun (2009) showed that explicit treatment of risks and uncertainties (e.g. weather, climate change, market situation or other risks such as the contamination of land or pasture) in agricultural production planning may considerably influence strategies for achieving robust outcomes with regard to sustainable agricultural developments. In this sense, the authors proposed both a spatially explicit simulation model used for planning livestock production expansion, and a new stochastic optimization approach for planning production allocation when some of the risks in the simulation model are represented by scenarios.Skevas et al. (2014) used a data envelopment analysis approach to measure the performance of arable farms. They modeled risks related to pests and diseases as an endogenous factor and used output variance as a measure of risk, while considering the producers choices on risk-adjusted inputs. At the farm level, Martins and Marques (2007) proposed a methodology for the economic evaluation of soil tillage technologies under the income risks.Su, Zhao, Zhang, Li, and Deng (2011) proposed a fuzzy methodological framework for integrative assessment of risk in agriculture. Facing random yields and uncertain demand, Hong, Lee, and Nie (2013) provided closed-form results for determining the optimal order quantity from a contract supplier when a spot market is used for both buying and selling. To analyze the optimal procurement decisions, multiple parameterized simulations, which incorporate the correlations between uncertainties, have been also done.Based-on multi-attribute decision modeling and analysis (Žnidaršič, Bohanec, & Zupan, 2008) implemented and proposed a software tool dedicated to addressing the ecological and economic impacts of cropping systems, with the focus on the differences between cropping systems with conventional crops and the ones with genetically modified crops. From the methodological point of view, this decision support tool explores general hierarchical structures, probabilistic utility functions and numerical values of basic attributes. Another decision support system based on simulation and stochastic dynamic optimization has been specially developed by Parsons et al. (2009) to assist arable farmers and advisers in weed control decisions.In the light of the previously reviewed studies, different approaches for dealing with uncertainty can be distinguished. The easiest of them consists of ignoring it and solving the problem using the average or most probable values. Another approach is to explicitly tackle uncertainties by embedding them in the problem constraints and/or objective function(s) jointly with available information on probability distribution functions. This is addressed in the framework of stochastic programming.Nevertheless, in many real life applications, full distributional information is unknown or very hard to determine. In this connection, robust programming seeks to propose feasible solutions for a whole range of uncertain parameters, while optimizing an objective function in a controlled or balanced manner. Furthermore, simulation turns out to be an affordable means to cope with various modeling types of uncertainty. To a large extent, many more exogenous uncertainties (problems in which the uncertainty occurrence is not influenced by decisions) have been handled in the agri-supply chain context than endogenous ones (problems in which the occurrence of uncertainty can be influenced by decisions).From a practical point of view, an evident gap is the lack of studies devoted to coping with endogenous uncertainty, in particular manifested in the context of actual requirements in agriculture sector: (i) collaborative working for joint agricultural commodities production, (ii) mutual exchange of information and resources, (iii) cross coordination on different levels in the agricultural cooperatives (companies or firms) for a medium and long term cooperation. Obviously, the integration of different levels of planning and actors collaboration might procure more reliability, flexibility, and generating more competitive solutions for the final consumers. On the other hand, it leads to highly complex systems in two forms: that of complex behavior, and that of complex structure. The design of such agricultural systems represents an interesting opportunity to combine modeling, optimization, and simulation OR approaches, able to deal with both deterministic and stochastic data in the wider context of the integrated supply chain network. Notwithstanding its hardness, the reviewed works in Section 7 witness the decision-support potential ensued from the combination of different complementary approaches.Another finding that can be drawn from the consulted literature concerns the resilience to environmental threats. As reported in Tables 1–4, two categories of uncertainty are taken preponderantly into consideration: (i) supply (weather, agronomic indices, resource availability, etc.); and (ii) market (cost, demand fluctuation, etc.) uncertainties. Against this statistic, the handling of environmental uncertainty in some papers (Peña Haro et al., 2011; Kampas and White, 2003, etc.) reveals that developing resilient agriculture is part of actual and future agricultural preoccupations, besides the traditional ones: quality, safety, yield and cost. Further investigations on designing sustainable agricultural supply chains are expected to be conducted in the years to come, not without the use of management and decision sciences.Apart from the above evoked issues, from a methodological point of view, only a few studies consider the dynamic uncertainty revelation over time, as is the case for most agricultural applications. As mentioned in Section 4, two powerful and competing frameworks dealing with uncertain and dynamic decision processes are well-known by the OR community: multi-stage and dynamic stochastic programming, successfully applied in many areas (e.g. portfolio selection, hydro-electricity production, logistics, etc.), but much less used in the agricultural field. Given the highly dynamic and stochastic character of agricultural realities, mores studies are required to support the work of practitioners. Taking into consideration both dynamic and stochastic dimensions of the data remains thus a major challenge.Recently, in a broad manner, Pla, Sandars, and Higgins (2014) have also offered insights into new avenues for operations research. In particular, the authors enumerated some hot topics highly affected by uncertainty, which create new possibilities to support strategic investment and operations management within both the primary production and related supply chains, such as (i) trends in demand for food security and bio-refineries, (ii) the quest for sustainability, (iii) information technology, and (iv) commercial power. The reviewed literature in this paper bears of witness the actuality of these hot topics, especially under the growing number of sharp global pressures (globalization, climate change, land and water scarcity, population growth, etc.). The design and the transition toward sustainable agricultural supply chain models is still in the early stage, and significant work remains to be done in order to make operate it efficiently in its entirely.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
