@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tackling uncertainty in multi-criteria decision analysis – An application to water supply infrastructure planning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This approach tackles uncertainties in MAUT in a structured and consistent manner.Five major sources of uncertainty in MCDA/MAUT are reviewed.Ways to simplify elicitation and impacts on the results are evaluated.Robustness is assessed by scenario, uncertainty and global sensitivity analyses.This is exemplified for water infrastructure planning in a complex case study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision analysis,Uncertainty modeling and global sensitivity analysis,Multi-attribute utility theory,Preference elicitation,Water infrastructure planning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a novel approach for practically tackling uncertainty in preference elicitation and predictive modeling to support complex multi-criteria decisions based on multi-attribute utility theory (MAUT). A simplified two-step elicitation procedure consisting of an online survey and face-to-face interviews is followed by an extensive uncertainty analysis. This covers uncertainty of the preference components (marginal value and utility functions, hierarchical aggregation functions, aggregation parameters) and the attribute predictions. Context uncertainties about future socio-economic developments are captured by combining MAUT with scenario planning. We perform a global sensitivity analysis (GSA) to assess the contribution of single uncertain preference parameters to the uncertainty of the ranking of alternatives. This is exemplified for sustainable water infrastructure planning in a case study in Switzerland. We compare 11 water supply alternatives ranging from conventional water supply systems to novel technologies and management schemes regarding 44 objectives. Their performance is assessed for four future scenarios and 10 stakeholders from different backgrounds and decision-making levels. Despite uncertainty in the ranking of alternatives, potential best and worst solutions could be identified. We demonstrate that a priori assumptions such as linear value functions or additive aggregation can result in misleading recommendations, unless thoroughly checked during preference elicitation and modeling. We suggest GSA to focus elicitation on most sensitive preference parameters. Our GSA results indicate that output uncertainty can be considerably reduced by additional elicitation of few parameters, e.g. the overall risk attitude and aggregation functions at higher-level nodes. Here, rough value function elicitation was sufficient, thereby substantially reducing elicitation time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past decade, the number of applications of multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) and more specifically, multi-attribute utility theory (MAUT) and multi-attribute value theory (MAVT) (e.g. Keeney, 1982; Keeney & Raiffa, 1993), has considerably increased in the environmental sciences (Ananda & Herath, 2009; Huang, Keisler, & Linkov, 2011). This is also the case in other disciplines (Wallenius et al., 2008). In MAUT applications, strong simplifying assumptions are often made to keep elicitation and modeling of preferences feasible given the available resources. Common simplifications are a) the choice of additive MAUT models (Hajkowicz, 2008; Hyde, Maier, & Colby, 2005; Joubert, Stewart, & Eberhard, 2003), b) use of linear marginal value functions (Raju & Vasan, 2007; Weber, 1987), c) assumption of risk neutrality, as well as d) neglecting uncertainty of model parameters (e.g. “weights”), attributes, and boundary conditions such as socio-economic change (Hyde, Maier, & Colby, 2004; Martin, Bender, & Shields, 2000; Torrance et al., 1996). The reasons are manifold, e.g. higher model comprehensibility for decision makers, time constraints, and the need for cognitively tiring repetitive assessments (Karvetski, Lambert, & Linkov, 2009a; Stewart, 1995), but often remain undisclosed. Although the necessity of a systematic consideration of uncertainty has been widely acknowledged in theory (e.g. Butler, Jia, & Dyer, 1997; Durbach & Stewart, 2011, 2012b; French, 2003; Kangas & Kangas, 2004; Keeney & Raiffa, 1993; Stewart, 1995, 2005), it is commonly not considered in practice.Different sources of uncertainty in MCDA are discussed in the literature. These cover uncertainties arising from (1) problem framing and structuring, (2) attribute prediction, and also (3) components of the preference model, i.e. in the case of MAVT and MAUT: (3a) the choice of hierarchical aggregation functions, (3b) the form of the marginal value/utility functions, and (3c) the corresponding aggregation parameters (“weights”). Furthermore, many of the commonly used preference elicitation techniques lack robustness towards biases (Bleichrodt, Pinto, & Wakker, 2001; Borcherding, Eppel, & von Winterfeldt, 1991; Morton & Fasolo, 2009; Weber & Borcherding, 1993), constituting an additional source of uncertainty.By using the word “uncertainty” in this paper, we make no distinction between uncertainties elsewhere referred to as risk (known cause–effect, probabilistically quantifiable), uncertainty (known cause–effect, not probabilistically quantifiable), and ignorance (“deep uncertainty”, unknown cause–effect, not quantifiable). Other classifications distinguish between aleatory uncertainty (due to randomness, see risk) and epistemic uncertainty (due to lack of knowledge, sometimes quantifiable). Instead, we use the term uncertainty when referring to “knowledge gaps or ambiguities that affect our ability to understand the consequences of decisions” (Gregory et al., 2012, p. 127), i.e. the way it is used in common language.(1)Problem framing and structuring: Problem framing and structuring concerns the definition of the decision problem and boundary conditions, a stakeholder analysis to establish participation, and the development of the system of objectives and a set of alternatives for evaluation (Belton & Stewart, 2002; Keeney, 1982). Uncertainties arising from problem structuring are hardly quantifiable. People arrive at different decisions for the same problem dependent on the problem framing (Belton & Stewart, 2002; Morton & Fasolo, 2009). Different hierarchical structuring of the same system of objectives has been shown to affect the assigned weights (due to ``splitting bias'', e.g. Weber & Borcherding, 1993). Additionally, the number of identified fundamental objectives is linked to how well decision makers are supported during the formulation of fundamental objectives (Bond, Carlson, & Keeney, 2008, 2010). Thorough structuring is thus indispensable. An overview of structuring methods is given in e.g. Belton and Stewart (2010) and Franco and Montibeller (2011). A growing trend in MCDA is to address uncertainties about future framework boundary conditions that are beyond the influence of decision makers with scenario analysis (e.g. Goodwin & Wright, 2001; Montibeller, Gummer, & Tumidei, 2006; Stewart, French, & Rios, 2013).Attribute prediction: The sources of uncertainty about the attribute levels of each decision alternative depend on the assessment process. Uncertainty can arise from the imprecision of quantitative elicitation and formulation of expert estimates which is prone to biases (Ayyub, 2001; Cooke, 1991; Kynn, 2008; O'Hagan et al., 2006). It can also stem from the uncertainty of model predictions such as uncertainty of model input/structure/parameters (see e.g. French, 1995; Refsgaard, van der Sluijs, Højberg, & Vanrolleghem, 2007; Walker et al., 2003).Hierarchical aggregation function: The multi-attribute value or utility function is typically structured hierarchically (see later example, Fig. 1). The value or utility of the main objective depends on lower-level utility or value functions. These may directly depend on the attributes (“marginal utility or value functions”) or indirectly through intermediate aggregation functions. The uncertainty about the hierarchical aggregation function is governed by the lack of knowledge about which independence conditions are satisfied by the decision maker's preferences (Eisenführ, Weber, & Langer, 2010; Keeney & Raiffa, 1993), and the precision of other aggregation model parameters. The additive, multiplicative, and multi-linear models are presented in Keeney and Raiffa (1993). The first requires mutual preferential independence, additive independence, and either difference independence (for values) or mutual utility independence (for utilities) to hold (Eisenführ et al., 2010). The second model does not require additive independence. The third model requires the weakest assumptions, but easily becomes infeasible due to non-identifiability of its parameters (Stewart, 2005). Other less common models are the Cobb–Douglas model (i.e. the weighted geometric mean, originally suggested as a production function but later also used in the current context; Cobb & Douglas, 1928), minimum-models, or mixtures of these (e.g. Langhans, Lienert, Schuwirth, & Reichert, 2013; Langhans, Reichert, & Schuwirth, 2014; Schuwirth, Reichert, & Lienert, 2012).Marginal (“single-attribute”) value or utility functions: Uncertainty about the shape of value and utility functions also arises from the imprecision of preferences, as well as inconsistencies and elicitation biases. Following von Neumann and Morgenstern (1947), in Eisenführ et al. (2010) and Dyer and Sarin (1979), we differentiate between (measurable) value functions and (ordinal) utility functions. Value functions describe preferences regarding sure attribute outcomes. Utility functions are used to rank “risky” attribute outcomes (the uncertainty of which is quantifiable by probability distributions). Utility functions are either directly elicited (Hershey & Schoemaker, 1985; Wakker & Deneffe, 1996) or obtained from converting value functions to utility functions given a specific intrinsic risk attitude (Dyer & Sarin, 1982). Again, several biases are known. For assigning values: scope insensitivity and reference point effects (e.g. Morton & Fasolo, 2009), and for the assessment of utilities (Bleichrodt et al., 2001; Cox, Sadiraj, Vogt, & Dasgupta, 2012; Eisenführ et al., 2010): non-linear weighting of probabilities (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), ambiguity aversion (Ellsberg paradox; Ellsberg, 1961), and certainty effects (Allais paradox; Allais, 1953). In the absence of bias-free elicitation methods, some have questioned the use of expected utility theory (e.g. Abdellaoui, Bleichrodt, & Paraschiv, 2007;Cox et al., 2012; Rabin, 2000; Schmidt, Starmer, & Sugden, 2008). Others developed approaches to correct for biases (Bleichrodt et al., 2001) or simply accept some degree of descriptive deviation from theory in prescriptive decision analyses (e.g. French, 2003; Stewart, 2005).Aggregation parameters (“weights”): Uncertainty and imprecision of the weights are related to the articulated accuracy and consistency of judgments (Jessop, 2011). The elicitation of weights is prone to biases, such as the splitting bias, range effect, and hierarchical effects (Morton & Fasolo, 2009; Weber & Borcherding, 1993). Comparing four weight elicitation methods, Borcherding et al. (1991) judge none to be internally more consistent or less biased than the others, and suggest doing more consistency checks. Mustajoki et al. (2005) and Jessop (2011) argue that the assumption of exact weights imposes a precision not represented by the stakeholder's preferences and recommend using imprecise or interval weights instead. Using imprecise weights also reduces inconsistencies within and between elicitation methods. Hierarchical elicitation (e.g. Pöyhönen, Vrolijk, & Hämäläinen, 2001) and ex post corrections (Jacobi & Hobbs, 2007) have been suggested to minimize the splitting bias.Although often interchangeably used, the term uncertainty analysis refers to the quantification of model output uncertainty through propagation of uncertainty of model parameters and inputs (French, 2003), and sensitivity analysis to “the study of how uncertainty in the output […] can be apportioned to different sources of uncertainty in the model input” (Saltelli, Tarantola, Campolongo, & Ratto, 2004). Global sensitivity analysis (GSA) allows inputs to vary according to a given probability distribution, whereas local sensitivity analysis (LSA) uses a linearization of the model at a pre-defined point in parameter space (Saltelli, 2008). Uncertainty and sensitivity analyses address a range of modeling-related questions (e.g. French, 2003; Saltelli, 2008). Two of them are of particular interest to decision making: (1) How does the ranking of alternatives change, given the uncertainty of preference model inputs and (2) how strong is the influence of individual factors (to focus elicitation and modeling on reducing uncertainty that matters)?In MAVT and MAUT, uncertainty and local sensitivity analyses are much more commonly performed than global sensitivity analyses (Gómez Delgado & Bosque Sendra, 2004; Saltelli, Ratto, Tarantola, & Campolongo, 2006; Saltelli, Tarantola, & Chan, 1999a). GSA has been suggested to support decision makers in the analysis of results from MCDA studies (Mustajoki, Hämälainen, & Lindstedt, 2006; Saltelli et al., 1999a), but only applied in few cases (e.g. solid waste management: Gómez Delgado & Tarantola, 2006). The vast majority of available uncertainty and sensitivity analyses focusses on the uncertainty of the weights (e.g. Butler et al., 1997; Hyde et al., 2005; Jessop, 2011; Jiménez, Ríos-Insua, & Mateos, 2006; Mustajoki, 2012; Mustajoki et al., 2006; Raju & Pillai, 1999) or a combination of aggregation parameters and attributes (e.g. Gómez Delgado & Bosque Sendra, 2004; Gómez Delgado & Tarantola, 2006; Hyde et al., 2004; Saltelli et al., 1999a). Zhou and Ang (2009) consider weights and two multi-attribute aggregation methods. Simulation studies by Stewart (2005) and Durbach and Stewart (2009, 2012a) assess the impact of hierarchical value und utility model simplifications under different marginal utility curvatures, degrees of imprecision in preference statements, and attributes among other aspects. Schuwirth et al. (2012) perform a LSA over changes of the weights, marginal value functions, risk attitudes for conversion to utilities, and the attributes. Another methodology for tackling uncertainty of the weights and marginal utility function curvatures is “Stochastic Multiobjective Acceptability Analysis” (SMAA; see e.g. Lahdelma, Hokkanen, & Salminen, 1998; Lahdelma & Salminen, 2012). SMAA is a simulation approach for determining which preference combinations would lead specific alternatives to rank best without requiring the decision makers’ preferences to be known. The model structure only allows compensatory (additive) aggregation and risk neutral (value functions identical to utility functions) preferences.The planning of urban water supply infrastructures is an ideal application field for MAUT because it not only involves many, conflictive objectives and stakeholders, but also because of the high interactions with other systems, its long asset life times, and uncertain future development of main drivers of its performance. Urban water supply infrastructures in industrialized countries are mainly centralized treatment and piped distribution systems, which ensure a continuous supply of drinking water for households, industries, businesses, and public use (e.g. street-cleaning, public green space). They are facing a number of dynamic challenges such as urbanization and population development, aging and need of rehabilitation, climate variability, as well as a highly dynamic socio-economic and socio-political environment (Ferguson, Frantzeskaki, & Brown, 2013; Ruth, Bernier, Jollands, & Golubiewski, 2007; Sharma, Burn, Gardner, & Gregory, 2010). For a thorough planning of these water infrastructures, long-term changes and large uncertainties of drivers such as water availability, water demand, population and spatial development, and economic development need to be considered. Technically, transitions to more decentralized infrastructures (e.g. rainwater harvesting, or water treatment and reuse in households) are suggested to ensure flexible adaptation to future changes and increase sustainability (Sharma et al., 2010; Wong & Brown, 2009). Additionally, alternative forms of utility governance can be chosen, e.g. regionalization or (partial) privatization to achieve higher efficiency and professionalism (Dominguez, Worch, Markard, Trujillo Alvarez, & Gujer, 2009; Lieberherr, Klinke, & Finger, 2012). In contrast to this, the reality of today's water infrastructure planning is often judged inflexible, narrow-minded, and negligent of future uncertainties, broader goals, important stakeholders, and alternative paths of action (Ashley et al., 2008; Dominguez et al., 2009; Economides, 2012; Ferguson et al., 2013; Störmer et al., 2009).The objective of this paper is to show how to practically tackle uncertainty in elicitation and modeling of MAUT preferences. Our approach is developed and tested in a case study on sustainable water infrastructure planning in Switzerland. It is part of a larger study on water supply and sanitation planning introduced in Lienert et al. (2014a) . We use this case study to exemplify our approach, and present the results for water supply. This includes the elicitation of preferences of 10 stakeholders, which were selected based on an earlier stakeholder analysis (Lienert, Schnetzer, & Ingold, 2013). To address the challenges of long-term infrastructure planning under uncertainty, the MCDA is combined with scenario planning. The study is guided by three main questions:1.How can multiple sources of uncertainty in MAUT be comprehensively considered during elicitation and analysis of preferences?Which uncertain preference parameters contribute most to the overall uncertainty of the ranking of alternatives, and how does this contribution change under different modeling assumptions?What are the stakeholders’ preferences regarding “good water supply infrastructure”, and which water supply alternatives can be recommended given different future scenarios?The case study and methods are presented in Section 2. Of the above mentioned sources of uncertainty, the sources from (2) to (5) are quantitatively described. The uncertainty from framing and structuring (1), was considered by systematic structuring and framing within individual interviews and workshops (see Lienert et al., 2013; Lienert et al., 2014a), and preference elicitation including consistency checks. In Section 3 we present the elicited preferences, attribute predictions, and resulting rankings of alternatives including uncertainty for four future scenarios. The results of the global sensitivity analysis for one exemplary stakeholder are shown in Section 4. The results from Sections 3 and 4 are discussed in Section 5 and conclusions are drawn in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We presented an approach to tackle uncertainty in a complex practical MAUT intervention and identified five major sources of uncertainty to be addressed during preference elicitation and modeling. These are the problem framing and structuring, attribute predictions, hierarchical aggregation function, marginal value or utility functions, and the weights. We explained how we dealt with these uncertainties in a complex case study on water supply infrastructure planning in Switzerland. A thorough uncertainty analysis was combined with a scenario planning approach regarding socio economic boundary conditions, to evaluate the performance of water supply infrastructure alternatives in light of uncertain preferences (and preference models), and uncertain attribute predictions for four future scenarios. Despite individually different preferences, we could identify potential compromise alternatives. The ranking of the alternatives changed most strongly under the highly dynamic Boom scenario, indicating that the consideration of changing boundary conditions (e.g. regarding population increase or decrease and the economic situation) is very important in long-term planning of water supply infrastructures.Global sensitivity analysis (GSA) allowed us to assess the contribution of individual parameters and parameter groups on the uncertainty of the ranking of alternatives. In the presented example, the overall uncertainty in the ranking of alternatives can be largely reduced by additional elicitation of only a few parameters. An analysis assuming no preference information at all demonstrated in hindsight that our elicitation approach was able to address the most important uncertain preference parameters (in this case: the weights). It also showed that GSA can be helpful even prior to factual preference elicitation, to focus on reducing the uncertainty of those parameters which matter. To improve the presented elicitation approach, we suggest to split the interview into two parts. The first should be used to elicit interval weights and to check independence conditions. Also, rough information about the marginal value function forms can be obtained with the simplified procedure described herein. Based on these, a valid MAUT model is defined and an uncertainty analysis is done. If no clear ranking of alternatives can be derived from the results, GSA can be performed to determine which parameters should be elicited in-depth during a second, follow-up interview.