@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The contagion channels of July–August-2011 stock market crash: A DAG-copula based approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the financial contagion between stock markets.We identify the possible channels of transmission of the 2011 stock market crash.We use the DAG-copula based approach to study the structure of causal dependence.Diversification benefits are limited especially during crisis periods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
2011 stock market crash,Financial contagion,Transmission channels,Copula functions,Directed acyclic graph,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this paper is to empirically investigate whether there is a contagion phenomenon between the stock markets during the July–August-2011 stock market crash. When there is a market contagion, we will identify the propagation channel through which the crash is transmitted. Hence, after checking if there is financial contagion between the stock markets, we will see if the transmission mechanism “constraints of wealth” outweighs that of the “portfolio rebalancing”. An additional test covering the interdependence between the stock and bond markets during the crash helps us verify whether the transmission is due either to the “cross-market rebalancing” channel or to the “flight to quality” phenomenon.On the basis of the combination of the copula theory and the directed acyclic graph to study the structure of causal dependence between the stock market during the period that lies between 01/02/2010 and 28/11/2012, we show that the links between countries are different between the pre-crash period and that of the crash. More specifically, the links that do not exist during normal times seem to have a major role during the crash period. We interpret this result as an evidence of the existence of pure contagion. On the one hand, the tests show that the channel of the “portfolio rebalancing” was the major mechanism for the spread of the crash. On the other hand, the phenomenon of the cross-market rebalancing existed only in Germany; whereas, that of the flight to quality was in all the other studied stock markets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Financial crises occur repeatedly and the recent years have not been an exception. Both industrialized countries and emerging markets have been affected by the large-scale American and European crises. To mention only the best known examples, we will retain the bursting of the housing bubble in the United States of 2006, the American subprime crisis of 2007, the economic crisis of 2008, the European sovereign debt crisis of 2010, and the stock market crash of 2011. At every financial crisis, the stock markets have been the first to react (Chevapatrakul & Tee, 2014; Kontonikas, MacDonald, & Saggu, 2013).Generally, the term ‘financial crisis’ is used to refer to the destabilization of the banking and financial system of one or numerous economies. A financial crisis is a sharp deterioration in the value of financial assets, such as the global financial crisis of 2007–2010. The latter, which was caused by banking difficulties, particularly affected the stock markets. It was worsened by the debt crisis in the eurozone and the stock market crash of July and August 2011. When financial crises do not disappear, it would be fair to say that their nature is changing in a serious way over time. Therefore, they seem to have a contagious nature, like a virus that spreads in a population. In other words, a crisis in one country can spread through the global financial markets and can have an impact on other economies. The international finance uses the word “contagion” to describe this type of effect.For example, Jayech and Zina (2012, 2013) studied financial contagion in the four S&P 500, FTSE 100, CAC 40 and DAX 30 stock markets during the period that went from 01/01/2004 to 27/08/2010 (see Fig. 1). They noticed an increase in the equity indices before the subprime crisis and a decrease after the crisis, which proves the severity of the crisis on the stock markets of the developed countries. Moreover, in August 2007 all the indices fell. Therefore, it could be noticed that the period from August to September 2008 clearly reflected the severity of the subprime crisis. Through the use of the copula theory, the results have proved that it was only in the case of the French stock market that the level of infection intensity was significantly very high. It could be also seen that these countries were not immune to the July–August-2011 stock market crash since all the indices declined rapidly.The last stock market crash was characterized by a very strong and serious decline in most of the major Western stock markets. In particular, the Paris stock exchange, the CAC 40 index, fell by 28.8 percent (from 4007 to 2855) between 1 July and 12 September, 2011, and was severely affected by this crash. Furthermore, this crash had harmful economic and political effects on some economies due to the decrease in their assets. Faced with the deterioration of investment, numerous financial institutions found themselves at the edge of bankruptcy.When there is contagion between stock markets, it is important to know how it occurs. This is mainly because the stock market crashes are very costly and financial contagion has strong impacts on the management of international portfolios.According to Boyer, Kumagai, and Yuan (2006), contagion can occur through a fundamental channel or a channel linked to investors. On the one hand, when contagion is based on fundamentals, it means that it is linked to real factors, such as international trade and direct foreign investment. On the other hand, if the transmission of shocks is based on the behavior of investors, contagion may occur due to the constraints of the investors’ wealth or portfolio rebalancing. Moreover, the investors can spread the crisis by imposing wealth constraints. This occurs when the investors suffer losses in the crisis target country, so they will be forced to sell assets in other countries (Kyle & Xiong, 2001). The need to sell may be caused by margin calls or by large withdrawals of mutual funds.Furthermore, the portfolio rebalancing may be dominated by a cross-market rebalancing or a flight to quality within the same country. On the one hand, the cross market rebalancing channel is linked to international investors who adjust their portfolios to the changes in the country risk after a shock (Cheung, Tam, & Szeto, 2009). In the theoretical model of Kodres and Pritsker (2002), international investors might have a balanced exposure to a macroeconomic risk in several countries. Once a shock occurs in a country, it affects other countries. Thus, the investors adjust their portfolios to reduce the risk they are exposed to. They do not sell their assets only in the country hit by the crisis but also in other affected countries, which can cause the spread of the crisis. On the other hand, the flight-to-quality channel is closely linked to the local investors who adjust the portfolio risk after a shock through the transfer of funds from riskier assets to less risky ones (Boyer et al., 2006). A typical example of this is selling shares to buy bonds in the same country; i.e., local investors opt for quality within the same country, so they will replace shares by bonds. Accordingly, the correlation between the stock prices and the bond prices decreased during the crash.In our study, we consider that the cross market rebalancing and channels of wealth constraints have different implications for the co-movements of the markets during the periods of crashes and in normal periods. In the model of Kodres and Pritsker (2002), the adjustment of international portfolios by investors means that the intensity of the co-movements is the same when there is a crisis and when the market movements are on the rise. However, the models of Kyle and Xiong (2001), Calvo (1999) and Yuan (2005), which highlighted the wealth constraints as the main channel of transmission, showed that the correlations between markets were higher in times of crises than in bull markets because liquidity constraints existed during the periods of crises.Actually, the fast transmission of the crash to other financial markets in the United States and abroad has raised some important questions. On the one hand, was there any financial contagion between these four stock markets during the crash or just a simple interdependence between countries? On the other hand, what were the mechanisms that could transmit the various shocks to stock markets during this period? In the next section, we will present the methodology by which we will study both the spread of contagion between the stock markets and the various transmission channels of the market crash.The period between September and August 2011 was characterized by the largest drop in stock prices in the United States, Europe and Asia. Most of the stock markets in the advanced economies were affected by this crash. The studies of contagion in the stock markets of the developed countries are still rare, and up to our knowledge, the analysis of these specific markets has not been made yet. Our contribution is to address the problem of financial contagion in the stock market crash of 2011 and to highlight the transmission mechanisms that may have played a role in this crash, which have not been discussed in the literature.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the methodology used in this investigation. Section 3 discusses the data and presents the overall results. Section 4 gives the conclusion.In our study, we use the daily returns (expressed in US dollars) relating to the stock indices and to the government bonds. The considered financial markets are those of the United States (US), the United Kingdom (UK), France (FR), Germany (GR), Australia (AS), Japan (JP), New Zealand (NZ), China (CH) and Philippines (PH), which include nine stock markets (S&P 500, FTSE 100, CAC 40, DAX 30, All OI, Nikkei 225, New Zealand Stock Exchange 50 Index, Shanghai Composite Index and PSE Composite Index) and 2-, 5- and 10-year sovereign bond yields. All the data are taken from Econstate. Moreover, we have checked these data by comparing them with the ones from other authors, by consulting the Wall Street Journal.We examine the dependence before and after the stock market crash of 2011. The overall period ranges from 2010 to 2012 (738 observations).11The period from February 1, 2010 to November 28, 2012 is especially important to study, though it is not a new crisis, since it was the period during which a stock market crash particularly affected the stock markets of the Western countries. Generally, it is just a continuation of the events following the bursting of the housing bubble in 2006.The pre-crash period, which started on February 1, 2010 and ended immediately before the 2011 stock market crash, was deemed to occur on June 30, 2011. The crash period started at the beginning of July and lasted until November 28, 2012. For all the series, the returns are defined as the percentage of the logarithmic difference, i.e.rt=log(pt/pt−1)with ptbeing the asset at time t.According to Forbes and Rigobon (2002), contagion is defined as “a significant increase in cross-market linkages after a shock in one country (or group of countries).” The transmission mechanisms are often approximated by the correlation coefficient between the financial markets. Contagion is thus measured by the significant increase in the correlation between these markets. Recently, several studies have used the copula theory to examine financial contagion during the 2007/2009 crisis (Aloui, Hammoudeh, & Nguyen, 2013; Baur, 2013; Horta, Lagoa, & Martins, 2014; Samitas & Tsakalos, 2013; Silva Filho, Ziegelmann, & Dueker, 2012; Wen, Wei, & Huang, 2012; Ye, Liu, & Baiqi Miao, 2012; Zhu, Li, Liang, Chen & Wu, 2013). For the last few years, this statistical tool has known a considerable success in the field of financial contagion and the mechanism of crisis transmission (Brendstrup & Paarsch, 2007; Demarta & McNeil, 2005). There are advantages of using copulas instead of analyzing correlation coefficients. Besides allowing non-linear dependencies, copulas also measure extreme events. For example, asymptotic tail coefficients measure the probability that stock markets may have suffered large increases or decreases simultaneously. Moreover, it allows returns to have asymmetric and heavy tail distributions, where some empirical evidence has shown to be adequate to describe financial returns (Horta, Lagoa, & Martins, 2012).Viale, Bessler, and Kolari (2014) proposed the combination of the copula theory and the directed acyclic graph to measure both causality and dependence structures. They proposed another definition of financial contagion to test both dependence and causality structures. Actually, it is “a shift in the causal dependence structure across asset returns in a network of financial markets after a local negative shock over and above the relation expected during the status-quo economic regime.”Their analyses were based on the work of Bessler and Yang (2003), through the use of the directed acyclic graph and the mixed model copula, Hu (2006). The main objective of their study was to identify both the causal structure and the dependence intensity or the degree of the co-movements of the asset prices through a network of financial markets, and find out if there were spillovers between the equity indices, the sovereign debt, the interest rates and the exchange rates from seven Latin American countries during the financial crises of the 1990s and early 2000s.A major problem in developing a test of financial contagion is that there is a little consensus in the literature related to the definition of financial contagion. Since this is still an open debate in economics, and on the basis of the definition of Forbes and Rigobon (2002) and Viale et al. (2014), we have developed our own definition: “Contagion is a significant increase in the causal dependence structure between markets after a shock in one country (or group of countries)”. This definition has been used to test both the dependence and causality structures. Based on this definition and on the work of Horta, Mendes, and Vieira (2010a, 2010b), Horta et al. (2012), Bessler and Yang (2003),22Bessler and Yang (2003) proposed to combine the error correction model (ECM) and the directed acyclic graph to study the structure of interdependence between the stock markets. The objective of this combination is to analyze the direction of causality between innovations in the stock markets. The DAG helps measure the direction of contagion between the markets.Yang and Bessler (2008) and Viale et al. (2014), we have used a new methodology based on the copula theory and the DAG. This new suggested method has several advantages. It provides a flexible modeling of the dependence between two or more random variables. The dependence structure is important to properly assess the benefits of diversification in normal times and at crisis times. The existence of financial contagion means that the diversification benefits associated with investing in the stock market will decline. It helps measure both the dependence and causality structures. It solves several problems related to the study of financial contagion. Therefore, the copula theory is the most appropriate approach to study, not only, the existence and intensity of financial contagion between markets, but also, the transmission channels of the crisis. Furthermore, can it help handle the hypothesis tests based on the rank correlation coefficient (ρ and τ) and the lower and upper tail dependence coefficients (λLand λU). However, the DAG is used only to improve our test based on the copula theory. It helps identify the direction of causality between the markets.Copulas are “functions that join or couple multivariate distribution functions to their one-dimensional marginal distribution functions” (Nelsen, 1999). The most important result in the copula theory is the Sklar's theorem (Rodriguez, 2007). LetX1,…,Xnbe random variables with marginal distributionF1,…,Fnand joint distribution F, then there is a copula C: [0, 1]n→ [0, 1] such that:(1)C(x1,…,xn)=C(F1(x1),…,Fn(xn))=F(F1−1(u1),…,Fn−1(un))=F(x1,…,xn)Conversely, if C is a copula andF1,…,Fnare distribution functions, the function F, defined earlier, is a joint distribution with the margins F1,…, Fn(Nelsen, 1999). Therefore, if F is a continuous multivariate distribution function, the Sklar's (1959) theorem says it is possible to separate the univariate margins from the dependence structure represented by the copula.This can be seen more clearly if we assume that the Fis are differentiable, and C and F are n times differentiable. Then, deriving both sides of Eq. (1) to get the density of F, we get:(2)f(x1,…,xn)=c(F1(x1),…,Fn(xn))×f1(x1)×…×fn(xn)Accordingly, the density of F has been expressed as the product of the copula density and the univariate marginal densities. It is in this sense that we can say that the copula has all the information about the dependence structure.In addition to linear correlations, there are various other measures of dependence, such as the Kendall's τ and the Spearman's ρ, which are free two scale measures of rank dependence and commonly studied with copula models.(3)ρSpearman(X1,X2)=12∫01∫01C(u1,u2)du1du2−3(4)τKendall(X1,X2)=Q(C,C)=4∫01∫01C(u1,u2)dC(u1,u2)−1An asymptotic measure of dependence, especially focusing on bivariate extreme values, is the tail dependence coefficient (Dias, 2004). Moreover, the tail dependence between X1 and X2, as one of the copula properties, is invariant under a strictly increasing transformation of X1 and X2. The lower (inferior) and upper (superior) tail dependence coefficients are defined as:(5)limu→1P{Y>G−1(u)|X>F−1(u)}=λU(6)limu→0P{Y<G−1(u)|X<F−1(u)}=λLwhere  λLand λU∈ [0, 1]. If λLor λUare positive, X1and X2 are said to be left (lower) or right (upper) tail dependent. These asymptotic tail coefficients (λUand λL) and these rank correlation coefficients (the Kendall's tau (τ) and Spearman's rho (ρ)) are both suggested in this paper to measure the contagion between markets and the channels of transmission in the July–August-2011 stock market crash. The analysis of the contagion effects in this article is based on the daily returns of the indices of four developed countries and five Asian ones.A directed graph is an illustration using arrows and vertices to represent the causal flow among a set of vertices (or variables) (Pearl, 2000). Three elements, variables, marks – representing the symbols attached to the end of edges – and edges between variables comprise a directed graph (Park, Mjelde, & Bessler, 2006). A directed acyclic graph is a directed graph that contains no directed cyclic paths (Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines, 2000). Only the directed acyclic graphs are considered.Following Pearl (2000), the DAGs can be used to represent the conditional independence as implied by the recursive product decomposition:(7)Pr(v1,v2,…,vn)=∏i=1nPr(vi|pai)where Pr is the probability of verticesv1,v2,…,vnand paiis the realization of some subsets of variables that precede (come before in a causal sense) viin order (v1,v2,…,vn). Pearl (1995) proposed a d-separation as a graphical characterization of conditional independence; i.e., the d-separation characterizes the conditional independence relations given by Eq. (7). If we formulate a directed acyclic graph in which the variables corresponding to paiare represented as the parents (direct causes) of vi, then the independencies implied by Eq. (7) can be read away the graph through the use of the d-separation concept (Pearl, 1995). Geiger, Verma, and Pearl (1990) showed that there was a one-to-one correspondence between the set of conditional independencies, (X⊥Y|Z), implied by Eq. (7) and the set of triples (X, Y, Z) that met the criterion of the d-separation in graph G.Spirtes et al. (2000) developed a causal search algorithm (PC algorithm) for inference on directed acyclic graphs from observational data. The PC algorithm has been widely applied in several empirical studies (Awokuse, Chopra, & Bessler, 2009). The algorithm applies statistical tests so as to detect the conditional independence between the variables and thus rebuild the causal structure on the basis of these independence relationships. Initialized by a non-fully directed connected graph, the algorithm performs statistical tests for the detection of conditional independence. Once the independence is detected, the corresponding arc is removed. The statistical tests are performed in a given order prior to the variables.The methodological procedures applied here can be divided into four steps and described as follows:Step 1. ARMA-GARCH modelsFirst, we begin by modeling the series of returns with an ARMA-GARCH model. The identification of the most appropriate model for each series is made on the basis of the Akaike criterion (AIC). The returns are supposed to be generated by a stochastic process with a volatility which varies in a GARCH model depending on time.Step 2. Copulas adjustment for bivariate seriesSecond, the samples of the filtered returns are divided into two periods: the pre-crash period and the crash period. The Gaussian distribution is used to estimate the copulas through the maximum likelihood. The AIC criterion is used again to select the most appropriate copulas (Dias, 2004). The pure and mixed copulas33For more details on pure (Gaussian, Clayton, Gumbel and Frank) and mixed copulas (Clayton–Gumbel–Frank, Gumbel–Survival Gumbel and Clayton–Gumbel), the reader may refer to Horta et al. (2010a, 2010b) and Jayech and Zina (2012).are estimated. The first are the Gaussian, Clayton, Gumbel and Frank; the second are the Clayton–Gumbel–Frank, Gumbel–Survival Gumbel and Clayton–Gumbel. The measures λL,  λU, ρ and τ are calculated using the estimated copulas. The mixed copulas have been compared with the bivariate ones (Gaussian, Frank, Clayton and Gumbel) to find the best suitable model. It is necessary to choose a criterion among them. In our case, we use the Akaike criterion (AIC).Step 3. The bootstrap technique ofTrivedi and Zimmer (2005)Then, in order to obtain the ‘parameters’ variance–covariance matrix V and other measures associated with copulas,Horta et al. (2010a, 2010b, 2012) and Jayech and Zina (2012) proposed the use of the bootstrap technique referred by Trivedi and Zimmer (2005). The bootstrap procedure may be summarized as follows:(a)The computation with the IFM method can help us estimate the vector of marginal distribution parameters(β^1andβ^2)and that of the copula(θ^). The joint vector of parameters is defined asΩ^=(β^1,β^2,θ^)T.Randomly draw a sample of observations (with a replacement) from the original data.Use the randomly drawn sample to re-estimate β1, β2 and θ by IFM and store the values.Repeat steps (b) and (c) R times (R = 1000) and denote the rth vector of parametersβ^1(r),β^2(r)andθ^(r),r=1,…,R. The rth vector of parameters isΩ^(r)=(β^1(r),β^2(r),θ^(r))T.The parameters’ standard deviations are the square roots of the main diagonal elements in matrix V, estimated as follows:V^=R−1∑r=1R(Ω^(r)−Ω^)(Ω^(r)−Ω^)T.Step 4. Four tests of financial contagionFinally, we use the “bootstrap” results of the estimated copulas to evaluate the contagion hypothesis. In this step, we investigate the transmission channels of the stock market crash by making specific assumptions about quantities  τ, ρ, λUand λL, which depend on Ω. The "bootstrap" technique helps get the gains for the proposed tests through the use of a normal distribution. After that, we describe the tests being evaluated. The first scenario is to examine the existence of a contagion of the stock market crash of 2011 using the new definition. Naturally, we cannot say that the US stock market S&P 500 is considered to be the heart of the 2011 stock market crash as in the case of the subprime crisis. Indeed, in the latter, the United States was the country at the origin of this crisis. However, in the context of this crash, we do not know the country from which contagion originated. As a result, our goal in this paper is twofold. First, we will study the financial contagion between all the markets without knowing the country from which the crisis originated by using the copula theory. We will give the exact rate of contagion between the four markets. Then, we will identify the source country of the crash using the directed acyclic graph. Hence, our goal is to detect the direction of contagion between the indices and identify the country likely to be at the origin of contagion. If there was contagion, the correlation between the American, British or French stock market returns and those of country x – which are measured by the Kendall's tau coefficient or by Spearman's rho estimated copula – would rise during the crash, compared to the pre-crash period. The first hypothesis has been examined by the following test:Test 1 – If there was contagion, the dependence or co-movement between the markets would be greater during the period of the crash.Using the Kendall's tau:{H0:Δτ=τcrash(x)−τpre−crash(x)≤0H1:Δτ=τcrash(x)−τpre−crash(x)>0x = The United States, the United Kingdom, France and Germanywhereτpre−crash(x)and τcrash(x) measure the correlation between the United States, the United Kingdom, France and Germany and the stock market returns of country  x during the pre-crash and the crash periods, respectively.Using the Spearman's rho:{H0:Δρ=ρcrash(x)−ρpre−crash(x)≤0H1:Δρ=ρcrash(x)−ρpre−crash(x)>0x = The United States, the United Kingdom, France and Germanywhere ρpre-crash(x) and ρcrash(x)  measure the correlation between the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the stock market returns of country  x during the pre-crash and crash periods, respectively.If contagion in market x was more intense than in market y, this would not give precise information about the direction of causality. The first test has only given us the weight of the chosen copula, that is to say the weight of this causal structure. For example, on the basis of the following relationship A/B, we cannot say whether A or B is the source country of contagion. Besides, if we use the results of one test, the second test for the causal structure between the markets will be defined as follows.Test 2 – We assume that A and B are two stock markets. To capture the source country of contagion during the crash, we have to show that there is a causal relationship from A toward B. According to the research of Naim, Wuillemin, Leray, Pourret, and Becker (2005), the most intuitive graphical representation of the impact of one variable on another is to possibly indicate causality by linking the cause with the effect through a directed arrow in a causal graph.We use the TETRAD IV software that contains the PC algorithm to carry out an analysis of a directed acyclic graph. The TETRAD IV is applied to the rank correlation matrix (Spearman's rho and Kendall's tau). For each market regime, we start with a full non-oriented chart bringing together all the settings provided by the copula functions. The standard strategy to retrieve the best chart is the PC algorithm. Given a certain level of importance set in advance, the statistically significant links are identified using the Fisher Z statistics distributed asymptotically as a normally distributed random variable.Test 3 – If the null hypothesis is rejected in the first test, we will conclude that there was contagion between the markets. The next step is to check which channels of contagion were active. Therefore, the third test tries to show whether the investors transmitted the crash because of the wealth constraints or because of the portfolio rebalancing. In Test 1, for example, we said that the correlation between the American S&P 500 stock market and the stock market of country  x was more important during the crash than in a normal period.To measure the correlation between markets in a period of extreme price changes, we use the asymptotic tail coefficients obtained directly from the estimated copulas. In other words, during the periods of significant decline in the market, we use the lower tail dependency coefficient λL; whereas, during the periods of a sharp rise of asset prices, we use the upper tail dependence coefficient λU. Both coefficients measure the likelihood that a market reaches an extreme value since the other market has already reached this value; i.e., these coefficients measure the probability that two markets might suffer from very large increases or decreases in prices at the same time. Therefore, during a crash period, the test compares the correlation between the markets during a sharp fall in the prices with the one between the markets when there was a sharp rise in prices. Hence, the third hypothesis is measured by the following test:{H0:λLcrash(x)−λUcrash(x)≤0H1:λLcrash(x)−λUcrash(x)>0x = The United States, the United Kingdom, France and GermanyRejecting the null hypothesis in this third test means that the crash was transmitted through “the wealth constraints”.Test 4 – The fourth test focuses on the interaction between the stock and bond markets during a crash, assuming that the bonds are less risky. If the third test confirms that the portfolio rebalancing was the main transmission channel of contagion, it would be possible to know if this transmission was due to the portfolio rebalancing between countries or to the flight to quality of local investors. On the one hand, if international investors take their funds out of a country, they are going to withdraw from both its stock and bond markets at the same time, which means that the correlation between both markets will increase or remain the same. On the other hand, if local investors choose the flight to quality within the same country, they will replace the shares with bonds. Therefore, the correlation between the stock and bond markets falls during a crash. In view of theabove information, the fourth test compares the correlation between the stock and bond markets before and during the crash:{H0:τBond,Stockcrash(x)−τBond,Stockpre−crash(x)<0H1:τBond,Stockcrash(x)−τBond,Stockpre−crash(x)≥0x = The United States, the United Kingdom, France and Germanywhere τBond,  Stock(x), is the correlation between the bond and stock markets of country  x. If the null hypothesis is rejected, this means that the international investors were behind the portfolio rebalancing that triggered contagion. If the null hypothesis may not be refused, then the flight to quality is the main mechanism that explains the spread of the crash to the stock market.Fig. 2provides additional information with which we can observe the trend of volatility of the filtered returns obtained with the Hodrick Prescott filter, as in the work of Jayech and Zina (2012) and Horta et al. (2010b). The rise of the returns’ volatility during the crash is obvious.The volatility peak of the stock market was reached on May 6, 2010, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average index had its largest loss in history when it fell by 9.2 percent in a few minutes. This stock market tumble is sometimes referred to as the 2010 Flash Crash in Wall Street. Following this tumble, we think that the four leading international stock indices had already recorded a strong decline of about 4 percent. Indeed, the series of the conditional volatility of the stock market increased after the 2011 stock market crash, which shows the instability of the international financial markets.In Fig. 3, we present the scatter plots of the studied market pairs. Tables 1–3show the copula estimates for the various stock markets during the pre-crash and crash periods. According to Tables 1 and 2, the various estimated copula parameters increase between the period before the crash and the one after the crash, suggesting that the correlation between the S&P 500, FTSE 100, CAC 40 and DAX 30 stock markets became more pronounced during the stock market crash. In this study, we use the Gaussian distributions to test the bivariate and mixed copulas.In this study, we use the Gaussian distributions to test the bivariate and mixed copulas. Despite the presented distinct levels of dependence, all the stock markets in the developed countries show a positive dependence coefficients, which shows that they were all connected with the United States and were changing in the same direction. We notice as well that the Gumbel–Survival Gumbel mixed copulas were more effective to specify the dependence structure between the stock markets before and after the 2011 crash (Tables 1 and 2).Table 3shows that the Clayton's copula is the most effective method to specify the dependence structure between the stock markets in both periods. Tables 4–6present the results for the selected copulas regarding the pre-crash and crash periods, by combining the stock market returns of two countries for each period. We present the copula parameters (θ and w) and several measures obtained from the estimated copulas, namely the Kendall's tau and the asymptotic tail dependence coefficients λLand λU(the standard deviations between parentheses).Concerning the pre-crash period, the mixed copulas Gumbel–Survival–Gumbel are the most suitable for the US/France and the US/Germany. This type of copulas shows a strong tail dependence to the right and a relatively weak one to the left. We notice that the tail dependencies to the right and to the left for the US/France are represented by the probabilities of 39.78 percent (λU=0,3978) and 16.80 percent (λL=0,1680). Moreover, concerning the US/UK pair, the most suitable copula is the Clayton–Gumbel's mixture. This means that there was an asymmetry in the return distribution during the pre-crash period. Another important aspect is that the extreme dependence between the series, as assessed by  λUand λL, is significant. The stock returns were positively correlated across countries, with correlations ranging from 45.22 percent for the US/UK, 48.58 percent for the US/France and 46.44 percent for the US/Germany. The correlation was stronger for larger markets, with a declining correlation degree of France, Germany and the United Kingdom (Table 4).We now turn to the time of the crash. Table 4 shows that the copula estimated for the series in two variables are typically skewed. Thus, the copulas for equity returns of the US/UK, the US/France, and the US/Germany have strong right tail dependence. Indeed, the coefficients of greater tail dependence for the three cases are respectively represented by the following values: 32.41 percent; 32.71 percent and 73.14 percent. In these three cases, the correlation between markets is higher when the indices’ increase. For example, the Kendall's tau for the US/UK pair increased from 0.4522 to 0.5092 between the two periods. In addition, the mixed copulas Gumbel–Survival–Gumbel are the most chosen for the time of the crash. From this table, we can deduce that both measures of correlations based on the ranks (Kendall's tau and Spearman's rho) rose during the period of the crash for all the pairs of the stock markets, which indicates that there was contagion. Finally, we apply the tests of hypotheses proposed to evaluate the possibility of financial contagion and determine the main transmission channels.Tables 5and 6show that both rank correlation coefficients (τ and ρ) are significant at 5 percent for all the pairs, the US/Asia, the UK/Asia, FR/Asia and GR/Asia, where “Asia” shows for five Asian countries studied in our test. Also, we note the reduction of dependence between all pairs except for the following three cases: the US/Japan, the US/New Zealand, and GR/Philippines. Therefore, to check if this increase is a phenomenon of financial contagion or just a strong interdependence between the markets, we have to use the tests of the hypotheses shown in the next section.•	Results for the assessment of contagion – Test 1To assess the existence of contagion (Tables 7and 8), it is necessary to analyze the sign and significance of the change in the Kendall's tau and the Spearman's rho for the crash, designating them by Δτ and Δρ. To construct the function probability, we have considered R = 1000 replications of the bootstrap procedure. For each replication, a value has been obtained for Δτ. Then we have sorted the 1000 values in an ascending order to obtain the p-values of the null hypothesis of no contagion: (H0: Δτ ≤ 0 and H0: Δρ ≤ 0).44The p-values are obtained for a unilateral test, reflecting the probability weight to the left of Δτ = 0 and ofΔρ=0.Therefore, the existence of financial contagion is confirmed when the dependence increase between the pre-crash and crash periods is statistically significant. From Table 5, it can be concluded that financial contagion existed at a significance level of 5 percent in the following stock markets: the US/UK, the US/France and the US/Germany. Hence, the German stock market was the only one which showed high levels of contagion intensity (Δτ=0.0939) at a significance level of 1 percent. With Jayech and Zina (2012), concerning the same sample but during the subprime crisis (the crisis period started at the beginning of August 2007 and lasted until August 27, 2010), the alternative hypothesis of the presence of the contagion showed very high levels of significance, with 58 percent for the French case, 40 percent for the British case and 47 percent for the German case. They also obtained slight increases proportional to the Kendall tau during the crisis for the studied countries, with the exception of France. We can therefore say that the signs of contagion generally increase when the crash intensifies.From Table 6, we can see that there was no contagion between the four stock markets in the developed countries and the five Asian stock markets. In this case, we notice that the increase in dependence was not significant for all the three pairs of the US/JP, the US/NZ and GR/PH. This also reflects the continuity of the strong links between the economies of the whole world. According to Forbes and Rigobon (2002), when two markets show a high degree of co-movement during the stability period and continue to be highly correlated after a generated shock, we cannot speak about contagion; it is rather a continuity of interdependencies that existed before the shock.• Directed acyclic graphs – Test 2In what follows, the application of the rank correlation between the indices in normal times and the crisis helps us draw the following four tables:As discussed previously, the use of the rank correlation coefficients and the directed acyclic graph is to define the countries likely to be at the origin of contagion. These countries are represented by the indices shown at the top of the four tables (Tables 9–12). This helps us comment on the results more accurately concerning the meaning of contagion.We notice that the strongest correlations (in the crash period) are between the innovations of the FTSE 100 and the CAC 40 (0.916) indices, the CAC 40 and the DAX 30 (0.901) indices, the FTSE 100 and the DAX 30 (0.891) indices. The weakest correlations (in the pre-crash period) are between the innovations of the S&P 500 and the FTSE 100 index, the S&P 500 and the CAC 40 indices, the S&P 500 and the DAX 30 indices which are 0.944, 0.863 and 0.923, respectively. We use the TETRAD IV software that contains the algorithm PC so as to conduct an analysis of directed acyclic graph. TETRAD IV is applied to the correlation matrix and generates the rank graph given in Fig. 4.The 2011 stock market crash has made us clarify the interdependence structure and contagion transmission effects among the four stock markets. Fig. 4a and b illustrates the causality structure between the new stock markets studied in our analysis during the pre-crash and crash periods, respectively. The first test shows that the relationship between the four stock markets in the developed countries and the five Asian stock markets presented strong interdependence. For this last reason, we move on to interpret the cases that had contagion relationships with one another, such as the case of the four developed countries, for the purpose of identifying the source country of contagion. Fig. 4c shows that the United States affected only the German and British stock markets and the British stock market affected only the French stock market before the crash. However, since this transmission's causal channel also existed under a stable system, we could not reject the null hypothesis only of the interdependence after the crash at a significance level of 5 percent. Fig. 4b presents the results of the directed acyclic graph for the period after the 2011 stock market crash. Several important observations can be made about the relationship between the four stock markets during the crash. First, unlike the results of period 1, the predominant role of the stock markets in the United States declined during the crash of 2011. This result shows that the United States was not the source country of the 2011 crash.There are statistic data at a significance level of 5 percent of a transmission's causal channel between the stock markets of the United States and Germany before the crash in period 1, whereas period 2 has no transmission channel. France led the German stock market during period 1 and the British and the American stock markets during the second period. This causal relationship is represented by a divergent connection. In this case, we can detect the source of pure contagion from France to these two countries. Besides, we notice the existence of a retro-inverse effect (feedback) of interdependence between the French and German stock markets. The German stock market seemed to significantly affect three countries, namely the United States, the United Kingdom and France, at a threshold of 5 percent. This led the French market before the crash in period 1 and those of Britain, France and the US in period 2. According to this result, we can conclude that Germany was the cause of the 2011 stock market crash since it affected all the stock indices in our sample.The United Kingdom led the United States during the crash. Therefore, the FTSE 100 stock index was a direct cause of the S&P 500 index and the S&P 500 index was a direct consequence of the FTSE 100. These causal relationships did not exist in a stable system at a significance level of 5 percent. Therefore, both variables are related to an undirected arc in the first period. The results about the transmission channel of causality in the stock market are robust to the research method used to reconstruct the directed acyclic graph. Therefore, we cannot reject the null hypothesis only for interdependence at a significance level of 5 percent.•	Contagion channels tests – wealth constraints or portfolio rebalancing – Test 3Given that there was contagion during the 2011 stock market crash between the stock markets of the developed countries, we can identify the main contagion channels. Thus, a third test has been performed indicating that the portfolio rebalancing was the main channel of transmission of this crash, which is different from that of the wealth constraints (see Table 13). This conclusion is similar to the one of Boyer et al. (2006) on the Asian crisis and to the contagion theoretical model of Kodres and Pritsker (2002). At this stage, we can find out if the crash transmission was due to the portfolio rebalancing between countries or to the local investors’ flight to quality (Table 16).•	Contagion channels tests – cross market rebalancing or flight to quality – Test 4Before moving to the last test, we will adjust all the copulas for the series of the bond/stock in both periods before and after the 2011 stock market crash. We will first compare the mixed copulas with the bivariate ones in order to find the best fitting model. In this case, the AIC is used to select the most appropriate copula. This stage is important as it helps us choose the most effective copula for the study of the dependence structure between the debt and stock markets for each country.Table 14shows the copula estimates for the bond market during the pre-crash and the crash periods. We notice as well that the Gumbel copula appears to be more adequate to model the dependence structure between the stock and bond markets of the UK and France in the crash period. The mixed Clayton–Gumbel–Frank copulas are more effective to specify the dependence structure between the stock and bond markets of France and Germany during the crash period. Table 15shows the obtained results for the selected copulas before and after the crash.According to Table 16, we can clearly see, on the one hand, that the correlation between both markets increased during the period of the crash only in Germany. In fact, the null hypothesis for the fourth test is rejected. This means that international investors were behind the portfolio rebalancing that triggered contagion, which implies that they would withdraw from both the stock and bond markets simultaneously. On the other hand, we can see that the correlation between the stock and bond markets decreased during the crash for two cases (the United Kingdom and France). The null hypothesis could not be rejected, so the flight to quality was the main mechanism that explained the spread of the crash on the stock market. Consequently, the local investors would replace the shares with bonds.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
