@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
How to properly decompose economic efficiency using technical and allocative criteria with non-homothetic DEA technologies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We discuss the decomposition of economic efficiency under non-homotheticity.Radial measures estimate true technical efficiency only for CRS with one output.In a non-homothetic setting, we show how to correctly decompose economic efficiency.We define a new directional distance function with endogenous direction.We show that large differences arise using either the standard or the new approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis,Overall efficiency,Technical efficiency,Allocative efficiency,Homotheticity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We discuss how to properly decompose economic efficiency when the underlying technology is non-homothetic using alternative allocative and technical efficiency criteria. We first show that only under the production of one output and assuming the particular case of constant returns to scale homotheticity, we may claim that the standard radial models correctly measure pure technical efficiency. Otherwise, when non-homotheticity is assumed, we then show that these traditional estimations would measure an undetermined mix of technical and allocative efficiency. To restore a consistent measure of technical efficiency in the non-homothetic case we introduce a new methodology that takes as reference for the economic efficiency decomposition the preservation of the allocative efficiency of firms producing in the interior of the technology. This builds upon the so-called reversed approach recently introduced by Bogetoft et al. (2006) that allows estimating allocative efficiency without presuming that technical efficiency has been already accomplished. We illustrate our methodology within the Data Envelopment Analysis framework adopting the most simple non-homothetic BCC model and a numerical application. In this application we show that there are significant differences in the allocative and technical efficiency scores depending on the approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Economic (overall) efficiency measurement based on the approach initiated by Farrell (1957) has received great attention from academics and practitioners. Since Farrell, economic efficiency originates from two different sources, viz. technical efficiency and allocative efficiency. In the spirit of his renowned decomposition, technical efficiency is estimated in first place as some measure of the gains obtained from moving the evaluated firm to the frontier of the production possibility set. The main argument behind this approach is that the measurement of allocative efficiency presumes technical efficiency since only on the production isoquant the rate of substitution between production inputs is well-defined and comparable with the ratio of market prices. Therefore, under the Farrell’s approach, the analysis focuses on the isoquant corresponding to the observed output before estimating allocative efficiency. Specifically, Farrell (1957) resorted to radial movements in order to measure technical efficiency, relating this particular component to both the coefficient of resource utilization of Debreu (1951) and the inverse of the Shephard’s distance function (Shephard, 1953). Indeed, and thanks to duality results (Shephard, 1953), allocative efficiency can be derived as a residual between the overall economic efficiency and its technical efficiency component As a result of this residual nature of the allocative efficiency term, where its technical efficiency counterpart is the driving component, the former has received much less attention in the literature. While there are many ways to define and calculate technical efficiency (oriented and non-oriented models, radial, additive, directional-based measures, etc.), the allocative efficiency problem of the firm in relation to the overall economic efficiency has been neglected.However, this is changing nowadays. In contrast to Farrell’s approach, Bogetoft, Färe, and Obel (2006) introduced a new method for estimating the potential gains from improving allocative efficiency without presuming that technical efficiency has already been accomplished. In particular, they propose to use a ‘reversed’ Farrell approach, first correcting for allocative efficiency and next for technical efficiency and, consequently, changing the traditional order to decompose overall efficiency. The rationale is that when a firm is inefficient, both the input and output orientations are feasible choices to gain efficiency, and allocative efficiency can be evaluated in alternative input or output isoquants. Following this thread, we show that approaching the problem of decomposing overall economic efficiency dealing with allocative efficiency in the first place sheds new light on the analysis of the economic behavior of inefficient firms, which must be taken into account by researchers.Particularly, the fact that firms may solve technical inefficiencies by either reducing inputs or expanding outputs has relevant implications in empirical research, as these two alternative dimensions normally used by researchers when measuring technical efficiency—output or input—pass on to the concept of allocative efficiency. This is indeed central in our analysis since an inefficient firm situating inside the technology may have used inputs in excess for the observed level of output (input perspective), or may have fallen short of potential output given its observed level of inputs (output perspective). This theoretical or conceptual ambivalence that the applied researcher faces when choosing a particular orientation has an immediate implication in a cost minimizing analytical framework because a firm, when demanding its optimal input quantities, may take as reference its actually observed output level that the firm has not been capable of producing efficiently by incurring in input excesses (an input perspective), or the intended—and unknown—potential output level (an output perspective).In this respect, the analytical implications of the choice of the output benchmark are clear. Given the observed market prices for inputs, the first order conditions for cost minimization subject to a given output level determine whether the firm is allocative efficient or not; particularly, if the marginal rates of technical substitution are equal to the price ratios. As a result, a firm will demand different input mixes depending on its ex-ante planned output level, which may not be realized latter on resulting in technical inefficiency. Assuming perfect competition in the input markets results in price taking firms, and therefore alternative input mixes imply different allocative efficiency levels. As a result both technical and allocative efficiency will differ depending on the chosen orientation when assessing overall cost efficiency.Relevant for this discussion, Bogetoft et al. (2006) prove that if the technology is homothetic then both decompositions based on the standard and reversed Farrell approaches are equivalent. Therefore, researchers do not have to worry about whether the subjective analytical choice of orientation yields alternative decompositions of overall economic efficiency, as they are the same. This is because from an economic theory perspective, one remarkable result of homotheticity is that least cost expansion paths are vectors passing through the origin and, therefore, this property preserves marginal rates of substitution as one moves along rays from the origin. Consequently, as it is well-known in the standard Farrell approach, radial measures preserve the value of allocative efficiency along the contracting paths given by the input mix. Since market prices are exogenous, allocative efficiency remains constant along radial projections of technically inefficient firms. As marginal rates of substitution do not change, whatever the difference between the ratios of market prices and marginal rates might be (when they are equal the firm is allocative efficient), it does not change regardless of the input or output isoquant that is considered to evaluate allocative efficiency—formally the marginal rates of substitution are independent of the output levels. Moreover, it is this normally overlooked property of homothetic technologies what guarantees that the radial movements associated to the traditional input and output measures can be rightly interpreted as pure technical efficiency gains, since allocative efficiency remains unchanged, resulting in a consistent decomposition of overall economic efficiency. In this framework, and not surprisingly, Chambers and Mitchell (2001) established the advantages of assuming homotheticity as the most common functional restriction used in economics. Specifically, the level sets for a homothetic function are radial expansions (“blow ups”) of a reference level set.While non-homotheticity in a parametric setting has been addressed both by the non-frontier and the frontier approaches, it has been completely disregarded by the non-parametric—DEA—approach. From a parametric perspective, classical references showing that non-homothetic parameters for a diversity of functional forms are indeed statistically significant are Christensen and Greene (1976) for a translog cost function, or Sato (1977) for a constant elasticity of substitution specification. In the frontier approach, Koop and Diewert (1982) also allowed for a non-homothetic generalized Cobb-Douglas and translog functional forms. However, even if non-homotheticity is pervasive, its existence goes normally untested among practitioners, who customarily rule it out and therefore do not test if the underlying assumption of homotheticity is supported by the data. From a non-parametric perspective, the issue of whether the most common DEA models are non-homothetic has not been studied until now, including the consequences it has on the decomposition of economic efficiency. Additionally, there are recent attempts of moving stochastic frontier methods to semi-parametric and non-parametric estimation techniques that also allow flexible functional forms—e.g. Delis, Iosifidi, and Tsionas (2014), where the introduction of the ideas developed in this study represents a promising field of research.One interesting byproduct of the reversed Farrell decomposition proposed by Bogetoft et al. (2006) is that it opens the way to determine allocative efficiency without first projecting the evaluated firm on the isoquant corresponding to the observed level of output. In this respect, a point that has received little attention in the production economics literature and that stems from the above discussion is that if one is interested in measuring the technical efficiency corresponding to a firm producing in the interior of the production possibility set through movements to the frontier, then it is necessary to assure that the allocative efficiency does not change along this process—as in the standard Farrell approach for homothetic technologies. In other words, if we determine the ‘starting’ allocative efficiency of the assessed firm before projecting it on the frontier of the technology, applying the reversed approach, this value should coincide with the estimation of the allocative efficiency at the projected point after moving the original production plan of the firm to the corresponding isoquant. Only in this way we could be sure that the gains in moving from the original to the projected plan are waste due to exclusively technical reasons. In a homothetic setting researches do not have to worry about how to measure the residual allocative efficiency, either by the standard or reversed approaches since both methodologies coincide, but this would not be the case for non-homothetic technologies. Keeping in mind that true technologies will not generally follow the stylized assumptions underlying theoretical analyses, we believe that to define, interpret and correctly measure technical efficiency, it is necessary to keep constant the allocative efficiency so as to rightly and unambiguously decompose overall efficiency.As a result of these reflections, in this paper we maintain that the interpretation of the scores in the well-known radial Data Envelopment Analysis models (the CCR by Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978 and the BBC by Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984) as technical efficiency is unclear unless we can assume that the underlying technology is homothetic, a scenario that is verified only for the production of one output when the technology exhibits constant returns to scale (CRS). This implies that unless researchers are certain of the mistakes made by the managers of the firm resulting in input excesses or output deficits (and note that individual firms in the evaluated sample could differ in their production errors), the decomposition of overall economic efficiency may be erroneous. Additionally, we propose a simple solution for properly measuring technical efficiency and decomposing overall efficiency when the technology is non-homothetic, which should result in an improvement of the strategies prescribed to managers when adopting both technical and economic decisions aimed at improving their efficiency.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly recall the standard and reversed Farrell approaches and, in addition, we study under which technological assumptions the radial models actually measure technical efficiency in Data Envelopments Analysis, DEA. Section 3 is devoted to introduce the correct decomposition of economic efficiency into its technical and allocative components when the technology is not homothetic. In particular, we show that any DEA measure of economic performance would not only convey technical shortcomings, but also would be related to allocative criteria and, consequently, we suggest a method to overcome this problem. In Section 4, we illustrate the new methodology using a numerical application. Section 5 concludes.In this section, we first formalize some key notions about the technology and recall how overall economic efficiency has been traditionally decomposed. In a second stage we show the main characteristics of the approach introduced by Bogetoft et al. (2006) and, finally, we prove that the Shephard’s distance function, related to the inverse of the radial models in DEA, properly measure technical efficiency if the technology satisfies the particular homotheticity property.Let us consider n firms (or decision making units, DMUs) to be evaluated, which consume m inputs to produce s outputs. Firm j consumesXj=(x1j,…,xmj)∈R++mamounts of inputs to produce the following amounts of outputs:Yj=(y1j,…,ysj)∈R++s. As usual, the relative efficiency of each firm in the sample is assessed with reference to the so-called production possibility set, which can be empirically constructed using DEA from the observations by assuming several postulates. In particular, if we impose constant returns to scale on the technology including the postulate of ‘ray-unboundedness’, Banker et al. (1984) proved that the production possibility set can be characterized as follows:(1)TCRS=(X,Y)∈R+m+s:∑j=1nλjxij⩽xi,i=1,…,m,∑j=1sλjyrj⩾yr,r=1,…,s,λj⩾0,j=1,…,n.On the other hand, if we assume variable returns to scale, then the corresponding characterization of the production possibility set, denoted by TVRS, is the same as (1) but adding the additional constraint∑j=1nλj=1. Hereafter, we will use the corresponding subscripts when needed.As in the introduction, and seeking simplicity, we state most of our discussions in the input space. To do so, we need to introduce the input requirement set L(Y) defined as the set of inputs that can produce output Y. Formally,L(Y)={X∈R+m:(X,Y)∈T}. On the other hand, in order to measure technical efficiency it is necessary to isolate certain subset of L(Y) that serves as benchmark for the evaluation of efficiency. We are referring to the isoquant of L(Y): IsoqL(Y)={X∊L(Y):ε<1⇒εX∉L(Y)}.Since we are concerned with overall efficiency in the input space, and following standard economic theory, we assume that firms minimize production costs while facing exogenously determined input prices. This implies that if firms succeed in choosing the inputs combination (bundle) resulting in the minimum cost of producing a given output level at the existing market prices, they are allocative efficient. Let us denote by C(Y,W) the minimum cost of producing the output level Y given the input price vectorW=(w1,…,wm)∈R++m:C(Y,W)=min∑i=1mwixi:X∈L(Y).The standard Farrell approach (Farrell, 1957) views the overall (cost) efficiency as originating from technical efficiency and allocative efficiency. Specifically, Farrell quantified, and therefore defined each of these terms as follows. Technical efficiency corresponds to the largest feasible equiproportional contraction of the observed input vector X0, capable of producing the observed output vector Y0, by moving from X0 toθ0∗X0∈IsoqL(Y0), whereθ0∗is determined as the optimal value of the following linear program:(2)minθ0s.t.∑j=1nλjxij⩽θ0xi0,i=1,…,m∑j=1sλjyrj⩾yr0,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj=1,λj⩾0,j=1,…,nThis program is known in the DEA literature as the BCC model (Banker et al., 1984) and it is closely related to the Shephard’s input distance function (Shephard, 1953), which defines as Di(Y,X)=sup{δ>0:X/δ∊L(Y)}, thereby coinciding with the inverse ofθ0∗.Regarding the allocative efficiency component, following Farrell’s tradition, it corresponds to the adjustment of the projected input vector to the minimum cost input combination; i.e., fromθ0∗X0to X∗(Y0,W), whereX∗(Y0,W)=argmin∑i=1mwixi:X∈L(Y0). As for the decomposition of cost efficiency, the following well-known inequality holds:(3)C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwixi0︸Cost Efficiency(CE)⩽θ0∗︸Technical Efficiency(TE)⇔C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwixi0︸CE⩽1Di(Y0,X0)︸TE.Finally, the residual allocative efficiency (AE) component is derived from (3) rendering it an equality, i.e., AE=CE/TE.We now illustrate the standard decomposition through Fig. 1and a set of seven firms that consume two inputs producing a single output (x1,x2,y): (3,6,1), (2,2,1), (1,5,1), (4.5,0.5,1), (3,5,2), (4,2,2) and (7,1,2). Additionally, we consider w1=1 and. In Fig. 1, variable returns to scale have been assumed in order to estimate the piecewise linear input requirement sets and their corresponding isoquants. For the particular firm (X0,Y0)=(3,6,1), Fig. 1 shows that it is producing in the interior of the technology represented by the input requirement set L(1). Resorting to the standard equiproportional projection for solving technical efficiency, this firm should reduce input quantities matching those used by D on the IsoqL(1). Afterwards, the firm should correct for allocative efficiency by changing its input bundle from D to C, the production plan where cost is minimized for IsoqL(1).Complementing the classic approach, Bogetoft et al. (2006) recently introduced an alternative decomposition to CE in (3). In their method, allocative efficiency is corrected in first place and technical efficiency is calculated in a second stage. In order to undertake the new approach it is necessary to consider a reference output vector Y∗ such that X0∊IsoqL(Y∗). Following this approach, they define the ‘reversed’ allocative efficiency AERand the ‘reversed’ technical efficiency TERas:(4)AER=C(Y∗,W)∑i=1mwixi0,andTER=1Di(Y0,X∗(Y∗,W)).In this way, they first correct for allocative efficiency by changing the input bundle form X0 toX∗(Y∗,W)=argmin∑i=1mwixi:X∈L(Y∗)on the IsoqL(Y∗), and, later remove technical inefficiency by reducing input quantities from X∗(Y∗,W) to γX∗(Y∗,W)∊IsoqL(Y0), whereγ=1Di(Y0,X∗(Y∗,W)).The reversed decomposition is also shown in Fig. 1. In the example, Y∗=2 since X0=(3,6) belongs to IsoqL(2). Therefore, X0 reduces cost by adopting A’s production plan, and mirroring the input mix that minimizes the cost of producing Y∗=2. Afterwards, technical inefficiency should be corrected by moving from A to B, where B is the efficient projection of A on IsoqL(1) obtained by way of an equiproportional—radial—contraction of inputs.Bogetoft et al. (2006) proved that the reversed decomposition coincides with the standard Farrell approach if and only if the technology is input homothetic, a property that geometrically establishes that the input requirement sets for different output vectors are “parallel”; i.e. L(Y)=H(Y)⋅L(1s), where H(Y):Rs→R+ and 1s=(1,…,1)∊Rs(Jacobsen, 1970).Proposition 1(Bogetoft et al., 2006)AE=AER and TE=TER and, consequently, CE=AE⋅TE=AER⋅TER if and only if the technology is input homothetic.Note that in Fig. 1, Proposition 1 is not verified as the projection of firm A into B does not correspond to firm C minimizing cost for IsoqL(1). Nevertheless, as argued in the introduction, if firm X0 = (3,6) had planned producing Y∗=2, the right reference for allocative efficiency measurement is indeed firm A, and Bogetoft’s approach yields the decomposition that is consistent with the production plan of firm (X0,Y∗) = (3,6,2). While information on the firm’s planned output level (either Y0 or Y∗) is necessary to choose the correct decomposition (standard or reversed) for non-homothetic technologies (as exemplified above with the popular variable returns to scale BCC formulation), it is not a matter of concern for homothetic technologies since Proposition 1 holds.Indeed, the equivalence of the standard and reversed approaches under homotheticity is illustrated in Fig. 2. In this example the same dataset used for Fig. 1 is exploited for estimating two isoquants (those corresponding to Y0 and Y∗) but assuming now the constant returns to scale case. Considering again for evaluation the firm X0=(3,6), its output benchmarks are either Y0=1 or Y∗=2.1, with the latter being a suitable transformation of L(1s) in accordance with the usual structure of input homothetic technologies and such that X0∊IsoqL(2.1). Applying Farrell’s approach technical efficiency is solved by projecting X0=(3,6) to C and, subsequently, allocative inefficiency is corrected by shifting the input mix from C to B. On the other hand, following Bogetoft et al.’s approach allocative efficiency is corrected by matching A’s input bundle, while technical inefficiency is solved by projecting A onto B. By input homotheticity, it can be proved that AE=AER, TE=TERand CE=AE⋅TE=AER⋅TERas Proposition 1 states.After Farrell’s work, and particularly during the last two decades, part of the economic theory literature has focused on duality theory and distance functions, being Briec and Garderes (2004), Briec and Lesourd (1999), and Chambers, Chung, and Färe (1996) good examples. In particular, Chambers et al. (1996) introduced the notion of directional input distance functions as a way of generalizing the Shephard’s input distance function and showed by duality how cost efficiency may be decomposed into the usual technical and allocative components.LetG=(g1,…,gm)∈R+mbe a vector such that G≠0m, then the directional input distance function defines asD→i(X,Y;G)=sup{β:X-βG∈L(Y)}(see Chambers et al., 1996). It can be proved that if G=X0 thenD→i(X0,Y0;X0)=1-1/Di(X0,Y0)=1-θ0∗, and from this relationship and the flexibility of G, the directional input distance function encompasses the Shephard’s input distance function. Moreover, Chambers et al. (1996) were able to establish a dual correspondence between the cost function and the directional input distance function, depending on the value of the reference vector G:(5)∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwigi︸Cost Inefficiency(CI)⩾D→i(X0,Y0;G)︸Technical Inefficiency(TI).From (5), allocative inefficiency may be computed as a residual: AI=CI – TI. Note that in this case the decomposition is additive instead of multiplicative due to the nature of each of the corresponding distance functions used in (3) and (5). Also, AI can be explicitly expressed as∑i=1mwi(xi0-D→i(X0,Y0;G)gi)-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwigi, since, from (5), AI=CI – TI and TI can be equivalently rewritten asD→i(X0,Y0;G)=∑i=1mwiD→i(X0,Y0;G)gi∑i=1mwigi.Also, if G=X0CI can be expressed asCI=∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwixi0=1-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwixi0=1-CE, and regarding the technical component:TI=D→i(X0,Y0;X0)=1-1/Di(X0,Y0)=1-θ0∗=1-TE. However,AI≠1-AE=1-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwiθ0∗xi0(see Färe & Primont, 1995, p. 61) even in the case of G=X0. So, we adapt AI so as to work with an expression of allocative inefficiency that encompasses the allocative efficiency component of Farrell:(6)AI(X0,Y0,W,G):=∑i=1mwi(xi0-D→i(X0,Y0;G)gi)-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwiθ0∗gi.It is worth noting that although (5) is highly flexible in measuring cost and technical inefficiency through a wide set of potential reference vectors G, in practice researchers usually resort to G=X0 as their only choice. The reason is apparent; when G=X0 the overall cost inefficiency decomposition (5) in the additive framework is completely equivalent to the well-known multiplicative setting of the Shephard’s input distance function (3) and, therefore, the value of the technical measure has a clear interpretation in terms of equiproportional reduction in inputs. However, dismissing the flexibility of the directional distance function by adopting a decomposition dating back to the fifties is unjustified as it holds back theoretical breakthroughs. In fact, we believe that thanks to the flexibility of the directional distance function we here can consistently extend the notion of cost efficiency decomposition to non-homothetic technologies and, in doing so, show that the current practice, results, and interpretations of allocative and technical efficiency obtained in many empirical studies using common DEA models can be questioned. In this respect, until now, one of the most attractive features of the directional input distance function, its flexibility associated with the direction G, has been underutilized. Finally, besides its convenience when interpreting results, the only explanation for the systematic adoption of G=X0 is the absence of a criterion to a priori select a vector different from that related to the standard scenario. Here we set the ground for a far reaching application of the directional distance function and the choice of a different vector G as a consistent and interpretable measure of technical inefficiency in non-homothetic technologies.Once the definition of the standard overall economic efficiency decomposition in terms of the directional distance function has been presented, we can now extend Bogetoft’s et al. (2006) reversed efficiency contribution to the case of the directional input distance function. As already presented, these authors introduced a way to estimate the “starting” allocative efficiency of X0, which does not need the initial projection of this vector to the input requirement set defined by the observed output vector Y0, IsoqL(Y0). As previously discussed in the motivation we believe that if one is interested in measuring the technical efficiency corresponding to X0 in the input space by means of movements to the frontier associated with the production of Y0, then it seems appropriate to assure that the allocative efficiency does not change along this process. Only in this way, one could be sure that the cost savings derived from these input adjustments are consequence of exclusively technical—engineering—issues not related to allocative efficiency; i.e., changes in the input mix in the homothetic case.To formalize these ideas let us define the reversed allocative inefficiency associated with an arbitrary output vector Y∗ and an input vector X0∊IsoqL(Y∗) as the normalized difference between the optimal cost given a set of market prices W and the observed cost at X0:(7)AIR(X0,Y∗,W,G)=∑i=1mwi(xi0-D→i(X0,Y∗;G)gi)-C(Y∗,W)∑i=1mwigi=∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y∗,W)∑i=1mwigi.The second equality in (7) is true as long asD→i(X0,Y∗;G)=0for X0∊IsoqL(Y∗) withG=(g1,…,gm)∈R+m, G≠0m. We will suppose hereafter that this situation holds.Now, returning to the idea of properly interpreting and measuring technical efficiency, we contend that it is necessary to keep constant allocative efficiency along projections of the observed input vector X0. In this case the following question arises naturally: Is there a reference vector G that actually measures technical inefficiency through the directional input distance function while leaving allocative efficiency unchanged? We now undertake this question. In particular, we show that under the assumption of input homotheticity the directional input distance function with reference vector G=X0, always satisfies this desired property. In words, in the case of using this specific direction the “starting” allocative inefficiency, measured with respect to IsoqL(Y∗), i.e., before projecting the original input vector X0 to the isoquant of Y0, and the “final” allocative inefficiency, after projecting the original input vector, are the same.Proposition 2Let T be an input-homothetic technology andY0,Y∗∈R+s. Then,AIR(X0,Y∗,W,X0)=AI(X0,Y0,W,X0), for all X0∊L(Y0)∩IsoqL(Y∗).If G=X0 thenAIR(X0,Y∗,W,G)=1-C(Y∗,W)∑i=1mwixi0andAI(X0,Y0,W,G)=∑i=1mwi(xi0-D→i(X0,Y0;X0)xi0)-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwiθ0∗xi0=1-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwiθ0∗xi0sinceD→i(X0,Y0;X0)=1-1/Di(X0,Y0)=1-θ0∗. Finally, based on the assumption of input-homotheticity,C(Y∗,W)∑i=1mwixi0=C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwiθ0∗xi0(see Bogetoft et al., 2006, p. 456) and, therefore,AIR(X0,Y∗,W,X0)=AI(X0,Y0,W,X0).□Indeed, by Propositions 1 and 2, the directional input distance function with reference vector G=X0, or equivalently the Shephard’s input distance function, is the unique—exact—measure that yields allocative efficiency-preserving estimations of technical efficiency when input homotheticity is assumed. Some comments on this result are in order. First, we have established that for properly measuring technical efficiency we previously need to make sure that allocative efficiency does not change between the “starting” technical inefficient input vector and its “final” technical efficient projection. That is, allocative efficiency must be the same with respect to Y∗ and Y0 at the existing input market prices (regardless of whether we decide for the standard or the reversed approach). Therefore, the correct estimation of the technical efficiency component so as to ensure that allocative efficiency remains unchanged requires knowledge of the applicable input prices.However, the significance of Proposition 2 is that, even without knowing actual input prices, the true technical efficiency can be computed from the observed quantity data using the directional input distance function taking as reference vector G=X0, irrespective of input prices and ignoring the allocative efficiency of the firm. Secondly, since allocative efficiency remains constant along the radial projections of the input vector, it turns out that the actually planned—but unrealized—output level Y∗ that the inefficient firm might had in mind when setting its production schedule, does not need to be known by the researcher when assessing the relevant allocative efficiency, since it is the same regardless that output level. That is, input homotheticity guarantees that the cost efficiency decomposition into its technical and allocative terms is always correct, as the actually planned level of output that should be taken as benchmark to measure allocative efficiency is irrelevant, because allocative efficiency is the same across the whole set of possible reference output levels. Thereby, the radial input measure constitutes a precise measure of technical efficiency. From an empirical perspective, assuming (even if wrongly) input-homotheticity simplifies the whole evaluation process in terms of the information required to achieve a correct decomposition of cost inefficiency, as both knowledge of input market prices and the actually planned output level are unnecessary to properly estimate technical efficiency (but not, obviously, for calculating cost efficiency).We now turn to the analysis of the most usual DEA technologies in order to explore whether their technological characteristics ensure a correct decomposition of cost efficiency by satisfying the desirable allocative efficiency-preserving property. In this respect, the usual constant returns to scale (CRS) assumption is an example of an input homothetic technology, but only in the case of a single output.Proposition 3Let s=1. Then, TCRS in(1)is input homothetic.H(y)L(1)={H(y)X:X∈R+m,(X,1)∈T}={Z:Z∈R+m,(H(y)-1X,1)∈T}, where the last equality is true thanks to the following change of variables: Z=H(y)X. Finally, considering that TCRS=δTCRS, for all δ>0, we have that{Z:Z∈R+m,(H(y)-1Z,1)∈T}={Z:Z∈R+m,H(y)(H(y)-1Z,1)∈T}={Z:Z∈R+m,(Z,H(y))∈T}. Defining H(y)=y, then{Z:Z∈R+m,(Z,H(y))∈T}={Z:Z∈R+m,(Z,y)∈T}=L(y).□Fig. 2 illustrates Proposition 3, where a CRS DEA technology is generated using the dataset with two inputs and one output.By Propositions 1 and 2, the above result ensures that the only measure that properly estimates technical inefficiency under the restricted scenario of a DEA technology exhibiting CRS and one single output is the well-known CCR measure (Charnes et al., 1978), which yields the same projections that the Shephard’s input distance function. Additionally, we conclude that even under this so simple scenario, alternative measures as, for example, the input-oriented Russell measure (Färe & Lovell, 1978), the input-oriented additive models (Lovell & Pastor, 1995), or even the directional input distance function itself with a reference vector different from X0 (Chambers et al., 1996), would not correctly measure technical efficiency. This is because these measures cannot assure that the starting allocative efficiency, assessed at X0 with a given isoquant as reference, IsoqL(Y∗) in our case, and the final allocative efficiency, evaluated in its corresponding projection on IsoqL(Y0), coincide.Let us now to prove that in general the DEA technologies under CRS are not input homothetic. To do that, we next show a numerical counterexample. Let us assume that we have observed two firms using two inputs to produce two outputs (x1,x2,y1,y2): A=(2,1,2,1) and B=(1,1,1,1). Resorting to expression (1), the DEA technology under CRS is estimated for this example as follows:(8)TCRS=(x1,x2,y1,y2)∈R+4:2λA+λB⩽x1,λA+λB⩽x2,2λA+λB⩾y1,λA+λB⩾y2,λA⩾0,λB⩾0.The input set for the output vector (y1,y2)=(1,1) corresponds toL(1,1)={(x1,x2)∈R+2:x1⩾1,x2⩾1}.However, for the output vector(y1,y2)=(1,2),L(1,2)={(x1,x2)∈R+2:x1⩾1,x2⩾2}≠kL(1,1), for any k>0. Consequently, the technology is not input homothetic since L(Y) cannot be written as L(Y)=H(Y)⋅L(1s), with H(Y):Rs→R+ for all Y=(y1,y2).Likewise, it can be shown that the common variable returns to scale DEA production possibility set characterizes technologies that are not in general input homothetic. In fact, Fig. 1, which corresponds to this kind of technology, depicts two isoquants that do not follow ‘parallel’ expansions. As a result, we conclude that radial projections linked to the CCR-CRS and BCC-VRS models do not always keep allocative efficiency constant in moving from X0 to its projected benchmark on the isoquant, except in the case of CRS DEA technologies restricted to exclusively one output. Therefore, it cannot be guaranteed that the values provided by the CCR and BCC models could be unambiguously interpreted as true technical efficiency scores, since they depend on the relevant output level targeted by the firms.Finally, as a historical note, we point out that the methodology introduced by the seminal paper of Farrell (1957) to decompose cost efficiency was well defined in the sense of this study. It is due to the input homotheticity setting that was implicitly assumed by the author, who restricted his analysis to CRS technologies with one single output.These findings call for the introduction of new DEA models that estimate technical efficiency in the general case of non-homothetic technologies. These models would keep constant allocative efficiency as in the classic approach, thereby allowing for a correct interpretation of the distance function as a measure of technical efficiency. Having shown that the classic radial measures in DEA are not suitable measures of technical efficiency under non-homothetic technologies, it is necessary to overcome their inadequacy by adopting the flexibility offered by the directional distance function. To do that, we resort to Bogetoft et al.’s approach for estimating the starting allocative efficiency of the firm, and from there we determine its technical efficiency subject to the condition that when projected to its benchmark on the isoquant, its final allocative efficiency must be the same as the starting one.Accordingly, in a first step we need to determine a level of output Y∗, at which to evaluate allocative efficiency, such that X0∊IsoqL(Y∗) (e.g., Y∗=2 in Fig. 1).1Hereafter and seeking simplicity we assume a variable returns to scale technology—the case of constant returns to scale with s>1 can be implemented analogously.1To identify a valid level of output Y∗ for X0, it is necessary to solve the following linear programming model:(9)Maxλ,ββs.t.∑j=1nλjxij⩽xi0,i=1,…,m∑j=1nλjyrj⩾yr0+βyr0,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj=1,λj⩾0,j=1,…,n.Model (9) coincides with the directional output distance function with the reference direction Gy=Y0. It is well-known that if(λ∗,β∗)is an optimal solution of (9), thenY0+β∗Y0∈IsoqP(X0), where P(X0) denotes the set of outputs producible from X0. Less known is the fact that X0 belongs to the isoquant of the optimal level of output Y∗:=Y0+β∗Y0.Proposition 4Let(λ∗,β∗)be an optimal solution of(9). Then, X0∊IsoqL(Y∗), where Y∗=Y0+β∗Y0.This results is derived from Lemma 2.2.10 in Färe et al. (1985).□Given input market prices W and Y∗ from (9), it is trivial to determine C(Y0,W) and C(Y∗,W), the minimum cost at output levels Y0 and Y∗, respectively. However, in order to calculate the starting allocative inefficiency at IsoqL(Y∗) using expression (7) we need to choose a value for the endogenous reference vector G. However, prefixing its value has both implications on the calculation of technical inefficiency, as well as the compliance of the desired property: allocative inefficiency must remain constant along the projection of X0 on IsoqL(Y0). For example, if we determine Y∗ by means of (9) for X0=(3,6) using the dataset in Fig. 1, we obtain a value of 2 for the optimal output, with (3,6)∊IsoqL(2) by Proposition 4. Given input market prices w1=1 and w2=1.3, we first calculate C(Y∗,W) and, subsequently, AIR(X0,Y∗,W,G). If we define G=X0, then we obtain AIR(X0,Y∗,W,X0)=0.389 using (7) but, additionally, we are measuring technical inefficiency along that specific input vector, projecting X0 on point D=(1.6,3.2) by contracting inputs equiproportionally (see Fig. 1). In this respect, as argued above, radial projections may not keep allocative efficiency constant in the case of non-homothetic technologies. Indeed, using (6)AI(X0,Y0,W,X0)=0.201≠0.389. Therefore, the question is, what reference peer in the input space is generated by removing technical inefficiency through reductions in X0 to its corresponding projection on the frontier of L(Y0) while ensuring that allocative inefficiency remains constant?Next, we introduce the reversed directional input distance function that simultaneously yields the reference vector that preserves allocative inefficiency, and provides a consistent measure of technical inefficiency. In particular, we take advantage of the flexibility of the directional distance function allowing the reference vector G be a decision variable of the following optimization problem:2See Färe, Grosskopf, and Whittaker (2013), Lee (2014), Zofio, Pastor, and Aparicio (2013) as examples of directional distance function approaches where the reference vector is a decision variable of the corresponding model.2(10)D→iR(X0,Y0,Y∗,W)=Maxλ,β,Gβs.t.∑j=1nλjxij⩽xi0-βgi,i=1,…,m∑j=1nλjyrj⩾yr0,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj=1,AI(X0,Y0,W,G)=AIR(X0,Y∗,W,G),λj⩾0,j=1,…,nβ⩾0,gi⩾0,i=1,…,m.Model (10) is similar to the directional input distance function but in this case gi, i=1, …, m, is a set of decision variables and, additionally, we force that the final allocative inefficiency at L(Y0), AI(X0,Y0,W,G), matches the starting allocative inefficiency as calculated by AIR(X0,Y∗,W,G) at L(Y∗).From (6) and (7), we have that the constraint AI(X0,Y0,W,G)=AIR(X0,Y∗,W,G) is equivalent to∑i=1mwi(xi0-βgi)-C(Y0,W)∑i=1mwiθ0∗gi=∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y∗,W)∑i=1mwigi, which can be written as∑i=1mwiβgi=∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y0,W)-θ0∗∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y∗,W). Before we engage in the corresponding maximization process, we remark that (10) yields an infinite number of optimal solutions; i.e., it is affected by an arbitrary positive multiplicative scalar since given a feasible solution(λ¯,β¯,G‾), the transformation(λ¯,kβ¯,G‾/k)is also a feasible solution for any k>0. So, if a feasible solution exists, then (10) is unbounded as we may consider k=2, 3, 4, … To control for this possibility and settle for a single solution we propose the following restriction to be incorporated as an additional constraint in (10):(11)∑i=1mgi=∑i=1mxi0.This formulation presents several advantages. First it is linear and simple. Second, it does not eliminate any a priori feasible direction for model (10) since the constraint is only a normalization of the reference vector. And third, it makes comparable the solution of model (10), the optimal value of β, with the value of the most usual directional input distance function withG=X0⇔gi=xi0,∀i=1,…,m, as in this case the sum of the components of the reference vector coincides with∑i=1mxi0. In other words, both reference vectors have the same size. Note, however, that model (10) enhanced with (11) is not linear. Fortunately, it may be transformed into a linear model by adopting the following change of variables: ψi=βgi, i=1, …, m.(12)Maxλ,ψ∑i=1mψi∑i=1mxi0s.t.∑j=1nλjxij⩽xi0-ψi,i=1,…,m∑j=1nλjyrj⩾yr0,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj=1,∑i=1mwiψi=∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y0,W)-θ0∗∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y∗,W),λj⩾0,j=1,…,nψi⩾0,i=1,…,m.Proposition 5Let(λ∗,ψ∗)be an optimal solution for(12). If∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y0,W)-θ0∗∑i=1mwixi0-C(Y∗,W)≠0, then(λ∗,β∗,G∗)withβ∗=∑i=1mψi∗∑i=1mxi0andG∗=ψ∗/β∗is an optimal solution of(10)plus(11).If(λ∗,ψ∗)is an optimal solution of (12), then(λ∗,β∗,G∗)withβ∗=∑i=1mψi∗∑i=1mxi0and G∗=ψ∗/β∗ is a feasible solution of (10) satisfying (11). Note, in fact, that G∗ is well-defined because β∗>0 since, by hypothesis, and wi>0, ∀i=1, …, m. Let us now assume that(λ∗,β∗,G∗)is not an optimal solution of (10) plus (11). Then there exists a feasible solution(λ¯,β¯,G‾)such thatβ¯>β∗. Now, it is not hard to prove that(λ¯,ψ¯)withψ¯i=β¯ig¯i,∀i=1,…,m, is a feasible solution of (12). But then, regarding the objective function value of model (12), we have that∑i=1mψ¯i∑i=1mxi0=∑i=1mβ¯g¯i∑i=1mxi0=β¯∑i=1mg¯i∑i=1mxi0=β¯∑i=1mxi0∑i=1mxi0=β¯>β∗=∑i=1mψi∗∑i=1mxi0, which is the contradiction we were seeking.□On the other hand, the standard directional input distance function with G=X0 has the property of yielding technical inefficiency measures between zero and one. This desirable property is retained by the new approach as the following result establishes.Proposition 6Let(λ∗,β∗,G∗)be an optimal solution of(10)plus(11), then 0⩽β∗⩽1.(i) 0⩽β∗ is trivial by the constraints of (10). (ii) Let us assume that β∗>1. Then if we sum the first m constraints of model (10) we have that∑i=1m∑j=1nλj∗xij⩽∑i=1mxi0-β∗∑i=1mgi∗=(1-β∗)∑i=1mxi0using (11). But then∑i=1m∑j=1nλj∗xij<0because (1−β∗)<0. However, we get a contradiction with the fact thatλj∗⩾0, j=1, …, n, and xij>0, j=1, …, n, i=1, …, m. Consequently, β∗⩽1.□We now apply model (12) to the dataset portrayed in Fig. 1. Resorting to the standard directional input distance function with G=X0 for evaluating X0=(3,6), the projection on IsoqL(Y0) coincides with point D. In this situation, as previously shown, AIR(X0,Y∗,W,X0)≠AI(X0,Y0,W,X0). However, solving (12) we obtain thatψ1∗=1.187andψ2∗=3.438and, therefore, by Proposition 5 the reversed directional input distance function—technical inefficiency—equalsD→iR(X0,Y0,Y∗,W)=0.514withg1∗=2.31andg2∗=6.69, being in this particular case E the final projected benchmark. The main difference between both approaches is that the reversed directional input distance function keeps allocative inefficiency constant: AIR(X0,Y∗,W,G∗)=AI(X0,Y0,W,G∗).This section includes a numerical illustration of the use of the methodology proposed in this paper. We are particularly interested in showing that we may find substantial differences between the estimation of the technical inefficiency obtained when considering the usual directional input distance function with G=X0—or, equivalently, the traditional BBC model, and that obtained when implementing the new approach. This issue is quite relevant when decomposing cost inefficiency for non-homothetic technologies as researchers ignore the output level targeted by the firms. To illustrate the discrepancy between the standard and reversed approaches we use the KLEM data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics already explored in Ray (2004, pp. 222–223). A set of 51 production observations are assessed: 50 US states plus Washington D.C. The production is characterized by one output, Gross value of production, and six inputs, Production workers (L), nonproduction workers or employees (EM), buildings and structures (BS), machinery and equipment (ME), materials consumed (MC) and energy (ENER), along with their corresponding input prices.The efficiency analysis performed by applying the standard input-oriented BCC model yields 17 technically efficient observations with a score of 1. Consequently, 34 states are found inefficient with an average value ofD→i(X0,Y0;X0)=0.054, i.e.,θ0∗=0.946, with our analysis focusing on the estimation of the technical inefficiency of these observations (see Table 1). Regarding the application of the reversed directional input distance function, we perform the steps described in Section 3. First, we solve (9) for each unit. In this way, we determine an output level Y∗ such that the evaluated X0 lays on the frontier of its corresponding input requirement set L(Y∗). In this respect, for some observations we find significant differences between both possible target output levels Y∗ and Y0, with the former exceeding the latter by 5.68% on average. Afterwards, we calculate the minimum cost of producing both Y0 and Y∗, denoted as C(Y∗,W) and C(Y0,W), respectively, with the increment in output resulting in a cost increase of 6.61%. Finally, we determine the allocative inefficiency-preserving estimation of technical inefficiency, which is solved through (12). Table 1 reports, for all technically inefficient units except for unit 45, all these values, with an average value ofD→i(X0,Y0;G)=0.085, as well as the specific reference optimal vectors G obtained from (10) plus (11).3Program (12) is infeasible for DMU 45. This scenario, although rather unusual given the results obtained for the analyzed database, may occur as the program requires that the final projection on the isoquant L(Y0) dominates in the sense of Pareto the evaluated X0.3In particular, in the last set of columns of Table 1 we report the optimal value of the reference vectors that yield the projections on each corresponding isoquant of L(Y0) associated with the reversed directional input distance function.The first result to be highlighted is the large differences between the standard directional input distance function and the technical inefficiency obtained from the new reversed approach. Indeed, we find statistically significant differences between the technical inefficiencies estimated by both methods: 0.054 and 0.085 (p-value=8.886·10−7 running a Wilcoxon signed rank test on two paired samples).4Other possibility of comparison would be sub-sampling and the application of bootstrap methods. Nevertheless, this procedure requires a previous analysis of the properties (consistency, rate of convergence, asymptotic distributions, etc.) of the estimator of the new approach. Although all these properties have been recently studied in depth in Simar, Vanhems, and Wilson (2012) for the traditional directional distance function, they cannot be straightforwardly applied to our new approach as it is based on a modification of the traditional directional distance function, using the vector G as a decision variable of the model and incorporating a new constraint to the program. Consequently, this comparison is only possible after studying whether sub-sampling provides a consistent bootstrap approximation for DEA estimators in our framework or not, something that is beyond the scope of this paper.4The second result is that in contrast to the standard directional input distance function, where the reference direction is a priori fixed, the new approach allows to know the main inputs responsible for technical inefficiency, as the individualized directions show what inputs must be reduced and the magnitude of such reduction. It is clear that materials consumed (MC) and machinery and equipment (ME) are the input variables resulting in the most important sources of pure technical inefficiency—with gMC=3.525 being on average one order of magnitude larger than the rest, while preserving the allocative efficiency values.Finally, it is clear that in the case of non-homothetic technologies, the overall cost efficiency decomposition is quite different depending on whether one is willing to assume that inefficient firms incur in input excesses when producing Y0 from X0 (the standard approach), or, alternatively, as this is unknown to the researcher, fall short of producing Y∗ (the reverse approach). Our findings show that the difference between the results obtained by both approaches increases as the gap between the two possible target outputs gets larger. This is quite relevant when prescribing strategies aimed at improving both technical and allocative efficiency, since both the reductions in the observed input levels might not be equiproportional, but rather restricted to some particular inputs as in the example, and considering also that the cost minimizing input mix may not be that corresponding to Y0 but Y∗. It is apparent that in the most realistic case of non-homothetic technologies, researchers should make an effort to determine the intended output level of every individual firm lying inside the production possibility set since this information is critical when choosing the proper cost efficiency decomposition, and advice managers on what the relevant sources of inefficiency are and how to solve them.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Standard economic efficiency analysis assumes homothetic technologies when decomposing overall efficiency accounting for technical and allocative criteria. This assumption is rather convenient because it allows researcher to bypass the lack of information on whether inefficient firms use inputs in excess or fall short from a target output, which is critical to determine the firms’ allocative efficiency with respect to the cost minimizing input bundle. When the technology is homothetic allocative efficiency is the same despite the output level that is considered for its measurement, and we show that the directional input distance function with G=X0—and equivalently the traditional radial distance functions—can be correctly interpreted as measures of technical efficiency, thereby yielding a consistent decomposition of overall efficiency into allocative and technical components. In particular, we show that only under constant returns to scale technologies producing a single output one can claim that these models measure true technical efficiency. Unfortunately the homotheticity assumption is quite restrictive from a theoretical perspective and generally untenable in empirical works.The directional distance function constitutes the analytical tool that finally allows breaking the straight jacket represented by the classical and restrictive framework of the radially based decomposition of cost efficiency, and extend it to the case of non-homothetic technologies. The cornerstone for a correct decomposition of economic efficiency is the need for a flexible measure of technical efficiency that preserves allocative efficiency unchanged when prescribing reductions in the observed input vector. Resorting to Bogetoft et al. (2006) we are able to measure the starting allocative efficiency of interior points of the technology and, following the rationale behind a correct technical efficiency interpretation, the same allocative estimation must be observed at the final projected benchmark.Based on these findings we conclude that all empirical work adopting the popular Data Envelopment Analysis models of constant (in the multiple output case) and variable returns to scale is prone to important errors of interpretation with regard to the sources of cost inefficiency, as these models characterize non-homothetic technologies where allocative efficiency depends on the chosen output level. In this case the value of the radial distance functions could be interpreted as an undetermined mix of sources of inefficiency instead of an estimate of true technical efficiency as traditionally assumed. Our new methodology overcomes these limitations by allowing the definition of consistent standard and reversed decompositions of cost efficiency.We illustrate our concerns regarding the limitations of the traditional decomposition based on radial distance functions and the new methodology using a numerical application. We show that for technically inefficient observations, substantial differences arise when decomposing cost efficiency by applying the standard non-homothetic BBC model, and that obtained when the new reversed approach is implemented. As a result, the alternative strategies that firms may undertake so as to improve their economic performance based on both allocative and technical criteria would be substantially different, and the decision making process informed by researchers may be misleading if information of the intended output levels is not at hand; particularly with respect to the reduction of the observed vector of inputs. While the standard approach prescribes equiproportional reductions that do not alter the input mix, the new approach may call for individual adjustments.In summary, it can be concluded from our analysis that researchers must keep in mind that in the—usual—case of non-homothetic technologies, both the standard and reverse approaches yield different results, and that further information on the target output levels need to be brought into the analysis so as to correctly choose the appropriate method, and attain a consistent decomposition of overall cost efficiency.