@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integration of selecting and scheduling urban road construction projects as a time-dependent discrete network design problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three different bi-level programming models based on DNDP are developed.A general framework and an evolutionary approach are proposed to solve the model.A procedure is proposed to reduce significantly the model solution time.Computational tests show acceptable performance of the proposed approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Project selection,Network design problem,Scheduling of transportation projects,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Decision making on the selection of transportation infrastructure projects is an interesting subject to both transportation authorities and researchers. Due to resource limitations, the selected projects should then be scheduled during the planning horizon. Integration of selecting and scheduling projects into a single model increases the accuracy of results; however it leads to more complexity. In this paper, first, three different mathematical programming models are presented to integrate selecting and scheduling of urban road construction projects as a time-dependent discrete network design problem. Then, the model that seems more flexible and realistic is selected and an evolutionary approach is proposed to solve it. The proposed approach is a combination of three well-known techniques: the phase-I of the two-phase simplex method, Frank-Wolfe algorithm, and genetic algorithm. Taguchi method is used to optimize the genetic algorithm parameters. The main difficulty in solving the model is due to the large number of subsequent network traffic assignment problems that should be solved which makes the solution process very time-consuming. Therefore, a procedure is proposed to overcome this difficulty by significantly reducing the traffic assignment problem solution time. In order to verify the performance of the proposed approach, 27 randomly generated test problems of different scales are applied to Sioux Falls urban transportation network. The proposed approach and full enumeration method are used to solve the problems. Numerical results show that the proposed approach has an acceptable performance in terms of both solution quality and solution time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Transportation Infrastructure Project Selection (TIPS) is a common challenge in the field of transportation planning, particularly for transportation authorities, who always deal with a variety of potential projects, of which merely a limited number can be selected. The process of handpicking certain projects from the wide range of available options is of high complexity. Unless the TIPS process is planned with a scientific and comprehensive perspective, not only does the improvement of the available transportation system seem unlikely, but also it might worsen the status quo, which can in turn account for numerous negative outcomes such as increment of the direct and indirect costs (for both system administrators and users), jeopardy of human safety, public dissatisfaction with the transportation system, and so forth. Hence, the significant influence of the transportation system on the public life necessitates an in-depth and wise attitude toward the TIPS process.Another issue that needs to be addressed along with project selection is project scheduling. In other words, it should be specified when the selected projects should be implemented along the planning horizon, because some constraints such as budget limitation may not allow these projects to be implemented simultaneously. Generally, two strategies for selecting and scheduling of projects can be considered. The first strategy involves the selection of projects prior to the scheduling, whereas the second strategy deals with the simultaneous selecting and scheduling of projects. It is more complicated to model and resolve the associated problems within the second strategy, though it provides more accurate and precise results for a variety of reasons such as those discussed in the following:•The main constraint in project selection is the availability of resources such as budget. Annual resource constraint can be applied in the model only when the projects have time dimension. Otherwise, only the total resources over the planning horizon (and not in different years) can be considered in the selection process. This will reduce the precision and it is even possible to select projects whose implementation with the consideration of the annual resource constraints is infeasible within the planning horizon.To ensure that transportation system achieves the expected short- and long-term goals, it is necessary to know when selected projects are to be operated, a fact, which is dependent upon the scheduling of projects.Therefore, it will be more suitable to determine scheduling of projects concurrent with selecting projects. However, integration of selecting and scheduling of projects in a single model makes it much harder to solve. Suppose there are n candidate roads for addition to the network and the planning horizon includes T years. In case our goal is only to select the projects, the total number of scenarios for addition to the network is 2n. However, should we consider selecting and scheduling of project simultaneously, i.e. to specify which projects should be executed and in which year, then the total number of scenarios will be 2n × Twhich is much greater than the previous case. For example, considering n = 10 and T = 5, in first case (i.e. project selection alone) we will have210=1024scenarios, while in second case (i.e. selecting and scheduling of projects simultaneously)250=1.12×1015scenarios should be checked (i.e. about 1012 times more). Although many of these scenarios would be infeasible due to constraints such as budget limitation, we need to evaluate all feasible scenarios to find the optimal scenario because of Braess's paradox (Braess, Nagurney, & Wakolbinger, 2005). This fact, alone, reveals the complexity of the integrated problem of selecting and scheduling of projects.An application of TIPS problem, especially in developing cities, is to select among candidate roads to be added to the existing urban transportation network. This problem is inherently a Network Design Problem (NDP). NDP is the problem of improving or expanding transportation networks to optimize certain objective(s) under resource constraint(s) (Poorzahedy & Rouhani, 2007). The NDP can be posed either in a discrete form, which deals with the addition of new links to a transportation network, known as Discrete Network Design Problem (DNDP), or a continuous form which deals with the optimal capacity expansion of existing links in the network, also known as Continuous Network Design Problem (CNDP). Moreover, there is a Mixed Network Design Problem (MNDP), simultaneously involving both the discrete and continuous decision variables to determine the links which need to be improved and the new links which need to be added to an existing network (Yang & Bell, 1998). Therefore, the problem at hand is a DNDP. We focus on this problem with the aim of extending models for selecting and scheduling road construction projects simultaneously, and to propose an appropriate resolution approach. This paper is organized as follows: First, a literature review on road construction project selection problem is provided in Section 2. Next, three mathematical programming models are extended in Section 3 to integrate selecting and scheduling of urban road construction projects. The proposed approach to solve the selected model is presented and discussed in Section 4. Numerical examples to verify the performance of the proposed approach are given in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Urban road construction projects selection has been an important and widely considered problem in the field of transportation planning. This problem is inherently a Discrete Network Design Problem (DNDP). Integration of selecting and scheduling transportation projects makes the results more accurate. Therefore, this paper presents three bi-level programming models based on DNDP to integrate selecting and scheduling of urban road construction projects. Also a general framework to solve the model and a procedure to reduce the solution time are proposed. The proposed procedure to reduce the solution time is based on providing a feasible near-optimal initial solution for Frank-Wolfe method to solve the lower-level problem. Results showed that this procedure significantly decreases the solution time. Since the problem under study is very complicated, devising an exact algorithm to solve large-scale problems in a reasonable time is not possible. Hence, using heuristic or meta-heuristic approaches which provide near-optimal solution in an acceptable time is inevitable. Accordingly, an evolutionary approach based on GA is proposed such that only a small fraction of the entire solution space is checked to achieve an optimal or near-optimal solution.To verify the performance of the proposed approach, we used the Sioux Falls network which can be considered as a medium-size test network. Computational tests show acceptable performance of the proposed approach in terms of solution quality and time. For large-scale problems, using exact methods to solve our proposed model is not practical while our proposed solution approach can be used in such situations. Because, first, the solution time of our proposed approach is influenced less than exact methods by increasing the size of problems (as shown in Fig. 3) and, second, our proposed approach is to find a good, rather than optimal, solution. Therefore, implementation of the proposed model and solution approach for real large-size networks could be pursued as a worthwhile research subject. Some other scopes in order to extend the present study are suggested as follows:(a)In the presented models, only one objective is considered (total travel time) while in the most real cases, multiple objectives should be optimized simultaneously. Therefore, extending the models to a multiple objectives form and then utilizing multi-objective decision making approaches could be pursued in future studies. Presently, the authors are working on this field.Utilization of other meta-heuristic techniques to solve the model such as Simulated Annealing (SA), Tabu Search (TS), Ant System (AS), and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and then comparing their efficiency with our proposed approach could also be done in further studies.