@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investment strategies and compensation of a mean–variance optimizing fund manager

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Continuous-time mean-variance stochastic control problems.Theoretical and numerical results.Integral-type and path-independent payoffs.Fund performance and strategies induced by compensation schemes.Symmetric/asymmetric remuneration schemes and different.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mean–variance,Continuous-time stochastic control,Viscosity solutions,Investment strategy,Managerial compensation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a general continuous-time mathematical framework for solution of dynamic mean–variance control problems. We obtain theoretical results for two classes of functionals: the first one depends on the whole trajectory of the controlled process and the second one is based on its terminal-time value. These results enable the development of numerical methods for mean–variance problems for a pre-determined risk-aversion coefficient. We apply them to study optimal trading strategies pursued by fund managers in response to various types of compensation schemes. In particular, we examine the effects of continuous monitoring and scheme’s symmetry on trading behavior and fund performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Markowitz’s seminal paper [29] introduced the mean–variance criterion into portfolio optimization. Single-period problems, which are mathematically tractable, have enjoyed popularity both in the academia to model investor preferences and behavior (see, e.g., Epstein [16], Ormiston and Schlee [30], Tobin [35]) and among practitioners (see, e.g., Bodie et al. [12], Litterman [28]). An extension of this theory to continuous-time models proved to be difficult due to fundamental problems introduced by the variance term. A natural approach to continuous-time optimization is to use dynamic programming, which relies on markovianity of functionals. The variance is, however, not markovian. There are three main alternatives. The first involves the study of risk-sensitive functionals (see, e.g., Bielecki et al. [10]), whose second order Taylor expansion has the form of a mean–variance functional(1)E(H)-γ2Var(H),where H is a random outcome of the investment and γ is the risk-aversion coefficient. The second alternative to dynamic programming hinges on the use of martingale methods (see, e.g., Bielecki et al. [9]). Although these methods can be used to obtain closed-form solutions for a class of mean–variance problems, they turned out to be unsuitable as a basis for efficient numerical algorithms for general mean–variance problems.A substantial progress in the theory for mean–variance functionals was due to a third approach, closely related to the one we employ in this paper. This approach, introduced by Li and Ng [26] in a discrete-time setting, embeds the mean–variance problem into a class of auxiliary stochastic control problems that can be solved by dynamic programming methods (see also Leippold et al. [25]). An extension of this method to a continuous-time framework is presented in Zhou and Li [38], and further employed by Fu et al. [18] and Lim [27]. These papers put several constraints on the optimization problem in order to obtain auxiliary control problems in a linear-quadratic form. In particular, the random variable H in the mean–variance functional (1) is assumed to be a linear function of the portfolio wealth process. Wang and Forsyth [36] design numerical schemes for auxiliary linear-quadratic problems formulated in [38] and construct an efficient frontier.In this paper we present a mathematical framework for the solution of general mean–variance stochastic control problems in continuous time. This framework extends the continuous-time theory of Zhou and Li [38] in two aspects. First, we allow the random variable H in the mean–variance functional (1) to be specified either as a continuous function of the portfolio wealth at a terminal time (in general, the value of the controlled process) or as an integral of a continuous function of the portfolio wealth (in general, the value of the controlled process) over time. A particular case when H depends linearly on the portfolio wealth at terminal time is covered theoretically in Zhou and Li [38] and numerically in Wang and Forsyth [36]. Second, we relax assumptions on the dynamics of the controlled process to cover non-homogeneous degenerate diffusions with Lipschitz coefficients of linear growth.To the best of our knowledge, mean–variance optimization problems based on the integral of a function of the value of the controlled process over time have not been widely studied. A closely related paper by Aivaliotis and Veretennikov [4] provides theoretical approximation results via regularization; their solution leads to randomized strategies. In our paper, the optimization problem is solved directly using the theory of viscosity solutions to Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equations (see Fleming and Soner [17], Pham [33]). In particular, our results enable computation of (non-randomized) optimal strategies in a feedback form. The justification of their optimality – the verification theorem – requires very restrictive assumptions (for the latest results see Gozzi et al. [21]) that our control problem does not satisfy. We, therefore, resort to numerically testing the optimality of strategies extracted from numerical solutions of the HJB equations.Our theoretical results are used to develop numerical algorithms to maximize functional (1) for a given (pre-determined) risk-aversion coefficient γ. Wang and Forsyth [36] solve auxiliary markovian optimization problems which are parametrised neither by risk-aversion nor by the expectation of terminal value. Once the optimal strategy is known, they can compute the risk-aversion, the expectation and the variance. This proves to be sufficient if one aims at graphing an efficient frontier. Our approach is different as we endeavor to find an optimal strategy for a pre-determined risk-aversion coefficient. We reformulate the mean–variance problem as a superposition of a static and a dynamic optimization problem, which is equivalent to solving a set of parametrized HJB equations and maximizing the resulting value functions over a compact interval valued parameter. We demonstrate that, for practical applications, our approach leads to an efficient numerical algorithm.Recently, Basak and Chabakauri [7,8] proposed another view on mean–variance optimization. They introduced a notion of optimality in an intra-personal game theoretic sense. This has the advantage of turning the optimization problem markovian. It should, however, be noticed that strategies optimal in a game-theoretic sense might not be optimal in a classical sense; and vice versa.Theoretical results of this paper are applied to a study of a delegated portfolio management problem. It is a common practice in the asset management industry to use mean–variance preferences for choosing portfolios (see Bodie et al. [12] and Littermann [28]). We assume that fund managers apply the same type of preferences to their compensation and tend to follow trading strategies that maximize their satisfaction from compensation. The mathematical framework introduced in this paper allows us to study trading strategies pursued by fund managers in response to various types of compensation (incentive) schemes. We also analyze implications of complex schemes on distributional properties of the fund’s wealth process. We consider symmetric (e.g., co-ownership) and asymmetric (with a hurdle rate provision) schemes based on the terminal wealth and on the continuously monitored wealth.Incentives have been proven to be a significant factor influencing the behavior and performance of fund managers. Agarwal et al. [2] examine, in an empirical study, the influence of incentives and managerial discretion on the performance of hedge funds. They find that managers with performance-related incentives – the inclusion of hurdle rate provisions, or co-ownership – are associated with a better performance. We study numerically the implications of the above incentives on trading decisions of fund managers. Managers with symmetric (co-ownership) compensation schemes show a superior performance over those remunerated by schemes with hurdle-rate provisions: the resulting Sharpe ratio of the terminal wealth is higher.Incentives also influence the riskiness of trading strategies pursued by fund managers. Elton et al. [15] find that managers with asymmetric incentive contracts tend to follow riskier strategies than those with symmetric compensation schemes.1The fixed fee in the paper by Elton et al. [15] can be represented in our framework as a symmetric compensation contract.1In particular, they observe that asymmetric schemes encourage large variations in the riskiness of portfolios over time: a poor performance at any time triggers a sharp increase in the risk taking. Our numerical results show that such behavior is optimal for a fund manager with mean–variance preferences.Our numerical study contributes also to the discussion about the frequency of portfolio monitoring (see, e.g., Agarwal et al. [2] and Goetzmann et al. [20]). We analyze trading strategies and portfolio performance when the manager’s compensation is based on her performance sampled continuously over the whole investment period. We observe a fall in Sharpe ratios for symmetric and asymmetric schemes. This agrees with the empirical findings of Agarwal et al. [2]. A continuous examination of the fund’s wealth diminishes managerial discretion, which, according to [2], impacts on the fund performance. One would, however, expect that the closer scrutiny offered by such compensation schemes lowers the riskiness of investment decisions. We demonstrate that the opposite is true: the variance of excess returns increases.A classical but more challenging problem is the design of compensation schemes that align preferences of an investor and a fund manager. Existing literature offers results in the case of preferences represented by utility functions (see, e.g., Carpenter [13] and Ou-Yang [31]). Mean–variance optimality criterion has only been used in a static (single-period) framework [6,14].The outline of the remaining part of the paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces a general mathematical framework for the solution of mean–variance stochastic control problems and prepares the ground for design of efficient numerical schemes. The problem of managerial compensation in a continuous-time market model alongside with various types of compensation schemes and discussion of numerical methods used for computation of optimal investment strategies is presented in Section 3. Analysis of the trading strategies is performed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes. In the Electronic Supplement, Section A introduces numerical schemes and verifies their convergence, Section B collects proofs.In this section we present a general framework for the solution of mean–variance dynamic optimization problems. Section 2.1 studies functionals depending on the value of controlled process at the terminal time. In Section 2.2, these ideas are extended to functionals based on the whole trajectory of the controlled process. Our exposition is geared towards numerical computations, necessary for practical applications.The state is described by a d-dimensional non-homogeneous stochastic differential equation (SDE) driven by a d1-dimensional Wiener process (Wt)(2)dXt=b(αt,t,Xt)dt+σ(αt,t,Xt)dWt,Xt0=x,whereb:A×[0,∞)×Rd→Rdandσ:A×[0,∞)×Rd→Rd×d1. The process (αt,t0⩽t⩽T) is from the classAof all progressively measurable processes (with respect to the filtration generated by the Wiener process (Wt)) with values in a compact setA⊂Rℓ. Its role is to control the dynamics of the diffusion (Xt). Eq. (2) has a pathwise unique (weak) solution if the following conditions are satisfied (see, e.g., Gikhman and Skorokhod [19, Section Remark V.8.1] or Fleming and Soner [17, Appendix D]):2These conditions are superficial for the uniqueness of solutions. We will, however, need them later in the study of the value function of the mean–variance optimization problem.2(A0)The functions σ, b are Borel with respect to (a,t,x) and continuous with respect to (a,x) for every t; moreover, there exists a constant K such that‖σ(a,t1,x)-σ(a,t2,z)‖⩽K(‖x-z‖+|t1-t2|)‖b(a,t1,x)-b(a,t2,z)‖⩽K(‖x-z‖+|t1-t2|)(Lipschitzcondition),and‖b(a,t,x)‖⩽K(1+‖x‖)‖σ(a,t,x)‖⩽K(1+‖x‖)(lineargrowthcondition).The solution (Xt) depends on the initial condition x, time t0, and the control (αt); to simplify notation we indicate this dependence in the expectationEt0,xαand the varianceVart0,xα. When this is not sufficient we shall writeXtα,t0,x.Consider a (Markowitz-type) mean–variance control problem(3)u(t0,x)≔supα∈AEt0,xαh(XT)-θVart0,xαh(XT),whereh:Rd→Ris a continuous function satisfying a polynomial growth condition:|h(x)|⩽K1(1+‖x‖m),for some constants K1>0 and m⩾1.A major obstacle in solving this type of control problems is the non-markovianity. The value function u does not satisfy the Bellman principle as a strategy that is optimal for some t0 does not have to be optimal for investment starting at t>t0 (this property is also called time-inconsistency). We show that the optimization problem (3) can be represented as a superposition of a dynamic markovian control problem and a static optimization problem. Our approach has the advantage of leading to numerical methods solving the original Markowitz problem for a pre-determined risk aversion parameter θ. Related literature focuses mostly on graphing of an efficient frontier.Using a dual representationx2=supψ∈R{-ψ2-2ψx}(as in Aivaliotis and Veretennikov [4]), we rewrite the variance term:Vart0,xαh(XT)=Et0,xα(h(XT))2-Et0,xαh(XT)2=Et0,xα(h(XT))2-supψ∈R-ψ2-2ψEt0,xαh(XT).Inserting this into (3) yields the following representation of the value function:(4)u(t0,x)=supψ∈R{U(t0,x,ψ)-θψ2},where for a fixedψ∈R,U(t0,x,ψ)is the value function of a markovian control problemU(t0,x,ψ)=supα∈AEt0,xα{(1-2θψ)h(XT)-θ(h(XT))2}.Notice that if ψ∗ is the maximizer in (4) and α∗ is an optimal strategy for U(t0,x,ψ∗), thenψ∗=-Et0,xα∗{h(XT)}. This follows from the fact that in the dual representation of the square function, x2=supψ{−ψ2−2ψx}, the supremum is attained for ψ=−x.The following theorem provides a representation of the value function U as a viscosity solution to an appropriate Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) equation.3Cf. Fleming and Soner [17], Pham [33] and Aivaliotis and Palczewski [3] for the exposition of the theory of viscosity solutions to Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equations and their relation to value functions of optimal stochastic control problems.3The proofs of this and the following theorems are in Section B of the Electronic Supplement. Recall that h is assumed to be continuous and of polynomial growth; these conditions will not be reiterated in the coming theorems.Theorem 2.1Under assumption (A0) for everyψ∈Rthe value function U is the unique continuous polynomially growing viscosity solution to the HJB equation(5)Ut0+supa∈Ab(a,t0,x)TUx+12tr(σσT(a,t0,x)Uxx)=0,U(T,x,ψ)=(1-2θψ)h(x)-θ(h(x))2,whereUt0denotes the partial derivative with respect to time t0, Uxis a gradient vector arising in the differentiation with respect to the state x, and Uxxis a matrix of the second derivatives.The value function u is related to U via the formula (4). This is not a simple quadratic relation with respect to ψ, since the function U depends on ψ in a non-linear way (due to the supremum operator). The following theorem explores the dependence of U on ψ.Theorem 2.2(i)The function U is convex and continuous in ψ.The value function u is given byu(t0,x)=supψmin⩽ψ⩽ψmax{U(t0,x,ψ)-θψ2},where(6)ψmin=-supα∈AEt0,xαh(XT)andψmax=-infα∈AEt0,xαh(XT).The above theorem shows that the supremum in (4) can be computed over a compact interval [ψmin,ψmax]. This, together with the continuity of U with respect to ψ, ensures that the optimal ψ exists. In applications to managerial compensation discussed in this paper, this interval is very small and the optimal ψ can be found efficiently (see Section 3.3).The function under supremum in (4) is a difference of two convex functions. Although the numerical maximization of such functions is not as fast as the maximization of concave functions, one has at one’s disposal advanced numerical techniques, see, e.g., Horst and Hoang [22, Chapter 10].Let us summarize the findings of this section. The mean–variance problem (3) can be solved using a family of auxiliary HJB Eqs. (5). Formula (4) provides the relation between the value function U, being the unique viscosity solution to the Eq. (5), and the value function u. For a given (t0,x) the algorithm of finding the value of u is as follows:Step 1:Compute the function g(ψ)=U(t0,x,ψ)−θ ψ2 for ψmin⩽ψ⩽ψmax.Find the maximum of g on the interval [ψmin,ψmax]. Since g is continuous there is ψ∗ for which the maximum is attained.An optimal strategy for U(t0,x,ψ∗) is also optimal for the original mean–variance problem u(t0,x). The value function U is characterized as a viscosity solution to an HJB equation; it might not be a classical solution due to a possible degeneracy of the controlled diffusion (Xt). The computation of an optimal strategy from a viscosity solution to the HJB equation – the verification theorem – requires very restrictive assumptions; the latest results can be found in Gozzi et al. [21]. These assumptions are not satisfied by our managerial compensation example based on the Black–Scholes model. We, therefore, propose to rely on a numerical verification of optimality of a strategy extracted from the HJB equation.In this subsection we extend the above theory to mean–variance functionals with an integral term:(7)v(t0,x)≔supα∈AEt0,xα∫t0Tf(αs,s,Xs)ds-θVart0,xα∫t0Tf(αs,s,Xs)ds.Proceeding as in the previous subsection we reformulate the variance term and obtain(8)v(t0,x)=supψ{V(t0,x,ψ)-θψ2},whereV(t0,x,ψ)=supα∈AEt0,xα(1-2θψ)∫t0Tf(αs,s,Xs)ds-θ∫t0Tf(αs,s,Xs)ds2.The auxiliary optimization problem for V is still not markovian due to the term involving the square of an integral. Following Aivaliotis and Veretennikov [4] we propose an approach to reformulate this quadratic term. Fubini’s theorem impliesEt0,xα∫t0Tf(αs,s,Xs)ds∫t0Tf(αt,t,Xt)dt=2Et0,xα∫t0Tf(αt,t,Xt)∫t0tf(αs,s,Xs)dsdt.Define a new state process (Xt,Yt) by the following stochastic differential equation(9)dXt=b(αt,t,Xt)dt+σ(αt,t,Xt)dWt,dYt=f(αt,t,Xt)dt.If we assume a polynomial growth of f, then under (A0) this equation has a pathwise unique (weak) solution for any initial value(t0,x0,y0)∈[0,T]×Rd×R(see, as before, Gikhman and Skorokhod [19, Section 6.7] or Fleming and Soner [17, Appendix D]). Using this extended state process we haveV(t0,x,ψ)=V^(t0,x,0,ψ), whereV^(t0,x,y,ψ)=supα∈AEt0,x,yα(1-2θψ)∫t0Tf(αt,t,Xt)dt-2θ∫t0Tf(αt,t,Xt)Ytdt=supα∈AEt0,x,yα∫t0Tf(αt,t,Xt)[1-2θψ-2θYt]dt.The functional definingV^is of markovian type. Since the function f steers the dynamics of the extended state process, we impose on it analogous assumptions as on b and σ:(A1)The function f is Borel with respect to (a,t,x) and continuous with respect to (a,x); moreover, there exists a constant K2 such that|f(a,t1,x)-f(a,t2,z)|⩽K2(‖x-z‖+|t1-t2|),|f(a,t,x)|⩽K2(1+‖x‖).The following theorem states the HJB equation for the value functionV^. This result is used in the design of a numerical scheme approximatingV^.Theorem 2.3Under assumptions (A0)–(A1), for everyψ∈Rthe value functionV^(·,ψ)is the unique continuous polynomially growing viscosity solution to the following HJB equation:(10)V^t0(t0,x,y,ψ)+supa∈Ab(a,t0,x)TV^x+12tr(σσT(a,t0,x)V^xx)+(1-2θψ-2θy+V^y)f(a,t0,x)=0,V^(T,x,y,ψ)=0.Note that even if we had assumed uniform non-degeneracy of the process (Xt) (which we did not do), Eq. (10) would be degenerate as Ytis degenerate. Standard methods are, therefore, insufficient to prove existence and uniqueness of classical or weak solutions. In Aivaliotis and Veretennikov [4], this obstacle is overcome by a regularization of the process Yt; an independent diffusion part is added with a small constant diffusion coefficient. Subsequently, it is shown that the regularized value function converges to the actual one uniformly when this artificial diffusion coefficient vanishes.In Theorem 2.3 we apply methods of viscosity solutions to show that Eq. (10) has a unique solution which corresponds to the value functionV^. The reason for this development is threefold. First, an optimal markovian strategy can be extracted from (10) (see the discussion of the verification theorem and optimal strategies at the end of Section 2.1). In contrast, solutions to regularized problems offer only a possibility of extracting a randomized markovian ε-optimal strategy for the original problem. Second, the representation of the value function as a solution to an HJB equation allows for the construction of an approximating numerical scheme. Third, we do not have to assume the uniform non-degeneracy of σ. Yet another reason is the elegance of the theory which can embrace both the original and the regularized equation in the same framework.Another feature that sets apart this paper from the earlier work by Aivaliotis and Veretennikov [4] is the unboundedness of the diffusion coefficients and of the function f. This is a crucial feature that enables the study of the compensation schemes described in Section 3.The extension of the state space (9) allows us to consider the stochastic control problem (7) as a special case (3) with h(x,y)=y. This, however, leads to an inefficient numerical scheme. Our formulation of the value functionV^with an integral-type functional and the integrand depending on Xtas well as on Ytsmooths out errors induced by numerical approximations of the process Yt.The following theorem explores the dependence ofV^on ψ.Theorem 2.4(i)The functionV^is continuous and convex in ψ. If f is non-negative,V^is decreasing in ψ.There exists a constant C such that|V^(t0,x,y,ψ)-V^(t0,x,y,ψ′)|⩽C(1+‖x‖)|ψ-ψ′|.The value function v is given byv(t0,x)=supψmin⩽ψ⩽ψmax{V^(t0,x,0,ψ)-θψ2},whereψmin=-supα∈AEt0,xα∫t0Tf(αs,s,Xs)ds,andψmax=-infα∈AEt0,xα∫t0Tf(αs,s,Xs)ds.Thanks to the properties stated in the above theorem the computation of v(t0,x) can be performed by a similar algorithm to the one presented at the end of Section 2.1.In this section we introduce a delegated portfolio management problem in a framework of a financial market with one risk-free asset with a continuously compounded return r and a stock (risky asset) whose price follows a geometric diffusion with a constant drift μ and a constant volatility σ:dSt=μStdt+σStdWt.The manager invests clients’ money in the two available assets. Her strategy is described by a progressively measurable process (πt) which represents the proportion of the total wealth at time t invested in the stock. The dynamics of the total wealthX^tare, therefore, given by the following equation:(11)dX^t=X^t(rdt+πt(μ-r)dt+πtσdWt).We constrain the stock investment πtto a bounded interval which represents restrictions on short-selling and borrowing; this puts limits on leverage levels. The bound on the leverage is imposed by regulators on many financial institutions (for example, the FSA in the UK requires that firms set their leverage limits according to the risk-management regulatory requirements [1]). In the simplest case, when no borrowing and short-selling is allowed, πt∈[0,1].The manager is remunerated according to the performance of the fund under her supervision. The amount of compensation depends on the market evolution, the strategy (πt) she implements and the compensation contract (hereafter also called the compensation scheme) agreed between investors and the manager. We assume that the fund manager applies mean–variance preferences to her compensation and follows trading strategies that are optimal for her, i.e., that maximize her satisfaction from compensation. This choice of preferences is in line with the common practice in asset management industry (Bodie et al. [12] and Littermann [28]).Given a compensation contract the manager endeavors to find a strategy (πt) that maximizes the mean–variance criterion(12)E(Hπ)-γ2Var(Hπ),where γ>0 is her risk-aversion coefficient and Hπis a random variable representing the amount of compensation the manager receives if she follows a trading strategy (πt).In this paper we focus on two approaches to constructing managers’ compensation schemes. The first one, which is based on continuous (over the whole investment period) performance monitoring, requires novel results presented in the previous section. The second one depends on a well-documented terminal time (e.g., end-of-year) performance measurement. Our theoretical findings facilitate numerical solution of the resulting optimization problems for both approaches.Empirical evidence suggests that frequent monitoring has a negative effect on the fund performance (see, e.g., Agarwal et al. [2] and Hunton et al. [23]). We will show that this phenomenon can arise in a fully rational setting, i.e., without psychological/behavioral factors that might influence decision-making in a real-life environment. In the modeling framework of this section, we compare optimal responses to contracts based on a terminal-time and continuous monitoring of funds wealth. Continuous monitoring can be regarded as a limit case, when inter-observation intervals become infinitesimally small.Another aspect of compensation schemes explored in this paper is their symmetry. Investment Company Amendments Act of 1970 ruled that all performance based compensation schemes employed by US investment companies (such as mutual or pension funds) have to be symmetric. A symmetric compensation contract pays out premiums to the manager when she outperforms a target, but imposes a penalty for under-performance. This can be viewed as a means of risk sharing or co-ownership by the manager.In a symmetric scheme with continuous monitoring, the manager’s compensation is proportional to the cumulative future value of the difference between the portfolio return and the benchmark return:(13)Hπ=C∫0TX^tπX^0-eβter(T-t)dt,where β is the benchmark growth rate,X^tπdenotes the value of the portfolio π at the time t and C> 0 is the factor translating accumulated returns into manager’s compensation. Notice that the coefficient er(T−t) ensures that the performance measure takes into account the time-value of money.An intuition would suggest that the compensation scheme (13) encourages close tracking of the benchmark. This is however not true as the manager’s optimization problem can be written in the following equivalent form:4We call optimization problems equivalent if their optimal strategies are identical and their functionals are related in a deterministic way. Manager’s optimization problem takes the following formCE∫0TX^tπX^0-eβter(T-t)dt-γC22Var∫0TX^tπX^0-eβter(T-t)dt.We divide this functional by C and notice thatVar∫0TX^tπX^0-eβter(T-t)dt=Var∫0Ter(T-t)X^tπX^0-1dt. ChangingE∫0TX^tπX^0-eβter(T-t)dtintoE∫0Ter(T-t)X^tπX^0-1shifts the value of the functional by a constant but does not affect the optimal strategy. This proves equivalence of (14) and the original manager’s optimization problem (12) with the compensation scheme (13).4(14)E∫0Ter(T-t)X^tπX^0-1dt-θVar∫0Ter(T-t)X^tπX^0-1dt,whereθ=Cγ2. This separates the portfolio choice from the benchmark rate β and relates it only to the future value of the cumulative returns in a clear analogy to the standard Markowitz problem.Although the regulation banning the use of asymmetric incentive plans in mutual or pension funds holds, asymmetric schemes are still popular with hedge funds which are characterized by strong performance incentives to their managers. Typically, there is a small annual management fee and a performance-based bonus payment. The latter, for most funds, is paid if the return exceeds a hurdle rate (the benchmark rate) or a high-water mark (the previous maximum). The manager’s incentive payment with the hardle-rate provision is given by(15)Hπ=C∫0TX^tπX^0-eβt+er(T-t)dt,where β is the hurdle rate and (x)+=max(x,0) is the positive part of x. Since compensation schemes with high-water mark provision can be placed, in terms of the strength of incentives, between the symmetric and hurdle-rate schemes, they will not be part of the analysis presented in this paper. However, they can be accomondated by our mathematical framework and numerical methods.The dynamics of portfolio wealth (11) is multiplicative, i.e., for any trading strategy (πt) the returnX^tπ/X^0is independent ofX^0. The initial wealth,X^0, can, therefore, be fixed to 1. Under the assumption that short-selling is not allowed, the compensation schemes (13) and (15) can be written in a unified way:(16)Hπ=C∫0TX^tπ-Keβt+er(T-t)dt.For a symmetric scheme, one takes K=0. The hurdle rate payoff is obtained when K=1.The corresponding manager’s optimization problem takes the form(17)E∫0TX^tπ-Keβt+er(T-t)dt-θVar∫0TX^tπ-Keβt+er(T-t)dt→max,whereθ=Cγ2.Compensation schemes introduced in the previous subsection have their counterparts based on the fund’s wealth at the terminal time. In a symmetric scheme, the manager’s compensation is proportional to the difference between the portfolio return and the benchmark return:(18)Hπ=CX^TπX^0-eβT.As in the case of the continuous monitoring, the trading strategy maximizing manager’s satisfaction does not depend on the benchmark rate. Taking β=0 simplifies manager’s optimization problem to(19)EX^TπX^0-1-θVarX^TπX^0-1withθ=Cγ2. Since the quantityX^TπX^0-1is the return of the portfolio, the optimization problem (19) is consistent with a standard Markowitz portfolio optimization approach. Hence, by an appropriate selection of C a mean–variance investor can align their risk aversion with the risk aversion of the fund manager (see Starks [34] for similar results). This also implies that the symmetric compensation scheme (18) is equivalent with manager’s co-ownership of the fund.A remuneration scheme with a hurdle-rate provision results in the payoffHπ=CX^TπX^0-eβT+,where β is the hurdle rate.Similar to the case of continuous monitoring, above two schemes can be represented in a unified form:(20)Hπ=CX^Tπ-KeβT+,where the choice K=0 leads to a symmetric scheme whereas K=1 corresponds to a scheme with the hurdle-rate provision. An optimization problem faced by a manager with mean–variance preferences and the risk aversion coefficient γ is(21)EX^Tπ-KeβT+-θVarX^Tπ-KeβT+→max.Optimization problems (17) and (21) are solved numerically. We apply explicit–implicit scheme to the discretized Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman Eqs. (10) and (5) for the auxiliary optimal control problems. Maximization with respect to ψ is constrained to a closed interval (see Theorems 2.2 and 2.4) which is found by solving appropriate optimal control problems (see Column 3 in Table 1). In the case with continuous monitoring, this has to be done numerically. When compensation scheme is based on the terminal value of the fund, the interval for ψ is given analytically:Lemma 3.1Assume that πt∈[0,πmax] for some πmax>0 and μ>r. For any t0<T, we haveψmax=-(erTx-eβTK)+,ψmin=-xeπmax(μ-r)T+rTΦ(d1)+eβTKΦ(d2),where Φ is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution andd1=log(x/K)+πmax(μ-r)(T-t0)+12πmax2σ2(T-t0)-(β-r)TπmaxσT-t0,d2=d1-πmaxσT-t0.The proof of the above lemma (see the Electronic Supplement) is surprisingly difficult. First, the optimization problems (6) with the payoff (20) are of a non-standard form: the objective function is not concave which prevents the use of the well-developed theory of continuous-time utility optimization. Another difficulty stems from the fact that the objective function is not differentiable.Numerical solution of HJB equations requires trimming of the state space (to a bounded region: interval or rectangle) as well as discretizing it. The trimming of the state space and the choice of discretization grid in time and space is usually guided by experience. Existing mathematical results explore the speed of convergence as the bounded region expands and the number of discretization points tend to infinity; such results do not allow to assess the precision of a given computation. Moreover, the verification theorem for viscosity solutions to HJB equations (see [21]) is not applicable in our setting. Hence, it is not known whether the strategy extracted from the discretized HJB approximates the optimal strategy. We propose an approach that fills these gaps. We store the strategy obtained while solving the discretized HJB for the optimal ψ∗ and use it to run a Monte Carlo simulation. In each Monte Carlo run we generate a trajectory of the stock prices and invest according to the computed optimal strategy. The collection of samples of manager’s compensation is stored and used to approximate the value of their mean–variance functional. Table 1 displays results for a selection of compensation schemes and model parameters. They hint that the approach presented in this paper with an auxiliary variable ψ performs well. It is also efficient; in the case of terminal value functional, all the computation of the value function, i.e., the maximization over ψ and solution of auxiliary optimization problems required around 5seconds.5All computations were performed on a Dell Lattitude E6400 laptop with Intel Core2 Duo 2.54gigahertz processor.5. In comparison, each Monte Carlo computation took 90seconds. Understandably, computational intensity of numerical scheme solving the problem with the continuous monitoring increases dramatically due to the introduction of another state variable y. In addition, the functional is based on an integral over time. Its computation requires a dense time grid, which has a further impact on the computation time. It is still, however, practical taking a few minutes with most of the time used for the determination of ψ∗. This can be sped up by doing pre-runs with rougher grids.Interested reader is referred to Section A of the Electronic Supplement for a more detailed presentation of numerical methods and proofs of their convergence.In this section we analyze optimal trading strategies for the various managerial compensation schemes presented in Section 3. Specifically, we look at:(SC)symmetric compensation scheme (K=0),asymmetric compensation scheme with a hard hurdle rate provision (K=1,β=0.6),based on the continuously monitored performance (see (16)) and on the terminal value (see (20)). We fix the market parameters at: μ=0.1, σ=0.2, and r=0.05. The manager’s risk aversion is γ=6.6Risk-aversion between 4 and 6 is commonly shown to be typical for the stock market investments, see, e.g., [11,28].6We assume that borrowing is not allowed, i.e., the maximum investment in the stock is 100% of the wealth (πmax=1). Relaxation of this assumption is discussed in Section 4.4. We constrain the analysis to the investment horizon T=5.7Results for other investment horizons are similar. We choose the investment horizon longer than a year because differences between compensation schemes are more pronounced for longer horizons and graphs are easier to analyze.7The risk-adjusted expected payoff to the manager heavily depends on the choice of compensation scheme (see Table 1). Indeed, for terminal-wealth based schemes and C=1, the symmetric risk-adjusted payoff is 1.315 whereas the asymmetric one with the hurdle rate provision is 0.156. To ensure the level playing field, we propose to choose the compensation scaling factor C for each scheme in such a way that the manager is indifferent to the choice of his remuneration scheme, i.e., such that the valueE(Hπ)-γ2Var(Hπ)is independent of the choice of the scheme. This sets our approach apart from the majority of the literature analyzing relations between investment strategies and fund manager’s compensation contracts; these studies rarely take into account that different incentives imply different levels of payoff to managers, see, e.g., Carpenter [13], Kouwenberg and Ziemba [24], Panageas and Westerfield [32].Table 2shows the results of the calibration of four compensation schemes to be studied in this section.Fig. 1displays realized portfolio positions along simulated trajectories of the stock price. Circles represent the average stock position at each time. The length of the bar above/below the mean shows the standard deviation. Optimal strategy for the asymmetric scheme (Panel (c)) is more volatile and tends to invest more in the risky asset than the one for the symmetric scheme (Panel (a)). This gives support to the findings of Elton et al. [15] who demonstrate that stronger incentives encourage higher riskiness of trading strategies (higher investment in the risky asset); in our setting the HR scheme offers stronger incentives. The explanation of this phenomenon is however more complicated. Managers remunerated with any of the schemes increase the risky investment after a period of poor performace in order to recoup the losses. However, compared to the symmetric scheme, the optimal strategy for the asymmetric scheme prescribes higher stock investment for small values of wealth and smaller stock investment for large values. This is rather unintuitive; one would expect managers paid according to the asymmetric schemes to hold larger stock positions in all cases. It seems that the primary goal of managers with HR schemes is to beat the benchmark. Their optimal strategy shows strong reactions to the values of the wealth below the benchmark with this behavior becoming even more pronounced towards the end of the investment period. This agrees with results obtained by other authors in various frameworks, see Carpenter [13], and Kouwenberg and Ziemba [24].Above results suggest that asymmetric schemes induce benchmark tracking behavior. Recall that symmetric schemes cannot enforce benchmark tracking. Investors willing to include the benchmark into manager’s compensation should therefore consider including an asymmetric scheme as part of the compensation contract.Arya and Mittendorf [5] associate stronger incentives with higher abilities of portfolio managers. In our setting, the asymmetric scheme induces strategies that react quickly to market changes resulting in a much larger variation compared to symmetric schemes (see Fig. 1a and c). Therefore, fund managers with asymmetric compensation schemes have to make quicker and more precise trading decisions, which requires more skills than strategies prescribed by the symmetric scheme.Distributional properties of the annualized fund returns obtained by following optimal strategies are presented in Table 3. Agarwal et al. [2] and Arya and Mittendorf [5] suggest that stronger incentives encourage better performance. Our findings demonstrate that it is not necessarily true. The Sharpe ratio as well as the expected return of a fund whose manager is remunerated by a scheme with a hurdle-rate provision is lower than those for the fund with a symmetric compensation. It is not the strength but an appropriate choice of incentives that leads to a better performance, see Kouwenberg and Ziemba [24] for detailed analysis of the interplay between the symmetric (co-ownership) and asymmetric incentives in the fund management.Fig. 1, Panels (b and d), shows realized portfolio positions obtained via a Monte Carlo simulation. A common feature of both strategies is the increase of the stock investment when time approaches the investment horizon T.8This behavior persists when changing model parameters, investment horizon T and the maximal stock holding πmax.8Such behavior was also observed by Panageas and Westerfield [32] in a different modeling framework in which they studied the impact of high-water marks and investment horizon on portfolio positions. Their conclusion was that it is not the asymmetry of the compensation scheme but the finiteness of the investment horizon that encourages fund managers to opt for large stakes in the stock towards the end of the investment period. Our findings for terminal-value based compensation schemes contradict their conclusions: trading strategies for all types of compensation do not show any tendencies of increasing stock positions when time approaches T. In our opinion the integral form of the functional, the feature that is shared by Panageas and Westerfield’s model and our compensation schemes based on continuously monitored performance, contributes mostly to this behavior. It results from the interaction between the risk aversion and the ability to accumulate performance over time. High proportion of risky investment at the beginning of the investment period increases the probability of a substancial decrease in the portfolio value. Such drop means that no compensation is accumulated until the loss is recouped increasing the riskiness of the compensation earned by the manager. On the other hand, a big loss closer to the terminal time has disproportionately smaller consequences.Compensation schemes based on continuous monitoring of portfolio value lead to inferior properties of the terminal time wealth distributions compared to the terminal-value based schemes (see Table 3). This is in agreement with the findings of Agarwal et al. [2] who notice that the discretion of fund managers impacts the returns: the larger the flexibility that managers enjoy the better their investment results. Our results show that this phenomenon is not caused by psychological reaction to close scrutiny but is rather an optimal behavior. Continuous monitoring of portfolio wealth prevents managers from implementing strategies with long-term goals (and possible short-term losses) since the short-term performance impacts their compensation in the same way as the long-term does. This not only lowers the Sharpe ratio compared to the terminal-wealth based schemes, but also boosts the riskiness of the excess returns. This comes as a surprise since continuous monitoring (closer scrutiny of managers’ decisions) should, intuitively, encourage better management.In this subsection we relax the borrowing constraint; we allow the leverage of up to 2 (πmax=2). We restrict our attention to terminal-wealth based schemes for two reasons as we have already shown the superiority of terminal-wealth based schemes over the continuously monitored schemes. This behavior is further amplified by the relaxation of the borrowing constraint.Table 4displays properties of the annualized excess returns. The relaxation of the borrowing constraint results in the decrease of the Sharpe ratio for the asymmetric scheme; bigger investment flexibility benefits the manager (via higher risk-adjusted expected payoff) but worsens the Sharpe ratio for the fund. The returns implied by an optimal strategy for the symmetric scheme are unchanged. Indeed, this strategy is unaffected by the relaxation of the borrowing constraint. This finding lends support to the claims of supremacy of symmetric schemes over the asymmetric ones.The relaxation of the restriction on the borrowing yields an increase of the expected excess return for the HR scheme; the corresponding quantity for the symmetric scheme remains unchanged. A manager with an asymmetric scheme exploits an increased investment flexibility available on the market to boost the returns; the expected excess return for the HR scheme are substantially higher than for the SC scheme. This supports the view, which we share with Arya and Mittendorf [5], that asymmetric compensation schemes should only be awarded to highly skilled managers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented theoretical and numerical results for the optimization of a mean–variance functional based on the terminal-time value or on the whole trajectory of the underlying process. An optimization problem of this form cannot be studied directly by employing dynamic programming methods. We reformulated it as a superposition of a static and a dynamic optimization problem, where the latter is feasible for dynamic programming methods. We characterized its value function as the unique continuous, polynomially growing, viscosity solution to an appropriate degenerate Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation. Our reformulation of the mean–variance problem allowed us to numerically calculate the value function and an optimal strategy for a pre-determined risk-aversion coefficient.We applied this theory to the delegated portfolio management problem: given a compensation contract, a mean–variance optimizing fund manager seeks a trading strategy that maximizes her (risk-adjusted) compensation. Our mathematical and numerical framework can accomodate optimization problems induced by complex (real-world) contracts. In particular, we were able to study the relatively unexplored relations between strategies pursued by managers remunerated according to schemes based on the terminal wealth and on the continuously monitored wealth. Surprisingly, terminal-wealth based schemes turned out to induce more prudent investment behavior and superior performance than the schemes that rely on the continuously monitored wealth.Goetzmann et al. [20] show, in a discrete-time setting, an advantage of frequent monitoring of portfolio value. Our continuous-time results contradict this finding.9The model of the financial market studied in Section 4 is complete. Therefore, many options and other derivative contracts on the stock price, in particular many of those considered in Goetzmann et al. [20], are included in our framework through the replicating strategies. The limitation in the use of options stems from the requirement that the total position in the stock must be non-negative.9Future research will aim at explaining this paradox. We will also try to design compensation schemes that benefit from the continuous monitoring of the portfolio value and lead to trading strategies outperforming those induced by terminal-time based schemes.