@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting retailer orders with POS and order data: The inventory balance effect

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Develops the rationale for the error correcting behavior of retail orders and POS.Develops the inventory balance approach to order forecasting.Inventory balance approach outperforms traditional order forecasting approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Point-of-sale,Retail,Vector error correction model,Forecasting,Inventory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite advances in retail point-of-sale (POS) data sharing, retailers’ suppliers struggle to effectively use POS data to improve their fulfillment planning processes. The challenge lies in predicting retailer orders. We present evidence that retail echelon inventory processes translate into a long-run balance or equilibrium between orders and POS, which we refer to as the inventory balance effect, allowing for more accurate order forecasting. Based on the inventory balance effect, this research prescribes a forecasting approach which simultaneously uses both sources of information (retailer order history and POS data) to predict retailer orders to suppliers. Using data from a consumable product category, this approach is shown to outperform approaches based singularly on order or POS data, by up to 125%. The strength of this novel approach – significantly improved forecast accuracy with minimal additional analysis – make it a candidate for widespread adoption in retail supply chain collaborative planning and forecasting initiatives with corresponding impact on fulfillment performance and related operating costs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Several challenges prevent optimal levels of product availability on retailers’ shelves, including suppliers’ ability to forecast orders accurately (Gruen, Corsten, & Bharadwaj, 2002). It is typical for suppliers to attempt to forecast orders that are placed by retailer distribution centers (DC) (Fig. 1). One might expect that predicting retail order quantities is as simple as summing the sales or point-of-sale (POS) data at the retail store(s) served by a DC since the most recent replenishment. However, retailer replenishment and execution processes along with store and replenishment manager behavior (Schweitzer & Cachon, 2000) introduce complexity into the ordering process, making orders difficult to predict (Williams & Waller, 2010).Inaccurate order forecasts are a pervasive problem in the retail supply chain and offer a substantial opportunity for improvement (Aviv, 2001, 2007; Kahn, 2003; Raghunathan, 1999; Sadarangani & Gallucci, 2004). Often, suppliers use a retailer’s order history and traditional time-series forecasting methods (referred to here as the order approach) to forecast the retailer’s orders (Williams & Waller, 2010). However, developments in sell-through or POS sharing (Bourland, Powell, & Pyke, 1996; Cachon & Fisher, 2000; Gavirneni, Kapuscinski, & Tayur, 1999; Kulp, Lee, & Ofek 2004; Lee, So, & Tang, 2000; Raghunathan, 2001) have increased interest in whether POS data sharing might improve forecasting performance (Choi, Hui, Ng, & Yu, 2012; Jiang, Zhong, & Klein, 2000; Williams & Waller, 2010) (referred to here as the POS approach).Recent empirical studies suggest improvement in forecast accuracy may be achieved with the POS approach (Granger & Lee, 1989; Williams & Waller, 2010). In fact, Hanssens (1998) finds that orders and sales have a long-run equilibrium relationship in the high-tech consumer durables industry and broadly imply orders and POS may have the same underlying nonstationary process, suggesting the vector error correction model (VECM) can be used to leverage this equilibrium relationship between POS and orders (Hanssens, 1998; Jiang, Maosen, Klein, & Chen, 2004; Zhong, Pick, Klein, & Jiang, 2011).In this study, we assert that retail echelon inventory policies create a long-run equilibrium between POS and orders, which we refer to as the inventory balance effect, and that any disequilibrium will be corrected by the retailer’s orders in the short term, leading to potential reduction in short-term order forecast error. This research contributes by developing its basis and demonstrating its efficacy through improving order forecasts. To highlight the contribution of the current research and how the research builds on the evolving literature, we compare the current research to the applicable extant literature where cointegration and error correction models are utilized to characterize the relationship between production/orders, sales (POS) and inventory and where POS is utilized in the retail supply chain to improve forecasts (Table 1).In the next section, we (1) develop the inventory balance effect, (2) suggest that forecasting orders by using the inventory balance approach will reduce order forecast error, and (3) specify each order forecasting approach. In the following section, we present data from a consumable product category collected to test our approach and develop a hierarchical linear model which statistically tests the performance of the inventory balance approach relative to the POS and order approaches. Next, findings from the comparisons and hierarchical linear model are presented. Those results are discussed along with managerial implications, and conclusions are then drawn.Consider the replenishment of product i for a retail echelon consisting of a retail DC j and the k retail stores it serves. It is common for retailers to replenish the DC via a base stock policy (Chen, Drezner, Ryan, & Simchi-Levi, 2000a; Chen, Ryan, & Simchi-Levi, 2000b; Graves, 1999; Dejonckheere, Disney, Lambrecht, & Towill, 2004; Luong 2007), where the orders of DC j for product i during period t (qi,j,t) are placed to replenish the sum of sales from each retail store (si,k,t) during period t, which is observed from the retailer’s point-of-sale (POS) information system.The long-run equilibrium between POS and orders can be explained by the behavior of sales and orders. The echelon’s inventory position (IP) declines as shoppers make purchases in stores and increases when an order is placed by distribution centers. If POS exceed orders in a period, the echelon’s inventory position decreases, whereas if orders exceed POS, the echelon’s inventory position increases in that period. In either case, orders are adjusted by the retailer in subsequent periods, given the endogenous relationship between the retailer’s inventory level and sales (Kesavan, Gaur, & Raman, 2010) and subsequently retailer orders. Otherwise, the retailer’s inventory would grow without bound, or backorders and lost sales would accumulate to unacceptable levels, regardless if the retailer’s base stock level is changing.In Fig. 2, the inventory balance effect is illustrated from the change in inventory position (ΔIP) of a single product-location taken from the sample data over a 52-week period, whereΔIP=qi,j,t-si,j,tandsi,j,t=∑r=1ksi,r,t.Notice that a period where the difference is positive is often followed by a period where the difference is negative. This phenomenon where the orders seek a balance with POS is the inventory balance effect.While inventory policies such as a base stock policy are used by a retailer’s ordering system to place replenishment orders, orders are often subject to managerial influences (Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997; van Donselaar, Gaur, van Woensel, Broekmelen, & Fransoo, 2010). These influences occur via manual order adjustments, where a manager manually changes the order generated by the replenishment system or by adjusting the ordering system parameters, such as the forecast, lead time or service level, among others. Cognitive psychology explains that managers may intervene as a result of over precision behavior and overconfidence bias, believing they know more than they actually know. Further, the behavioral operations literature suggests such adjustments are likely to be influenced by judgmental and decision biases (Niranjan, Wagner, & Bode, 2011; Tokar, Aloysius, & Waller, 2012), such as anchoring behavior (Sterman, 1989) and framing effects (Amaral & Tsay, 2009; Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). While we expect POS and orders to display a long-run equilibrium, many factors may lead to a short-run disequilibrium to be corrected by future orders.When a set of time series exhibit a long-run equilibrium, at least one of those time series will correct any temporary disequilibrium by adjusting back toward the equilibrium. With respect to POS and orders, it is expected that retailer will correct the imbalance by adjusting its orders, either automatically through the replenishment system or manually. However, the retailer’s rate of adjustment to the disequilibrium will differ based on several factors that are likely unobservable to suppliers. For example, the degree to which managers will adjust orders in response to an inventory imbalance is difficult to predict. However, over time, these patterns likely exist in the order data and when combined with POS in a VECM, the error correction term will estimate the rate of disequilibrium correction.Granger and Weiss (1983) define a long-run equilibrium between two time series as “a stationary point characterized by forces which tend to push a system of variables back toward equilibrium whenever it moves away” (p.251). Granger and Weiss (1983) formalize the concept of long-run equilibrium between nonstationary variables as cointegration, where two or more time series are nonstationary and have common underlying stochastic processes. Srinivasan and Bass (2000) describe cointegration as “the existence of an equilibrium or stationary relationship among two or more time series, each of which is individually nonstationary” (p. 166). For a formal development of cointegration, see Appendix A.Granger and Weiss (1983) suggest that cointegrated time series follow an error correction process, such that any short-run deviation from the long-run equilibrium is corrected by at least one of the cointegrated time series in future period(s). Thus, an error correction process dictates that one or both variables will adjust the system back to long-run equilibrium when disequilibrium occurs. Given POS and orders are expected to exhibit a long-run equilibrium, we suggest that leveraging the inventory balance effect through an error correction process will reduce order forecast error. Any short-run disequilibrium between POS and orders represents a change in the retail echelon’s inventory position. Because future orders are expected to correct the disequilibrium, the inventory balance approach, which incorporates an error correction term to estimate the rate of correction, is expected to reduce short-term order forecast error, relative to the order and POS approaches.First, we specify each approach, where h denotes the number of forecast periods ahead and m denotes the number of periods of data included in the in-sample period. The order forecast approach relies on retailer order history to predict future orders as shownqˆo,i,j,t+h=f(qi,j,t,qi,j,t-1,…,qi,j,t-m).The POS approach(qˆp)relies on POS data to forecast future order behavior and is shownqˆp,i,j,t+h=f(si,j,t,si,j,t-1,…,si,j,t-m).The inventory balance approach incorporates order and sales history along with estimating how the order will change in the forecasted period due to disequilibrium between sales and ordersqˆIB,i,j,t+h=f(qi,j,t,qi,j,t-1,…,qi,j,t-m,si,j,t,si,j,t-1,…,si,j,t-m,qˆi,j,t+h).Because Holt–Winters exponential smoothing is known to be one of the most widely used methods in practice (McCarthy, Davis, Golicic, & Mentzer, 2006) and is appropriate for seasonal products, such as those used in this research, the inventory balance approach’s out-of-sample order forecast performance is compared against the performance of the additive Holt–Winters exponential smoothing method. The Holt–Winters smoothing parameters are optimized over the in-sample period by minimizing the in-sample mean absolute percent error (MAPE).The inventory balance approach is operationalized using a VECM where {si,j,t} and {qi,j,t} are cointegrated, CI(1,1). To determine whether cointegration exists, we first test for nonstationarity in both {si,j,t} and {qi,j,t}, using the augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) testΔqi,j,t=βi,jqi,j,t-1+∑c=1mαmΔqi,j,t-c+εi,j,t,andΔsi,j,t=βi,jsi,j,t-1+∑c=1mαmΔsi,j,t-c+εi,j,t.For each time series, the t-statistic associated with βi,jis compared to the critical value provided by Dickey and Fuller (1979). When {si,j,t} and {qi,j,t} are integrated of the same order, we test for cointegration by estimating the long-run equilibrium relationshipqi,j,t=βi,j,0+βi,j,1si,j,t+εi,j,t,and check the residuals of the equilibrium regression for stationarity, which indicates cointegration (Enders, 2004), by again using the ADF testΔεi,j,t=βεi,j,t-1+∑c=1mαcΔεi,j,t-c+δi,j,t,When the time series are found to be I(1) and the residuals of the equilibrium regression are found to be stationary, {si,j,t} and {qi,j,t}are said to be cointegrated, CI(1,1) (Enders 2004). Where {si,j,t} and {qi,j,t} are cointegrated, CI(1,1), the VECM is appropriate and is shown hereΔsi,j,t=ai,j,1+bi,j,1(L)Δsi,j,t-L+ci,j,1(L)Δqi,j,t-L+di,j,1εi,j,t-1+μi,j,tΔqi,j,t=ai,j,2+bi,j,2(L)Δqi,j,t-L+ci,j,2(L)Δsi,j,t-L+di,j,2εi,j,t-1+vi,j,t,where εi,j,t−1 is the lagged error term from the equilibrium regression or the deviation from the equilibrium in t−1, L is the lag operator, and μi,j,tand νi,j,tare white noise disturbances.The inventory balance parameters are estimated during the 104-week in-sample period, such that MAPE is minimized during the in-sample period. Order forecasts are generated for each horizon (h), as shownqˆi,j,t+h=qi,j,t+∑n=1hΔq^i,j,t+n,throughout the 6-week out-of-sample period.4Dynamic forecasts derived from the VECM parameters.4To test the efficacy of the inventory balance approach, we obtained data from a large consumable products manufacturer that sells branded products in a dry grocery category at retailers throughout the US. The data consist of weekly orders and POS for six stock keeping units (SKU). These SKUs span the range of volume levels within this seasonal product category. The SKU data are taken from nine retail DCs, geographically dispersed throughout the US However, each SKU is not distributed by each DC due to factors such as regional consumer preferences, so the data contains a total of 36 distinct SKU-locations. POS and order data for each SKU–location were collected over a period of 110 consecutive weeks. 104weeks of data are treated as in-sample observations, while the final 6weeks are reserved as out-of-sample observations. To disguise the identity of the companies, we provide SKU-location numerical identifiers throughout the paper.The out-of-sample forecast performance of the inventory balance approach is compared to the order and POS approaches, where POS and orders are found to be cointegrated. From the ADF tests of each SKU-location, we found POS to exhibit a unit root in 34 of 36 SKU–locations (Table B.1). Furthermore, orders were found to have a unit root in 24 of the 34 SKU–locations, where POS exhibited a unit root (Table B.1). We tested for higher orders of integration when POS and orders exhibited a unit root. Only one SKU-location indicated a higher order of integration. Therefore, we eliminated this SKU-location from the remainder of the analyses at this point. For 20 of the 23 SKU–locations tested, we find evidence that POS and orders are CI(1,1) (Table B.2).In Fig. 3, MAPE for the three approaches are compared over the 6-week forecast horizon (Table B.3). The comparisons indicate that the inventory balance approach consistently outperforms both the order and POS approaches in each week during the horizon. Over the forecast horizon, the inventory balance approach lowers MAPE on average by 29% and 125% relative to POS approach and order approach, respectively.5Note the order approach for a single SKU-location in our sample has a relatively high forecast error value in horizon 4, causing a spike in MAPE for this horizon. This is evidence of the nature of the problem faced by suppliers attempting to forecast retailer orders via the order approach, where large orders are often followed by small orders.5To statistically test the comparisons, we develop a hierarchical linear model (HLM) (Ang, Slaughter, & Ng, 2002; DeHoratius & Raman, 2008; Liao & Chuang, 2004). The nested nature of the data (SKU-location observations within a product or DC which are not expected to be independent), results in the violation of the assumptions of ordinary least squares (OLSs). Because it allows observations in the data to be nested within higher-level categorizations and accounts for the lack of independence among observations due to the multi-level structure of data (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002), HLM accounts for nested structures in the data. To parameterize the model, we employ a full maximum likelihood (ML) technique.The HLM test equation islnAPEi,j,z,t=θ0+b00i+cooj+ei,j+β1Horizoni,j,t+β2Orderi,j,t+β3POSi,j,twhere lnAPEi,j,z,tis the log of the out-of-sample absolute percent error of product i at DC j based on forecast method z. θois the fixed intercept parameter, while the random effect parameter of product i is b00iand the random effect parameter of DC j is c00j. Additionally, the random effect parameter of SKU-location k is eijk. Note that b00i, c00jand eijkare each normally distributed with a zero mean and variances of τb00, τc00, and σ2, respectively. β1is the estimate of the parameter associated with the forecast horizon (Horizon), which controls for any effects due to the length of time over which the forecast is created. β2and β3are the parameter estimates of interest, the order approach (Order) and the POS approach (POS).From the hierarchical linear model results (Table 2), notice that the order approach significantly increases order forecast error relative to the inventory balance approach (βorder=1.253, p<.01) and the POS approach also significantly increases order forecast error relative to the inventory balance approach (βPOS=0.652, p<.001).Upon controlling for the potential random effects associated with specific products and locations, the HLM results statistically confirm the findings from the forecast error comparisons that the inventory balance approach may outperform the order forecast performance of the POS and order approaches.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the retail supply chain where customer orders are often difficult to predict, the inventory balance effect offers a framework for understanding the equilibrium seeking behavior of echelon POS and orders. By modeling this effect, suppliers subsequently account for how changes in the retailer’s echelon inventory position influences the retailer’s future orders in addition to demand and order patterns. An alternative approach may be to integrate retailer on-hand inventory information into the supplier’s order forecasting process. However, such an approach may be problematic for two primary reasons. First, many retailers typically do not share on-hand inventory information with suppliers. Second, on-hand inventory information is known to be relatively inaccurate (Raman, DeHoratius, & Ton, 2001), potentially introducing additional error into the forecasting process. The approach suggested in this research overcomes both potential problems. Through the inventory balance approach, changes in the retailer’s on-hand inventory are inherently incorporated into the order forecasting model. Therefore, on-hand inventory is not required from the retailer. Subsequently, this eliminates the potential error that inaccurate inventory records might introduce into the order forecasting process.The inventory balance approach utilizes both customer orders and POS and accounts for how the retail customer corrects a current inventory imbalance through future replenishment orders. Traditional forecasting approaches that use a single demand signal to forecast orders, such as the POS and order approaches, are unable to account for this behavior in the order forecast. Due to this distinct capability, the inventory balance approach is shown to lower order forecast error relative to the POS and order approaches over each week in the short-term forecast horizon (see Table 3).Enders (2004) provides a formal representation of cointegration, where two time series, such as orders {qi,j,t} and POS {si,j,t}, are each modeled according to a random walkqi,j,t=μq,i,j,t+εq,i,j,t,andsi,j,t=μs,i,j,t+εs,i,j,t,where μq,i,j,tand μs,i,j,tare nonstationary components, and εq,i,,j,tand εs,i,j,tare the stationary error components. If a stationary linear combination of the two nonstationary series exists, then {qi,j,t} and {si,j,t} are cointegrated. Now consider a non-zero vector, (βi,j,1,βi,j,2), which when multiplied by a vector that contains {qi,j,t} and {si,j,t}, produces a stationary process, as follows:βi,j,1qi,j,t+βi,j,2si,j,t=β1(μq,i,j,t+εq,i,j,t)+β2(μs,i,j,t+εs,i,j,t),andβi,j,1qi,j,t+βi,j,2si,j,t=(βi,j,1μq,i,j,t+βi,j,2μs,i,j,t)+(βi,j,1εq,i,j,t+βi,j,2εs,i,j,t).Because βi, j, 1μq, i, j, t+βi, j, 2μs, i, j, t is the nonstationary portion of the linear combination of {qi,j,t} and {si,j,t}, (βi,j,1,βi,j,2) can be defined such thatβi,j,1μq,i,j,t+β2μs,i,j,t=0,and thus, βi,j,1ɛq,i,j,t+βi,j,2ɛs,i,j,tremains, which is known to be stationary given ɛq,i,j,tand ɛs,i,j,tare stationary (Enders, 2004).See Tables B.1–B.3.