@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A rank-dependent bi-criterion equilibrium model for stochastic transportation environment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper proposes a rank-dependent bi-criterion user equilibrium model.Stochasticities in criteria measurements and traveler preferences are considered.It reduces to the user-equilibrium model when only the first rank is considered.Shows flexibility in describing travelers’ bounded rationality in various levels.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Route choice,Rank dependent user equilibrium,Stochastic multicriteria acceptability analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper proposes a rank-dependent bi-criterion (travel time & monetary travel cost) equilibrium model for route choice problems, stochasticities in both the criteria measurements and the subjective preferences are considered simultaneously. Travelers rank all the choices, according to the generalized travel dis-utility, then choose from the first several (see K) best ranked ones. By searching inversely the supporting preference sets for each alternative in each rank, the overall choice probability of a path is determined. The equilibrium model is formulated and transformed into a fixed-point problem. The existence of the equilibrium is given out for a simple two-link network, however may not be guaranteed for more complex network topologies. WhenK=1, the proposed model reduces to the optimal user equilibrium that allows for the stochasticities of criteria measurements and the arbitrarily distributed preferences. Some remarks about the selection of some parameters in the new model are discussed and also the solution algorithms. Two numerical examples are presented to illustrate the implementation of the model, and also the capability and flexibility of the new model in handling the heterogeneity in traveler preferences and requirements. The paper concludes with discussions about the assumptions and limitations of the new model and possible future research opportunities as well.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-criteria traffic equilibrium models explicitly consider that travelers base their choice decisions on multi-criteria, such as travel time, monetary travel cost, accessibility and stability, parking availability as well as destination attractiveness and so on. Travelers evaluate the choice alternatives referring to these criteria according to personal preferences (priority or weight distribution across the criteria), and choose one that minimize (maximize) the general trip disutility (utility), or one satisfiable. Multi-criteria based transportation researches cover many aspects, including the GIS-based multicriteria route/tour plan support (Nadi & Delavar, 2011; Niaraki & Kim, 2009; Niaraki, Kim, & Varshosaz, 2010), (vehicle) routing (Blue, Adler, & List, 1998; Bowerman, Hall, & Calamai, 1995; Doerner, Focke, & Gutjahr, 2007; Jozefowiez, Semet, & El-Ghazali, 2008; Raith, 2009; Tan, Chew, & Lee, 2006b; Tan, Chew, & Lee, 2006a) or evacuation routing (Stepanov & Smith, 2009); and the network equilibrium modeling (Chen, Oh, Park, & Recker, 2010; Dafermos, 1982; Dial, 1979; Leurent, 1993; Raith, Wang, Ehrgott, & Mitchell, 2013; Wang & Ehrgott, 2013), which is also the concern of this paper.In the researches associated with network equilibrium modeling, travel time and monetary travel cost based bi-criterion researches are widely investigated (Jiang, Mahmassani, & Zhang, 2011; Lu, Mahmassani, & Zhou, 2008; Mahmassani, Zhou, & Lu, 2005; Wang, Ehrgott, & Chen, 2013). Travelers perceive all the route alternatives by combining the two criteria with subjective value of time (VOT) beliefs, i.e., the relative magnitude of travel time to monetary cost, or the money units one willing to pay to save a time unit, and then choose from the optimal ones. The bi-criterion equilibrium models play an important role in many choice associated estimations, f.i., route choice equilibrium (assignment) models (Dial, 1996; Dial, 1997; Huang & Li, 2007; Leurent, 1996; Nagurney, 2000; Nagurney & Dong, 2002a) congestion pricing (Chen & Yang, 2012; Dial, 1999a; Dial, 1999b; Guo, 2013; Guo & Yang, 2009; Han & Yang, 2008; Jiang et al., 2011; Yang & Huang, 2004; Zhang, Yang, & Huang, 2008), and some other researches related to landuse and site selection (Briggs, Kunsch, & Mareschal, 1990; Jankowski et al., 1994; Rinner & Matin, 2004).Generally, the building-up of a bi-criterion network equilibrium model may concern many factors, including path choice type (probabilistic or deterministic path choice decision), travel demand type (fixed or elastic demand), model dynamics (static or dynamic), the VOT belief pattern (fixed, continuous or discrete distributed, class specified or purpose specified and alike), the variation and flow dependence of each criterion measurement, extra information (ATIS available or not), the formation of the model (Optimization, inf.- and fin.-dimentional VI, and Nonlinear complementarity problem (NCP)) and so on. Table 1gives a selective summary of some related research works mainly cover the concerns mentioned above. There are also some researches considering more than two criteria, see e.g., Nagurney, Dong, and Mokhtarian (2002b) and Jaber and O’mahony (2009), however not covered in this paper. The extension of the bi-criterion model to a more-than-two criteria one is direct but more complicated in computation.Most of above studies consider only the best choices or assume that travelers always try to maximize (minimize) personal travel (dis-) utility, while those inferior composite alternatives, though may satisfy DMs’ requirements, are not included. However, since travelers may differ in experiences of travel time as well as travel cost, and may differ in their VOT holdings which are hard to recognize clearly, it is impossible and unnecessary for them to evaluate and compare all the route alternatives based on precise computations of the overall disutilities. Especially for daily ‘trial’ decision occasions, a ‘good’ and satisfiable choice is enough to meet one’s requirement. Thus, the conventional cardinal value based behavioral assumption may not suit well, when considering the stochastic multiple criteria measurements and the vague and heterogenous individual preferences, a simple while intuitive individual decision mechanism is needed. To this end, this paper proposes a rank-dependent user equilibrium (RDUE) model initiated from the concept of Stochastic Multi-criteria Acceptability Analysis (SMAA, Lahdelma, Joonas, & Salminen, 1998). SMAA is a class of Multi-Criteria Decision Aiding (MCDA) methods for discrete issues. By exploring the VOT preference space, SMAA calculates the (rank) acceptability indices measuring the variety of VOTs supporting each choice with certain rank, in other words, the probability of an alternative being preferred in that rank. SMAA deals with uncertain criteria measurements representing as probability distributions, and imprecise, partial or ignorance of preference information. It is capable to handle arbitrarily distributed stochastic criteria measurements as well as decision makers’ preferences, simultaneously.This paper assumes that, (1) travelers follow the rank-dependent decision schemes in the daily route choices, they perceive all the route alternatives basing on personal experience and VOT belief, then choose from the top K ranked ones with the respective probabilities defined as the so-called meta-weight. (2) Congestion effects are considered in the modeling, link travel time and travel cost are separate, monotonic and continuous functions of link flows. (3) According to the relative priority of travel time to travel cost, travelers are classified into two preference patterns, i.e., Pattern 1 with VOT<1 and Pattern 2 with VOT⩾1, other possible classifications are discussed in the end of the paper. (4) The stochasticity of path travel time as well as travel cost are considered, and further assume that (5) travelers’ VOT preferences are continuously distributed, travelers in different OD pairs may differ in requirements of punctuality, so as their beliefs of VOT values and the holding of holistic Ks. The model is transformed into a fixed-point problem, the existence of the equilibrium is guaranteed for a two-link network, but not guaranteed for more complex network topologies. WhenK=1, the new model reduces to the user optimal equilibrium model with allowing for randomly distributed VOT holdings and the stochasticity of criteria measurements. Two numeric examples are presented to illustrate the implementation of the proposed model, included are a testing scenario with three routes connecting one OD pair and the Nguryen and Dupluis network. Basic outputs are analyzed, sensitivity analyses of the testing network are conducted to find the possible impact pattern on the network state evolution as well as systematic performances. The proposed model exhibits great flexibility and capability to represent different traveler requirements as well as rationality levels.The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 gives a brief introduction of the methodological foundation of this paper, i.e., SMAA. The RDUE model is put forward in Section 3 and followed by some discussions and short remarks of the equilibrium. Solution algorithms are given in Section 4. Sections 5 and 6 give out two numeric examples and the associated analysis. This paper concludes with some discussions of the assumptions, limitations of the new model and many further research opportunities.SMAA is a family of methods for discrete multicriteria decision aiding (MCDA) problems, in which criteria measurements can be uncertain or inaccurate, decision makers’ (DMs’) preference (priority assignment over different criteria) information may be imprecise, missing, or hard to determine.Similar to Dial’s (1996) idea (Dial, 1997; Dial, 1999a; Leurent, 1993; Leurent, 1996), SMAA tries to find out the supporting preference sets for each alternative to be favored, however in various ranks. By integrating over the supporting preference sets for each alternative in each rank, it tells the rank-acceptability indexes (which we will employ in this paper as the choice probability of each alternative in each rank), then combines with the Meta-Weights, it obtains the overall acceptability indexes (choice probabilities) of each alternative.What distinguishes SMAA from other MCDA methods is that, (1) it applies the rank-based choice strategy, i.e., for a traveler with certain preference style and overall requirements, he/she first ranks all the possible choice alternatives according to the generalized cost, that obtained as the combination of different criteria measurements with the preference weights as other MCDA methods do, then chooses from the first several best ranked choices that meet his/her need, thus the inferior but satisfiable choices are considered in the model; (2) it allows arbitrarily distributed criteria measurements as illustrated following, which endows it the ability to handle measurements of different styles (ordinal, cardinal) and distributions (discrete or continuous, etc.), and (3) also the capability to handle imprecise or uncertain preference information simultaneously. Basing on the assumed feasible weight distribution, more specific information can be added to further refine the DMs’ preferences. The possible types of restriction may include (Lahdelma & SalMinen, 2001)1We takeϕjas the weight preference value for criterion j, namely the magnitude of the criterion;ϕjminandϕjmaxare the respective minimum and maximum values.1:1.Partial (or complete) ranking information of criteria (ϕj⩾ϕzfor some criteriaj,z).Intervals for weightsϕj∈ϕjmin,ϕjmax.Intervals for weight ratios (trade-offs)(ϕj/ϕz,ϕj,ϕz∈[ϕmin,ϕmax]).Linear inequality constraints for weights(Aϕ⩽c).Nonlinear inequality constraints for weights(g(ϕ)⩽0)The possible treatment of the restrictions contains Union, Intersection and Average density, Lahdelma and SalMinen (2001) gave more detail introductions.In recent years, the SMAA family has seen a great enrichment in modeling developments, the SMAA (Lahdelma et al., 1998); SMAA-2 (Lahdelma & SalMinen, 2001), SMAA-O (Lahdelma, Miettinen, & Salminen, 2003) and the SMAA-P (Lahdelma & Salminen, 2009a) and so on. In this paper, we adopt the SMAA-2 model, since it considers the information brought by different choice ranks, and favors the understanding and evaluation of an alternative more thoroughly. As for the modeling and implementation of the original SMAA models, it is omitted here for the sake of space, the readers can refer to Tervonen and Lahdelma (2007) and some other works (Lahdelma, Makkonen, & Samlminen, 2009b; Tervonen & Figueira, 2008; Tervonen, 2010) for detail illustrations.Consider a fully-connected transportation networkG=(N,A), with N and A being the node set and the link set respectively. Let W be the set of OD pairs,dwandRwbe the fixed travel demand and the path set between OD pairw∈W, respectively. Letp∈Pbe the preference pattern travelers hold in the network,πpbe the ratio of population in pattern p over the whole, andxwrp∈[0,1]be the flow share on pathr∈Rw2We assume the terms path and route are exchangeable in the following of this paper.2holding the preference pattern p andxwrbe the total flow share on path r,(1)xwr=∑pxwrp,∀w∈W,r∈Rw.Then, we havex=(⋯,xwr,⋯)as the network state. More over, take(2)qwr(x)=∑pxwrpdwπp,∀w∈W,r∈Rwas the traffic flow on path r. The traffic volume on linka∈Ais denoted by,(3)va(x)=∑w∈W∑r∈Rwδwraqwr(x),a∈A,=∑w∈W∑r∈Rw∑pδwraxwrpdwπp,(by(2))whereδwrais the link-path incidence that equals 1 if link a is on pathr∈Rw, and 0 otherwise.In this paper, two flow-dependent attributes are considered, i.e., the link average travel timetˆa(x)and the average monetary travel costcˆa(x), both are continuous and monotonic with respect tox. The corresponding link travel timetaand the link travel costcaare assumed to be random variables defined by,(4)ta(x)=tˆa(x)+ta′,a∈A,(5)ca(x)=cˆa(x)+ca′,a∈A,whereta′andca′are the random components, representing the real variations in the quantities (e.g. as in Watling, 2006) associated with the criteria measurements experienced by travelers. They can be caused by the fluctuations in the road capacity (e.g., Lo, Luo, & Siu, 2006; Lo & Tung, 2003) due to bad weather, minor accident, road physical condition and sport events, or by variations in trip demand (e.g. see Chen et al., 2010; Clark, Sumalee, Shepherd, & Connors, 2009; Shao, Lam, & Mei, 2006). To some extent, the effect of the variations in criteria measurements is similar (if not equivalent) to that caused by the subjective perceptual ‘errors’ (see e.g. Sheffi, 1985) when assuming the same ‘variation/error’ distributions.Similarly, lettwrtˆwrandcwrcˆwrbe the path (average) travel time and travel cost respectively, we havetwrandcwras,(6)twr(x)=tˆwr(x)+twr′,∀w∈W,r∈Rw,(7)cwr(x)=cˆwr(x)+cwr′,∀w∈W,r∈Rw,and the path average travel time and travel cost as,(8)tˆwr(x)=∑a∈Aδwratˆa(x),∀w∈W,r∈Rw,(9)cˆwr(x)=∑a∈Aδwracˆa(x),∀w∈W,r∈Rw,wheretwr′andcwr′are the random variations of path travel time and cost. The joint probability density function oftwr,cwris denoted byψwr(t,c).To cope with the bi-criteria decision problem, a general approach is to take the combination of the two criteria measurements, as the generalized cost(G)of a path alternative. LetGwrpbe the general cost a person experiences in pattern p on path r, which is defined as the linear combination of the two measurements,(10)Gwrp(t,c,ϕ)=cwr(x)+ϕwptwr(x),∀w∈W,r∈Rw,p∈P,whereϕwp∈Φwpis the VOT preference a traveler holds,Φwp=ϕ̲wp,ϕ¯wpis the respective feasible VOT space,ϕ̲wp⩾0andϕ¯wp>0are the lower and upper boundary of the VOT holdings. Since it is hard to specify clearly each driver’s VOT belief, we turn to the statistic approach by sampling the preference distributions among drivers. We assume that travelers’ VOT values between an OD pair follow the PDFfΦ(ϕ), which may vary for different OD pairs and preference patterns. For each traveler, all the possible routes between the OD pair are ranked to tell the good from the bad. Given travel time & cost(t,c)and the VOT holdingϕ, the rank of path r is formulated as the integer from the best(k=1)to the worst (k=∣Rw∣,∣·∣is the size of the set) based on the Gs,(11)rank(r,t,c,ϕ)wp=1+∑i=1∣Rw∣ρGwip(t,c,ϕ)<Gwrp(t,c,ϕ),w∈W,p∈P,in whichρ(true)=1andρ(false)=0. Then the set of favorable VOTs assigning path r with rank k for pattern p travelers given(t,c)is defined by(12)Srpk(t,c)=ϕ∈Φwp:rank(r,t,c,ϕ)=k,∀r∈R,p∈P,k=1,2,…,K,where K refers to the lowest holistic rank travelers will consider, soK⩽maxw∣Rw∣. By exploring the favorable preference space over the criteria distributions, we can compute the expected volume of the set of favorable VOTs, i.e., the rank acceptability indexerpk(x). It measures the proportion of VOT values granting alternative r the rank k for pattern p travelers considering the variety of the two criteria. It is computed as a multi-dimensional integral over the criteria distributions and the favorable VOT sets in each rank for each pattern,(13)erpk(x)=∫twr(x),cwr(x)ψwr(t,c)∫ϕ∈Srpk(t,c)fΦ(ϕ)dϕd(t,c),r∈R,p∈P,k=1,2,…,K.The rank acceptability index measures the proportion of drivers following the VOT PDFfΦ(ϕ)with travel time & cost density functionψwr(t,c)will assign path r rank k, which falls in the range[0,1].With the belief that drivers are not completely rational, which may due to limited capability in information acquisition and computation, they may fail to distinguish the routes ranking the highest sometimes. Then it is likely for the drivers to choose a route in lower while acceptable ranks, which makes it necessary to consider the rank acceptability indices of lower ranks when to estimate the drivers’ choice distributions. In this paper, the so-called meta-weightαis adopted to combine the acceptability indices of different ranks. We term the combined oneErpK(x)as the Kth holistic acceptability of path r for pattern p,(14)ErpK(x)=∑k=1Kαkerpk(x)∑k=1Kαk,∀r∈R,p∈P,K,whereαkis the meta-weight for rank k, representing the chance of the kth ranked alternatives being preferred. The meta-weights indicate the weight distribution across different ranks. Accordingly, the Kth holistic acceptability indices for path r is defined by(15)ErK(x)=∑pErpK(x),∀r∈R,K,where the feasible state spaceΩ={x∣∑rxr=1,xr∈[0,1],∀r∈R}3However, the value space ofErKmay not be the same as that ofx, since the former represents the possible network equilibrium states, while the latter stands for the temporal system conditions. The boundaries of the equilibrium flow share on a path are determined by the definition of the meta-weight and the choice of the holistic rank K. In detail, a path will obtain the maximum flow shareα1∑k=1Kαkwhen it dominates all the other choice alternatives. The minimum possible flow share on a path is zero whenK<∣R∣(∣R∣is the size of the paths), and will be reached when the path is dominated in the rank K for all the preference holdings. For the caseK=∣R∣, the minimum possible flow share on a path is lifted toαK∑k=1Kαkwhen the lowest ranked choice alternatives will be considered.3is compact and convex, thenErKrepresents the total proportion of travelers preferring path alternative r as their choices. LetEK=(E1K,E2K,⋯,E∣R∣K)(∣R∣is the size of the path set) be the Kth holistic acceptability index vector, letx∗be the network state in equilibrium, we have(16)x∗=EK(x∗).Note that, in this paper, we employ the Kth holistic acceptability indices with K varying from 1 tomaxw∣Rw∣other than the full-range one, under the consideration that alternatives in lower ranks are often eliminated from one’s preferred choice set. It brings great flexibility to describe drivers’ choice behavior, withK=1, the underlying assumption is that travelers are rational and will only choose routes of the highest rank; withK>1, the model assumes that travelers are of bounded rationality and tend to make ‘error’ choices of the non-best ranked routes. We assume that the Kth holistic acceptability indices well describe the drivers’ choice distribution allowing for the first K best ranks. Therefore, to quite an extent, the value of K defines the rationality level of drivers in the path choice context, a larger K infers lower rationality, so does the setting of the meta-weights for each rank. Generally, the setting of the meta-weights should meet some natural requirements, f.i., nonnegativeness and the non-increasing as the rank increases (i.e.,α1⩾α2⩾⋯⩾αK⩾⋯⩾0). Lahdelma and SalMinen (2001) introduced three meta-weight types, among them are linear weightsαk=(K-k)/(K-1),(k=1,2,…,K), inverse weightsαk=1/k,(k=1,2,…,K), and centroid weightsαk=∑i=kK1/i∑i=1K1/i,(k=1,2,…,K). In this paper, we take the last meta-weight pattern.Definition 1the Kth Rank-Dependent User Equilibrium (RDUE)Letx∗be the network flow distribution solving Eq. (16) for all the routes considering the first K best ranks, thenx∗is the Kth RDUE.It is seen thatx∗equalsEKin the equilibrium state, every component ofx∗(i.e.,xw∗r) equals to the corresponding componentErK∈EK. In other words, in equilibrium, the network statex∗will result in the holistic rank acceptability indexEK, namely the equilibrium state is the fixed point of Eq. (16). For the existence of the network equilibrium, this paper gives out the proof for the two-link network case (see Fig. 1). The path generalized costGr(t,c,ϕ)under statexare written as,(17)G1(t,c,ϕ)=ϕt1(x1)+c1(x1),G2(t,c,ϕ)=ϕt2(x2)+c2(x2),they are linear functions of traveler VOT holdings(ϕ). With the premium thattr(xr)andcr(xr)are continuous and monotonic with link flow sharesxr(r=1,2), we have,Proposition 1In the two-link network asFig. 1shows, the Kth holistic acceptabilityEK(x)is continuous overx.For the simplicity of the proof, we suppose there is only one preference pattern (i.e.,p=1), assume thatϕ̲wp=ϕ̲andϕ¯wp=ϕ¯, and neglect the stochasticity oftr(x)andcr(x), we claim that the negligence will not affect the continuity ofErK(x).(1)K=1. Since the equity of the two paths, we may assume thatc1(x1)⩽c2(x2)in Eq. (17), i.e., the intercept ofG1is lower than that ofG2,t1(x1)andt2(x2)are the slopes.First consider the caset1(x1)>t2(x2), the two lines in Fig. 2will intersect at,(18)ϕˆ(x)=c2(x2)-c1(x1)t1(x1)-t2(x2),which is continuous and monotonic with the network statex(the proof of the monotonicity ofϕˆ(x)overx1refers to Appendix A). Then,ErK(x)can be rewritten as,(19)E11(x)=α1α1∫ϕ̲ϕˆ(x)fΦ(ϕ)dϕ;E21(x)=α1α1∫ϕˆ(x)ϕ¯fΦ(ϕ)dϕ,with the presumption thatfΦ(ϕ)is continuously distributed,Er1(x)(r=1,2)are continuous withx.For the case whent1(x1)⩽t2(x2)establishes as Fig. 2 shows, sinceGr(t,c,ϕ)is monotone increasing overϕ,G1⩾G2holds all the way,E11(x)=1andE21(x)=0. According to the relative size ofxrtoEr1(here takex1andE11as an example), and the relative adjusting speed ofcrtotr(r=1,2), the network will evolve into three cases (see Fig. 3as being separated into three parts by the dashed lines): (1) Reaches the equilibrium point (1,0) (Fig. 3(b), the middle section). In this case,x1increases to 1 beforeE11gets smaller than 1, there are four subcases (marked as the arrowed lines leading to Case (b)) will lead to this equilibrium, during the evolving course,E11remains constant as 1.(2) Evolves into the case of Eqs. (18) and (19) as Fig. 2 shows (Fig. 3(c), the lower section). In this case, asx1<E11=1increases,t1(x1)=t2(x2)realizes first withc1(x1)<c2(x2)andx1<E11=1,x1continues to increase tillG1intersectsG2withϕˆ(x)falling betweenϕ̲andϕ¯, thenE11<1and the network becomes the case of Eqs. (18) and (19). (3) Enters the counterpart case of (2) (see Fig. 3(a)). In this case, the network first reachesc1(x1)=c2(x2)witht1(x1)<t2(x2)andx1<E11=1, asx1continues to increase, the network enters the case withc1(x1)>c2(x2)andt1(x1)<t2(x2), i.e., the counterpart situation of (2), the continuity ofEr1(x)exists still.K=2. For the casec1(x1)⩽c2(x2)andt1(x1)>t2(x2), the intersection pointϕˆ(x)ofG1andG2follows Eq. (20),ErK(x)as,(20)E12(x)=α1α1+α2∫ϕ̲ϕˆ(x)fΦ(ϕ)dϕ+α2α1+α2∫ϕˆ(x)ϕ¯fΦ(ϕ)dϕ;E22(x)=α2α1+α2∫ϕ̲ϕˆ(x)fΦ(ϕ)dϕ+α1α1+α2∫ϕˆ(x)ϕ¯fΦ(ϕ)dϕ,withα1⩾α2, the continuity and monotonicity ofErKstill hold.For the casec1(x1)⩽c2(x2)andt1(x1)⩽t2(x2), the analyses are similar to those of the caseK=1. The only difference caused byK=2is that the range ofEr2(x)changes toα2α1+α2,α1α1+α2rather than[0,1], as a result of the consideration of the second ranked alternative.When allowing for the stochasticity oftr(x)andcr(x), sinceψ(t,c)is continuous with(t,c), the incorporation of the stochasticity will not change the continuity of Eq. (10),ErK(x)is continuous overx. This completes the proof.□Based on Proposition 1, we have the following Theorem,Theorem 1For the two-link network as shown inFig. 1, the bi-criterion equilibrium model defined by Eqs. (1)–(16)has at least one solution.From Proposition 1, it is seen thatErK(x)is continuous withxin the two-link network, combine with the fact thatx∈Ωis compact and convex, link travel timetrK(x)and travel costcrK(x)are continuous withx, and the presumption that individual VOT preferenceϕis continuously distributed, the existence of the solution of Eq. (16) is guaranteed by Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem.□However, for the network with more than two links, especially for cases withK⩾2ranks being considered, the continuity of the favorable setSrpk(t,c)(∀r,p,k=1,2,…,K)overϕmay not exist, since there are many cases (rank combinations) supporting a certain alternative in each rank. Thus the existence of the network equilibrium may not be guaranteed.From the proof of the caseK=1in Proposition 1, we can extend the two-alternative case to cases with finite choice alternatives, we haveEr1from Eqs. (12)–(14),(21)Er1(x)=α1er1(x)α1=∫twr,cwrψwr(t,c)∫ϕ∈ϕ∈Φw:Gwr(·)⩽Gwi(·),∀ifΦ(ϕ)dϕd(t,c)=∫twr,cwrψwr(t,c)Probϕ∈Φw:Gwr(·)⩽Gwi(·),∀id(t,c)=∫twr,cwrψwr(t,c)Probϕ∈Φw:minϕGwr(·)d(t,c)=Prob{(t,c,ϕ):min(t,c,ϕ){Gwr(·)}},∀r∈R,whereinGwr(·)refers toGwr(t,c,ϕ). Thus, whenK=1, the 1th rank holistic acceptability represents the share of (t,c,ϕ) values granting a path alternative the lowest generalized costGr(t,c,ϕ),∀r.LetProbr̃(t,c∣ϕ)be the probability of pathr̃being chosen in equilibrium by travelers holding the VOT preferenceϕ, andGr̃(t,c∣ϕ)be the corresponding generalized cost. Then, we have,(22)Probr̃(t,c∣ϕ)⩾0,ifGr̃(t,c,ϕ)=minr{Gr(t,c,ϕ)}=0,ifGr̃(t,c,ϕ)>minr{Gr(t,c,ϕ)}∀r̃∈R,in equilibrium. Function 22 means that, in the equilibrium state, a route will earn a nonnegative choice probability if it offers the minimal generalized costminr{Gr}to travelers holdingϕ, otherwise the chance of the route being chosen by travelers holdingϕis null. Based on the above analysis, it is easy to obtain the following corollary,Corollary 1WhenK=1, model(16)reduces to the user-optimal equilibrium traffic assignment model with continuous VOT distributions.WhenK=1, the model is an extension of that proposed by Dial (1996, 1997, 1999a, 1999b), in which the flow-dependencies of link travel time and cost are considered, travelers’ VOT preferences are allowed to be arbitrarily distributed; aside, the proposed model allows for the stochasticity of the criteria measurements at the same time.Notice that, withK>1, the underlying assumption is that the drivers are of bounded rationality, they can recognize the better ones but not always the best, or put it another way, the satisfiable solutions will meet their requirements. Thus the RDUE is different from the concept of UE as commonly defined. In fact, the RDUE is a more general type of the Stochastic User Equilibrium (SUE) model. In the RDUE withK>1, drivers make their path choices depend on the perceived path ranks instead of detail path general costs (In this sense, the RDUE is different from the classical SUE which bases on cardinal evaluations). It is reasonable since travelers may tell the good from the bad but maynot the detail differences in general costs. For a driver, he ranks all the alternatives, then chooses from the first K best ranked paths with chances equal to the corresponding meta-weights. Then, by searching inversely the drivers’ preference space, the favorable preference sub-spaces are determined to support each alternative with any of the first K ranks. Through combining the size of each subspace for a candidate path and the corresponding meta-weight, we obtain the choice proportions on each path.Remark 1It can be seen from the above analysis that the choice of a proper K matters a lot to the accuracy of the estimation. A small K means travelers are of high rationality with only the top K ranked paths being considered, those lower ranked paths are omitted though they are potentially satisfiable; while a large K may bring in too much even some negative information, f.i., the least ranked paths with high rank acceptability indices should be eliminated other than being considered, which may result in overestimation. A proper K well describes the drivers’ requirement level or their rationality. Note that the value of K is often a positive integer, however it does not deny the possible existence of a non-integral K, which can be treated as the linear combination of the two nearest integers, namely the combination of⌊K-1⌋and⌊K+1⌋(⌊·⌋means the floor integer of·).Another important issue is the specification of meta-weight. Meta-weight is adopted to combine the acceptability indices in different ranks for each alternative, it represents drivers’ weight distribution among different ranks (i.e., acceptance of different ranks) and defines the ratio of drivers assigning a path with certain rank will take it in that rank. To put it another way, the meta-weightαk(k=1,⋯,K)indicate the percent of drivers who constitutes the rank acceptability indexerk, will take path r. So, the meta-weight represents the travelers’ familiarity of the network and defines the travelers’ rationality from another perspective. A higher rank with larger meta-weight value supposes that the travelers can clearly distinguish the alternatives in different ranks, thus show higher rationality level. Meta-weight values may differ as the preference changes. For example, the drivers with higher VOT beliefs, who are apt to pay more effort to find the best acceptable choices, are more likely to have higher top-rank-employment meta-weights. Meta-weight works together with the holistic degree K to reflect the travelers’ requirement level and rationality level. The specification of meta-weights thus means a lot.It is seen that the number of ranks between an OD pair increases synchronously as the number of paths, which leads to the quadratic increase (i.e.,∣Rw∣2) in the number of the rank acceptability indicesewrk(∀w∈W,r∈Rw,k=1,2,…,K). Making the computation even more burdensome, the computation ofewrkconducts a three-dimensional integration (i.e., Eq. (10)) over the travel time, travel cost and the favorable preference space as well. All of the three dimensional spaces can be continuous distributed. While in the real world, the number of paths between an OD pair is often quite large, which makes the direct computation of all the rank acceptability indices impossible. To simultaneously simulate the probabilistic process of both the criteria (time & cost) as well as the preferences, and to make the computation ofewrkpossible, the Monte-Carlo simulation approach is applied. Monte-Carlo simulation is a well-established approach to compute high-dimensional integrals approximatively by randomly generating the distribution values. The required number of iterations is proportional to the inverse of the desired accuracy. By repeating the Monte-Carlo simulation 10,000 times, one can achieve an error limits within 0.01 with 95% confidence according to Milton and Arnold (1995), see also Tervonen and Lahdelma (2007). The solution procedure is presented as follows:Step 0. Initialization. Initialize the network statex=xwrpwrp, the maximum iteration number M, the maximum number of the Monte-Carlo simulation N, the holistic rank K, the VOT range for each preference pattern (i.e., theVOT<1pattern and theVOT⩾1pattern), the setting ofkwfor each OD pair, the meta-weight function as well as the adaptation step sizeΔ, set iter=1;Step 1. Calculate the link volume with Eq. (3), the link/path travel time & cost (Eqs. (4)–(9)), as well as their joint distributions;Step 2. Compute the functions (10)–(15) allowing for the preference distribution, repeat the Monte-Carlo simulations to get theErpk,∀r,p,k;Step 3. Determine the adjustment directiondir=ErpK-xwrprp;Step 4. Path share update.x(iter+1)=(1-Δ)*x(iter)+Δ*dir;Step 5. Check if the maximum iteration number M is reached or the convergence criteria∑r=1∣R∣xrn+1-xrn2/∑rxrn⩽ξ(orsum(∣dir∣)⩽ξ),whereξis the accuracy criterionsatisfied. If yes, algorithm stops; otherwise returns to Step 1.In this section, a testing scenario is put forward to illustrate the implementation of the model. The testing network consists of three links connecting one OD pair (Fig. 4). In the network, the three routes are a Rural Highway, an Urban Highway and an Urban Freeway. We apply the BPR link travel time function in this paper,(23)ta=ta01+θvaCam+ta′,∀a∈A,wherein Eq. (23),ta0=Lasarefers to the link free flow travel time as the function of link lengthLaand the link free flow speedsa,vaandCaare the link flow and link capacity,ta′is the random section of link travel timeta,θand m are the parameters. Supposeta′satisfiesta′∼N0,σta′2, whereσta′2=cvt·ta01+θvaCam2,cvtis the coefficient of variance of the link travel time. Then we haveta∼Nta01+θvaCam,σta′2accordingly.The link travel cost function is defined by Huang and Li (2007),(24)ca=Laκa+λvaCan+ca′,∀a∈A,in whichκais the vehicle operating cost per unit physical distance,λand n together reflect the congestion effect on travel cost. Similarly, letca′be the random section of travel cost that satisfiesca′∼N0,σca′2, whereσca′2=cvc·Laκa+λvaCan2andcvcbeing the coefficient of variance of the link travel cost, we haveca∼NLaκa+λvaCan,σca′2.As described above, both the route travel time and the route travel cost follow the normal distributions. The basic settings of the network are presented in Table 2. For the other parameters, we setθ=0.15,m=4,λ=0.1,n=2,cvt=0.2,cvc=0.1andκa=0.56¥/kilometer(¥ is the Chinese yuan,6.1¥≈1US dollar) for all roads.As for the probability density function (PDF) of drivers’ VOT holdings, we assume that it follows the uniform distribution for simplicity, however within two complementary subspaces. There are other assumptions of the PDF of VOT holdings, Dial (1979) considered a gamma distribution while Leurent (1993) suggested a log-normal PDF pattern (Huang & Li, 2007; Yang & Meng, 2001). According to the relative magnitude of travel time to travel cost, the VOT preference pattern is divided into two sub-ones, i.e., P1 with VOT<1 and P2 with VOT⩾1.4In this paper, we take the comparison base of the two criteria as of the same quantity, i.e. the comparison of the magnitude of travel time and travel cost is conducted between 1hour and 1¥. Other travel time base or travel cost base can be applied, f.i., 1hour versus 10¥, however, without affecting the fundamental observations and findings in this paper.4Since the two subspaces represent two opposite while complementary preference styles, it is reasonable and necessary to consider them separately. For drivers who value travel time heavier than the monetary cost, the corresponding VOT valuesϕvary from 1 to infinity, for simplicity, we assumeϕ∼U[1,200]; similarly, for drivers with the opposite preference, we takeϕ∼U[0.005,1]on the other side. Suppose the drivers holding VOT⩾1 take up 60 percent of the whole population, while the rest insist the belief VOT<1, the actual proportions can be obtained through survey in practice.For the testing scenario, we set the OD traffic demand fixed at 2200, and start with random initial network states. All the three cases (i.e.,K=1,2,3) are investigated to examine the impact. The general outputs for each route and each preference pattern are given out in Table 3. For each K value and each preference pattern, the first three columns are the basic rank preference distributions (i.e., traveler distribution on each path in each rank), the fourth columnxpK,p=1,2represents the traveler distributions across the paths allowing for the first K ranked paths for each preference pattern, the last column is the overall choice distributions considering all the two preference patterns.As shown in Table 3, in the case where only the best ranked choices are considered (i.e.,K=1), about 45.7 percent tend to select the urban highway (Path 2), among which0.7910*40%=31.64%come from P1 with VOT<1, the others from P2 with VOT⩾1; while for the freeway (Path 3), the source of the total 44.59 percent travelers is quite the opposite, among which P2 travelers take up 97 percent; in contrast, the rural highway (Path 1) attracts less than 10 percent of the total flow. The distribution data shows that different preference patterns exhibit quite different choice behaviors, this also validates the necessity to set up the pattern specifications.For the case where both the first and the second ranked choices are considered, traveler shifting among the paths are observed. Comparing to the caseK=1, about 6 percent of the overall population switch to the rural highway (Path 1) from the freeway (Path 3), leading to about 15 percent decrease in flow on the latter path while about 60 percent increase on the former one. The choice shifting is mainly caused by those assigning Path 1 the second rank with the preference of monetary travel cost to travel time (i.e., the P1 travelers with the preference VOT<1). Thus, with the incorporation of the choice distributions in the second rank, the choice predictions may be more reasonable.However, when all the three ranks of choice distributions are considered (sayK=3), redundant or even negative information is made use of which may largely in the ‘wrong’ manner. In the above case, about 76.1% P1 travelers rank the freeway the lowest, they value money heavier and would like to avoid the lengthy freeway and the corresponding cost increase; while, for those who value more on the travel time, the rural highway is the last to considered. Though the inclusion of the third rank distribution information may cause further change in overall choice prediction, the incorporation of the junk information (the lowest ranked choice distributions) is likely to impair the accuracy of the forecast.So, the real world application of the model need to trade off between the inclusion of positive and negative information, i.e., to decide the proper K to apply. As mentioned in Section 3, the value of K does not confine to integers, decimal value may be acceptable and seems more likely, which can be the combination of the two nearest integers.Fig. 5offers a graphical illustration of the evolution courses of path shares on each route for different Ks, obvious deviations are observed in path shares, especially on the rural highway and the freeway. The detail analysis is the same with that of Table 3, thus omitted.The impact of value of K on the network performances is examined. The network performance indicators include the system (/path/pattern) based Total Travel Time (TTT), Total Travel Cost (TTC) and Total Dis-Utility (TDU). The computation of the indicators are defined as follows:The total travel times (TTTs):(25)trpk∼=∫twr,cwrtψ(t,c)∫ϕ∈Srpk(t,c)fΦ(ϕ)dϕd(t,c),∀r∈R,p=1,2;k=1,2,…,K,(26)TTTrpK=∑k=1Ktrpk∼xwrpαk(dwπp),∀r∈R,p=1,2,(27)TTTK=∑r∑pTTTrpK,wheretrpk∼is the average travel time for pattern group p on path r in the kth rank,TTTrpKis the pattern-based path total travel time, and TTTK is the network TTT.Similarly, we have the total travel costs (TTCs):(28)crpk∼=∫twr,cwrcψ(t,c)∫ϕ∈SrpkfΦ(ϕ)dϕd(t,c),∀r∈R,p=1,2;k=1,2,…,K,(29)TTCrpK=∑k=1Kcrpk∼xwrpαk(dwπp),∀r∈R,p=1,2,(30)TTCK=∑r∑pTTCrpKand the total dis-utilities (TDUs):(31)grpk∼=∫(twr,cwr)G(t,c)ψ(t,c)∫ϕ∈SrpkfΦ(ϕ)dϕd(t,c),∀r∈R,p=1,2;k=1,2,…,K,(32)TDUrpK=∑k=1Kgrpk∼xwrpαk(dwπp),∀r∈R,p=1,2,(33)TDUK=∑r∑pTDUrpK.In Eq. (31),grpk∼is the path-based average generalized disutility in the kth rank for each pattern.Fig. 6depicts the evolving traces of the path-based TTT, TTC and TDU in each holistic rank K. As it shows, the urban highway and the freeway demonstrate similar trend inTTTrKandTTCrK, a larger K causes smallerTTTrKandTTCrK. On the other hand, the rural highway exhibits the opposite trend, as the overall share is smaller, the rural highway has smaller TTT and TTC than the urban highway does, but is higher in TTT than the freeway. Though the three routes diverse in TTT and TTC evolving trends, they display similar change momentum in the combined one (i.e., theTDUrK,∀r∈R), that is, TDU increases on each route as K adds.The network overall evolution trends in TTT, TTC and TDU are presented in Fig. 7. All the three indicators ascend when K increases, meaning that as travelers get more and more irrational, their choices will result in higher systematic travel time & cost, which is congruent with our expectations.After the introduction of the basic outputs for all the three cases(K=1,2,3), we further investigate the impact of several parameters consisting of the OD demanddw, the range of VOT distributions and the network variation levelcvt(cvc). During the analysis of each parameter, we control for other settings as the same with those in the testing scenario, and K equals 2 in all the following sensitivity analyses.The first factor under analysis is the OD demanddw(w=1here, thus is omitted in the following). Generally, as the total travel demand increases, the overall travel time as well as travel cost are assumed to increase, but how will travelers response, especially for whom with different preference patterns, toward the climbing-ups of the average time & cost(tˆr,cˆr,∀r∈R). This kindles our interest to conduct the current examination.Fig. 8shows the relative and absolute path flow share changes comparing to the initial equilibrium state withd=1400. Generally, the rural highway and the freeway will attract more flow share as d increases, the highest increase can reach to a 15% percent hike (see on the rural highway), while the urban highway shoulders less flow share at the same time.This seems to follow our intuition, as the total travel demand increases, more and more traffic flow crowds on the urban highway, causing the congestion-associated increases intˆr&cˆr(∀r∈R), which repel some travelers to those detours that are less affected. How will travelers’ tradeoff between time and cost affect their choices in each pattern, we turn to the pattern based flow share distributions. Take the share of P1 travelers for example (see Fig. 9), they take up more than 70 percent of the total flow on the Rural Highway. On the other side, the ratio of P2 travelers on the Freeway is even larger, to a level of almost 90 percent. Pattern preference diversions on the Urban Highway is much less significant.These diversions in pattern preference may root intˆr&cˆr(∀r∈R). Fig. 10presents thetˆr&cˆr(∀r∈R)traces on each path. The Rural Highway has the longest travel time and moderate travel cost, the Urban Highway exhibits moderate travel time while the lowest travel cost, the Freeway enjoys the lowest travel time but the highest travel cost. As a result, P1 travelers who value travel cost more prefer more to the rural and urban highways, while P2 travelers tend to amount on the freeway and the urban highway. The distinctive choice preference pattern has many managerial implications, for example, monetary ‘incentives’ can be taken to appeal more P1 travelers to take the freeway to lower the burden of the highways (Bliemer, Dicke-Ogenia, & Ettema, 2009; Ettema, Knockaert, & Verhoef, 2008; Van-Amelsfoort, Bliemer, & Zanterma, 2008).As for the impact of travel demand change on the network performances, we investigate the network overall TTT, TTC and TDU. As shown in Fig. 11, P1 exceeds P2 in overall TTT (Fig. 11(a)), and be exceeded in overall TTC (Fig. 11(b)). With individual preferences (VOT holdings) considered, P2 travelers suffer more overall general disutilities even when the differences in pattern population size are eliminated (see Fig. 11(c)).The variation of the VOT range is supposed to change the average VOT values traveler hold within each preference pattern, and thus will affect the diversity of their perception of route alternatives as well as their choice decisions. The overall landscape of the flow distribution is believed to vary accordingly. This section tries to investigate the possible effect pattern.Figs. 12(a) and (b) depict the pattern-based flow share distribution in respect to the VOT range changes. Generally, the change of VOT scope causes limited impact on the flow distribution for P1 travelers, but leads to significant variations on that for P2 travelers. As the VOT range expands, more P2 travelers switch into the freeway from the two highways (Fig. 12(c)). These partly consistent with our conjectures, since the expansion of the VOT range brings down the average VOT value on the P1 side while raise that on the P2 side, thus making the P1 travelers less sensitive to the travel time increase while the very opposite for the P2 travelers. The synthetic effect is that P1 travelers insist on the low cost highways while more P2 travelers shift to the short-time freeway, and lead to the decrease in the network TTT while increases in the network TTC and TDU as well (Fig. 13).To sum up, as the range of VOT expands, the average VOT value for P1 travelers is pulled down while that for P2 travelers is raised up, resulting in more P2 travelers swarm into the freeway to lower their experienced travel times at the cost of more money, the overall TTT decreases while the TTC and TDU increase at the same time. So it is essential to make a precise specification of the VOT range for both preference patterns to ensure the prediction accuracy.The CVs (cvtandcvc) define the variation level of travel time and travel cost, travelers are expected to experience more extreme cases with larger CVs, i.e., smaller travel time and costs or the verse. How will travelers do in response to these changes, and how will the overall travel time & cost as well as the choice distribution evolve, invoke our curiosity.Controlling for other settings, we change the CVs (cvt,cvc) and keepcvttwice the size ofcvc. Figs. 14(a) and (b) displaytˆr&cˆr(∀r∈R)with respect to CVs, it seemstˆr&cˆrare less affected by the variance level in the low-demand case, the underlying inference may be that the overall choice distribution is less affected neither. However, as demonstrated in Fig. 14(c), the path flow shares vary and differ in evolving patterns. In detail, the Rural Highway ascends in flow share all the way and speeds up after the third CV combination (0.15,0.075), the Freeway descends at the same time, while the Urban Highway reveals some interesting attributes, it attracts some flow as the CVs going up but loses some as the CVs above a certain level.To figure out the beneath rule, we examined the pattern based flow share distributions (Fig. 15). Travelers in the two preference patterns show different choice behaviors toward the CV changes. For P1 travelers, the increase of CV makes the Rural Highway and the Freeway more attractive, while imposes the opposite effect on the Urban Highway; for P2 travelers who care more about travel time, the enlarged travel time variation makes the Freeway less preferred while the highways more preferable.Fig. 16shows the TDU trend lines, all the three trend lines exhibit declining momentum as the CV values add. This is interesting, since it infers that the increase of network travel time & cost variability somehow decreases the systematic disutility. This may possibly be explained by that, enlarged travel time & cost variabilities make the route alternatives less distinctive from each other, somehow drive the choice behavior to random choice (Avineri & Prashker, 2005), and eliminate the extreme cases where travelers overweight one criterion at the cost of the other. The increases in variation of travel time & cost create more opportunities for travelers to experience lower personal disutility, thus bring down the network TDU. However, thorough investigation work is required to reach a more cogent answer.Note, recall thattˆr&cˆr(∀r∈R)show less response to the CV changes but not the overall flow distribution, an intuitive reflection is that the absolute flow changes are not significant enough to produce obvious fluctuations intˆr&cˆr(∀r∈R). To this end, we tested another case with a larger total demand(d=5000). As Fig. 17shows, path average travel times change significantly, the other observations generally consistent with the above statements, thus omitted.In the last section, we discussed the implementation of the proposed model in a simple three link network connecting one OD pair, for the cases where a network consists of more than one OD pair, each OD pair consists of many possible alternatives, the application of the new model is much more complicated and calls for some tricks accordingly.In this section, we consider the Nguyen and Dupuis (1984). In the rank-dependent decision context, the lower ranked route choices bring negative rather than positive information to the travelers, thus need to be excluded. Apart, in the Nguyen and Dupuis network, each of the four OD pairs contains more than five route alternatives, making the choice of K for each OD pair even complicated. In this example, we suppose that travelers with different destinations hold different requirements of punctuality, thus hold different VOT preferences, they are likely to pay different efforts to search for the satisfiable choices, and show different levels of rationality accordingly. Recall that the setting of meta-weight together with the choice of K defines travelers’ rationality level, we consider different Ks for different OD pairs according to their destinations and origins, while meta-weights apply the same producing mechanism. We may find real world correspondences, f.i., suppose the two origins are white color dwelling zone and blue color dwelling zone, and the two destinations are business zone and leisure zone. Travelers’ understandings of value of time and requirements of accuracy/stability of travel time differ from one OD pair to another, as a result of traveler soci-attributes and trip goals. In the network (Fig. 18), La={24kilometer for link 18, 16kilometer for links 4 and 16, and 8kilometer for all other links},Sa=40kilometer/hour,Ca=3000veh/hourandκa=0.56¥/kilometer. The VOT ranges for each OD pair are set the same as those in Example I, i.e.,ϕ∈[0.005,1,200], the CVs of the travel time and travel cost are fixed ascvt=0.1andcvc=0.05respectively. The other settings of the Nguyen and Dupuis network and some parameters are listed in Table 4.In this example, the link travel time and travel cost functions keep the same as introduced in Example I, i.e., functions (23) and (24). Letτa=E[ta]andσta2=(cvt·τa)2be the expectation and the variation of the travel time on link a respectively. Similarly, leteca=E[ca]andσca2=(cvc·ca)2be the travel cost expectation and variation respectively. Then path r follows an expectationτwr=E[twr]in travel time, andecwr=Ecwrin travel cost, the corresponding variances in path travel time and travel cost areσtwr2andσcwr2,(34)σtwr2=∑a∈Aδwraσta2=∑a∈Aδwra(cvt*τa)2,σcwr2=∑a∈Aδwraσca2=∑a∈Aδwra(cvc*ca)2.Assume that the travel time and travel cost on each link are independent from each other, regardless of the possible covariance that may exist due to the network topology. Then the path travel time and travel cost follow normal distributions according to the central limit theorem, regardless of the link travel time (cost) distributions (Lo & Tung, 2003; Shao et al., 2006), i.e.,(35)twr(v)∼Nτwr,(cvt·τwr)2,cwr(v)∼Necwr,(cvc·ecwr)2,∀r∈Rw,w∈W.Apart from the proposed model, we also build two other models as contrast set, namely the Single-Criterion based User Equilibrium (SCUE) model and the Bi-Criterion based Stochastic User Equilibrium (BCSUE) model. For the SCUE model, we consider only the travel time factor; while in the BCSUE model, both the time & cost factors are considered and combined with the implementation of VOTs, and travelers’ choice distributions follow the Logit probability basing on the generalized travel disutilities. The basic settings are the same with the RDUE model.Table 5displays the equilibrium states of the three models, including the path flow distributionxr, path average travel timeτwrand path average travel costecwr(∀w∈W,r∈Rw).As Table 5 shows, either the SCUE model or the BCSUE model gives a ‘better’ estimation or assignment result referring to the OD-concerned path average travel time (cost). However, the results overestimate travelers’ rationality and neglect the fact that travelers with different VOT beliefs may pay varying efforts to improve the quality of their choice decisions, i.e., they will present varying rationalities as a result. For people who hold higher VOT beliefs, they are willing to pay more effort to obtain extra information (such as subscribed service) so as to avoid the bad cases, and lower their travel disutilities at the same time. Thus it is plausible to believe that they are more likely to make better if not the best choices. While, for those with lower VOT beliefs, a satisfiable choice will meet their requirements and thus will be acceptable, there are then more chances for the lower-ranked choice alternatives being chosen. By applying differentPRwp(∀w∈W,p∈P)setting and differentKw(w∈W)for different VOT holders, the proposed model is capable to capture travelers’ varying requirements as well as efforts to make the acceptable decisions.Figs. 19(a)–(c) depict the network overall performance indicator (TTT, TTC and TDU) evolution processes for each model. It is observed that the SCUE model will lead to the lowest TTT when considering only the travel time factor, the RDUE model gives the highest estimation of TTT but a lower TTC than the SUE model. What surprises us is that the RDUE model produces a bit lower TDU than SUE model does, though with generally higher path average travel times as well as travel costs. We also refer to the pattern based TDU distributions. As shown in Fig. 19(d), RDUE has lower TDU for both patterns than the SUE model. This may possibly due to the negligence of the lowest ranked paths, which helps to bring down the general disutilities for the RDUE model. The result also validates the efficacy of the model in describing travelers’ pursuing of lower generalized cost though with bounded rationality. More work is required to determine the settings ofKw(w∈W)as well asPRwp(∀w∈W,p∈P)for each OD pair in practice. The second example exhibits certain flexibility and capability of the RDUE model to represent various traveler rationalities as well as choice behaviors in the bi-criterion context.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed a rank-dependent bi-criterion user equilibrium (RDUE) model, in which travelers rank all the possible choice alternatives basing on two criteria, namely the travel time and the monetary travel cost and of which the combination is carried out by the introduction of the VOT parameter, then the travelers choose from the first K best ranked choice alternatives with the respective probability (or metaweight)αk(k=1,2,…K). The computation of the preference probabilityewrk(∀w∈W,r∈Rw,k=1,2,…,K)is conducted by searching inversely the preference space over the distributions of path travel time and cost, to determine the size of preferences supporting route alternative r in the rank k. In this sense, arbitrary criteria distribution types, partial or even missing information of the preferences can be handled simultaneously. In the RDUE model, travelers holding different VOT beliefs are classified into two preference patterns in general, travelers’ VOT beliefs may differ from one OD pair to another, so do the settings of Ks as well as the definition ofαk(k=1,2,…,K), which make the RDUE model enjoy great flexibility and capability to represent traveler bounded rationality in varies levels.However, before the implementation of the RDUE model, some aspects apart from the two Remarks in Section 3 need to specify,Remark 3The underlying assumptions of the proposed model include, (1) travelers are of bounded rationality. They perceive the attribute values of each alternative based on subjective experience and preference. However as the preference information is hard to specify clearly, they may tell the good choices from the ‘bad’ ones, but not the accurate utility values of each choice alternative. In these cases, the traditional cardinal utility based decision schemes may not work, the rank based choice principle is applied, travelers condition their route choices on the relative rank of each alternatives, the higher ranked choices are assumed to enjoy larger attractiveness. (2) Generally, the daily route choices are not ‘important’ issues so that some minor mistakes or inaccurate evaluations may not result in significant ‘losses’, thus the non-best choice alternatives may be acceptable and have large chances of being chosen. This makes the rank based choice decision principle plausible for daily ‘trial’ issues.From the above two assumptions, we may also infer the limitations of the RDUE model: (1) For ‘non-trial’ (or important) decisions that require precise evaluations of all the possible alternatives, or conditions where all the alternatives can be accurately evaluated and compared, the cardinal evaluations can provide better estimations than the ordinal ranking-based decision schemes do, and the former will be more appropriate. (2) For cases where all the alternatives bear similar cardinal valuations which makes them hard to distinguish exactly, travelers’ choices may appear random choices somehow, the generic logit-based SUE models may seem to be more proper to handle this kind of issues, though we can alter the RDUE model by defining a proper meta weight function as well as larger Ks.Remark 4Another issue to concern is the definition of preference patterns, since it defines the traveler classifications and the associated preference beliefs. A well defined classification will correctly represent the diversity of travelers’ concerns. For the bi-criterion concerned RDUE model, the specification of the preference patterns can be carried out as those introduced in the above examples, namely divide the travelers into two preference patterns according to their priority of travel time to travel cost. However, this specification method is somehow too rough to characterize travelers’ VOT holdings precisely, value based segmentation of VOT distribution ranges can be applied though other problems may arouse like the number of patterns, the boundary of each pattern and alike. What is more, the PDF pattern of the preference distributions should be concerned and clearly specified, as different VOT PDF assumptions will result in different general VOT holdings across the travelers and thus their understandings and choices.The paper puts forward a theoretical model about the rank-dependent user equilibrium, empirical work is urgent to validate and calibrate the model. Further research opportunities may include, the analysis of Co-impact patterns of different parameters, f.i., VOT range and pattern 1 traveler ratioπ1, travel demand and the network variance levels(cvt&cvc)and the extension of the RDUE model to other applications. Also, the scalability of the proposed techniques to practical-sized networks, especially when allowing the generation and enumeration of efficient path set (Raith, 2009; Chen et al., 2010; Zhang, Mahmassani, & Lu, 2013), and the ranking of path alternatives across the travelers’ preference distributions, is of great importance to extend the scalability of the techniques. As for the potential applications, just like Dial (1996) once put it: ‘The application areas include mode-choice, congestion pricing, parking policy, accessibility measures, and land-use forecasting’, however, not limited to.