@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Quadrant Shrinking Method: A simple and efficient algorithm for solving tri-objective integer programs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new exact algorithm for solving tri-objective integer programs.We prove that the algorithm solves a linearly bounded number of integer programs.The algorithm is competitive with the state-of-the-art algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tri-objective integer programs,Quadrant shrinking method,Criterion space search method,Nondominated frontier,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a new variant of the full 2-split algorithm, the Quadrant Shrinking Method (QSM), for finding all nondominated points of a tri-objective integer program. The algorithm is easy to implement and solves at most3|YN|+1single-objective integer programs when computing the nondominated frontier, whereYNis the set of all nondominated points. A computational study demonstrates the efficacy of QSM.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many real world-problems involve multiple objectives. Due to conflict between objectives, finding a feasible solution that simultaneously optimizes all objectives is usually impossible. Consequently, in practice, decision makers want to explore and understand the trade off between objectives before choosing a suitable solution. Thus, generating many or all efficient solutions, i.e., solutions in which it is impossible to improve the value of one objective without a deterioration in the value of at least one other objective, is a primary goal in multiobjective optimization.Exact algorithms for multiobjective integer programs (MOIPs) can be divided into decision space search algorithms, i.e., methods that search in the space of feasible solutions, and criterion space search algorithms, i.e., methods that search in the space of objective function values. Criterion space search algorithms tend to be easier to implement and as effective, if not more effective, than decision space search algorithms. Therefore, we have chosen to focus on criterion space search algorithms. Readers interested in recent advances in the area of decision space search algorithms are referred to Belotti, Soylu, and Wiecek (2013), Stidsen, Andersen, and Dammann (2014), Vincent, Seipp, Ruzika, Przybylski, and Gandibleux (2013).The simplest form of a multiobjective integer program (MOIP) has only two objectives and is known as a biobjective integer program (BOIP). The earliest algorithms only generated a subset of all nondominated points, the so-called extreme supported nondominated points, e.g., Aneja and Nair (1979). But not long after, algorithms were developed that generated the complete nondominated frontier. Presently, a number of effective and efficient criterion space search algorithms for solving BOIPs exist. Interested readers are referred to Ehrgott (2006) and Boland, Charkhgard, and Savelsbergh (2015a) for an overview of recent advances in solving BOIPs using criterion search space algorithms.The situation is quite different when the number of objectives is greater than two; far fewer methods have been proposed for generating the complete nondominated frontier in these settings. The main reasons that generating the complete nondominated frontier of a MOIP with more than two objectives is significantly more challenging are that:1.The number of nondominated points tends to grow with the number of objective functions (see Brunsch, Goyal, Rademacher, and Röglin, 2014 for recent theoretical results that support this empirical observation). Since at least one search operation has to be performed to find a nondominated point, and searching for a nondominated point in (current) criterion space search methods involves solving a single-objective IP, the number of single-objective IPs that needs to be solved in order to solve even relatively small MOIP instances becomes quite large as the number of objectives grows.Developing effective strategies for decomposing the criterion search space is much more difficult, because such strategies need to balance the number and shape of the elements in the decomposition with the difficulty of the single-objective IP used to explore an element of the decomposition. Consequently, many single-objective IP solves or very expensive single-objective IP solves are unavoidable.In this paper, we restrict ourselves to generating the complete nondominated frontier of a tri-objective integer program (TOIP).Searching for an as-yet unknown nondominated point is a core operation in any method for generating the nondominated frontier of a TOIP and accounts for most of the solution time. It is done by solving one or more single-objective IPs depending on the scalarization technique used. As a consequence, the total number of IPs solved when generating the nondominated frontier of a TOIP depends on the scalarization technique used. The relevant scalarization techniques are (1) weighted-sum, in which one IP is solved which optimizes a weighted sum of the three objectives, and (2) lexicographic, in which a sequence of IPs is solved; in the case of a three-stage lexicographic scalarization, three IPs, each optimizing one of the objectives, or, in the case of a two-stage lexicographic scalarization, one IP optimizing one of the objectives and one IP optimizing a weighted sum of the other two objectives (or, possibly, of the three objectives). It is important to mention and emphasize that solving a single IP which optimizes a weighted-sum objective in the search for an as-yet unknown nondominated point (as in weighted-sum) is not necessarily more efficient than solving a sequence of IPs in the search for an as-yet unknown nondominated point (as in lexicographic). In fact, computational experiments reveals that it usually is not. The reason is that the IPs solved during a lexicographic search tend to be easier, and, other than the first, can be initialized with a high-quality known feasible solution. In the following, when reporting the number of IPs solved by a specific method, we assume, unless specifically stated otherwise, that the weighted-sum scalarization technique is used.Sylva and Crema (2004) proposed a simple, straightforward algorithm for solving a TOIP, which solves exactly|YN|+1single-objective IPs, whereYNis the set of nondominated points (the algorithm solves one infeasible IP to determine that no other nondominated point exists). However, the single-objective IPs that need to be solved get harder and harder (as more and more disjunctive constraints are added), and, as a consequence, in practice, after only a few iterations, solving the single-objective IPs becomes computationally prohibitive.More sophisticated algorithms solve more, but easier IPs (compared to the algorithm of Sylva and Crema) and end up being more efficient in practice, including the enhanced recursive method (Özlen, Burton, & MacRae, 2013), the full 3-split method (Dächert & Klamroth, 2014; Dhaenens, Lemesre, & Talbi, 2010), the full 2-split method (Dächert & Klamroth, 2014; Kirlik & Sayın, 2014; Lokman & Köksalan, 2013), and the L-shape search method (Boland, Charkhgard, & Savelsbergh, 2015b). (We note that besides Dächert and Klamroth (2014) and Boland et al. (2015b), all cited methods are designed for any number of criteria, not only for TOIPs.)A full 3-split method works with 3-dimensional boxes in criterion space that may still contain as-yet unknown nondominated points. It searches a box to find a new nondominated point. When a new nondominated point is found, the box is decomposed into smaller boxes and the process is repeated in each of the new, smaller boxes. It can be shown that an implementation of the method exists that solves at most3|YN|+1IPs (Dächert & Klamroth, 2014).The full 2-split method is similar to the full 3-split method. The difference is that the full 2-split method works in a projected (2-dimensional) space rather than the original (3-dimensional) criterion space. The main advantage of doing so, in practice, is that the number of infeasible IPs that has to be solved is much smaller, and single-objective IP solvers tend to struggle more when solving infeasible IPs. Because the full 2-split method operates in a 2-dimensional space, it works with rectangles instead of boxes. Depending on the variant of the method, the number of IPs solved is bounded byO(|YN|2)(Kirlik & Sayın, 2014) or2|YN|+1IPs (Dächert & Klamroth, 2014) (or3|YN|+1IPs if a two-stage scalarization technique is used).The L-shape search method (LSM) combines ideas of the algorithm of Sylva and Crema and the full 2-split method. It also operates in a projected space. However, instead of working only with rectangles, it also works with L-shapes. As far as we know, LSM is the most efficient algorithm to compute the (complete) nondominated frontier of a TOIP. Another important feature of LSM is that it can quickly produce a high-quality approximate nondominated frontier. It can be shown that the number of IPs solved by LSM is bounded byO(|YN|2).In this paper, we present a simple, easy to implement, but very efficient variant of the full 2-split method, the Quadrant Shrinking Method (QSM). In addition, we show that QSM solves at most3|YN|+1single-objective IPs (QSM uses two-stage scalarization). This bound equals the bound obtained (independently) by Dächert and Klamroth (2014) for their variant of the full 2-split method. QSM solves at most|YN|+1infeasible IPs, which may be one reason for its excellent performance. Furthermore,|YN|of the single-objective IPs solved by QSM convert a weakly nondominated point into a nondominated point, which typically can be done extremely fast, because a near-optimal feasible solution can be provided to jump-start the search.To demonstrate the efficacy of QSM, a computational study has been conducted using publicly available instances of the tri-objective one-dimensional knapsack problem (1DKP), the tri-objective three-dimensional knapsack problem (3DKP), the tri-objective assignment problem (AP), and the tri-objective traveling salesman problem(TSP), in which we compare the performance of QSM to the performance of LSM, KSA (the variant of the full 2-split method developed by Kirlik & Sayın, 2014), ERM (the enhanced recursive method developed by Özlen et al., 2013), and DKA (a reimplementation of the full 2-split method developed by Dächert & Klamroth, 2014). The results show that QSM is significantly faster than any of the existing methods.The superior performance of QSM, compared to existing methods, can be attributed to its novel decomposition technique (which immediately detects redundancy of many of the constructed rectangles), its simple data structures, its seeding of single-objective IPs with high-quality feasible solutions, and its use of enhancements aimed at eliminating redundant calculations.The rest of paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce critical concepts of tri-objective integer programming, detail the logic of QSM, and prove the bound on the number of single-objective IPs solved by QSM. In Section 3, we discuss the results of our computational study. Finally, in Section 4, we give some concluding remarks.A TOIP can be stated as follows(1)minx∈Xz(x)=(z1(x),z2(x),z3(x))whereX⊆Znis defined by a set of affine constraints that represents the feasible set in the decision space and z1(x), z2(x) and z3(x) are linear functions. The imageYofXunder the vector-valued functionz:Zn→R3represents the feasible set in the criterion space, i.e.,Y:=z(X):={y∈R3:y=z(x)for somex∈X}. For convenience, we also define the following sets:R≥3:={y∈R3:y≥0},the nonnegative orthant ofR3,andR>3:={y∈R3:y>0},the positive orthant ofR3.Definition 1A feasible solutionx′∈Xis called weakly efficient, if there is no otherx∈Xsuch that zk(x) < zk(x′) fork=1,2,3. If x′ is weakly efficient, then z(x′) is called a weakly nondominated point.A feasible solutionx′∈Xis called efficient or Pareto optimal, if there is no otherx∈Xsuch that zk(x) ≤ zk(x′) fork=1,2,3and z(x) ≠ z(x′). If x′ is efficient, then z(x′) is called a nondominated point. The set of all efficient solutions inXis denoted byXE. The set of all nondominated points inYis denoted byYNand referred to as the nondominated frontier or efficient frontier.Lety∈Y. If there is noy′∈Ysuch that y′ ≠ y andy∈y′+R≥3,theny∈YN.QSM works in a projected 2-dimensional criterion space. Without loss of generality, we assume that the 2-dimensional space on which points in the criterion space are projected is defined by the first two objectives, i.e., by z1(x) and z2(x). We thus define the projection of a pointy∈R3to be (y1, y2), which we denote byy¯. QSM makes use of quadrants in the projected space (i.e. inR2). Given u in the projected space, we define the quadrantQ(u)={y∈R2:y≤u}. We refer to u as the upper bound of the quadrant Q(u).Searching for an as-yet-unknown nondominated point is a core operation in any method for generating the nondominated frontier of a TOIP. A nondominated pointzn=z(xn)with the property that its projectionzn¯satisfieszn¯⩽ufor a given point u in the projected space, if one exists, is found by solving two IPs. (That is, we use a two-stage scalarization technique as in Kirlik & Sayın, 2014). First, an intermediate pointxi∈Xwith minimal third objective value over pointsx∈Xwithx¯⩽uis found viaxi∈arg min{z3(x):x∈Xandzk(x)≤uk,k∈{1,2}}.If this IP is feasible, it is followed by a second IP that converts the weakly efficient solution xiinto an efficient solution xnxn∈arg min{∑k=13zk(x):x∈Xandzk(x)≤zk(xi),k∈{1,2,3}}.We denote this search by 2D-NDP-Search(u). If the first IP is infeasible, we say 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns Null and xidoes not exist. Otherwise, i.e., if xiexists, the second IP must be feasible (as per Proposition 5below) and 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns xn. Observe that this search returns a nondominated point znwithz3nminimal over thosez∈YNwithz¯⩽u.Proposition 4If xiexists, then z(xi) is a weakly nondominated point.Suppose xiexists, but that z(xi) is not a weakly nondominated point, i.e., there exists a pointz^∈Ywithz^k<zk(xi)for k ∈ {1, 2, 3}. So for somex∈X,z(x)=z^and zk(x) < zk(xi) for k ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Thus zk(x) < zk(xi) ≤ ukfork=1,2and z3(x) < z3(xi), contradicting the optimality of xi.□If xi exists, then xn exists and z(xn) is a nondominated point, i.e.,z(xn)∈YN.If xiexists, then it is feasible for the second IP, and hence xnexists. In this case, supposez(xn)∉YN. Then there must exist somey∈YNwhich dominates z(xn), i.e. there must existx∈Xwithz(x)=y≤z(xn)and with y ≠ z(xn). Thuszk(x)=yk≤zk(xn)≤zk(xi)fork=1,2,3and∑k=13zk(x)=∑k=13yk<∑k=13zk(xn),contradicting the optimality of xn.□If 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns xn, then z(xn) dominates anyy∈Ywithz(xn)¯≤y¯≤uand y ≠ z(xn).Suppose 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns xnand lety∈Ywithz(xn)¯≤y¯≤uand y ≠ z(xn). By definition, xnhas the minimum possible value for z3(x) among allx∈Xwith z(x) having projectionz(x)¯≤u,and hence among allx∈Xwithz(xn)¯≤z(x)¯≤u. Thus y3 ≥ z3(xn). Moreover,z(xn)¯≤y¯≤uimpliesy¯≥z(xn)¯. Thus y ≥ z(xn). Since y ≠ z(xn), z(xn) must dominate y.□If 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns xn, thenYN∩{y∈Y:z(xn)¯≤y¯≤u}={z(xn)}.The result follows immediately from Propositions 5 and 6.□Letu1,u2∈R2be two points in projected criterion space such that u1 ≥ u2. Let xn be an optimal solution obtained by 2D-NDP-Search(u1). Ifz(xn)¯≤u2then it must be optimal for 2D-NDP-Search(u2).Obvious.□Letu1,u2∈R2be two points in criterion space such that u1 ≥ u2. If 2D-NDP-Search(u1) returns infeasibility then 2D-NDP-Search(u2) must also return infeasibility.Obvious.□As far as we know, Özlen et al. (2013) were the first to observe and apply Propositions 8 and 9 in their enhanced recursive method.Before introducing QSM, we make a simple, but important observation that is exploited extensively in QSM. Consider searching for a nondominated point with the property that its projection is in Q(u1) using 2D-NDP-Search(u1). If 2D-NDP-Search(u1) returns Null, then such a nondominated point does not exist. On the other hand, if 2D-NDP-Search(u1) returns an efficient solution with associated nondominated point z, then any other nondominated point with the property that its projection is in Q(u1) can now be found by searching for nondominated points with the property that their projection is in either quadrant Q(u2) or Q(u3) withu2=(u11,z2−ϵ)andu3=(z1−ϵ,u21),where ϵ > 0 is a small positive constant (see Fig. 1for an illustration; for presentational convenience, ϵ is not depicted). This follows from Proposition 6, which implies that no other nondominated pointy∈YNexists with z1 ≤ y1 ≤ u1 and z2 ≤ y2 ≤ u2. In the remainder, for presentational convenience, we will often use “a nondominated point in Q(u)”, when it would be better and more precise to say “a nondominated point with the property that its projection is in Q(u)”.The basic idea of QSM is to explore a quadrant that contains all as-yet-unknown nondominated points by searching for those nondominated points, using 2D-NDP-Search(u) with upper bounds u on the top and the right boundary of the quadrant. When it is established that as-yet-unknown nondominated points can no longer be found using 2D-NDP-Search(u) with upper bounds u on the top and the right boundary of the quadrant, the quadrant is shrunk and the process repeats until it is shown that the quadrant does not contain any nondominated points.Next, we describe QSM in more detail and discuss how it can be implemented efficiently.QSM maintains a double-ended linked list D of points in the projected criterion space with the property that if u ∈ D, then Q(u) may still contain as-yet-unknown nondominated points and⋃u∈DQ(u)contains all as-yet-unknown nondominated points. The double-ended linked list D is initialized withu:=(+∞,+∞). QSM also maintains an ordered list L of known nondominated points (and their corresponding solutions), which is updated each time a new nondominated point is found. The nondominated points in L are maintained in nondecreasing order of their third objective value. If two different nondominated points have the same third objective value, the one that QSM finds first appears first in L. The algorithm terminates when D is empty.Let{uf,…,ub}be the set of upper bounds in D at some point during the execution of QSM, where ubis the element at the back of the list and ufis the element at the front of the list. QSM ensures thatu1f>⋯>u1bandu2f<⋯<u2bat any time during the execution of the algorithm. As a result, ufand ubimply the active quadrant Q(u) with(u1,u2)=(u1f,u2b)(i.e., the quadrant currently being explored).To explore the right boundary of the active quadrant, we pop the element at the front of D. Let u be the extracted element. Next, we search for a nondominated point using 2D-NDP-Search(u). If 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns Null, the search along the right boundary terminates. If the operation 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns an efficient solution xn, it is added to L. Letz=z(xn). Proposition 6 implies that no other nondominated pointy∈YNexists with z1 ≤ y1 ≤ u1 and z2 ≤ y2 ≤ u2. Therefore, two new points(z1−ϵ,u2)and(u1,z2−ϵ)are created to be potentially added, in that order, to the front of D. We add(z1−ϵ,u2)only whenu1f<z1−ϵor when D is empty. This is because by constructionu2f≥u2. Observe that ifu1f≥z1−ϵ,then(z1−ϵ,u2)≤ufandQ((z1−ϵ,u2))⊆Q(uf). This means that all nondominated points in quadrantQ((z1−ϵ,u2))are also in quadrant Q(uf). Therefore, there is no need to add(z1−ϵ,u2)to D because when we explore uf, we will generate upper bounds that can generate all nondominated points of quadrant Q(u) (in fact, we are implicitly applying Propositions 8 and 9). We always add(u1,z2−ϵ). These steps are repeated until the search along the right boundary of the active quadrant terminates (i.e., 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns Null for an upper bound u on the right boundary of the quadrant).An illustration of searching along right boundary of an active quadrant can be found in Fig. 2. In this particular example, searching along the right boundary terminates after four iterations. Initially,D={u1}. 2D-NDP-Search(u1) returns a new nondominated point and generates two new upper bounds u2 and u3 (Fig. 2a). 2D-NDP-Search(u2) returns a new nondominated point and generates two new upper bounds u4 and u5 (Fig. 2b). 2D-NDP-Search(u4) returns a new nondominated point and generates only one new upper bound u6; due to the existence of u5, the other potential upper bound can be ignored (Fig. 2c). 2D-NDP-Search(u6) returns Null, which implies that the search along the right boundary of the active quadrant terminates and the search along the top boundary commences (Fig. 2d).Exploring the top boundary of the active quadrant proceeds similarly, but now elements are popped from the back of the list rather than the front of the list. If 2D-NDP-Search(u), for an extracted element u, returns Null, the search along the top boundary terminates. If 2D-NDP-Search(u) returns an efficient solution xn, the point is added to L and two new points(u1,z2−ϵ)and(z1−ϵ,u2)are created (z=z(xn)) to be potentially added to the back of D, where(u1,z2−ϵ)is only added whenu2b<z2−ϵor when D is empty.After the exploration of the right and top boundary of the active quadrant have been completed, the element at the front and at the back of D define the next shrunken active quadrant, and the search for as-yet-unknown nondominated points continues.When exploring a shrunken quadrant, it is possible to avoid redundant calls 2D-NDP-Search(u) by exploiting Propositions 8 and 9. To do so, we maintain and employ lists of upper bounds that record whether a call 2D-NDP-Search(u) with upper bound u returned an efficient solution or not. The upper bounds u for which 2D-NDP-Search(u) returned an efficient solution are kept with that efficient solution, where we note that an efficient solution may be found more than once and thus more than one upper bound may be kept with an efficient solution (which themselves are kept in list L). The upper bounds u for which 2D-NDP-Search(u) returned Null are kept in a separate list. Before solving the first IP in any call to 2D-NDP-Search, we go through the list of known efficient solutions and find the first one that is feasible for the IP, if it exists. If a feasible solution is found, we check whether one of the upper bounds that lead to its discovery allows Proposition 8 to be applied. If not, then we continue searching for feasible solutions in L with the same third objective function value, since the existence of a feasible point with this value is assurance that the optimal value of the first IP cannot be higher than this and the efficient solutions in L are kept in nondecreasing order of the third objective value. If no feasible solution has been found, we check the list of upper bounds that returned Null to see whether Proposition 9 can be applied.A precise description of the basic form of QSM is shown in Algorithm 1. To make the implementation of the algorithm as efficient as possible, we incorporate a few additional enhancements. Single-objective IP solvers can solve an IP faster when a high-quality feasible solution is provided at the start. Obviously, if the first IP in 2D-NDP-Search(u) is feasible, the optimal solution can be provided as a feasible solution to the second IP. More importantly, before solving the first IP in 2D-NDP-Search(u), we search L for a feasible solution. Because L is sorted in nondecreasing order of the third objective value, the first feasible solution encountered is also the feasible solution with the highest quality. Furthermore, if we provide a feasible solution x from L to the first IP in 2D-NDP-Search(u) and we find that x is optimal, i.e., the optimal objective value of the first IP is equal to z3(x), then, because x is efficient, x will be optimal for the second IP as well and there is no need to solve the second IP. That implies that the second IP is solved exactly|YN|times. In the remainder of this paper, QSM refers to the method with these enhancements, including the application of Propositions 8 and 9. Whenever Proposition 8 shows that z is optimal for 2D-NDP-Search(u), we assume that QSM does not invoke 2D-NDP-Search(u), and say that QSM finds z when exploring u. We also make the following assumption.Assumption 10If we provide a feasible solution, x, to 2D-NDP-Search(u), and x is optimal for the first IP, then 2D-NDP-Search(u) will return x.An illustrative example. We illustrated the workings of QSM on an instance with five nondominated points{z1,z2,…,z5}withz31≤z32≤⋯≤z35in Figs. 3and 4. The instance is solved in three iterations, where an iteration corresponds to exploring the right and top boundaries of a quadrant. In the figures, bold lines show the active quadrant, red crosses indicate upper bounds, small solid circle indicates NDPs, a large solid circle indicates the NDP identified in the specific iteration, and a dashed pattern indicates that no NDP is found in the specific iteration and the search along the right or top boundary terminates. Furthermore, in the caption,#IP,#P8,and#P9indicate the number of IPs solved and the number of times that Propositions 8 and 9 have been applied, respectively, up to that iteration. If one of the propositions has been applied in a step, the upper bound used is given in parentheses. Recall that when QSM explores an upper bound and finds an NDP that has already been found in an earlier iteration or it cannot find an NDP, it never solves more than one IP (because it can apply Propositions 8 and 9 or does not need to solve the second IP in 2D-NDP-Search). At the start of Iteration 1, the double-ended list D only containsu1=(+∞,+∞). QSM pops u1 from D and calls 2D-NDP-Search(u1) to find as-yet-unknown nondominated point z1, and two new upper bounds are added to D (Fig. 3b). This process repeats until QSM terminates. Observe that when QSM pops u3 from D to find as-yet-unknown nondominated point z4, due to existence of u5 in D, only u8 is added to D (Fig. 3f). Observe too that from Iteration 2 - Step 4 onwards, all the upper bounds created, i.e., {u12, u13, u14, u15} are redundant, in the sense that Proposition 8 can be applied to {u12, u13} and Proposition 9 can be applied to {u14, u15}.Next, we present a number of properties of QSM that will not only provide a better understanding of the workings of QSM, but will also provide the foundations for the proof that QSM solves at most3|YN|+1integer programs.Lemma 11LetU:={uf,…,ub}be the set of upper bounds in D at the beginning of iteration t ≥ 1 during the execution of QSM. We haveu1f>⋯>u1bandu2f<⋯<u2b.We prove the assertion by induction. Obviously, at the first iteration the claim is true sinceU={(+∞,+∞)}. Next, we suppose that the claim is true at (an arbitrary) iteration t, and we show that it must be true at iterationt+1too.In iteration t, QSM first searches along the right boundary ofQ((u1f,u2b)). In each step of the search along the right boundary, QSM pops the front element, i.e, uf, from D, and QSM replaces it with at most two other elements. Therefore, if we show that after adding new elements, the claim still holds then the assertion holds at any time during the search along the right boundary. Letu^fbe the front element of D after popping uffrom D, i.e.,U∖{uf}={u^f,…,ub}. It is clear that if we do not add any element to D after popping uf, i.e., when 2D-NDP-Searchreturns Null, then we haveu^1f>⋯>u1bandu^2f<⋯<u2b. Next, we analyze the case that 2D-NDP-Searchreturns an efficient point xn, i.e., QSM finds an efficient solution when searching Q(uf). In this case, two elements may be added to D, i.e.,(z1(xn)−ϵ,u2f)and(u1f,z2(xn)−ϵ):•QSM adds(z1(xn)−ϵ,u2f)to the front of D only whenu^1f<z1(xn)−ϵ. This implies that if(z1(xn)−ϵ,u2f)is added to the front of D, then we havez1(xn)−ϵ>u^1f>⋯>u1b. Moreover, becauseu2f<u^2f,we also haveu2f<u^2f<⋯<u2b,and the claim still holds after adding(z1(xn)−ϵ,u2f)to the front of D.QSM adds(u1f,z2(xn)−ϵ)to the front of D regardless of whether(z1(xn)−ϵ,u2f)has been added to D or not. Because xnis an efficient solution found searching Q(uf), we havez1(xn)≤u1fandz2(xn)≤u2f. First, assume that(z1(xn)−ϵ,u2f)has been added to D. Then we haveuf1>z1(xn)−ϵ>u^1f>⋯>u1bandz2(xn)−ϵ<u2f<u^2f<⋯<u2b. Next, if(z1(xn)−ϵ,u2f)has not been added to D, then we haveu1f>u^1f>⋯>u1bandz2(xn)−ϵ<u^2f<⋯<u2b. In both cases, the claim still holds after adding(u1f,z2(xn)−ϵ)to the front of D.After completing the search along the right boundary, QSM search along the top boundary ofQ((u1f,u2b)). The arguments that the claim holds during the search of the top boundary are similar.□Let u1and u2be two upper bounds explored by QSM during its execution. If u1 ≥ u2and u1 ≠ u2then u1and u2do not exist in D at the same time. Also, u1must have been explored before u2.Due to Lemma 11, at any point in time during the execution of QSM, the relationsu1f>⋯>u1bandu2f<⋯<u2bhold for the elements of D. Therefore, u1 and u2 cannot exist in D at the same time.Now suppose that u2 is explored before u1. Because u1 and u2 cannot exist in D at the same time, we have that u1 does not exist in D at the time u2 is explored. Therefore, u1 must be added to D after the exploration of u2. However, that implies that there must exist a u ∈ D with u1 ≤ u and u1 ≠ u at the time u2 is explored, because any upper bound u′ added to D hasu′≤u^,for some upper boundu^popped from D. However, again by Lemma 11, we haveu1f>⋯>u1bandu2f<⋯<u2bfor the elements in D at any time during the execution of QSM, which implies that u and u2 cannot exist in D at the same time. A contradiction.□Let u1and u2be two upper bounds explored by QSM with u2 ≤ u1. If Proposition8or9can be applied to avoid calling 2D-NDP-Search(u2), then eitheru12=u11oru22=u21.Suppose not, i.e., suppose there exist upper bounds u1 and u2 explored by QSM with u2 < u1, such that Proposition 8 or 9 can be applied to avoid calling 2D-NDP-Search(u2).First, suppose that calling 2D-NDP-Search(u2) can be avoided by applying Proposition 8. Letz∈YNbe the nondominated point that is found by 2D-NDP-Search(u1) and 2D-NDP-Search(u2). The logic of QSM implies that any element in D, except(+∞,+∞),is created because of the discovery of a nondominated point. In other words, for any element u ∈ D, there exists a nondominated pointz′∈YNwith z′ ≥ u and eitherz1′=u1+ϵorz2′=u2+ϵ. Let z′′ be the nondominated point that caused the creation of u2. It is clear that z′′ is feasible for 2D-NDP-Search(u1), i.e.,z′′¯∈Q(u1). Because QSM exploits known feasible solutions, and 2D-NDP-Search(u1) results in z rather than z′′, it must be the case thatz3≤z3′′.(Note that ifz3=z3′′and z′′ existed in L at the time of exploring u1 then z must have existed in L too but it appeared first. This is because QSM provides the first feasible solution found in L to initialize the first IP in 2D-NDP-Search(u1). Therefore, if z′′ was first in L, by Assumption 10, 2D-NDP-Search(u1) must have returned z′′ rather than z.)By Lemma 12, u1 and u2 cannot have been in D at the same time . Therefore, u2 must have been created after exploring u1. Let u3 be the upper bound whose exploration resulted in the creation of u2 (i.e., 2D-NDP-Search(u3) returns z′′). It is clear thatz¯∈Q(u3)(because Q(u2) ⊂ Q(u3)). Consequently, sincez3≤z3′′and QSM exploits known feasible solutions, it is impossible that 2D-NDP-Search(u3) returns z′′. (Note that according to our defined rules for keeping the nondominated points in L ifz3′′=z3and z′′ is created at some points after exploring u1, then z must appear first in L since it is found first.) A contradiction.Next, suppose that calling 2D-NDP-Search(u2) can be avoided by applying Proposition 9. The logic of QSM and the fact that u2 < u1 implies that there must exist a nondominated point in Q(u1) (because u2 must have been created based on the discovery of a nondominated point). A contradiction.□An illustration of Proposition 13 can be found in Figs. 3j and 4a. We see thatu212=u210,and that Proposition 8 can be applied to u12 because QSM has already explored u10 and returned nondominated point z5, which is optimal for 2D-NDP-Search(u12) too. The reason thatu212=u210is that u12 is created after finding z4 during exploration of u5 (see Fig. 3m).Definition 14An element u ∈ D is useful if calling 2D-NDP-Search(u) cannot be avoided by applying Propositions 8 or 9.Note that for each useful element u ∈ D at least one IP has to be solved (and possibly two). Note too that the first timez∈YNis found by QSM, two IPs are solved.In the remainder, we will denote by nIP(z) the number of times that a nondominated pointz∈YNis found by QSM by calling 2D-NDP-Searchand by nP8(z) the number of times a nondominated pointz∈YNis found by applying Proposition 8.Lemma 15Letz∈YNbe a nondominated point that is found exactly once by QSM, i.e.,nIP(z)=1andnP8(z)=0. The number of useful elements in D increases by at most one after finding z.Clearly, z is found by calling 2D-NDP-Search(u) for some u popped from D at some point during the execution of QSM. (Note that by definition u is a useful element.) After finding z, at most two useful elements are added to D. However, since u is popped from D, in total, the number of useful elements in D increases by at most one.□Letz∈YNbe a nondominated point that is foundn(z):=nIP(z)+nP8(z)≥2times by QSM. The number of elements in D does not increase after finding z for the n′th time when n′ < n(z), i.e., only one element (which may or may not be useful) may be added to D.Let u be the element popped from D when z is found for the n′th time. The logic of QSM implies that after finding z, elements(z1−ϵ,u2)and(u1,z2−ϵ)may be added to D. However, because z will be found again, there must exist an upper bound u′ in D withz¯≤u′and either(z1−ϵ,u2)or(u1,z2−ϵ)will not be added to D, depending on whether z is found while exploring the right boundary or top boundary of a quadrant. (Note that u′ must exist in D at the time of exploring u. Otherwise, for each element u′′ ∈ D we havez¯∉Q(u′′). This implies that z cannot be found again at any point in the future.) This is because QSM checks whetheru1′≤u1f<z1−ϵbefore adding(z1−ϵ,u2)during the exploration of right boundary, and it checks whetheru2′≤u2b<z2−ϵbefore adding(u1,z2−ϵ)during the exploration of top boundary.□An illustration of Lemma 16 can be found in Fig. 3f, j, and m, where the nondominated point z4 is found three times by QSM when exploring u3, u7, and u5. During the exploration of u3 and u7, QSM only adds elements u8 and u10 to D.Lemma 17Suppose that during the exploration of u1and u2QSM finds the same nondominated pointz∈YN. If, as a result of exploring u1and u2, the elements(z1−ϵ,u21)and(z1−ϵ,u22)are added to D(withu21≠u22), then the one with smaller second component is not useful. Similarly, if as a result of exploring u1and u2, the elements(u11,z2−ϵ)and(u12,z2−ϵ)are added to D (withu11≠u12), then the one with smaller first component is not useful.Without loss of generality, we assume that u1 is explored before u2. Furthermore, we only prove the case in whichu21≥u22and(z1−ϵ,u21)and(z1−ϵ,u22)are added to D. The arguments for the other case are similar. Note that in this case, sinceu22≠u21,we must haveu22<u21. Furthermore, we haveu12≥u11,since otherwise u2 ≤ u1 withu12<u11,which would imply that u2 is not a useful element, and, thus, by Proposition 13, must haveu22=u21; a contradiction. For convenience, we denote(z1−ϵ,u21)and(z1−ϵ,u22)by u3 and u4, respectively. By Lemma 12, and since u3 ≥ u4, QSM will explore u3 before u4. Next, we show that u4 is not useful.During the exploration of u3, three situations can arise:Case 1: QSM returns infeasible, which implies that there is no nondominated point in Q(u3). Because Q(u4)⊆Q(u3), Proposition 9 implies that u4 is not useful.Case 2: QSM finds a nondominated pointz′∈YNwithz′¯∈Q(u4)⊆Q(u3). Proposition 8 implies that u4 is not useful.Case 3: QSM finds a nondominated pointz′∈YNwithz′¯∈Q(u3)∖Q(u4). Thusz2′>u24andz1′≤u13.As a result of exploring u3, two elementsu5:=(z1−ϵ,z2′−ϵ)andu6:=(z1′−ϵ,u21)may be added to D.First, suppose that QSM adds u5 to D after exploring u3 (see Fig. 5).In this case, we have reached a situation that is similar to our starting point with u3 replaced by u5, i.e.,u15=u14andu25≥u24and, because u5 ≥ u4, and by Lemma 12, QSM will explore u5 before u4.Next, suppose that QSM does not add u5 to D when exploring u3. This implies that u3 is explored on the top boundary, and at the time u3 is processed,u2b≥z2′−ϵ. For convenience, we denote the ubby u7 (see Fig. 6).Recall that u1 is explored before u2,u21>u22,andu11≤u12. Moreover, from Lemma 16, we have that either(z1−ϵ,u21)or(u11,z2−ϵ)are generated from exploring u1, but not both. Moreover, we assumed (without loss of generality) thatu3=(z1−ϵ,u21)is created. Therefore,(u11,z2−ϵ)is not created, and we can conclude that u1 must have been explored on the top boundary of a quadrant.More precisely, since u3 is generated after exploring u1, it must be the case that QSM popped u1 from D before popping u3. Note that when QSM popped u1 from D, u7 was at the back of D. So by Lemma 12, it must be the case thatu17>u11andu27<u21,and thatz¯∈Q(u7). This in turn implies that if we search Q(u7), at some point, we should find z. (Note that when QSM explores u7, it may find a nondominated point other than z. However, in this case, QSM will create and add an elementu^7to D withu^27=u27andu11≤u^17<u17. This is because u7 was at the back of D after popping u1, and, consequently, when QSM pops u7 from D and createsu^7,there does not exist any upper boundu^in D withu^2≥u27(andu^1≥u^17) to prevent addingu^7to D. Furthermore,u11≤u^17,because otherwise exploring u7 would have returned z. Therefore, we have reached a situation that is similar to our starting point with u7 replaced withu^7.) Therefore, when QSM finds z when exploring Q(u7),u8:=(z1−ϵ,u27)must have been created and added to D. (Again, because when QSM creates u8, there does not exist any upper boundu^in D withu^2≥u27(andu^1≥u18) to prevent adding u8 to D.) In this case, we have reached a situation that is similar to our starting point with u3 replaced with u8, i.e.,u18=u14andu28≥u24,and, because u8 ≥ u4, QSM will explore u8 before u4.Since we assume that the set of nondominated points is finite, these situations cannot repeat indefinitely and at some point we must end up in Case 1 or Case 2.□An illustration of Lemma 17 can be found in Fig. 3f, j, and m, where QSM finds nondominated point z4 three times when exploring u3, u7, and u5, but where u13 (created after exploring u5) is not useful, because u8 has already been explored.The following notation is helpful in deriving subsequent results.Definition 18For a givenz∈YN,we write S(z) to denote the set of upper bounds explored by QSM that result in finding z.Thus|S(z)|=nIP(z)+nP8(z). Obviously u ∈ S(z) implies z ≤ u, i.e., z ∈ Q(u).Lemma 19If u, v ∈ S(z) with u1 < v1andnP8(z)=0then u2 > v2.Suppose u2 ≤ v2. Then u ≤ v, u ≠ v, and by Lemma 12, v is explored first, finding z. Thus, when u is explored, since z ≤ u, Proposition 8 would apply, contradictingnP8(z)=0. The result follows.□The following corollary is now straightforward.Corollary 20IfnP8(z)=0,then the elements of S(z) can be sorted so thatu1(1)<u1(2)<⋯<u1(|S(z)|)andu2(1)>u2(2)>⋯>u2(|S(z)|),whereS(z)={u(1),u(2),…,u(|S(z)|)}.Letz∈YNbe a nondominated point that is found at least twice by QSM, but never by applying Proposition8, i.e., nIP(z) ≥ 2 andnP8(z)=0. In the process, QSM solvesnIP(z)+1IPs and the number of useful elements in D decreases by at leastnIP(z)−2.We first show that QSM solvesnIP(z)+1IPs.Because the first time that QSM finds z, two IPs are solved, it suffices to show thatnIP(z)−1IPs are solved, in total, all other times that z is found. This is the case, because QSM exploits known feasible solutions, and only one IP is solved in 2D-NDP-Searchcalls after z is found the first time.We now show that the number of useful elements in D decreases by at leastnIP(z)−2.By assumptions,|S(z)|=nIP(z). Letu:=arg minu^∈S(z)u^1andu′:=arg minu^∈S(z)u^2. Note that, by Corollary 20, any v ∈ S(z)\{u, u′} has v2 < u2 andv1<u1′.It is evident that the two elements(z1−ϵ,u2)and(u1′,z2−ϵ)(which come from exploring u and u′) are potentially useful and they may have been added to D. More precisely, at least one of them must have been added to D. This is because, the first time that QSM found z, it must have been exploring either u or u′ on the top boundary or right boundary, respectively. (This follows from the fact that as long as u and u′ exist in D, no other elements v ∈ S(z)\{u, u′} can define the active quadrant.) Next we show that(z1−ϵ,u2)and(u1′,z2−ϵ)are the only useful elements that may be added to D after exploring all elements of S(z), which will prove the lemma.An illustration of this claim can be found in Fig. 7, where QSM finds the same nondominated pointz∈YNduring the exploration of useful elements u, u1, u2, and u′, but among the created elements{u3,u4,…,u10}only u3 and u10 are useful.Without loss of generality, we assume that the first time that QSM finds z is when it explores u′ while searching the right boundary. As a consequence, the element(u1′,z2−ϵ)is added to D the first time that z is found. Lemma 17 implies that any other elementu^withu^2=z2−ϵcreated when exploring an upper bound s ∈ S(z)\{u′} is not useful: take u1 in Lemma 17 to be u′ and take u2 to be s. For instance, in Fig. 7, {u7, u8, u9} cannot be useful due to existence of u10 in D.So far, we have shown that if after finding z, we add an elementuˇto D withuˇ1<u1′anduˇ2=z2−ϵ,it cannot be useful. In the remainder of the proof, we will show that if after finding z, we add an elementuˇto D withuˇ2<u2anduˇ1=z1−ϵ,it cannot be useful.As long as u, or anyuˇwithu≤uˇ,is in D after exploring an element s ∈ S(z)\{u}, then no elementu^withu^1=z1−ϵandu^2<u2can be created and added to D. (This follows from the logic of QSM, which stipulates that before addingu^to D, it must be checked thatz1(xn)−ϵ<u1forz2(xn)−ϵ>u2b,depending on whether QSM is searching along the right or top boundary.) For instance, in Fig. 7, as long as u is in D, {u4, u5, u6} cannot be added to D (sincez1(xn)−ϵ<u1≤u1f).As a consequence, after finding z, to be able to add a useful elementuˇto D withuˇ2<u2anduˇ1=z1−ϵ,the upper bound u, or any other elementuˇwithuˇ≥u,must have been popped from D. So suppose QSM finds z for the second time when exploring u. (Note that QSM found z for the first time when exploring u′.) Now two situations can occur:•After exploringu, the element(z1−ϵ,u2)is added toD. In this case, Lemma 17 implies that any other elementu^withu^1=z1−ϵcreated after exploring s ∈ S(z)\{u} is not useful: take u1 in Lemma 17 to be u and take u2 to be s.After exploringu, the element(z1−ϵ,u2)is not added toD. In this case, the logic of QSM implies that QSM must have been exploring u on the right boundary of a quadrant. However, this would imply that all other elements s ∈ S, s ≠ u have already been explored (since s1 > u1 for s ∈ S, s ≠ u), contradicting the fact that z is found for the second time when exploring u.Thus, the number of useful elements in D decreases by at least|S(z)|−2=nIP(z)−2.□An illustration of Lemma 21 can be found in Fig. 3f, j, and m, where QSM finds nondominated point z4 three times when exploring u3, u7, and u5 (all useful elements), but adds only two useful elements, i.e., u8 and u10, to D.Lemma 22Letz∈YNbe a nondominated point that is found at least twice by QSM, and at least once by applying Proposition8, i.e., nIP(z) ≥ 1 and nP8(z) ≥ 1. In the process, QSM solvesnIP(z)+1IPs and the number of useful elements in D decreases by at leastnIP(z)−2.The proof is similar to the proof of Lemma 21. The main differences are that•Because in this case the upper bound in S(z) with minimum first component and the upper bound in S(z) with minimum second component are not necessarily unique, we define u and u′ more carefully. More specifically, letS′(z):={s∈S(z):s1=minu^∈S(z)u^1}andS′′(z):={s∈S(z):s2=minu^∈S(z)u^2},then we setu:=arg maxu¯∈S′(z)u¯2andu′:=arg maxu¯∈S′′(z)u¯1.Each of the nP8(z) times that QSM finds z by applying Proposition 8, a non-useful element has been popped from D.□An illustration of Lemma 22 can be found in Figs. 3g, k, n, and 4b, where QSM finds the nondominated point z5 four times by exploring u8 and u10 (both useful elements), and u13 and u12 (both none-useful elements), but adds only two useful elements, i.e., u9 and u11, to D.Theorem 23The number of single-objective IPs solved by QSM is bounded from below by2|YN|and from above by3|YN|+1.We bound the number of IPs solved by QSM by examining the nondominated points. Note that when a nondominated pointz∈YNis found nIP(z) times by calling 2D-NDP-Search(u), the first such call requires the solution of two IPs and all subsequent calls require the solution of one IP. Furthermore, note that each time 2D-NDP-Search(u) is called, it is called with a useful element u. Thus, bounding the number of useful elements that is created implicitly bounds the number of IPs that has to be solved. We distinguish three types of nondominated points:•Nondominated pointszfound exactly once:nIP(z)=1andnP8(z)=0. To find point z, two IPs are solved, and the number of useful elements in D increases by at most one (Lemma 15);Nondominated pointszfound more than once:nIP(z) ≥ 2 andnP8(z)=0. The number of IPs solved to find point z (multiple times) isnIP(z)+1,and the number of useful elements in D decreases by at leastnIP(z)−2(Lemma 21).To find point z the first time, two IPs are solved. For the purpose of our analysis, it is convenient to think of solving the additionalnIP(z)−1IPs and decreasing the number of useful elements bynIP(z)−2as solving no IPs and increasing the number of useful elements in D by one. That is, rather than calling 2D-NDP-Search(u)nIP(z)−1times with a useful element that is popped from D (and solving one IP), we “return” thenIP(z)−1useful elements to D. Thus, the number of useful elements in D increases by at mostnIP(z)−1−(nIP(z)−2)=1. Consequently, for point z, two IPs are solved and the number of useful elements in D is increased by at most one.Nondominated points z found more than once: nIP(z) ≥ 1 and nP8(z) ≥ 1. Similar to the previous case with nIP(z) ≥ 2 andnP8(z)=0(Lemma 22).The analysis above shows that at least2|YN|IPs have to be solved to find all nondominated points and that after finding all nondominated points, the number of useful elements in D is at most|YN|+1(recall that D is initialized with(+∞,+∞)). Since the call to 2D-NDP-Search(u) for these useful elements (when popped from D) requires only one IP, at most|YN|+1additional IPs have to be solved. This implies that the total number of IPs that has to be solved is at most3|YN|+1.□The number of infeasible IPs which has to be solved to compute all nondominated points is at most|YN|+1.QSM is implemented in C++ and uses CPLEX 12.6 as the integer programming solver. The computational experiments are conducted on a computer with 2.30 gigahertz Intel Xeon E5-2650 processors and 264 gigabyte RAM, with the RedHat Enterprise Linux 7.1 operating system, and using a single thread.In our computational study, we use two publicly available sets of instances, Set I and Set II, used in previous studies of methods for solving TOIPs. The first set has been used by Özlen et al. (2013) and contains 19 instances (with different sizes), including 10 instances of the tri-objective assignment problem (AP), 6 instances of the tri-objective 3-dimensional knapsack problem (3DKP), and 3 instances of the tri-objective traveling salesman problem (TSP). The second set has been used by Kirlik and Sayın (2014) and has a class of AP instances and a class of 1DKP instances. Each class contains 10 subclasses, each with 10 instances. Thus, the total number of instances in Set II is 200. A subclass is characterized by the size of the instances it contains (in terms of the number of agents and tasks in AP and in terms of the number of items in 1DKP). The subclasses of AP have instances of size 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, and 50. The subclasses of 1DKP have instances of size 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, and 100. (Note that the size of an instance of 1DKP and 3DKP gives the number of binary variables in the formulation; the size of instance of AP to the power two gives the number of binary variables in the formulation, the size of an instance of TSP is in terms of the number of cities and thus the size to the power of two gives the number of binary variables in the formulation.) In our computational study, each instance was solved five times and averages over the results of the five runs are reported in the result tables and figures.Detailed performance statistics of QSM, the L-shape search method (LSM), the method of Kirlik and Sayın (KSA), the enhanced recursive method (ERM), and the method of Dächert and Klamroth (DKA) on the instances in Set I can be found in Tables 1and 2. The table shows instance information, namely the class, the size, and the number of points in the nondominated frontier, as well as result information, namely for each method the number of single-objective IPs solved and the time taken to generate the nondominated frontier, and the percent improvement in number of IPs solved and time taken to generate the nondominated frontier of QSM over LSM, KSA, ERM, and DKA. The number of IPs that were infeasible is shown in parentheses.We note that C/C++ implementations of ERM and KSA are publicly available, and we used these implementations in our computational experiments. We implemented the full 2-split method of Dächert and Klamroth (2014) (DKA) in C++ ourselves using their MATLAB code as a guide, which the authors kindly provided to us.For QSM, it can be seen that on average,2.5|YN|,2.9|YN|and3|YN|IPs are required to compute the entire frontier of classes AP, 3DKP, and TSP, respectively. Only for the smallest instance of each class, the algorithm solved exactly3|YN|+1IPs to compute all nondominated points. Moreover, observe that the number of infeasible IPs solved by QSM is only about0.13|YN|on average over all instances. This is one of the advantages of solving TOIPs in the projected space, and is an important contributor to the efficiency of QSM. We note that all algorithms spend more than 95 percent of their computing time on solving single-objective IPs, so solving as few single-objective IPs as possible, and solving these as efficiently as possible, is critical to the success of any algorithms.Comparing QSM’s results with those of LSM, KSA, ERM and DKA shows that QSM, on average, is about 17 percent faster than LSM, 28 percent faster than KSA, 39 percent faster than ERM, and 16 percent faster than DKA. The primary reason is that QSM solves fewer IPs in comparison to LSM, KSA, ERM, and DKA. We note that QSM is designed to efficiently generate the (complete) nondominated frontier, whereas LSM is designed specifically to quickly produce high-quality approximate frontiers, which comes at a small computational cost, and therefore it is not surprising that QSM outperforms LSM when generating nondominated frontiers.The importance of the enhancements embedded in QSM is illustrated in Fig. 8, which shows the ratio of time required to solve instances of set I when all enhancements are disabled (NO-E), when applying Propositions 8 and 9 is disabled (No-P), and when providing feasible solutions to IPs is disabled (No-F) to the time required to solve the instances when all enhancements are enabled. (The instances are presented along the horizontal axis in nondecreasing order of their number of NDPs.) It is clear that the enhancements are important and improve the performance of QSM significantly. It is also interesting to observe that the impact of providing feasible solutions compared to applying Propositions 8 and 9 becomes more important, relatively speaking, as the number of NDPs increases.Because the number of instances in Set II is much larger than the number of instances in Set I, we present performance profiles rather result tables. A performance profile is a graph with along the horizontal axis the ratio of the runtime of an instance to the minimum runtime for that instance among all methods and along the vertical axis the fraction of instances that achieved a ratio that is less than or equal to the ratio on the horizontal axis (Dolan & Moré, 2002). (This implies that values in the upper left-hand corner of the graph indicate the best performance.) The performance profile of the runtime of QSM, LSM, KSA, ERM, and DKA for the AP and 1DKP instances in Set II can be found in Figs. 9and 10, respectively. (Since there are also some very small instances in Set II that can be solved extremely fast, to draw the performance profiles, we add 0.1 second to the actual runtime of the algorithms.)We observe that QSM significantly outperforms LSM, KSA, ERM, and DKA on the AP instances. On the 1DKP instances, QSM clearly outperforms LSM, KSA, and ERM, but QSM and DKA have comparable performance on these instances. On the smaller instances DKA is better, but on the larger instances QSM is better. It is relevant to note that the largest 1DKP instances are far smaller than the largest AP instances. A closer examination of the results for the largest instances in both classes reveals that QSM solves fewer IPs (significantly fewer for AP instances) and solves these IPs faster (see Table 3, which presents averages over the instances in the class).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
