@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pesticide use, environmental spillovers and efficiency: A DEA risk-adjusted efficiency approach applied to Dutch arable farming

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fungicides and herbicides are risk-reducing inputs.Other pesticides and other inputs are risk-increasing inputs.Dutch farmers have considerable levels of pesticide environmental inefficiency.Fertilizer and all types of pesticides are overused.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Arable farming,Environmental spillovers,DEA,Pesticides,Production risk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Pesticides are widely used by crop producers in developed countries to combat risk associated with pests and diseases. However, their indiscriminate use can lead to various environmental spillovers that may alter the agricultural production environment thus contributing to production risk. This study utilises a data envelopment analysis (DEA) approach to measure performance of arable farms, incorporating pesticides’ environmental spillovers and output variance as undesirable outputs in the efficiency analysis and taking explicitly into account the effect of pesticides and other inputs on production risk. The application focuses on panel data from Dutch arable farms over the period 2003–2007. A moment approach is used to compute output variance, providing empirical representations of the risk-increasing or -decreasing nature of the used inputs. Finally, shadow values of risk-adjusted inputs are computed. We find that pesticides are overused in Dutch arable farming and there is a considerable evidence of the need for decreasing pesticides’ environmental spillovers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Risk constitutes an integral part of the agricultural production environment, playing an important role in farm-level production decision-making. Production risk arises from unpredictable weather events or sudden increase in destructiveness or population numbers of a pest species in a given area, affecting both the quantity and quality of production and the efficiency in using inputs. Several risk management tools are available to producers in developed countries to manage risk, notably market or financial insurance, future price contracts, pesticides, fertilizers, crop rotation, anti-hail protection equipment, and genetically modified crops.Pesticides feature prominently in farmers’ arsenal to reduce risk related to pests and diseases. As pest arrival is an uncertain event and pesticide productivity varies across time and space, there is an uncertainty at the time of application. This uncertainty can lead to overuse of pesticides relative to the private or social optimum. In an effort to avoid crop losses, risk averse farmers apply pesticides at an early stage when the pest population may not be at its peak. This action can lead to higher costs as additional pesticide doses are applied. On the other hand, waiting and monitoring the pest population and applying pesticide when full information is available may increase the crop loss during the monitoring stages. Norgaard (1976) states that the major motivation for pesticide application is the provision of “insurance” against damage. While uncertainty in the pest-pesticide system leads to a higher and more frequent use of pesticides, applying pesticides before the pest population is at its peak does not necessarily imply that farmers are risk averse. Doing so may be a profit-maximising strategy.Horowitz and Lichtenberg (1994) support the conventional view that when there is uncertainty due to pest damage, pesticides are likely to be risk-reducing inputs. However, the literature reports mixed findings on the role of risk aversion with some studies finding that pesticides are risk-reducing (Griffiths & Anderson, 1982; Saha, Shumway, & Talpaz, 1994; Smith & Goodwin, 1996) and others finding them to be risk-increasing inputs (Gotsch & Regev, 1996; Horowitz & Lichtenberg, 1993; Pannell, 1995; Saha, Shumway, & Havenner, 1997). When both pest populations are high and growth conditions are favourable, pesticides will be risk-increasing as they increase the variability of harvests. Horowitz and Lichtenberg (1993) have shown that pesticides may be risk-increasing inputs even if the public sector offers crop insurance that acts as a substitute for additional pesticide applications.Pesticide effectiveness can be influenced by fluctuations in weather conditions such as precipitation and temperature. Changes in weather conditions can impact both pest populations and the effectiveness of pesticides as each chemical product has different durability. The relationship between pesticide use and production risk may also be shaped by pesticides’ environmental spillovers. Farmland biodiversity can benefit farm productivity (Di Falco & Chavas, 2006; Omer, Pascual, & Russell, 2007; Tilman, Polasky, & Lehman, 2005), reduce environmental risk and yield variability, improve pest control by impeding the evolution of pest populations and consequently reducing pest damages (Heisey, Smale, Byerlee, & Souza, 1997; Priestley & Bayles, 1980). Therefore, indirect effects of pesticides on biodiversity may increase production risk through a decrease in beneficial natural predators (Pimentel et al., 1992). Sustainable agricultural systems focus on the optimal use of environmental resources and services, such as farmland biodiversity services, without damaging these assets (Tilman, Cassman, Matson, Naylor, & Polasky, 2002). In an era of increasing awareness of the indirect effects of pesticides on the environment, the future European Union (EU) policy schemes aim at the sustainable use of pesticides in agriculture (COM, 2006). Sustainable use of pesticides could decrease pesticides’ adverse impacts on the environment and mitigate production risk by protecting farmland biodiversity that is related to a wide variety of ecosystem services (e.g., control of pests by their natural enemies).Modelling firms’ production risk is well developed (Antle, 1987; Just & Pope, 1978). The Just and Pope (1978) approach to modelling production processes in the face of production risk is used widely in applied analysis, with the variation in production being influenced by the input levels; some inputs may be variation-increasing, while others are variation-decreasing, where risk is defined as the variance of output. An important question is whether variance is a good measure of risk. The widely adopted mean–variance approach uses variance as a measure of risk (Coyle, 1992, 1999) and various risk-adjusted efficiency studies in the banking sector incorporate risk in the production technology using a mean–variance criterion (e.g., Settlage, Preckel, & Settlage, 2009). Increasing attention has been given in recent years to risk in agricultural decisions and ways to mitigate it. Just and Pope (1978) define risk as output variability and we expand their concept by defining risk as a category of outputs such as output variance and pesticide effects on biodiversity. Output variance and pesticides’ environmental spillovers may be considered among the outputs of agricultural production to be minimised (i.e., undesirable outputs). Farmers are trying to prevent output variability through the use of pesticides, decreasing pesticide effects on farmland organisms can benefit farms through services such as soil nutrient enhancement and pollination (Pimentel et al., 1992). Several attempts using data envelopment analysis (DEA) methods have been made in the literature to measure efficiency in the presence of undesirable outputs (Ball, Lovell, Nehring, & Somwaru, 1994; Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, & Pasurka, 1989; Färe, Grosskopf, & Tyteca, 1996; Oude Lansink & Silva, 2003; Reinhard, Knox Lovell, & Thijssen, 2000; Sarkis & Cordeiro, 2012; Skevas, Oude Lansink, & Stefanou, 2012; Yang & Pollitt, 2009). An approach allowing for an asymmetric treatment of desirable and undesirable outputs was proposed by Färe et al. (1989), where undesirable outputs are treated as weakly disposable while desirable outputs are strongly disposable. Weak disposability (WD) means that reducing undesirable outputs is not a costless procedure; i.e., firms can discard an unwanted commodity at a positive private cost (Färe, Grosskopf, & Lovell, 1994). On this basis, a number of studies have proposed the use of directional distance functions as a tool for modelling production in the presence of undesirables (Ball, Fare, Grosskopf, & Nehring, 2001; Chung, Färe, & Grosskopf, 1997). A directional distance function allows for a simultaneous expansion of desirable outputs and contraction of inputs and/or undesirable outputs (Chung et al., 1997). The employment of directional distance functions to measure both technical and environmental efficiency of firms producing both desirable and undesirable outputs is widespread (Färe, Grosskopf, Noh, & Weber, 2005; Kjærsgaard, Vestergaard, & Kerstens, 2009; Murty, Kumar, & Dhavala, 2007; Skevas et al., 2012).Various attempts have been made to incorporate risk in DEA efficiency analysis with the vast majority being in the banking sector. Some studies focus on cost efficiency measures with incomplete price information (Camanho & Dyson, 2005; Schaffnit, Rosen, & Paradi, 1997) and risk-adjusted profit efficiency using a mean–variance criterion (Settlage et al., 2009).1Others include risk as an input in the production process of a bank (Berg, Førsund, & Jansen, 1992) or as an undesirable output (Chang, 1999; Park & Weber, 2006).1Others are treating risk as an external factor and employ the methods described in Fried, Lovell, Schmidt, and Yaisawarng (2002) to adjust efficiency measures for risk (Chang, 1999; Chen, Yu, Chang, & Hsu, 2007).Production risk can impact farmers’ production decisions and consequently their efficiency in using inputs and producing outputs. Therefore, production risk should be incorporated in modelling frameworks evaluating farmers’ performance. Chambers, Hailu, and Quiggin (2011) employ a DEA model incorporating climatic variables to account for the stochastic nature of agricultural production in the evaluation of farmers’ performance, finding that efficiency results change dramatically when acknowledging stochastic elements. Skevas et al. (2012) use a DEA production technology representation that considers both pesticides’ dynamic impacts and variability in climatic conditions in their effort to investigate the performance of Dutch arable farms, noting that ignoring the effects of variability in production conditions may lead to an overestimation of farmers’ inefficiency. The studies of Chambers et al. (2011) and Skevas et al. (2012) adjust efficiency modelling to reflect the effects of variability in production conditions on farmers’ production environment. However, they do not explicitly account for the risk-increasing or decreasing nature of agricultural inputs. Unlike previous studies that account for the production environment (Chambers et al., 2011; Skevas et al., 2012), this study models the effects on farmers’ production environment from an endogenous point of view by using output variance as a measure of risk and considering as inputs the producer’s decisions on risk. More specifically, this study investigates the performance of Dutch arable farms by using a risk-adjusted efficiency measure to: (a) identify technical inefficiency, risk-adjusted input inefficiency and undesirable output inefficiency, (b) incorporate output variance as undesirable outputs in the efficiency analysis, and (c) take explicitly into account the extent to which agricultural inputs increase or decrease production risk.This paper continues in Section 2 with the presentation of the methodology, while Section 3 describes the definition and sources of the data used. In Section 4, the empirical results from the analysis are presented and discussed, and Section 5 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study uses a DEA risk-adjusted inefficiency model of Dutch cash crop producers that explicitly accounts for the effect of production means on output variability in order to compute output, risk-adjusted inputs and undesirable outputs inefficiency. Farmers use risk-adjusted inputs to manage risk, with agricultural practices leading to the production of undesirable outputs, defined as the variance of output and pesticide effects on biodiversity. The first two moments of the output distribution are used to compute output variance, which is then incorporated into the efficiency modelling framework, thus accounting for the risk increasing or decreasing nature of the employed production inputs. The DEA literature in the context of agricultural production presents ways to model risk as an exogenous impact (e.g. by including weather variables in the modelling framework (Chambers et al., 2011; Skevas et al., 2012)). This study contributes to this literature by showing a way to model risk as an endogenous factor by using output variance as a measure of risk and considering the producers’ choices on risk-adjusted inputs. As in Skevas et al. (2012), this study uses a directional distance function with undesirable outputs to compute farmers’ technical inefficiency, the difference being that it incorporates risk by accounting for farmer’s decisions on risk mitigation and uses output variance as a measure of risk.Results show that fungicides and herbicides are risk-reducing inputs while other pesticides and other inputs are risk-increasing inputs. Dutch cash crop farmers have considerable levels of undesirable outputs’ inefficiency (i.e., 9%) implying that policy makers can focus on reducing pesticides’ environmental spillovers. The considerable pesticide environmental inefficiency of Dutch arable farmers implies that a reduction of pesticides’ environmental spillovers can be achieved with the current technology (e.g., more precise pesticide applications). Fertilizer and all types of pesticides (i.e., fungicides, herbicides, insecticides and other pesticides) are overused by Dutch cash crop farmers. The considerable level of undesirable outputs’ inefficiency in conjunction with pesticides’ overuse reveals a need to decrease pesticide use and their environmental spillovers. Pesticides are on average overused, and the dispersion in shadow prices implies that overuse applies to at least two-thirds of the farms, depending on the chemical material. The results suggest that particularly a reduction of the use of fungicides and herbicides yields high marginal benefits. Hence, policy makers could focus more on reducing the use of these types of pesticides. However, overuse of a particular category of pesticides should be examined relative to their benefits in production, as fungicides are important for combating Phytophtora infestans in potato production, an important cash crop for Dutch arable farmers. Pesticide policies, taking into account both the production and environmental efficiency of the different types of pesticides and their particular benefits to production, may benefit farmers by increasing their profitability and improving environmental quality through reductions in pesticides’ environmental spillovers.