@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A generalized equilibrium efficient frontier data envelopment analysis approach for evaluating DMUs with fixed-sum outputs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed approach can achieve an equilibrium efficient frontier only by one step.Our method relaxes the constraint that the same signs should be imposed on outputs' adjustments.It is not necessary to determine the evaluation order in advance by our method.Our method maintains all advantages of EEFDEA method.Our method with an assurance region is firstly applied to evaluate London Olympics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA),Generalized equilibrium efficient frontier,Fixed sum outputs,Assurance region,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The recently published equilibrium efficient frontier data envelopment analysis (EEFDEA) approach (Yang et al., 2014) represents a step forward in evaluating decision-making units (DMUs) with fixed-sum outputs when compared to prior approaches such as FSODEA (fixed-sum outputs DEA) approach (Yang et al., 2011) and ZSG-DEA (zero sum gains DEA) approach (Lins et al., 2003) and so on. Based on the EEFDEA approach, in this paper, we proposed a generalized equilibrium efficient frontier data envelopment analysis approach (GEEFDEA) which improves and strengthens the EEFDEA approach. Compared to EEFDEA approach, this approach makes several improvements in evaluation, namely that (1) it is not necessary to determine the evaluation order in advance, which overcomes the limitation that different evaluation orders will lead to different results; (2) the equilibrium efficient frontier can be achieved in only one step no matter how many DMUs they are, which greatly simplifies the procedure to reach the equilibrium efficient frontier especially when the number of DMUs is large; and (3) the constraint that signs of outputs’ adjustment of each DMU must be same (all non-positive or all non-negative) in prior approaches has been relaxed. In this sense, the result obtained by the proposed approach is more consistent with the demand of practical applications. Finally, the proposed approach combined with assurance regions (AR) is applied to the data set of 2012 London Olympic Games.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA), firstly introduced by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), is a non-parametric approach for evaluating the performance of peer decision-making units (DMUs) with multiple inputs and outputs. Classical DEA models such as CCR (Charnes et al., 1978) and BCC models (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984) assume that inputs or outputs can be expanded freely when projecting DMUs onto efficient frontier. However, this assumption is invalid when DMUs with fixed-sum outputs are evaluated, that is, Classical DEA models may not be suitable to evaluate this type of DMUs. In fact, a number of cases DMUs with fixed-sum outputs exist in the real world. For example, when evaluating the performance of nations in Olympic Games, the total number of gold (silver and bronze) medals is fixed. As a result, how to evaluate DMUs with fixed-sum outputs has attracted great attention recently. For example, Lins, Gomes, Soares de Mello, and Soares de Mello (2003) proposed zero sum gains (ZSG) DEA models to evaluate the performance of each entrant nation in Olympic Games. In their paper, two strategies were provided to project inefficient DMUs onto efficient frontier. One is called the equal reduction strategy. It means the increased outputs that the evaluated DMUs need to project onto efficient frontier are offset by the equal amount reduction of all other DMUs. This strategy may lead to negative outputs when a DMU's actual output is less than the equal amount of reduction. It is not realistic in many real cases such as negative number of medals won by participating nations in Olympics. The other is called the proportional reduction strategy. It means that increased outputs of the DMU evaluated are offset by the reduction of all other DMUs which is proportional to their actual outputs. Based on this strategy, Gomes and Lins (2008) extended the ZSG-DEA model to evaluate DMUs with one fixed-sum undesirable output, and Fonseca, Soares de Mello, Gomes, and Angulo Meza (2010) extended the ZSG-DEA model from the radial form to non-radial form with weight restrictions. However, both the two strategies cannot work unless the fixed-sum output is scalar.Similar to the ZSG-DEA model, several DEA models are proposed to make all DMUs on an efficient frontier via reallocating an input (Avellar, Milioni, & Rabello, 2007; Alves, Milioni, & Soma, 2014; Beasley, 2003; Colen, Freitas, Avellar, & Milioni, 2009; Du, Cook, Liang, & Zhu, 2014; Guedes, Milioni, Avellar, & Silva, 2012; Li, Yang, Chen, Dai, & Liang, 2013; Li, Yang, Liang, & Hua, 2009; Milioni & Alves, 2013; Milioni, Avellar, Rabello, & Freitas, 2011; Milioni, De Avellar, Gomes, & Soares de Mello, 2011; Silva & Milioni, 2012). For instance, based on the principle of efficiency maximization, Avellar et al. (2007), Silva and Milioni (2012) and Milioni, De Avellar et al. (2011) creatively proposed spherical frontier, adjusted spherical frontier and ellipsoidal frontier models to allocate an input, respectively. And these three parametric DEA models are developed by Alves et al. (2014), Milioni and Alves (2013), Guedes et al. (2012), Milioni, Avellar et al. (2011) and Colen et al. (2009). Nevertheless, all these parametric DEA models can only deal with the input or output in one-dimension case. In multi-dimension case, it should be pre-processed to be one dimension before applying those models.To extend fixed-sum outputs from one dimension to multi dimensions, Yang, Wu, Liang, and Liam (2011) developed an alternative model named fixed-sum outputs DEA (FSODEA) model to evaluate DMU with fixed-sum outputs. They found that the ZSG_DEA models based on the two strategies in Lins et al. (2003) are special cases of FSODEA models. The strategy adopted by Yang et al. (2011) is called the minimal reduction strategy. By this strategy, the output reduction of all other DMUs for offsetting the increment of DMU under evaluation is minimal, that is, all DMUs make the least adjustments to construct a new efficient frontier, based on which a DMU is evaluated. Such FSODEA models, however, may ignore the problem that all DMUs are evaluated based on different efficient frontiers. The problem is mainly caused by the “no memory” evaluation for each DMU. The “no memory” is so-called because the results obtained in the previous-round evaluation are ignored when entering the next round. That is to say, each DMU is projected onto an efficient frontier which may be quite different from others. Therefore, such an evaluation approach will lead to unfair evaluation for DMUs.In order to solve the problem in FSODEA method, Yang, Li, Chen, and Liang (2014) proposed a new method named as the equilibrium efficient frontier DEA (EEFDEA). In terms of this approach, all DMUs are projected onto efficient frontiers one at a time with a determined order. Finally, an equilibrium efficient frontier can be achieved when all DMUs are improved to be relatively efficient. Then all DMUs are evaluated based on the same equilibrium efficient frontier. Although this method makes more progress than FSODEA method, it has three main drawbacks. First, the evaluation results rely heavily on the predetermined “order” of evaluation for DMUs. It may report different results when a different “order” is used. Second, the equilibrium efficient frontier may be achieved in a large number of steps, especially when the number of DMUs is large. Thus, the calculation burden may be substantial. Third, according to EEFDEA model, the signs of all adjustments of fixed-sum outputs of each DMU must be the same (all non-positive or all non-negative). This rigid constraint cannot make sure the adjustment is minimal.In this paper, a new general equilibrium efficient frontier DEA (GEEFDEA) approach is first proposed to overcome the drawbacks of EEFDEA approach when evaluating DMUs with fixed-sum outputs. In terms of this approach, the equilibrium state can be achieved without any “orders” of DMUs but instead with only one step. And the constraint that signs of all outputs’ adjustments of a DMU are the same is relaxed. Meanwhile, the proposed approach maintains all advantages of EEFDEA approach.The rest of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 presents three types of DEA models for fixed-sum outputs. They are FSODEA, EEFDEA and the proposed GEEFDEA models, respectively. Section 3 reuses the small dataset from Yang et al. (2011) to illustrate our GEEFDEA approach and compare with FSODEA and EEFDEA approaches. Section 4 applies the proposed GEEFDEA models with assurance regions (AR) to the data set of 2012 London Olympic Games. Conclusions and directions for future research are provided in Section 5.Before introducing the general equilibrium efficient data envelopment analysis (GEEFDEA) model, we first review the prior models relative to evaluating DMUs with fixed-sum outputs such as FSODEA and EEFDEA models. Here, all models are based on the VRS (variable return to scale) assumption.Suppose there are n DMUs and that eachDMUj(j=1,2,…,n)consumes m inputsxij(i=1,…,m)to produce s variable-sum outputsyrj(r=1,…,s), and l fixed-sum outputsftj(t=1,…,l). Variable-sum outputs are those whose sum can be expandable while fixed-sum outputs are those which satisfy constraints∑j=1nftj=Ft,∀t∈(1,…,l), where Ftis a constant. In Yang et al. (2011), based on minimal reduction strategy, they proposed the FSODEA model as follows:(1)Min∑t=1lwtαtks.t.∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwt(ftk+αtk)+μ0∑i=1mvixik=1(a)∑r=1suryrj+∑t=1lwt(ftj−δtj)+μ0∑i=1mvixij≤1∀jandj≠k(b)∑j=1j≠knδtj=αtk0≤δtj≤ftj∀t,∀jandj≠k(c)ur,wt,vi≥0,∀r,t,i,μ0isfreewhere ur, wt, viare multipliers of the rth variable-sum output, the tth fixed-sum output and the ith input, respectively. In model (1), it is not difficult to observe that αtkis the minimal aggregated output expansion for DMUkto be relatively efficient and δtjis the output reduction of DMUj(j ≠ k) as an offset for αtk. The aim of this model is to project DMUkonto the efficient frontier without breaking the property of fixed-sum outputs. Subsequently they proposed an evaluation FSODEA model to evaluate the efficiency scores of DMUs as below:(2)ekFSODEA=Max∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwtftk+μ0∑i=1mvixiks.t.∑r=1suryrj+∑t=1lwt(ftj+Δtj*)+μ0∑i=1mvixij≤1∀jur,wt,vi≥0,∀r,t,i;μ0isfreeIn model (2), the only different notation from model (1) isΔtj*. It denotes the adjustment (both αtkand δtj) of the corresponding output which has been calculated by model (1). The first set of constraints in model (2) shows DMUkis evaluated based on the efficient frontier that is constructed by adjusted DMUkand other efficient DMUs in model (1). In fact, according to that approach, the different DMU is evaluated based on the different efficient frontier, because the adjustments of outputs of DMUs (i.e.Δtj*) we calculate via model (1) are changed when the DMU under evaluation is changed. Therefore, the results obtained by aforementioned models are not comparable, nor do they do treat DMUs fairly, on a common basis.In order to overcome the problems of FSODEA models, Yang et al. (2014) introduced another models called EEFDEA which ensure DMUs are evaluated on the base of a common equilibrium efficient frontier:(3)Min∑t=1lwtαtks.t.∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwt(ftk+αtk)+μ0∑i=1mvixik=1∑r=1suryrj+∑t=1lwt(ftj−δtj)+μ0∑i=1mvixij1=1∀j∈E1,j≠k∑r=1suryrj+∑t=1lwt(ftj−δtj)+μ0∑i=1mvixij≤1∀j∈E2,j≠kαtk=∑j=1j≠knδtj,0≤δtj≤ftjfor∀t,∀j≠k.ur,vi,wt≥0,μ0forfreeModel (3) is the equilibrium achieving model in Yang et al. (2014). According to this Model, each DMU in inefficient set E2 will become relatively efficient one by one until all DMUs belong to efficient set E1. After that, all adjusted DMUs are on the same equilibrium efficient frontier. Then, all DMUs with actual data can be evaluated based on that common equilibrium efficient frontier via the following model:(4)ekEEFDEA=Min∑i=1mvixik+μ0∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwtftks.t.∑i=1mvixij+μ0∑r=1suryrj+∑wt(ftj+Δtj*)≥1∀jur,wt,vi≥0,∀r,t,i;μ0isfreeIt is noteworthy that model (4) is output-oriented. According to Yang et al. (2014), the output-oriented model is chosen for two reasons: (1) it projects DMU onto efficient frontier in the output directions which consider the property of fixed-sum outputs mentioned in the above paragraph; and (2) it is always feasible while the input-oriented model based on the VRS assumption may be infeasible. The infeasible solution occurs when the inequationmax1≤j≤nftj>max1≤j≤n(ftj+Δtj*)holds.Although EEFDEA models make more progress than prior approaches, they also have the following disadvantages; including (1) the orders of evaluation, which must be determined in advance, have an effect on the final results. (2) The steps to achieve equilibrium state are large in number when the number of DMUs is large, which will aggravate the calculation burden. (3) All adjustments of outputs with fixed-sum have same signs (all positive or all negative). To address the problems above, we propose a general EEFDEA models in next section.In this section, a general EEFDEA (GEEFDEA) model is introduced to evaluate DMUs with fixed-sum outputs. Similar to EEFDEA models, GEEFDEA models are constructed by two models, one is called equilibrium achieving (EA) model which is displayed as follows:(5)Min∑j=1n∑t=1lwtαtjs.t.∑r∈1suryrj+∑t=1lwt(ftj+δtj)+μ0∑i=1mvixij=1∀i,r,t,j∑j=1nδtj=0∀tαtj=max{δtj,0},∀t,jftj+δtj≥0,∀t,jur,vi,wt≥0,δtjμ0arefreewhere δtjis the adjustments of the tth output of DMUj. The sign of δtjis free, which indicates it has three possible states: negative, positive or zero. The “negative” sign means DMUjneeds to derive at least δtjamount of the tth output from others to achieve an equilibrium state. While the “positive” means DMUjshould decrease δtjamount of the tth output to achieving equilibrium state. The “zero” means DMUjhas already been on the equilibrium state without any change. And the constraintsαtj=max{δtj,0}(∀t,j)mean that αtjequals to δtjwhen δtjis non-negative.Based on model (5), we obtain the following theorem.Theorem 1Model (5) is always feasible.see Appendix A.However, such constraintsαtj=max{δtj,0}(∀t,j)make model (5) difficult to be solved. Therefore, we use the following equivalent model to replace model (5):(6)Min∑j=1n∑t=1lwt|δtj|s.t.∑r∈1suryrj+∑t=1lwt(ftj+δtj)+μ0∑i=1mvixij=1∀i,r,t,j∑j=1nδtj=0∀tftj+δtj≥0,∀t,jur,vi,wt≥0,δtjisfreeModel (6) is a nonlinear model, but it can be transformed to be a linear one by two steps:First, we setδtj′=wtδtjand model (6) becomes model (7) as follows:(7)Min∑j=1n∑t=1l|δ′tj|s.t.∑r∈1suryrj−∑i=1mvixij+∑t=1l(wtftj+δ′tj)+μ0=0∀i,r,t,j∑j=1nδ′tj=0∀t∑i=1mvixij≥C,∀jwtftj+δ′tj≥0,∀t,jur,vi,wt≥0δ′tjμ0arefreeHere, C is a given positive constant which guarantees∑i=1mvixijas the denominator in model (6) must be positive and further guarantees the objective function of model (7) must be positive.Second, we setatj=12(|δtj′|+δtj′),btj=12(|δtj′|−δtj′)similar to Si et al. (2013), then|δtj′|=atj+btj,δtj=atj−btj(atj,btj≥0,∀t,j). Thus, model (7) can be transformed to be:(8)Min∑j=1n∑t=1l(atj+btj)s.t.∑r∈1suryrj−∑i=1mvixij+∑t=1l(wtftj+atj−btj)+μ0=0∀i,r,t,j∑j=1n(atj−btj)=0∀t∑i=1mvixij≥C,∀jwtftj+atj−btj≥0,∀t,jur,vi,wt,atj,btj≥0μ0isfreeSo far, the equilibrium achieving model has been transformed into the linear one and can be solved easily. According to model (8), all DMUs can achieve the equilibrium efficient frontier in only one step without any adjustment orders. It will alleviate computational burden heavily, especially when the number of DMUs is large. Besides, comparing with prior approaches, this model does not require constraints that signs of adjustments of a DMU are the same (all positive or all negative). It is more consistent with the demand of practical applications and the principle of minimal adjustments. In this sense, model (8) overcomes the above three limitations of EEFDEA method.According to model (8), we obtain the following theorem.Theorem 2If(vi*,ur*,wt*,μ0*,atj*,btj*)is an optimal solution to the model (8) with one given positive constant C, then,C′C(vi*,ur*,wt*,μ0*,atj*,btj*)(∀i,r,t,j≠k)is also an optimal solution of the model (8) with any other positive constant C' in the same round optimization.The proof of Theorem 2 is similar to that ofTheorem 3in Yang et al. (2014), so we do not repeat that here.Model (8) is the first model of GEEFDEA approach. In what follows, we introduce the second model of GEEFDEA approach, which is called the equilibrium-frontier based evaluation model. The model is as follows:(9)ekGEEFDEA=Min∑i=1mvixik+μ0∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwtftks.t.∑i=1mvixij+μ0∑r=1suryrj+∑t=1lwt(ftj+δtj*)≥1∀jur,wt,vi≥0,∀r,t,i;μ0isfreewhereδtj*(∀t,j)is the optimal value of δtjcalculated by models (6)–(8). In fact, the evaluation model of GEEFDEA is similar to that of EEFDEA. They are all output- oriented DEA model and objective functions are also calculated based on the original data of all DMUs. The difference between the two models is thatδtj*(∀t,j)in model (9) is calculated by model (8).Based on model (9), we obtain the following theorem.Theorem 3The efficiencies obtained by VRS-based model (9) are non-negative.see Appendix B.In this section, we illustrate the proposed method and compare the results with other methods (ZSG-DEA, SFM-DEA, FSODEA and EEFDEA). Since the ZSG_DEA and the SFM_DEA models can not work in multi-dimension case, we take the small data in Yang et al. (2011) with one fixed-sum output as an example. The data is shown in Table 1.We compare ZSG_DEA, SFM_DEA, EEFDEA and GEEFDEA methods in two aspects. One is the adjustments of the fixed-sum output for each DMU using these methods. The other is efficiency scores and ranks of DMUs. Obtained results of adjustments and efficiency scores and ranks for each DMU are shown in Table 2and 3, respectively.Table 2 shows that adjustments for each DMU based on the four methods are different. The obtained adjustments based on SFM_DEA, EEFDEA and GEEFDEA methods can make all DMUs on an efficient frontier. But the ZSG_DEA and FSODEA methods cannot for it constructs a different platform for each DMU evaluation (Yang et al., 2014).Table 3 shows efficiency scores and ranks of DMUs based on four methods under the CRS (constant return to scale) assumption. Since SFM_DEA method mainly focus on the input reallocation instead of evaluation, we do not give the results based on the SFM_DEA method. From Table 3, we observe that efficiency scores of DMU A, B, D and F obtained by ZSG_DEA and FSODEA methods are all one as well as their rank orders. This means the performances of those DMUs are the same. However, both the EEFDEA and GEEFDEA approaches give different efficiencies and rank orders for those four DMUs. For example, the EEFDEA approach shows the performance order: F > A > B > D, and the GEEFDEA approach shows F > A > D > B.In order to observe the difference of the above five methods clearly, we use Table 4 to describe different conditions that these methods satisfy. There are 5 different conditions: (1) whether the method can achieve an equilibrium state? (2) Whether the method can achieve an equilibrium state in one step? (3) Can the approach make full ranks for DMUs? (4) Can the “order” of DMUs not affect the adjustment? (5) Can adjustments of one DMU have different signs?From the results, we observe that ZSG_DEA, SFM_DEA and FSODEA methods only satisfy condition (4), i.e., they need not give the “order” of adjustments in advance. The EEFDEA method satisfies two conditions, which are condition (1) and condition (3). This method firstly proposed the concept of equilibrium efficient frontier, so it satisfies condition (1) naturally. This method evaluates DMUs with fixed-sum outputs based a common equilibrium efficient frontier. And the efficiency obtained by this method can be greater than 1. Therefore, it satisfies condition (3), i.e. it can make full rank order for DMUs. The only one which can satisfy all five conditions simultaneously is the proposed GEEFDEA method. That is to say, GEEFDEA method satisfies some conditions that other methods do not satisfy. In this sense, it improves prior methods at some extent.For the convenience in comparing results directly, we drew the following three figures to depict the processes of evaluation respectively based on three of methods with the same data11Here, this data contains two fixed-sum outputs. Therefore, three of methods we chose are ones which can deal with multi-dimension case. Other methods that can only deal with one dimension case do not be shown in this subsection.in Table 1. Fig. 1shows how DMUs are evaluated via FSODEA method. From the figure, we observe that each DMU is evaluated based on its own platform. For example, the evaluation platform of the original efficient DMU A, B and F is the original efficient frontier which is drawn with the piecewise line BAFD. The efficient frontier shown with the piecewise line B1A1C1F1D1 is the evaluation platform for DMU C. Similarly, the efficient frontiers shown with the piecewise lines B2A2F2D2 and B3A3E3F3D3 are the evaluation platform of DMU D and E, respectively. On the other hand, Fig. 2which shows the evaluation based on the EEFDEA method overcomes the limitation of the FSODEA method that each DMU is evaluated based on a different platform. From Fig. 2, we observe that the common platform for evaluation (or equilibrium frontier) is constructed in two steps. In step 1, the original efficient frontier was adjusted to the first round efficient frontier which is depicted with the piecewise line B1A1C1D1. And the equilibrium frontier was achieved in step 2 and was depicted with the piecewise line B2E2A2C2F2D2. Then all DMUs can be evaluated based on that common frontier with their actual data.Although Fig. 2 shows a more appropriate evaluation platform when compared with Fig. 1, we can simplify the steps to achieve common equilibrium frontier especially as the number of the evaluated DMUs is large. Fig. 3which shows the process of evaluation based on the proposed method which can construct the equilibrium frontier with only one step no matter how many DMUs are evaluated. In Fig. 3, the common platform is depicted with the piecewise line B1E1A1C1F1D1.In this section, we applied the above GEEFDEA approach to the dataset of 2012 London Olympic Games. Similar to Lins et al. (2003), 85 countries are regarded as DMUs who won at least one medal in this Olympic Games, inputs selected in this paper are population and gross domestic product (GDP) and outputs are gold, silver and bronze medals won by each country. Obviously, they are all fixed-sum outputs. The data is shown in columns 2–6 of Table 5.In prior methods such as ZSG and FSODEA methods, those outputs should be treated as single output with a group of given determined weights. However, this practice mainly leads to two problems, namely (1) the results of evaluation are too subjective because it heavily relies on the given weights, and (2) one group of weights is not reasonable because different countries are differently sensitive to different medals that they won.To solve these two problems, this paper applies the proposed GEEFDEA models with the assurance region (AR) (Churilov and Flitman, 2006; Dyson, 1988; Li, Liang, Chen, & Morita, 2008; Lozano, Villa, Guerrero, & Cortés, 2002; Zhu & Cook, 2007) to the dataset. For example, we can add assurance region (Sitarz (2013), De Mello, Angulo-Meza, Da Silva (2009) and Hai (2007)) constraints (w1−w2≥ɛ,w2−w3≥ɛ,w1−2w2+w3≥ɛ) to model (9). Here, w1, w2, w3 are the weights of gold, silver and bronze medal, respectively. The first constraintw1−w2≥ɛdemonstrates that the importance of a gold medal is greater than a silver one. The second constraintw2−w3≥ɛindicates that the importance of a silver medal is greater than a bronze and the third constraintw1−2w2+w3≥ɛmeans that the difference of importance between a gold medal and a silver medal is bigger than the difference between a silver medal and a bronze medal (De Mello et al., 2009). According to De Mello et al. (2009) that the constant ε not only should be large enough to provide discrimination among medals but also be small enough to avoid infeasibilities of these models. Computational tests demonstrate that the value ε = 0.005 meats both requirements. Because participating nations vary greatly from their inputs and outputs, we evaluate each DMU via GEEFDEA under the VRS assumption. The efficiency scores and ranks are shown in the last two columns of Table 5.Among all participating countries, Table 5 shows Jamaica is the best performing country which obtains the highest AR-GEEFDEA efficiency score 1.9224. In fact, the result is realistic. Its GDP and population rank 77th and 72nd in 85 countries, respectively. However, it won 4 gold medals, 4 silver medals and 4 bronze medals, whose gold medals rank 18th in 85 countries. While the worst performing country is the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), whose AR-GEEFDEA efficiency score is only 0.0529. It only won 1 bronze medal. Although there are some other countries such as Afghanstan and Bahrain won the same medal as KSA, their inputs are less than that of the KSA. For example, comparing with Afghanstan and Bahrain, the GDP of KSA is a dozens of times greater than that of the two countries and its population is similar or larger that that of the two countries. In this sense, it is reasonable that the KSA performs worse. We also observed from the Table 5 that the USA, which won the most gold, silver and second most bronze medals, obtains the efficiency score 0.9447 and ranks 16th in 85 countries. It does not rank top, because its GDP as one input is quite greater than the second largest country (China), let alone other countries. And its population as the other input is also larger than most of countries except China and India.A similar analysis can also be applied to China. China with absolutely largest population and the second greatest GDP won 38 gold medals (the second most), 27 silver medals (the second most) and 23 bronze medals (the third most). According to our method, it obtains the AR-GEEFDEA efficiency score 0.809 and ranks 24th among all countries. In conclusion, the evaluation results of participating nations in London Olympic Games based on the proposed AR-GEEFDEA method are reasonable.This study proposes a more general DEA-based equilibrium efficient frontier, on which the DMUs with fixed-sum outputs are evaluated in a fair way. The proposed approach improves EEFDEA approach (Yang et al., 2014) and FSODEA approach (Yang et al., 2011) in the following aspects. First of all, the equilibrium efficient frontier can be achieved in only one step instead of many steps in prior study. Secondly, the constraint in EEFDEA and FSODEA that the sign of adjustments of fixed-sum outputs of a DMU must be identical is relaxed in GEEFDEA approach. Thirdly, the order of evaluation which can affect the results in EEFDEA is not necessary in the proposed GEEFDEA approach. Last but not least, it remains to maintain all advantages of EEFDEA approach such as common platform evaluation and full rank orders.To compare the proposed approach with other approaches, a small data set from Yang et al. (2011) is reused for evaluation. Based on results’ comparison, the advantages described above are embodied sufficiently. Then the current approach is applied to evaluating performance of each participating country in the 2012 London Olympic Games. Reflecting the fact that the importance of different kinds of medals (Gold, Silver or Bronze) must be different, the assurance region should be added to the proposed model. It is more objective and practical to evaluate by adding an assurance region instead of giving a certain proportion to merge three kinds of medals into one.Although this study has made progress in some aspects, the equilibrium efficient frontier achieved via our method may not be unique. Therefore, future research may attempt to identify a unique equilibrium frontier for evaluation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
