@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A vague set based decision support approach for evaluating research funding programs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a novel decision support method based on vague set theory.A new family of parameterized S-OWA operator is first developed for the aggregation of vague values.This method provides a soft and expansive way to help the decision maker to make his decisions.The proposed method can be used for many agencies to make project assessment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision analysis,Vague set theory,OWA operator,Decision support approach,Scientific research assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Scientific Research Assessment (SRA) is receiving increasing attention in both academic and industry. More and more organizations are recognizing the importance of SRA for the optimal use of scarce resources. In this paper, a vague set theory based decision support approach is proposed for SRA. Specifically, a family of parameterized S-OWA operator is developed for the aggregation of vague assessments. The proposed approach is introduced to evaluate the research funding programs of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC). It provides a soft and expansive way to help the decision maker in NSFC to make his decisions. The proposed approach can also be used for some other agencies to make similar assessment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Scientific Research Assessment (Martino, 1995; Baker and Freeland, 1975; Steele, 1988; Booker and Bryson, 1985) is a significant and recurring activity in many organizations, like governmental funding agencies, universities, research institutes, and technology-intensive companies. It is receiving increasing attention in the field of project management. Usually, there are three main types of scientific research assessment: Research Project Selection, Research Project Assessment and Research Funding Program Assessment. Research Project Selection aims to evaluate and select research proposals for funding after being submitted to funding agencies. It is a challenge faced by a decision maker who has to allocate limited resources to a plethora of candidate projects. Research Project Assessment is the determination of the relative priority of research projects according to various criteria, such as strategic planning, process management and research outputs, which is a very difficult task, particularly when the assessors are from different research areas. Research Funding Program Assessment, however, is to analyze and assess the existing research funding programs of an organization, such as a governmental funding agency, whose objective is to make them distinguished, and to provide decision support to managers for improving the programs. This is a complicated decision-making process, in which groups of decision makers and experts are involved.SRA attracts much attention from researchers and practitioners. Large number of models and approaches to support SRA have been developed in academic and industrial areas in the past decades, which tend to be either quantitative or qualitative, ranging from mathematical methods to economic models. It has been acknowledged by many studies that SRA methods can be divided into the following seven categories. (1) Mathematical programming and optimization (Asher, 1962; Beged-Dov, 1965; Czajkowski and Jones, 1986; Fang et al., 2008; Ghasemzadeh and Archer, 2000) such as integer programming, linear programming, non-linear programming, goal programming, dynamic programming and portfolio optimization. (2) Decision analysis (Coffin and Taylor, 1996; Hsu et al., 2003; Hall and Nauda, 1988; Kocaoglu and Iyigun, 1994; Danila, 1989; Wang et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2006; Liesi et al., 2007) including multi-criteria decision-making, strategic methodology, decision trees, risk analysis and analytic hierarchy process. (3) Scoring model referred in (Dean and Nishry, 1965; Krawiec, 1984; Moore and Baker, 1969a,b; Henriksen and Traynor, 1999), which is the most popular method due to its simplicity in use. (4) Economic models (Hartmann and Hassan, 2006; Newton and Pearson, 1994; Schmidt, 1993), e.g., internal rate return, net present value, return on investment, cost benefit analysis, option pricing theory and so on. (5) Artificial intelligence and interactive methods (Eratore and Stylianou, 1995; Imoto et al., 2008) including Delphi, expert systems and fuzzy sets. (6) Decision support approaches developed recently (Tian et al., 2005; Sun et al., 2008; Iyigun, 1993; Tian et al., 2002), which are based on decision models and computer-based support tools. (7) Integrated method, for example, multi-criteria approach reported by Eilat et al. (2008), integrating the balanced scorecard and data envelopment analysis for project selection in different stages.As what we noticed, most of the studies above focus on Research Project Selection and Research Project Assessment, but very few on Research Funding Programs Assessment. Actually, in the process of SRA, especially of Research Funding Programs Assessment, the subjective evaluation information about projects (programs) could be either qualitative or quantitative. The numerical marking of programmes is definitely quantitative. However, some linguistic terms (Herrera et al., 2000; Zadeh, 1975; Herrera et al., 2000; Herrera et al., 1996; Herrera and Martinez, 2001) are often used as qualitative measurements rather than crisp numerical values. So it is a challenge how to deal with these types of information for SRA. Meanwhile, to determine the relative ranking importance of different programs, group decision support approach may be appropriate to elicit and aggregate group judgments. Fortunately, a powerful tool, vague set theory (Gau and Buehrer, 1993) is available and it has been extensively adopted in the fields of decision making and pattern recognition. It is emerging as an efficient tool in managing uncertainty, incomplete and imprecise information. In recent years, many important advances (Chen and Tan, 1994; Hong and Choi, 2000; Wang et al., 2006) on vague set theory and applications are achieved. Chen and Tan (1994) and Hong and Choi (2000) suggested some techniques for handling fuzzy MCDM problems based on vague set theory. They also introduced a family of intersection and union aggregation operators for vague values (sets).In this paper, vague set theory is introduced to SRA and a novel decision support method is developed for Research Funding Programs Assessment. Firstly, linguistic evaluation information is collected and converted into vague evaluation based on vague set theory. Secondly, a family of parameterized ordered weighted averaging (OWA) operator, named S-OWA operator, is developed to aggregate the vague evaluations. Finally, the alternatives evaluated are ranked and clustered according to the aggregated value. The proposed approach is introduced to evaluate the research funding program of National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) and the research findings provide good insight for the decision makers of NSFC.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background of Research Funding Programs Assessment. A vague set theory based decision support approach is proposed in Section 3. In Section 4, we discuss the application of decision support approach to NSFC Research Funding Programs Assessment. Analysis and discussion are provided in Section 5. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section 6.Since its inception in 1986, NSFC has become the largest governmental funding agency in China with the primary aim to promote basic and applied scientific research. There are seven scientific departments, four bureaus, one general office and three associated units. The scientific departments are the decision units responsible for projects management, and they are classified according to seven disciplines including mathematical and physical sciences (MPS), chemical sciences (CS), life science (LS), earth sciences (ES), engineering and material sciences (EMS), information sciences (IS), and management sciences (MS), respectively.As the largest governmental funding agency in China, NSFC has created a good environment promoting innovation, and it fostered a number of outstanding scientists, as well as innovative research groups at the frontiers of science. It has also created many categories of research funding programs, including Program of General Projects, Program of Key Projects, Program of Major Projects, Program of Major Research Plan, Program of Special Funds, Program of Joint Research Fund for Hong Kong and Macao Young Scholars, and so on.In recent years, NSFC’s annual budget has been dramatically increased from RMB 1.28billion Yuan in 2000 to RMB 5.35billion Yuan in 20081Data source: http://www.nsfc.gov.cn.1as shown in Fig. 1a. The outlay fluctuations for some main programs are presented in Fig. 1b–d. As can be seen from Fig. 1b, the outlay for Program of Projects of Free Application, Program of Projects for Young Scientists Fund, Program of Projects for Less Developed Regions, and Program of Fund for Innovative Research Group (IRG) has been continuously increasing from 2002 to 2008. The outlay shown in Fig. 1c for Program of Joint Research Fund for Hong Kong and Macao Young Scholars, National Science Fund for Talent Training in Basic Science and Program of President Fund & Department Directors’ Fund almost remain at a steady level. As shown in Fig. 1d, the outlay for five categories, including Program of Key projects, Program of Major Research Plan, Program of National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (DYS), Program of Special Fund and Major Program, revealed a trend of fluctuations.With the strong support of the Chinese government, more and more fund will be continuously increased for NSFC, when some crucial questions have to be answered. For example, how to distribute the increased budget to the existing research funding programs. Under such a background, the authors of this paper were requested by NSFC to evaluate the existing research funding programs and diagnose the management methods, with the aim to provide decision support in improving the fund structure and management methods. In this study, 18 main NSFC research funding programs, {RP1,RP2,…,RP18}, are involved in the investigation and evaluation, which are shown in Table 1.The flowchart of the proposed decision support approach based on vague set theory is shown in Fig. 2. Some basic definitions and properties of vague sets theory are presented in Appendix A. As can be seen in this figure, three main stages are involved in the decision support process. The first stage is ‘Data selection’, where a survey is conducted by means of telephone, questionnaires, the Internet, and so on. Here many participant are considered. In stage 2, the collected data are processed including data cleaning, merge and transformation. The final evaluating process is included in stage 3, where a family of parameterized OWA operators is developed for the aggregation of vague values (sets).In the process of survey, some linguistic terms are often used to describe the alternatives, such as:(1)“Successful”, “Not successful” and “Unknown”.“Good”, “Average”, “Bad” and “Unknown”.Based on vague set theory, these linguistic evaluations can be converted into vague evaluations in the following.Let A be a set of alternatives to evaluate and p decision members participating in the process of evaluation, where A=A1,A2,…,Am.(1)Assume the percentages of participants who regard the alternative Aias “Successful”, “Not successful” and “Unknown” are denoted by ri, ki, qi, i=1,2,…,m, respectively; then the vague evaluation of Aiis given as Ai=[ti,1−fi], where ti=ri, fi=ki, i=1,2,…,m.Assume the percentages of participants who regard the alternative Aias “Good”, “Average”, “Bad” and “Unknown” are denoted by ai, bi, ci, di, respectively, then the vague evaluation of Aiis given as Ai=[ti,1−fi], whereti=ai+bi×aiai+ci,fi=ci+bi×ciai+ci. Actually, biis distributed into aiand cibased on the ratio of aito ci, which means if the participants in favor of Aiis more than (less than) ones against, then it is the same in “Average”.Here tiindicates the degree that participants are satisfied with Aiand fiindicates the degree that participants are not satisfied with Ai, and ti∈[0,1], fi∈[0,1], ti+fi⩽1, 1⩽i⩽m. Specially, a crisp value x, x∈[0,1], can be represented by a vague value [x,x].An example: Assume two groups participating in a survey, named C1 and C2, with 10 and 12 members, respectively. If in C1, 3 members whose evaluation are “Good”, 4 “bad” and 3 “Unknown”, then the rate of the alternative is [0.3,0.6]; In C2, if 3 “Good”, 2 “Average”, 4 “bad” and 3 “Unknown”, then the rate of the alternative is [0.32,0.57].According to Chen and Tan (1994), the simple min and max operators can be used to aggregate the vague values (sets). However, it often appears that the aggregation function value of Aiis assigned the same as Aj, especially when the number of input alternatives is very large. In this case, we cannot distinguish the alternatives. In this section, two families of parameterized OWA operators are introduced to the aggregation of vague evaluations, which are called ’orlike’ S-OWA operators and ’andlike’ S-OWA operators. These families are based on classical OWA operatores (Yager, 1993; Yager, 1988) and specified by a few parameters being used to generate the weights. Some basic definitions of OWA operators are presented in Appendix B like ’orness’ and ’andness’.Let x1,x2,…,xnbe n vague values,x1=[tx1,1-fx1],…,xn=[txn,1-fxn], wheretxi∈[0,1],fxi∈[0,1], andtxi+fxi⩽1, i∈{1,2,…,n}.(a)Given a value of orness λ, if λ<0.5, the result of the andlike S-OWA operator of the vague values x1,x2,…,xnis a vague value z, written as z=[tz,1−fz], wheretz=FSA(tx1,tx2,…,txn)1-fz=FSA(1-fx1,1-fx2,…,1-fxn)Given a value of orness λ, if λ⩾0.5, the result of the orlike S-OWA operator of the vague values x1,x2,…,xnis a vague value y, written as y=[ty,1−fy], wherety=FSO(tx1,tx2,…,txn)1-fy=FSO(1-fx1,1-fx2,…,1-fxn)Let Xi, i∈{1,2,…,n} be n vague sets of the universe of discourse U with truth-membership function and false-membership functiontXiandfXi, respectively.Given a value of orness λ, if λ<0.5, the andlike S-OWA operator of n vague sets Xi, i∈{1,2,…,n} is a vague set C, whose truth-membership function and false-membership function are tCand fC, respectively, where for any uj∈U,[tC(uj),1-fC(uj)]=[FSA(tX1(uj),…,tXn(uj)),FSA(1-fX1(uj),…,1-fXn(uj))]Given a value of orness λ, if λ⩾0.5, the orlike S-OWA operator of n vague sets Xi, i∈{1,2,…,n} is a vague set D, whose truth-membership function and false-membership function are tDand fD, respectively, where for any uj∈U,[tD(uj),1-fD(uj)]=[FSO(tX1(uj),…,tXn(uj)),FSO(1-fX1(uj),…,1-fXn(uj))]This family parameterized operator reduces the burden of having to completely rank the inputs before aggregating in classical OWA operators (Yager, 1993; Yager, 1988). It also allows us through an appropriate selection of parameters to model any degree of orness between 0 and 1. In particular when λ=0, S-OWA operator corresponds to the intersection (min) operator presented by Chen and Tan (1994), and when λ=1, it is the union (max) operator.Assume there are m alternatives to be evaluated, A={A1,A2,…,Am}, and n participate groups, C={C1,C2,…,Cn}. Here Cimay be a department in university, or a branch in technology-intensive company or a research group in research institute. Based on the transformation in Section A, the characteristics of alternative Aiare represented by the vague set as follows:Ai={(C1,[ti1,1-fi1]),(C2,[ti2,1-fi2]),…,(Cn,[tin,1-fin])}where tijindicates the degree to which the participants in Cjare satisfied with alternative Ai, fijindicates the degree to which the participants in Cjare not satisfied with alternative Ai, andtij∈[0,1],fij∈[0,1],tij+fij⩽1,1⩽j⩽n,1⩽i⩽m.Let1-fij=tij∗where 1⩽j⩽n, 1⩽i⩽m. In this case, Aican be rewritten asAi=C1,ti1,ti1∗,C2,ti2,ti2∗,…,Cn,tin,tin∗where 1⩽i⩽m. Then the characteristics of these alternatives may be represented by Table 2.Given a value of orness λ, the vague evaluations can be aggregated using an appropriate aggregation operator. Assume that there is a decision maker who wants to choose an alternative at λ degree of orness. When λ<0.5, the degrees that the alternative Aisatisfies and not satisfies the decision maker’s requirement at λ degree can be measured by the function P,P(Ai)=FSA[ti1,…,tin],FSAti1∗,…,tin∗=tAi,tAi∗where the weight of the andlike S-OWA can be generated by β=1−2λ.When λ⩾0.5, the degrees that the alternative Aisatisfies and not satisfies the decision maker’s requirement at λ degree can be measured by the function Q,Q(Ai)=FSO[ti1,…,tin],FSOti1∗,…,tin∗=tAi′,tAi∗′where the weight of the orlike S-OWA can be generated by α=2λ−1.Obviously, when λ=1,Q(Ai)=[max[ti1,…,tin],max[ti1∗,…,tin∗]]=[max[ti1,…,tin],min[fi1,…,fin]]. This means the aggregated evaluation is the best evaluation from all the participant groups, which has the maximum “Good” and the minimum “Bad”. When λ=0 and λ=0.5, it is the worst and average evaluation of all the participant groups, respectively.A score function H(x) is presented by Chen and Tan (1994) to evaluate the degree of suitability that an alternative satisfies the decision maker’s requirement. Let x=[tx,1−fx] be a vague value, where tx∈[0,1], fx∈[0,1], and tx+fx⩽1. The score of x can be evaluated by the score function H, H(x)=tx−fx, where H(x)∈[−1,1]. Based on the score function H, we provide a ranking of all the alternatives as follows, two categories When λ<0.5,H(P(Ai))=tAi-fAi=tAi+tAi∗-1.When λ⩾0.5,H(Q(Ai))=tAi′-fAi′=tAi′+tAi′∗-1.The larger the value of H, the more the suitability that the alternative satisfies the decision maker’s requirement. Therefore, the best alternative x∗ such that H(x∗)=maxx∈A{H(x)}.Sensitivity analysis is conducted by analyzing the relationship between the choice of and the induced ranking. Some interesting results are documented in another paper, see Tian et al. (2005) in our manuscript. Particularly, the theorems e and f below ensure that under certain assumptions, the rankings correspond to (0,0.5) or [0.5,1) are the same, which is proved in Tian et al. (2005). It indicates that the decision maker only requires the information on whether he is positive or negative. If these assumptions do not hold, the induced ranking is identified by different λ. However, simulation study reveals that the impact of small change of on the induced rankings is insignificant, e.g., from λ=0 to λ=0.01 or from λ=1 to λ=0.99. Obviously, this serves as a certain tolerance towards noise and measurement errors in the values of the aggregated criteria.(e)Let A be a set of alternatives and C be a set of participant groups, where A={A1,A2,…,AM}, C={C1,C2,…,CN}. If min(t11,…,t1N)=⋯=min(tM1,…,tMN) andmin(t11∗,…,t1N∗)=⋯=min(tM1∗,…,tMN∗), then for all λ∈(0,0.5], the rankings of Ai,…,AMbased on the andlike S-OWA operators and the score function H(x) are the same.Let A be a set of alternatives and C be a set of participant groups, where A={A1,A2,…,AM}, C={C1,C2,…,CN}. If max(t11,…,t1N)=⋯=max(tM1,…,tMN) andmax(t11∗,…,t1N∗)=⋯=max(tM1∗,…,tMN∗), then for all λ∈[0.5,1), the rankings of Ai,…,AMbased on the orlike S-OWA operators and the score function H(x) are the same.In this section, the proposed vague set based decision support approach is used to analyze and evaluate NSFC research funding programs. The basic procedure of the approach is illustrated in Fig. 3. The specific steps are briefly listed first and their details are given in the following subsections.S1:Designing and sending out questionnaires for a survey.Analyzing the survey’s result from the received questionnaires.Transforming the linguistic evaluation to vague evaluation.Aggregating the vague evaluations of each research funding program by using S-OWA operators.Ranking and clustering the research funding programs.In the process of questionnaire design, the objective of the survey should be firstly articulated. In this study, the aim is to diagnose and assess the existing research funding programs and to support NSFC in adjusting its granting structure and management methods. It is also necessary to determine the sampling group before sending out the questionnaires. Here, 756 experts from universities and research institutes are involved. Although they belong to seven different disciplines (departments), all of them have excellent research records in their respective research areas and are very familiar with all kinds of funding programs of NSFC. The assessments of 18 main research funding programs introduced in Section 2 are included in the questionnaires. 756 questionnaires were sent out and 460 returned valid questionnaires were received. The data regarding the received questionnaires are presented in Table 3.In the process of the survey, four linguistic terms, “Successful”, ”Average”, “Not successful” and “Unknown” were provided for experts to evaluate the existing research funding programs in NSFC. Based on the transformation method presented in section 3, the linguistic evaluations were converted into vague evaluations, as presented in Table 4.Specially, we find out many interesting differences between these programs. Among 460 valid questionnaires returned, most of the experts presented their point of view (“successful”, “average” or “not successful”) for some general programs including RP1, RP2 and RP6. But for some programs like RP16, RP17 and RP18, most of the answers are “unknown”. A possible reason is that the amount of these projects is much less than general projects and the benefited area is very narrow. Vague set theory can be used to deal with this problem based on an interval-based membership, which has more powerful ability to represent imprecise information including positive, neutral and negative information of objects.We developed a soft way to evaluate and rank NSFC research funding programs, in which a proper λ ranging from 0 to 1 can be selected with flexility. Regard λ=0.5 as an example, we can get:Q(RP1)=[0.913,0.981],Q(RP2)=[0.864,0.921],Q(RP3)=[0.598,0.766],Q(RP4)=[0.733,0.830],Q(RP5)=[0.454,0.648],Q(RP6)=[0.801,0.918],Q(RP7)=[0.509,0.756],Q(RP8)=[0.444,0.768],Q(RP9)=[0.601,0.843],Q(RP10)=[0.464,0.766],Q(RP11)=[0.313,0.816],Q(RP12)=[0.273,0.846],Q(RP13)=[0.361,0.837],Q(RP14)=[0.350,0.882],Q(RP15)=[0.341,0.838],Q(RP16)=[0.457,0.891],Q(RP17)=[0.485,0.900],Q(RP18)=[0.252,0.879]Then the score of all programs can be computed by using the score function H(x) as follows,H(RP1)=0.894;H(RP7)=0.265;H(RP13)=0.198;H(RP2)=0.785;H(RP8)=0.213;H(RP14)=0.233;H(RP3)=0.364;H(RP9)=0.445;H(RP15)=0.180;H(RP4)=0.564;H(RP10)=0.231;H(RP16)=0.348;H(RP5)=0.101;H(RP11)=0.129;H(RP17)=0.385;H(RP6)=0.719;H(RP12)=0.120;H(RP18)=0.131;As can be seen that RP1- Program of Projects of Free Application is a very successful program with the highest score 0.894, but it is contrary to RP5- Program of Major Projects, whose score is only 0.101. The overall ranking of 18 main NSFC programs is given as follows,RP1≻RP2≻RP6≻RP4≻RP9≻RP17≻RP3≻RP16≻RP7≻RP14≻RP10≻RP8≻RP13≻RP15≻RP18≻RP11≻RP12≻RP5where ‘A≻B’ means the score of A is higher than B.This ranking result, however, cannot show an summery impression for the leaders in NSFC. What they are more concerned is which programs are success? Which are average? And which are needed to be improved? So we further incorporate their suggestions and attempt to cluster all the alternatives into three classes by using a simple K-means clustering method, such that:Class1≻Class2≻Class3.where Classi≻Classjmeans that programs in Classiare superior to those in Classj.Because the condition in (e) and (f) does not hold, different parameter λ may lead to different ranking of programs, which further results in different classes. If the decision maker is very positive, he may choose the λ=1, oppositely, λ=0. While λ=0.5, the decision is an average. If he does not belong to three cases above, he may choose any λ value in the range [0,1].The best advantage of this approach is that the decision maker can make his decision with great flexibility.In this study, five cases with λ=1, 0.75, 0.50, 0.25, 0, respectively, are considered and the corresponding classification results are shown in Fig. 4. As can be seen, the same clusters are obtained while λ=0, 0.25, 0.75, which are different from the case with λ=0.5, 1. The main 18 programs can be divided into six groups according to the clusters, which are shown in Fig. 5.As we can see that RP1-Program of Projects of Free Application, RP2-Program of Projects for Young Scientists Fund and RP6-Program of National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars are the most successful programs because they are definitely classified to Class1 no matter ‘orness’ equals to 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, or 1. Actually, RP1 and RP2 belong to Program of General Projects, which financially support researchers to choose free research topic for innovation. By now, they have become the most recognized research funding programs in NSFC. Meanwhile, RP6 aims at speeding up the growth of young scientific talents and encouraging overseas Chinese scholars to work in China. Since the beginning of the above three programs, they have shown better performance in NSFC than other programs.RP4-Program of Key Projects and RP9-Program of Fund for Innovative Research Groups are more or less successful in NSFC, which can be classified to Class1 with orness=0.5 and orness=1, respectively. RP4 mainly supports research work related to the demand of China, with the aim to promote the development of economy and society. Since RP9 was launched in 2000, it had also been recognized by the academic community, which supports mainly research groups carrying out basic or applied research focusing on some key research orientations. Both of them received a warm welcome from the academic community in China.RP3-Program of Projects for Less Developed Regions, RP16-Program of President Fund and RP17-Program of Department Directors’ Fund show average performance because they are definitely classified to Class2 no matter ’orness’ equals to 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, or 1. Meanwhile, RP5-Program of Major Projects, RP12-Fund for Public Understanding of Science, RP15-Fund for State Key Labs and RP18-Scientific and Technological Activities for the Youth have the lowest success degree, which have definitely been assigned to Class3.The rest programs also have the lowest success degree except for the case with orness=1, which include RP7-Program of Joint Research Fund for Overseas Young Scholars, RP8-Program of Joint Research Fund for Hong Kong and Macao Young Scholars, RP10-Program of Major Research Plan, RP11-Program of Special Fund for Basic Research on Scientific Instruments, RP13-Program of Special Fund for Key Academic Journals and RP14-Program of National Science Fund for Talent Training in Basic Science. The main reason for lower success is longer time for reviewing and organizing, as well as its poor efficiency. Substantial further improvements must be made on these programs in the future.Companying this study, a lot of investigations were made about overseas funding organizations, such as the National Science Foundation (NSF) in USA, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in Germany, and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). They have many successful experiences that China can learn from. These study on the overseas programs aids the strategic planning of NSFC. For instance, the three aforementioned programs (RP1, RP2 and RP6) that support junior researchers are widely acknowledged within Chinese academia since it has merits in encouraging the innovation of junior researchers, as well as being necessary as only few alternatives are open. In Japan, however, various programs are run by JSPS toward this end. In particular, two programs, i.e., Research Fellowships for Young Scientists and Postdoctoral Fellowships for Research Abroad, aim to support graduate students and postdocs. Another five programs including “Grant-in-Aid for Research Activity Start-up”, “Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists, A”, ”Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists, B”,”Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists, S” and “JSPS Prize” are offered to all junior researchers. Accordingly, we propose to promote the funding programs for junior researchers, which have been agreed on by NSFC. Not only did NSFC increase the total amount of funding for RP1, RP2 and RP6, but also it has established a new program-the Outstanding Youth Science Fund recently. This new program mainly supports the junior researchers with research experience from 5 to 10years.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a vague set theory based decision support approach for Scientific Research Assessment. The main methodological contribution of this paper is twofold. Firstly, a new family of parameterized S-OWA operator is first developed and a new aggregation method for vague assessments is presented. This provides decision maker with a soft way to evaluate the objectives with great flexibility. Secondly, in the framework of vague set theory, a new decision support approach is proposed for project evaluation. This approach allows user to rate an alternative by using vague values or linguistic terms, which only depends on a simple calculation of percentages.The proposed approach had been successfully applied to evaluate NSFC research funding programs and some policy suggestions have been adopted by NSFC in adjusting granting structure and management methods. It has also been applied successfully to an assessment project entitled “International evaluation of China’s Science Funding” in 2011 (Richard, 2011). The aim of this project is to evaluate Science Funding and Management Performance, which is by far the largest comprehensive performance assessment on science funding and management of science and technology. The International Evaluation Committee (IEC), formed by 13 senior scientists from 6 countries, showed the appreciation of the proposed method in the evaluation procedure. It is expected that this method can be used for other agencies to make similar assessment.