@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Approximation algorithms for hard capacitated k-facility location problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The first FPTAS for the single-sink capacitated k-facility location problem (CKFL).A polynomial time algorithm for the uniform CKFL with a fixed number of clients.Approximation algorithms for two variants of CKFL by utilizing the extreme solutions.An improved approximation algorithm for CFL with uniform opening costs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Combinatorial optimization,Facility location,Approximation algorithms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study the capacitated k-facility location problem, in which we are given a set of clients with demands, a set of facilities with capacities and a positive integer k. It costs fito open facility i, and cijfor facility i to serve one unit of demand from client j. The objective is to open at most k facilities serving all the demands and satisfying the capacity constraints while minimizing the sum of service and opening costs. In this paper, we give the first fully polynomial time approximation scheme (FPTAS) for the single-sink (single-client) capacitated k-facility location problem. Then, we show that the capacitated k-facility location problem with uniform capacities is solvable in polynomial time if the number of clients is fixed by reducing it to a collection of transportation problems. Third, we analyze the structure of extreme point solutions, and examine the efficiency of this structure in designing approximation algorithms for capacitated k-facility location problems. Finally, we extend our results to obtain an improved approximation algorithm for the capacitated facility location problem with uniform opening costs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the capacitated k-facility location problem (CKFL), we are given a set D of clients and a set F of potential facilities (locations where we can potentially open a facility) in a metric space. Each facility i ∈ F has a capacity si. Establishing facility i incurs an opening cost fi. Each client j has a demand djthat must be served. Shipping xijunits from facility i to client j incurs service costs cijxij, where cijis proportional to the distance between i and j. The goal is to serve all the clients by using at most k facilities and satisfying the capacity constraints such that the total cost is minimized. In this paper, we consider the hard capacities, that is, we allow at most one facility to be opened at any location. (Note that in the soft capacities case multiple facilities can be opened in a single location, see for instance Mahdian et al., 2003; Shmoys et al., 1997.)CKFL can be formulated as the following mixed integer program (MIP), where variable xijindicates the amount of the demand of client j that is served by facility i, and yiindicates whether facility i is open.(1)min∑i∈F∑j∈Dcijxij+∑i∈Ffiyi(2)subjectto:∑i∈Fxij=dj,∀j∈D,(3)∑j∈Dxij≤siyi,∀i∈F,(4)∑i∈Fyi≤k,(5)xij≥0,∀i∈F,∀j∈D,(6)yi∈{0,1},∀i∈F.If we replace constraints (6) by(7)0≤yi≤1,∀i∈F,we obtain the LP-relaxation of CKFL. Without loss of generality we assume that si, djare integral for all i ∈ F, j ∈ D.CKFL is related to the capacitated k-median problem (CKM), which corresponds to the special case where fi= 0, ∀i ∈ F. A constant factor approximation algorithm is still unknown for CKM, let alone CKFL. All the previous attempts with constant approximation ratios for these problems violate the capacity constraint, or cardinality constraint that at most k facilities are allowed to be used. We call these approximation algorithms pseudo-approximation algorithms when one of the constraints is violated up to a certain factor. Recently, Byrka et al. (2013) gave a constant factor approximation algorithm for CKM with uniform capacities while violating the capacities by a factor 2 + ε, where ε > 0 can be arbitrarily small. Although most researchers believe that relaxing the cardinality constraint makes the problem simpler than relaxing the capacity constraint with respect to designing pseudo-approximation algorithms, the best known violation ratio for the cardinality constraint is still 5 + ε (Korupolu et al., 2000) for CKM with uniform capacities. It seems that obtaining a better constant factor approximation algorithm by only violating the cardinality constraint has not received much attention yet.In this paper, we give an improved pseudo-approximation algorithm for CKFL with uniform opening cost by using at most 2k facilities. To show the potential power of this algorithm, we improve the approximation ratio for the capacitated facility location problem with uniform opening costs (Levi et al., 2012), by combining this algorithm with a pseudo-approximation algorithm for the k-median problem derived from a bifactor approximation algorithm for the uncapacitated facility location problem (Charikar and Guha, 1999). That is, pseudo-approximation algorithms for capacitated k-facility location problems may be extended to get approximation algorithms for well-studied capacitated facility location problems. We believe that this technique has the potential to further improve approximation ratios for capacitated facility location problems.In Section 2 we give the first fully polynomial time approximation scheme (FPTAS) for the single-sink capacitated k-facility location problem. In Section 3, we present a polynomial time algorithm for the uniform capacitated k-facility location problem with a fixed number of clients. In Section 4, we propose an improved pseudo-approximation algorithm for CKFL with uniform opening costs, and extend this algorithm to improve the approximation ratio for the capacitated facility location problem with uniform opening costs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
