@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel multi-objective particle swarm optimization with multiple search strategies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two search strategies are designed for updating the velocity of each particle.An evolutionary search strategy is performed on the external archive of PSO.A new definition of personal-best and global-best particles is given.A novel multi-objective PSO is designed based on decomposition approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple objective programming,Particle swarm optimization,Evolutionary computation,Multiple search strategies,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, multi-objective particle swarm optimization (MOPSO) has shown the effectiveness in solving multi-objective optimization problems (MOPs). However, most MOPSO algorithms only adopt a single search strategy to update the velocity of each particle, which may cause some difficulties when tackling complex MOPs. This paper proposes a novel MOPSO algorithm using multiple search strategies (MMOPSO), where decomposition approach is exploited for transforming MOPs into a set of aggregation problems and then each particle is assigned accordingly to optimize each aggregation problem. Two search strategies are designed to update the velocity of each particle, which is respectively beneficial for the acceleration of convergence speed and the keeping of population diversity. After that, all the non-dominated solutions visited by the particles are preserved in an external archive, where evolutionary search strategy is further performed to exchange useful information among them. These multiple search strategies enable MMOPSO to handle various kinds of MOPs very well. When compared with some MOPSO algorithms and two state-of-the-art evolutionary algorithms, simulation results show that MMOPSO performs better on most of test problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many real-world engineering applications, the problem that needs to optimize multiple objectives simultaneously is often encountered, which is called multi-objective optimization problems (MOPs) (Deb, Pratap, Agarwal, & Meyarivan, 2002; Ishibuchi & Murata, 1998; Samanlioglu, 2013). For example, the goals in job shop scheduling are commonly required to minimize the makespan, total workload, and critical workload, while the targets in product design are certainly needed to minimize the cost of product and optimize its quality. Since the conflicts exist among the objectives, the improvement of one objective may deteriorate other objectives and resultantly it generates a set of equally-optimal solutions, which is termed Pareto-optimal set (PS). The corresponding mapping of PS in objective space is termed Pareto-optimal front (PF). As the size of PF may be infinite, it is impractical to find out all the Pareto-optimal solutions. Thus, an important job of MOPs is to obtain a finite size of PS that is distributed uniformly along the PF, which supports the decision maker to select the appropriate solutions for different practical cases (Lin & Chen, 2013; Zhang & Li, 2007).Currently, nature-inspired metaheuristic algorithms have been recognized to be well suitable for solving MOPs since they can handle some complex problems that are characterized with multimodality, nonlinearity, and discontinuity (Jones, Mirrazavi, & Tamiz, 2002). Among them, particle swarm optimization (PSO) is an interesting nature-inspired algorithm that mimics the social cooperative and competitive behavior of bird flocking and fish schooling (Kennedy & Eberhart, 1995). Due to the fast convergence speed and easy implementation, it has attracted a great interest of researchers and been designed for solving many single-objective optimization problems (SOPs) and various engineering applications (Dang et al., 2013; Nayeri, Yang, & Elsherbeni, 2013; Unler & Murat, 2010). The promising results provided by PSO for solving SOPs validate its effectiveness and efficiency to locate the optimal results in a large and complex problem landscape. This motivates the researchers to extend PSO for MOPs and plenty of multi-objective PSO (MOPSO) algorithms are presented accordingly (Moubayed, Pertovski, & McCall, 2014; Coello Coello, Pulido, & Lechuga, 2004; Goh, Tan, Liu, & Chiam, 2010; Zhan et al., 2013). Generally, most of the existing MOPSO algorithms can be classified into two categories. The first class embeds the Pareto dominance relationship into PSO, which is used to determine the personal best and global best particles (Nebro et al., 2009; Sierra & Coello Coello, 2005; Wang & Yang, 2010). The second kind adopts decomposition approach to transform MOPs into a set of SOPs, where traditional PSO can be directly applied to solve MOPs (Moubayed, Pertovski, & McCall, 2010; Martinez & Coello Coello, 2011; Peng & Zhang, 2008). These MOPSO algorithms perform very well in solving some MOPs. However, when tackling the complex MOPs characterized with multimodality and the existence of many local PFs, e.g., WFG1 (Huband, Barone, While, & Hingston, 2005) and DTLZ3 (Deb, Thiele, Laumanns, & Zitzler, 2005), most MOPSO algorithms fail to effectively approach the true PF. This is mainly because they only adopt a single search strategy to update the velocity of each particle, which may lack the capabilities to tackle some kinds of complex MOPs.To repair this weakness, multiple search strategies may be an alternative technology as it has been studied experimentally in PSO for solving SOPs and proven to be an effective and efficient approach to enhance the capabilities of PSO when handling various types of SOPs (Hu, Wu, & Weir, 2013; Li, Yang, & Nguyen, 2012; Zuo, Zhang, & Tan, 2014). Inspired by the reported multiple search strategies for SOPs, it is reasonable to believe that multiple search strategies can be applied in MOPSO to further improve its convergence speed and the robustness when dealing with different kinds of MOPs. Therefore, a novel MOPSO algorithm with multiple search strategies is presented in this paper, called MMOPSO. Decomposition approach is adopted in MMOPSO to decompose MOPs into a set of SOPs and then each particle is assigned to optimize each SOP. Two search strategies for updating the particle's velocity are designed to accelerate the convergence speed and maintain the population diversity respectively. Their cooperation is controlled by a pre-defined threshold. All the non-dominated solutions visited by the particles are stored in a finite-size external archive. Once the external archive is full, only the non-dominated solutions with bigger crowding-distance values will be remained, which are considered to be the elitist solutions and good representatives of the entire PF. To let the elitist information be shared among the external archive, an evolutionary search strategy, composed by simulated binary crossover (SBX) and polynomial mutation (PM), is performed, which enhances the exploratory capabilities of MMOPOS. When compared with the existing MOPSO algorithms, the novelty of MMOPSO can be described as follows.(1)Different from the single search pattern adopted in most MOPSO algorithms, two search strategies are designed in MMOPSO for updating the velocity of each particle, which are aimed at accelerating the convergence speed and maintaining the population diversity respectively. Their executions are determined by a pre-defined threshold to retain the balance of exploitation and exploration.An evolutionary search strategy is run on the external archive of PSO, which is beneficial for the information exchange among the elitist individuals. The evolutionary operators can provide another search power for PSO and remedy the weaknesses of PSO-based search when handling some difficult MOPs.New definitions of personal-best and global-best particles are given in MMOPSO. Traditionally, personal-best and global-best particles are the best ones visited by each particle and the swarm respectively. Whereas, in MMOPSO, as decomposition approach is adopted to transform MOPs into a set of SOPs, personal-best and global-best particles are respectively considered to be the best values of each aggregation problem and all SOPs. Therefore, MMOPSO can focus on optimizing each aggregation problem by using PSO search.The advantages of multiple search strategies will be investigated and validated by the experimental studies. Total 24 standard benchmark problems, including Fonseca (Fonseca & Flemming, 1998), Kursawe (1990), Schaffer (1985), ZDT (Zitzler, Deb, & Thiele, 2000), WFG (Huband et al., 2005) and DTLZ (Deb et al., 2005) series test problems, are utilized to evaluate the comprehensive performance of MMOPSO. When compared with some MOPSO algorithms and two state-of-the-art multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs), e.g., DDMOPSO (Moubayed et al., 2014), CMPSO (Zhan et al., 2013), SMPSO (Nebro et al., 2009), dMOPSO (Martinez & Coello Coello, 2011), OMOPSO (Sierra & Coello Coello, 2005), NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002) and MOEA/D (Li & Zhang, 2009), MMOPSO performs better on most of test problems when considering both of the convergence speed and population diversity.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the related background, including some important terms of MOPs, decomposition approach, traditional PSO and the existing MOPSO algorithms. In Section 3, the details of MMOPSO are described, where the framework of MMOPSO and multiple search approaches are illustrated. The experimental studies are given in Section 4, which compare the performance of MMOPSO with various multi-objective optimization algorithms and analyze the advantages of multiple search strategies in MMOPSO. At last, conclusions are summarized in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a novel MOPSO algorithm with multiple search strategies is presented, which is based on decomposition approach to transform MOPs into a set of aggregation problems. Each particle in the swarm is accordingly assigned to optimize each aggregation problem. A novel velocity update approach is designed to renew the particle velocity by using two search strategies, which can concurrently promote the convergence speed and remain the population diversity. Additionally, evolutionary search strategy is further performed on the non-dominated solutions in the external archive, which is able to exchange their beneficial information. This embedded evolutionary search power can repair the weakness of PSO search pattern and resultantly enhance the comprehensive performance of MMOPSO in solving various kinds of MOPs. The effectiveness and efficiency of multiple search strategies are also justified by the experimental studies. When compared with some MOPSO algorithms and two state-of-the-art MOEAs, such as DDMOPSO, CMPSO, SMPSO, dMOPSO, OMOPSO, MOEA/D and NSGA-II, the experimental results illustrate that MMOPSO performs best on most of test problems.Our future study will further enhance the performance of MMOPSO, and extend it for tackling MOPs with more than three objectives. Furthermore, the applications of MMOPSO for some practical engineering problems will also be investigated in our future work.