@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Steiner travelling salesman problem with correlated costs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The Steiner TSP is a variant of the TSP suitable for road networks.We consider an extension with stochastic and correlated costs.This is modelled as a mean-variance optimisation problem.We show how to approximate the efficient frontier via integer programming.Instances with up to 100 nodes can be solved in reasonable times.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Travelling salesman problem,Mean-variance optimisation,Mixed-integer nonlinear programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Steiner Travelling Salesman Problem (STSP) is a variant of the TSP that is suitable for instances defined on road networks. We consider an extension of the STSP in which the road traversal costs are both stochastic and correlated. This happens, for example, when vehicles are prone to delays due to rush hours, road works or accidents. Following the work of Markowitz on portfolio selection, we model this problem as a bi-objective mean-variance problem. Then, we show how to approximate the efficient frontier via integer programming. We also show how to exploit certain special structures in the correlation matrices. Computational results indicate that our approach is viable for instances with up to 100 nodes. It turns out that minimum variance tours can look rather different from minimum expected cost tours.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP), one is given a complete graph, and a cost for each edge of the graph, and one seeks a Hamiltonian circuit of minimum total cost. The TSP is a classical and much-studied problem in combinatorial optimisation, and several books have been written on it (e.g., Applegate, Bixby, Chvátal, and Cook, 2006; Gutin and Punnen, 2002; Lawler, Lenstra, Kan, and Shmoys, 1985). Somewhat less well known is the Steiner TSP (STSP), which is a variant of the TSP that is suitable for instances defined on road networks (see, e.g., Cornuéjols, Fonlupt, and Naddef, 1985; Fleischmann, 1985; Letchford, Nasiri, and Theis, 2013; Orloff, 1974). In the STSP, one is given a sparse graph, representing a road network, a cost for each edge of the graph, and a subset of nodes that represent customers. The task is to find a minimum-cost tour that passes through each customer node. Edges may be traversed more than once, and nodes visited more than once, if desired.In real-life STSP applications, the edge-costs are likely to be stochastic rather than deterministic. (They are also likely to be time-varying rather than static, but we ignore that possibility in this paper.) For example, if the costs represent fuel consumption or travel times, then events such as rush hours, road works or accidents can cause the costs to be larger than expected. In addition, the costs are likely to be correlated, rather than statistically independent, since congestion on one road is likely to cause congestion on nearby roads.These considerations lead us to consider an extension of the STSP, which we call the Steiner TSP with Correlated Costs (STSPCC). This is like the STSP, except that the costs follow a multi-variate distribution whose first and second moments are known. Following the classical Markowitz mean-variance approach to portfolio selection Markowitz (1952), we view the STSPCC as a bi-objective optimisation problem, in which there is a trade-off between minimising the expected cost of a tour and minimising the variance of the cost. This leads naturally to the problem of computing (or approximating) the efficient frontier.Our approach to this problem is based on integer programming. We begin by taking the two best formulations of the standard STSP given in our earlier paper (Letchford et al., 2013), and adapting them to the problem of finding a single efficient solution to the STSPCC. This leads to four formulations, two quadratic and two linear. Next, we show how those formulations can be improved if the cost correlations have either of two special structures that may arise in practice. Finally, we take the best of the four formulations and solve it repeatedly, with different settings of a certain parameter, in order to construct an approximation of the efficient frontier. Our computational results show that, in this way, one can solve small- to medium-sized instances in reasonable times.The paper is structured as follows. The relevant literature is reviewed in Section 2. In Section 3, we present our approach to the case in which the correlation matrix has no special structure. In Section 4, we show how to deal with the two special correlation structures mentioned. The computational results are presented in Section 5, and some concluding remarks appear in Section 6.We use the following notation in the remainder of the paper. The road network is denoted by G = (V, E), where V is the vertex set and E is the edge set. The cost of traversing the edge (i.e., road) e ∈ E is denoted by ce. The set of customer nodes, which is a subset of V, is denoted by C. It is assumed that G is undirected, i.e., that all edges e ∈ E represent two-way streets. We do however make some remarks about the possibility of adapting our approach to the ‘asymmetric’ case, in which some or all of the roads are one-way (see Sections 2.1 and 3.1).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
