@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimisation of integrated reverse logistics networks with different product recovery routes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An integrated reverse logistics network with two recovery routes is considered.A two phase model for optimisation of this network is proposed.Fuzzy uncertainty in demand and return quantity of different quality is analysed.Quality thresholds are used to determine a recovery route for each returned product.Sensitivity of the network to changes in five of the main parameters is analysed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Reverse logistics,Quality of returned products,Uncertainty modelling,Inventory control,Fuzzy optimisation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The awareness of importance of product recovery has grown swiftly in the past few decades. This paper focuses on a problem of inventory control and production planning optimisation of a generic type of an integrated Reverse Logistics (RL) network which consists of a traditional forward production route, two alternative recovery routes, including repair and remanufacturing and a disposal route. It is assumed that demand and return quantities are uncertain. A quality level is assigned to each of the returned products. Due to uncertainty in the return quantity, quantity of returned products of a certain quality level is uncertain too. The uncertainties are modelled using fuzzy trapezoidal numbers. Quality thresholds are used to segregate the returned products into repair, remanufacturing or disposal routes. A two phase fuzzy mixed integer optimisation algorithm is developed to provide a solution to the inventory control and production planning problem. In Phase 1, uncertainties in quantity of product returns and quality of returns are considered to calculate the quantities to be sent to different recovery routes. These outputs are inputs into Phase 2 which generates decisions on component procurement, production, repair and disassembly. Finally, numerical experiments and sensitivity analysis are carried out to better understand the effects of quality of returns and RL network parameters on the network performance. These parameters include quantity of returned products, unit repair costs, unit production cost, setup costs and unit disposal cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Within the past few decades, environmental concerns have led to a significant increase in product recovery activities and interest in sustainability of supply chains and logistics networks. Consumer’s inclination toward ‘green logistics’, legal pressure and possible economic benefit are among the main reasons which led manufacturers to integrate recovery activities into their processes (Ilgin & Gupta, 2010). RL concerns handling of the flow of material and production from the point of consumption to the point of origin (Fleischmann et al., 1997). It covers product recovery activities which are crucial to sustainability, such as repair, remanufacturing and recycling. While recycling typically refers only to the reuse of materials used for a product without preserving its structure, repair usually involves activities necessary to restore a damaged product into the working order, while preserving its integrity. In contrast, remanufacturing comprises disassembly, replacement of components where necessary and assembly of a product to bring it back into as-good-as-new condition.One of the most important features of the reverse flow is the presence of uncertainty in both quantity and quality of returned products which needs to be considered when developing quantitative models of reverse flows (Inderfurth, 2005; Fleischmann et al., 1997). Quality of returned products has been discussed in the literature from various point of view such as inventory control, buy-back price, and different markets for new and repaired products (Dobos & Richter, 2006; Zikopoulos & Tagaras, 2007; Aras, Boyaci, & Verter, 2004; Mitra, 2007).The focus of this paper is on RL networks with two alternative recovery routes, including repair and remanufacturing, which are integrated with a traditional forward production route and a disposal option. Return products are inspected to determine their quality. They are separated into repair, remanufacturing and disposal routes based on repair and remanufacturing quality thresholds. The effects of different repair and remanufacturing thresholds on the RL network performance are examined.In this paper, fuzzy sets are used to describe uncertainty in both demand and quantity of returned products of a specific quality level. One of the main advantages that fuzzy sets provide is the possibility of describing parameters as linguistic variables (Zadeh, 1975). In this approach, in the absence of statistical data, the expert can give linguistic descriptions of the quantity values which are modelled using fuzzy numbers, for example, returned quantity is ‘considerably more than x’, ‘about x’, ‘more than x but less than y’, etc. (Petrovic, Xie, Burnham, & Petrovic, 2008).This paper is arranged as follows. Section 2 will briefly introduce the relevant literature. In Section 3, the problem statement is presented by describing RL networks under consideration and the main assumptions made. In Section 4, a fuzzy mixed integer optimisation model of the RL network is presented. Using the model described in Section 4, a set of numerical experiments are conducted and the results are reported in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6 the paper is concluded by discussing the outcomes and possible future directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper is focused on RL networks with a forward route, two recovery routes, including repair and remanufacturing, and a disposal option. A fuzzy mixed integer programming model which facilitates decision making in presence of uncertainty in demand and quantity of returned products of different quality levels is developed. Quality of products is described as a scalar value which is utilised to separate the returned products into the two recovery and a disposal routes. Recovery policies are defined by two thresholds, namely repair and remanufacturing thresholds.The RL network performances under different recovery policies are compared. It is concluded that recovery policies have a considerable impact on the RL network cost. Also, by carrying out numerical experiments, it is concluded that return quantity, unit repair costs, unit production cost, setup costs and disposal cost have impacts on the optimal recovery policy. Hence, a simple approach which assumes all returned products to be either recoverable or non-recoverable is not always realistic and can lead to inferior solutions.The numerical experiments carried out have brought some insight into RL behaviour under different quality thresholds, i.e., recovery policies. The summary of the findings is as follows. First, the selection of recovery routes to be used in the networks have a great impact on the networks’ performance. Further on, RL network parameters which have a considerable impact on selection of recovery policies are identified. It is shown that the repair route is used when there is a high quantity of returned products. The forward route is used for low quantities of return and the use of this route is decreasing while the quantity of returns is increasing. Repair only policies are cost effective for very high quantities of returns. It is proved that repair quality threshold decreases and increases with decreases and increases, respectively, in the unit repair cost. It seems that the remanufacturing quality threshold is not affected. In addition, for the lower unit production costs, the remanufacturing and forward production routes are more cost effective. For the higher unit production costs, the repair route becomes more economical, while remanufacturing and forward production routes are not used at all. With respect to the setup costs, mixed recovery policies, i.e. all recovery and forward production routes are used for certain range of the setup costs, while the repair route becomes dominant with increases in the setup costs. High unit disposal cost enforces the use of recovery routes, while the forward production route is used less, however, the unit disposal cost does not have an impact on the quantity of products to be repaired.The future work will be carried out in the following directions. First, a model for determining quality thresholds for repair and remanufacturing routes in Phase 1 will be developed. Furthermore, this model will be enhanced to enable dynamic changes in the quality thresholds within the given time horizon. Second, the model will be extended to incorporate multi products and multi components. Finally, a multi objective optimisation model which will consider not just the cost objective, but also environmental objectives will be developed and analysed.Fuzzy trapezoidal numbers are used to represent uncertainty in both demand and return quantities of different quality levels. Fuzzy trapezoidal numberãis represented by a 4-tuple(a̲,aL,aU,a¯)with a membership functionμã(x), as follows:μã(x)=x-a̲aL-a̲a̲⩽x<aL1aL⩽x⩽aUa¯-xa¯-aUaU<x⩽a¯0otherwiseA trapezoidal membership function is graphically presented in Fig. A.13.Table A.8shows fuzzy operators of trapezoidal fuzzy numbers used in this model, whereã=(a̲,aL,aU,a¯)andb̃=(b̲,aL,aU,b¯).A fuzzy linear programming model under consideration is as follows:FindX=[x1,x2,…,xn]whichminimisef̃(X)s.t.gi(X)⩽b̃ii=1,2,…,mgj′(X)⩾b̃j′j=1,2,…,m′0⩽Xwheref̃(x)is a fuzzy objective function andb̃iandb̃j′are fuzzy parameters. They are modelled using trapezoidal membership functions as illustrated in Fig. A.13. This optimisation problem involves both fuzzy objective function and constraints expressed using fuzzy parameters. In the method proposed, they are both interpreted in the same way, by introducing satisfaction degreeαin achieving the minimum off̃(x)and satisfying the constraints with fuzzy parametersb̃iandb̃j′.The fuzzy linear programming is converted into a crisp linear programming model as follows:maximiseαs.t.f¯(X)+(1-α)(fU(X)-f¯(X))⩽fmin+(1-α)(fmax-fmin)gi(X)⩽b̲i+(1-α)(biL-b̲i)+(1-α)pii=1,2,…,mgj′(X)⩾b¯j+(1-α)(bjU-b¯j)-(1-α)pj′j=1,2,…,m′0⩽X,α∈[0,1]In the crisp model,piandpj′are tolerances introduced for fuzzy right hand sides which includebĩandb̃j′, respectively. Fuzzy tolerance values represent the maximum extent to which the constraint can be relaxed and represent the decision maker’s intuition about the flexibility of parameters and constraints. In extreme cases, when the constraints cannot be relaxed at allα=1, while forα=0constraints can be relaxed up to their tolerance values as follows:whenα=1:f¯(X)⩽fmingi(X)⩽b̲ii=1,2,…,mgj′(X)⩾b¯j′j=1,2,…,m′whenα=0:fU(X)⩽fmaxgi(X)⩽biL+pii=1,2,…,mgj′(X)⩾bj′U-pj′j=1,2,…,m′In the case when a constraint with fuzzy parameters is expressed using equal relation, it is divided into two constraints, one less or equal constraint and one grater or equal constraint, and then converted into equivalent crisp constraints as described above.The fuzzy objective function is transformed into a crisp constraint which limits the fuzzy values of the objective function with respect to the worst and the best possible objective function values,fmaxandfmin, repsectively. In extreme cases, when the satisfaction degree reaches its maximum,α=1, the objective function should be lower than or equal tofmin, i.e.f¯(X)⩽fmin; while forα=0,fU(X)⩽fmax. Valuesfminandfmaxare determined depending on the problem under consideration.