@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cash demand forecasting in ATMs by clustering and neural networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ATM centers were clustered with respect to daily withdrawal trends.Four neural networks built to predict an ATM center’s cash demand within a cluster.We obtained the best symmetric mean absolute percentage error.It is much smaller than that obtained on all ATMs without clustering.This approach helps banks in reducing operational costs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Time series,Neural networks,SAM method,Clustering,ATM cash withdrawal forecasting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To improve ATMs’ cash demand forecasts, this paper advocates the prediction of cash demand for groups of ATMs with similar day-of-the week cash demand patterns. We first clustered ATM centers into ATM clusters having similar day-of-the week withdrawal patterns. To retrieve “day-of-the-week” withdrawal seasonality parameters (effect of a Monday, etc.) we built a time series model for each ATMs. For clustering, the succession of seven continuous daily withdrawal seasonality parameters of ATMs is discretized. Next, the similarity between the different ATMs’ discretized daily withdrawal seasonality sequence is measured by the Sequence Alignment Method (SAM). For each cluster of ATMs, four neural networks viz., general regression neural network (GRNN), multi layer feed forward neural network (MLFF), group method of data handling (GMDH) and wavelet neural network (WNN) are built to predict an ATM center’s cash demand. The proposed methodology is applied on the NN5 competition dataset. We observed that GRNN yielded the best result of 18.44% symmetric mean absolute percentage error (SMAPE), which is better than the result of Andrawis, Atiya, and El-Shishiny (2011). This is due to clustering followed by a forecasting phase. Further, the proposed approach yielded much smaller SMAPE values than the approach of direct prediction on the entire sample without clustering. From a managerial perspective, the clusterwise cash demand forecast helps the bank’s top management to design similar cash replenishment plans for all the ATMs in the same cluster. This cluster-level replenishment plans could result in saving huge operational costs for ATMs operating in a similar geographical region.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The importance of accurate forecasting of the withdrawal amounts in ATMs has the following motivation. Cash demand in ATMs needs to be forecasted accurately similar to other products in vending machines, as an inventory of cash needs to be ordered and replenished for a priory set period of time. If the forecasts are wrong, they induce costs. If the forecast is too high unused cash is stored in the ATM incurring costs to the bank. The bank pays different refilling costs depending on its policy with the money transportation company. In the first policy type, the bank pays a significant fixed fee for the refilling, independently of the amount, plus a small extra cost for each fraction of the transported money amount. In the second policy type, the bank pays a small fixed fee for refilling while the staircase costs are significant (Castro, 2009). According to Simutis, Dilijonas, Bastina, Friman, and Drobinov (2007) such cash-related costs represent about 35–60% of the overall cost of running an ATM. Wagner (2007) estimated a 28% cost saving as a result of improving the inventory policies and cash transportation decisions for an ATM network for a financial institution ranked among the world top 700 banks. On the other hand, if the ATM runs out of cash, profit is lost and customers are dissatisfied due to bad service (www.neural-forecasting-competition.com/NN5/motivation.htm). Osorio and Toro (2012) minimized the cost of a cash-management system for a Colombian financial services institution without negatively affecting the service level.It is obvious that daily cash withdrawal amounts are time series. Hence, typical cash demand forecast models will have to use time series prediction methods. Recognizing the need, Lancaster University came up with a NN5 timeseries competition, wherein daily cash withdrawal amounts over 2years from 111 ATM centers across the UK are posted as the input data sets and several researchers proposed various models for the task (www.neural-forecasting-competition.com/NN5). In this study, the available data from NN5 time series competition (Crone, 2008) is used. For each of the 111 time series we forecast the next cash demands as a trace forecast for a forecasting horizon of 1week.This paper advocates the use of clusterwise cash demand prediction as it might have two advantages: (1) improved accuracy of the cash demand forecasts due to reduction in computational complexity when predicting an ATMs daily cash demand for groups of ATM centers with similar day-of-the week cash withdrawal seasonality patterns and (2) potentially huge savings in operational costs as similar cash replenishment models can be used for ATM centers belonging to the same cluster.To facilitate the cash demand forecasts, the ATM centers are (1) clustered into groups of ATM centers with similar day-of-the week cash withdrawal patterns followed by (2) a clusterwise prediction of the daily cash demands.First, each ATM center’s withdrawal time series is translated into a “day-of-the-week” cash withdrawal seasonality sequence containing seven day-of-the-week cash withdrawal seasonality parameters. For each ATM center, the continuous seasonality sequence is translated into a discrete cash withdrawal seasonality sequence. This “abstraction” transforms the continuous seasonality sequence into a high-level quality seasonality sequence facilitating the detection of ATM clusters with similar day-of-the week cash demand patterns. The similarity between the ATMs’ discretized daily withdrawal seasonality parameter sequence is measured by calculating the Levenshtein distance using the Sequence Alignment Method (SAM). These distances are further processed by a clustering algorithm to produce groups of ATM centers which are relatively homogeneous with respect to the day-of-the-week cash withdrawal seasonality patterns.Second, a predictive model is built for each cluster. For each ATM cluster four different neural networks are employed separately for forecasting purpose. We used MLP because it is universally popular in forecasting tasks. We employed GRNN, GMDH and WNN based on our experience and that of other authors (Li, Luo, Zhu, Liu, & Le, 2008; Mohanthy et al., 2010a, 2010b; Rajkiran & Ravi, 2007; Ravisankar & Ravi, 2010; Ravisankar, Ravi, Raghava Rao, & Bose, 2011; Srinivasan, 2008; Vinay Kumar et al., 2008).The proposed approach is similar to Prinzie and Van den Poel (2006), as we also use SAM to first find ATM center clusters with similar temporal patterns. Our approach differs from Prinzie and Van den Poel (2006) in two major ways. Firstly, the sequences are represented by seven discretized day-of-the-week time series seasonality parameters rather than four discretized relative evolution turnover variables. We believe that the seasonality parameters estimated by time-series models are more precise than the calculation of relative evolution variables. Secondly, whereas Prinzie and Van den Poel (2006) include the cluster indicators as one of the predictors in the churn attrition model, this paper builds a separate cash demand forecasting model per ATM cluster.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, literature review is presented. In Section 3, an overview of Sequence-alignment method is described. Section 4 presents the proposed methodology: construction of the sequential dimension; method to find effect-of-the-day parameter and its discretization; calculation of SAM distances; and the clustering procedure employing the Taylor-Butina algorithm. Section 5 presents a brief overview of the forecasting methods viz., WNN, GMDH, MLFF and GRNN. Results are discussed in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The primary objective of the paper is to cluster different ATM centers using the Taylor–Butina’s clustering algorithm and build cluster-wise forecasting models using neural networks. The best result of the study, an average SMAPE value of 18.44% is yielded by GRNN. This result is better than the result of Andrawis et al. (2011). The initial phase of clustering the similar ATM centers reduces the computational task in the forecasting phase thereby improving cash demand predictions. Further, the proposed approach of clustering followed by prediction yielded much smaller SMAPE values than the traditional approach of direct prediction on the entire sample without clustering. From a managerial perspective, identifying ATM clusters with similar daily cash demand trends helps the bank’s top management to design similar cash replenishment plans for all the ATM centers falling under the same cluster. This segment-level replenishment plans could result in saving huge operational costs for ATM centers operating in a similar geographical region. For a financial-services institution having ATM centers operating in very different geographical regions, such huge cost savings could also be realized if the ATM segment-level cash replenishment plan is applied within operationally meaningful regions. That is ATM clusters with similar day-of-the week cash demand patterns are defined within each operationally meaningful region.