@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive large neighborhood search for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows, profits, and reserved requests

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new vehicle routing problem is modeled.This paper solves core sub-problem that appeared in carrier collaboration.An adaptive large neighborhood search is applied to a vehicle routing problem with profits.Request selection and routing decision are handled simultaneously by a new mechanism.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicle routing problem,Pickup and delivery problem,Time window,Profit,Adaptive large neighborhood search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows, Profits, and Reserved Requests (PDPTWPR), a new vehicle routing problem appeared in carrier collaboration realized through Combinatorial Auction (CA). In carrier collaboration, several carriers form an alliance and exchange some of their transportation requests. Each carrier has reserved requests, which will be served by itself, whereas its other requests called selective requests may be served by the other carriers. Each request is a pickup and delivery request associated with an origin, a destination, a quantity, two time windows, and a price for serving the request paid by its corresponding shipper. For each carrier in CA, it has to determine which selective requests to serve, in addition to its reserved requests, and builds feasible routes to maximize its total profit. A Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model is formulated for the problem and an adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) approach is developed. The ALNS involves ad-hoc destroy/repair operators and a local search procedure. It runs in successive segments which change the behavior of operators and compute their own statistics to adapt selection probabilities of operators. The MILP model and the ALNS approach are evaluated on 54 randomly generated instances with 10–100 requests. The computational results indicate that the ALNS significantly outperforms the solver, not only in terms of solution quality but also in terms of CPU time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the fierce competition in global markets, the introduction of products with shorter life cycles, the increasing fuel costs and labor prices, the growing transport legislation and the heightened expectations of customers have shrunk profit margins of shippers and carriers (Cruijssen, Cools, & Dullaert, 2007). Thus, as an effective way to cut empty backhauls and to increase vehicle utilization rate, Collaborative Logistics (CL) attracted a growing interest from industrial practitioners and academic research (Dai & Chen, 2009b). In CL, shippers, carriers, contractors and even competitors can be partners if their collaboration can create a win-win outcome.The collaboration among small or medium sized enterprises (SME) plays a growing role in their daily operation/management. Participation in a network and collaboration with other enterprises has now become an inevitable strategy for them to gain competitive advantages in current severe environment. To achieve economies of scale, more and more SMEs have formed collaborative networks by sharing distribution tasks and resources, in order to reduce costs, improve responsiveness to the evolution of market demands, and capture more business opportunities.In our study, we assume that several carriers form an alliance. This alliance aims at maximizing the total profit so as to generate more profit for each carrier. Inside this alliance, the carriers achieve collaboration by exchanging part of their transportation requests. We are developing a general two-step approach for carrier collaboration (e.g. Dai and Chen, 2009a; 2009b). The first step is reassignment/reallocation of requests among carriers, whereas the second aims at sharing the resulting profits among them (Dai & Chen, 2012, 2015). The task reassignment is realized through Combinatorial Auction (CA). In each iteration of CA, the auctioneer sets/updates a service price (revenue) for each request to be exchanged among carriers (Dai, Chen, & Yang, 2014), then each carrier determines which requests to bid for (to serve), in order to maximize its own profit. The latter problem is referred to Bid Generation Problem (BGP) (e.g. Wang and Xia, 2005; Lee, Kwon, and Ma, 2007; Buer, 2014; Triki, Oprea, Beraldi, and Crainic, 2014) for each carrier.In this paper, we consider the BGP (or request selection problem) for each carrier in CA (Dai & Chen, 2011). It is assumed that each carrier has a set of reserved requests (i.e., not proposed for exchange in CA) and can serve additional requests (selective requests) from other carriers. Each request is a pickup and delivery request associated with an origin, a destination, a quantity, two time windows, and a price (revenue) for serving the request paid by its corresponding shipper (a customer of the carrier). Two different decisions have to be simultaneously taken by the carrier: Which requests to bid for (to serve) and how to build routes for maximizing its own profit, equals to the sum of collected revenues minus the total cost of the routes. This raises a new Pickup and Delivery Problem (PDP) with Time Windows, Profits, and Reserved Requests (PDPTWPR). To the best of our knowledge, this problem was rarely studied in the literature.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A brief literature review on CL and Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP) with Profits (VRPP) is provided in Section 2. Section 3 defines the problem and provides a mathematical model. An adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) is developed in Section 4. Section 5 proposes a set of randomly generated instances and compares the results of our ALNS with the ones obtained by the CPLEX solver on the mathematical model. Finally, Section 6 provides a quick conclusion with some remarks for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This article introduces a new vehicle routing problem, the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows, Profits, and Reserved Requests (PDPTWPR). The PDPTWPR is an important sub-problem of Collaboration Logistics (CL) in Less than Truck-Load transportation (LTL) mode. To get a near optimal solution of the PDPTWPR under tight time window and fleet size constraints, we developed specific techniques to improve the basic adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) method, such as the meta-destroy mechanism, the search organized in segments and the dynamic adjustment of operator behavior (DAOB). Moreover, 8 tailored destroy/repair operators are designed to cope with the peculiarities of the PDPTWPR and a local search procedure based on 6 effective moves is added for further improvement. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time an ALNS is developed for a pickup and delivery problem with profits.To evaluate the performance of our ALNS heuristic applied to the PDPTWPR, a Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model is formulated and solved by CPLEX in a pre-specified time limit. For small to medium size instances (up to 50 requests), the upper and lower bounds achieved by CPLEX are compared with the lower bounds obtained by the ALNS. The test results show that our heuristic is able to retrieve the proven optima found by CPLEX. In the cases without proven optima, the ALNS significantly outperforms CPLEX both in terms of solution quality and CPU time. On the largest instances with 100 requests, even when CPLEX was not able to reach feasible solutions in 10 hours, the ALNS was still able to generate good feasible solutions in a reasonable computational time.Our future work will consider a variant of the PDPTWPR that has new characteristics such as a heterogeneous vehicle fleet, maximum tour duration, multiple vehicle depots, etc. The design of a fair post-collaboration profit reallocation scheme will also be addressed.