@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of the bullwhip effect in two parallel supply chains with interacting price-sensitive demands

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analytical framework for BWE in two-parallel supply chains is proposed.We explore two-parallel supply chains’ interactions to determine BWE.We derive the conditions under which the BWE is amplified or lessened.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Bullwhip effect,Multiple supply chains,Interaction,Price-sensitive,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper offers insights into how the bullwhip effect in two parallel supply chains with interacting price-sensitive demands is affected in contrast to the situation of a single product in a serial supply chain. In particular, this research studies two parallel supply chains, each consisting of a manufacturer and a retailer, and the external demand for a single product depends on its price and the other's price in a situation in which each price follows a first-order autoregressive process. In this paper, we propose an analytical framework that incorporates two parallel supply chains, and we explore their interactions to determine the bullwhip effect. We identify the conditions under which the bullwhip effect is amplified or lessened with interacting price-sensitive demands relative to the situation without interaction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The adoption of the simple serial supply chain structure model assumption is a powerful technique for studying the bullwhip effect; see, e.g., Lee, Padmanabhan, and Whang (1997a), Chen, Drezner, Ryan, and Simchi-Levi (2000a), Chen, Ryan, and Simchi-Levi (2000b), and Alwan, Liu, and Yao (2003). However, in many industries (e.g., automotive, electronic equipment, telecommunication, fast food, and apparel), the traditional model of a serial supply chain that addressed the issue of the bullwhip effect is giving way to a new paradigm of chain-to-chain interactions (e.g., potential competitions or collaborations). It is clear that in such interactions, either an upstream firm tier or a downstream firm tier in one supply chain interacts not only with its corresponding firm tier but also with the entire other chain. The performance of a supply chain will be influenced by the chain-to-chain interaction. However, it is not obvious in such interactions that the supply chain or the industry will be benefited or not from the bullwhip aspect. Boyaci and Gallego (2004), Ha and Tong (2008), Zhang and Zhao (2010), and Ha, Tong, and Zhang (2011) have investigated supply chain coordination and information sharing in two competing supply chains based on the non-serial supply chains assumption. However, these research works do not report any insight on the bullwhip effect in supply chain networks. Instead, we investigate the impact on the bullwhip effect of the two parallel supply chain interaction caused by product substitutability or complementarity.In this paper, we use the bullwhip effect as a measure of the supply chain performance, and we consider an industry with two parallel supply chains that display interactions at the level of their demand streams. A number of industries meet the criteria of our model. In the automotive industry, which includes Honda and Toyota, each forms a chain with its downstream dealer, who shares the same demand market. It is clear that the car's selling price plays an important role in its market share. For example, the higher the Honda car's selling price, the lower its market demand will be, and vice versa. However, because of the substitutability between Honda and Toyota, if the Toyota car's selling price is too high, a strategic consumer will switch to Honda and therefore increase its market share if the two brands have nearly the same configurations and if there are no brand preferences. Similarly, a lower Toyota car's selling price will restrain the Honda market share. In other words, consumers make purchase decisions based not only on the Honda car's selling price but also on that of the Toyota. This situation is also relevant in the mobile telecommunication industry for competing products (e.g., Samsung Galaxy Note II and Apple iPhone 5) and in the food industry for complementary products (e.g., pizza and soft drink).The objective of this paper is to offer insights into how the bullwhip effect is affected in two parallel supply chains with interacting price-sensitive demands as opposed to a single product in a serial supply chain. To do so, we consider two supply chains in which each distributes a single product and each consists of a manufacturer and a retailer. The demand in each supply chain is price-sensitive, and its market demand scale depends on the two product prices. In other words, because the two products are substitutable/complementary or the two supply chains are competitors/partners, the market demand scale in each supply chain depends not only on its own price but also on the price in the other supply chain. Assuming that both retailers use an optimal order-up-to-inventory policy and an optimal minimum mean-squared error (MMSE) forecasting technique, we explore their interactions in determining the bullwhip effect and derive conditions under which the bullwhip effect is amplified (or lessened) relative to the situation without interaction.This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature. Section 3 presents the interacting demand and price processes in two parallel supply chains. Section 4 introduces the inventory policy and the forecasting technique for each supply chain. Section 5 investigates the interactions between the two parallel supply chains in determining the bullwhip effect and derives the conditions under which the bullwhip effect is amplified (or lessened) with interacting price-sensitive demands relative to the situation without interactions. Section 6 provides a numerical study to explain the conditions and reveal managerial insights. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper and suggests follow-up research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we establish closed-form expressions to quantify the bullwhip effect in a setting with two interacting supply chains. Based on a structure of two parallel supply chains with interactions that emerge from the demand stream level due to product substitutability or complementarity, our findings reveal that the interactions may increase or dampen the bullwhip effect:(1)The interactions between the two competitive supply chains due to product substitutability may increase or dampen the bullwhip effect. A decreased bullwhip effect is expected if the marginal rate of substitution is low. Otherwise, an exacerbated bullwhip effect will occur.When the two parallel supply chains are partners or their products are complementary, a decreased bullwhip effect will occur if the marginal rate of complementary is high. Otherwise, the bullwhip effect may be amplified.If the product in one supply chain has a long lead time, a large self-acting price sensitivity coefficient, a medium-large price correlation coefficient, a small demand variance, or a large price variance, then the interactions due to product substitutability or complementarity will be likely to dampen the bullwhip effect.77We didn't intend to recommend that managers should affect lead time or intentionally invite competition to reduce the bullwhip effect. Actually, if the supply chain managers ignore the interactive effect, they will miscalculate the bullwhip effect in interactive supply chains. Our study draws attention to this potential error and could help managers avoid unnecessary pitfalls due to such miscalculations.In contrast to previous research, in this paper, we have shown that the bullwhip effect can be completely dampened. Only when the two parallel supply chains are competitors or their products are substitutable is there a possibility that their interaction can completely eliminate the bullwhip effect in this supply chain.Our findings suggest that managers who ignore the interactions between supply chains are likely to overstate or underestimate the bullwhip effect in a supply chain, depending on the product properties. Our findings could help managers better understand bullwhip effects and this enhanced understanding will probably help them do a better job in managing supply chains. The research presented in this paper suggests several future directions for enhancement of our understanding of the interaction between supply chains via the bullwhip effect. First, because the bullwhip effect may lead to misguided inventory levels and result in serious cost implications for the supply chain (Lee et al., 1997a), the method for quantifying the impact of the interactions between supply chains on the inventory and the cost is a direction worth pursuing. Second, this paper only considers the order-up-to inventory policy and MMSE forecasting technique. Thus, other inventory policies and forecasting techniques must be analysed in further studies. Moreover, extending the chain-to-chain interaction on the demand stream level to different tiers of the supply chain (i.e., chain-to-chain interaction on the manufacturer level or on the retailer level) is another future direction for a follow-up paper.