@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Opening the technological innovation black box: The case of the electronics industry in Korea

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a system dynamics to uncover the hidden technological innovation black-box.Investments in product innovation maximize a firm's profits in the long run.Product portfolio complexity is a constraint on new product introduction.Process innovation is a facilitating factor for achieving time to market.Product and process innovation should be pursued simultaneously, not sequentially.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
R,&,D investment,Technological innovation,Investment portfolio,Product portfolio complexity,Product architecture complexity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this system dynamics simulation study we analyze a series of feedback causal relationships wherein R&D investments create new knowledge stocks, increasing technological knowledge “triggers” and interactions among entities of technological innovation, leading to firm profits through the commercialization process.Major aspects of this study are: First, we provide a holistic modeling approach to technological innovation in order to explicate the hidden causal relationships underlying innovation and the mechanisms which lead to innovative performance. Second, hypotheses pertaining to process and product innovation are tested utilizing the system dynamics model to open the black box of technological innovation incorporating long-term and dynamic perspectives.This study addresses strategic innovation policies vis-a-vis product complexity and suggests that a new paradigm wherein product and process innovations are pursued concurrently instead of sequentially can ensure a firm's sustainable growth.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a knowledge-based economy, technological innovation is pursued by firms as a major strategy for continued business growth. With increasing competition among firms due to globalization of markets and shortening product lifecycles, innovative new product development (NPD) has emerged as an important and essential element of increasing a firm's competitiveness (Salomon, Weise, & Gemunden, 2007). If a firm is to have competitive advantage in a rapidly changing market environment, technological innovation is essential; a precise understanding of the dynamic feedback structure by which R&D investments are translated into financial performance through technological innovation is a prerequisite for pursuing such a strategy (Ettlie, 1998; Utterback & Abernathy, 1975).However, most of current models in the literature do not adequately explain what is referred to as the ‘black box of technological innovation’ in an environment of rapidly changing technological evolution (Coombs & Bierly, 2006; Koellinger, 2008). The standard methodologies for the analysis of technological innovation are based on the correlation between a set of independent variables or influences and the steady state of the system. This modeling approach may be valid in technological innovations where technology change exhibits a smooth pattern over long product lifecycles and a low coefficient of variation. There is, however, an increasingly important family of innovative products with shorter new product lifecycles and larger technology variability for which the traditional linear and static methodologies may lead to incorrect conclusions (Kline & Rosenberg, 1986; Samara, Georgiadis, & Bakouros, 2012). Unlike before, the multifarious pathways by which technological innovation affects firm performance have become more complicated and uncertain. This makes it difficult to comprehend the multidimensional and complex nature of the interaction between technological capability and firm performance.There are a series of system dynamics (SD) papers in the literature that employ similar SD structures for technological innovation and derive either more specialized results or offer more generalizable views of Abernathy and Utterback's ‘dynamic model of product and process innovation’ hypotheses (Maier, 1999; Milling & Stumpfe, 2000). However, these studies are less applicable to the rapidly changing, current technological innovation strategies linking R&D investment, technological innovation, and financial performance.This paper proposes and analyzes a different series of feedback relationships from technological innovation to financial value creation based on information from the digital IT division of a global electronics firm in Korea (Kim & Choi, 2009). Further, this study is an attempt to carry out this unexplored avenue of research on technological innovation by building a system dynamics (SD) model to explain the hidden ‘black box of technological innovation’ under conditions of rapid technological evolution.The research issues of interest in this study are: (1) How should a firm choose between product innovation that is innovativeness-focused and process innovation that is efficiency-focused? Can they be pursued simultaneously? (2) Given the importance of releasing innovative new products in response to customer demands and shortened product lifecycles, how does product complexity affect the performance of a firm that seeks to be the ‘first mover’ through innovative products? And, (3) since technological innovation is achieved by means of feedback relationships between product and process innovations, in a situation where market demands for innovative products are steadily increasing, how do trade-off relationships between product and process innovation change over time?Since technological innovation process is highly fluid and dynamic, technological innovation needs unique prescriptions and strategies that fit well with the rapidly changing business environment (Danneels, 2002; Kline & Rosenberg, 1986). Therefore, it is important to examine the dynamic feedback processes that underpin the effects of technological innovation strategies on firm performance. This research offers four main contributions:•We extend previous studies by modeling the system dynamics to uncover the hidden black box relating technological innovation to performance.We demonstrate that investments in product innovation rather than process innovation maximize a firm's profits in the long run.We demonstrate that product portfolio complexity is a constraint on new product introduction; however, manufacturing process innovation is a facilitating factor for achieving time to market objective.Our results suggest that in an environment of short product and process life cycles, product and process innovation should be pursued simultaneously, not sequentially.In the next section, we review the literature on dynamics of technological innovation and develop the causal loop diagram (CLD) for the innovation process. Section 3 describes the SD methodology. Section 4 presents the analyses and results of simulation runs, and Section 5 discusses the implications of the results and offers suggestions for future research.Our model is based on the chain-link hypothesis of Garcia, Calantone, and Levine (2003), Kline and Rosenberg (1986); the dynamic model of product and process innovation due to Taylor and Taylor (2012), Utterback and Abernathy (1975); system thinking on innovation process of Galanakis (2006), and the national innovation system dynamics model of Samara et al. (2012). The model of the dynamics of technological innovation presented in this study is designed to assess the complicated dynamic process of interactions between technological innovation and firm performance.A review of the relationships between R&D as a means of knowledge creation and financial performance indicates that scientific technological knowledge and interdepartmental or intradepartmental innovations are utilized by firms to create existing and new markets. As R&D investments increase, R&D knowledge related to new products is accumulated, resulting in enhanced market performance through innovative new products (Ford & Sterman, 1998; Garcia et al., 2003; Murmann & Frenken, 2006; Yeh, Chu, Sher, & Chiu, 2010). This can be viewed as a direct effect of R&D investment on performance.In contrast, accumulated knowledge of manufacturing process and technological advancement resulting from it causes indirect effects by reducing production costs by enhancing efficiency of labor and capital. While explaining accumulative relationships of cause and effect between technology and corporate growth, Mozier and Towler (2004) argue that increased R&D budgets raise R&D resources, through which technological knowledge is accumulated, and accumulated knowledge, in turn, increases a firm's profits. A review of the literature elucidating the relationships between R&D and profit leads to the conclusion that, in general, increased R&D investments or technological innovation leads to increased level of R&D concentration, which, in turn, positively affects revenue and growth. The review also suggests that it can negatively affect business profit and growth in the short term since there is a considerable time lag before technological knowledge and innovation is incorporated into innovative products or manufacturing processes (Coad & Rao, 2008; Hagspiel, Huisman, & Nunes, 2015). Therefore, R&D or technological innovation has a dual effect.Utterback and Abernathy (1975) and Taylor and Taylor (2012) show that firms are spurred to introduce innovative products to be responsive to customer needs. During what the authors refer to as the fluid phase, a period for introduction of new technological paradigms, product innovation occurs extremely rapidly, largely by relying on new product traits. Radical innovation which is a fundamental change, representing a shift in existing technological systems, is made largely by discontinuous technological initiatives based on knowledge stocks accumulated through R&D investments. Differentiation and diversity of accumulated knowledge pertaining to product innovation through R&D investments and the variety of new products created through specific product innovations enhance the technological standing of new products in the market; the level of consumer attraction to the product, thus, increases product purchases during the commercialization phase. Expansion of investments in new product development (NPD) along with accumulation of product innovation leads to increases in the number of NPD projects (Godener & Söderquist, 2004; Sheng, Zhou, & Lessassy, 2013), and the increase in NPD projects accelerates introduction of new products, thereby increasing the firm's profit. Increased total profits arising from increased sales are linked back to reinvestments in R&D (see feedback relationships depicted in R1 and R3 Loops in Fig. 1).A firm in a competitive situation seeks to enhance its competitiveness in two ways. First, firms seek to enhance competitiveness by upgrading quality and functionality of products, which is a form of product innovation arising from R&D (Sterman, 2000; Yeh et al., 2010). Second, firms seek to minimize costs through process innovation aimed at maximizing efficiency of resources employed in production. R&D investments in process innovation and the ensuing accumulation of knowledge about manufacturing process serve as a factor accelerating process innovation (Repenning & Sterman, 2001). As process innovation increases, average unit production costs are reduced and increased profits lead to R&D investments for process innovation (see R2 Loop in Fig. 1 that captures these relationships).A firm's R&D investment portfolio can be viewed in terms of product and process innovation investments (Huisman & Kort, 2003). Based on the arguments presented, this study analyzes changes in the investment portfolio comprised of product innovation and process innovations and how these changes affect the firm's total profit through the causal relationships depicted in Fig. 1. As discussed previously, product innovations can have a direct effect on performance by enhancing the competitiveness of the firm and through positive perceptions for the firm's products. Process innovations can lead to performance gains, indirectly, to the extent that the firm is able to exploit the reduction in costs and increased productivity. We test the following hypothesis relating product and process innovation based on the dynamic model.H1Increased investments in product innovation are more influential in increasing a firm's profit than increased investments in process innovation.Due to the variety of consumers’ needs, technological advances, shorter product lifecycles, and strategic alliances, product complexity has been rapidly increasing (Kamath & Roy, 2007; MacDuffie, Sethuraman, & Fisher, 1996). Product portfolios are becoming complicated because of the need for mass customization and due to shortened product lifecycles, especially in electronics and high-tech industries (Coad & Rao, 2008). Moreover, a decrease in technology gaps between firms and an increase in individualization and diversity of customers’ needs has led to an increase in the complexity of product architectures or structures. Meanwhile, digital convergence among various product features is rapidly increasing (Jacobs & Swink, 2011; Wonglimpiyarat, 2005).Product complexity can be categorized into two types: (1) product portfolio complexity, which refers to the diversity of the product or service portfolio offered by firms to their customers, and (2) product architecture complexity, which refers to the complexity of integrating product components due to the number, specifications, or options of the product parts. Product complexity can have both positive and negative impacts on a firm's performance (Novak & Eppinger, 2001; Wilson & Perumal, 2009). In this research, we analyze the impact of product complexity on the firm's performance.Diversification of product portfolios, allows firms to provide customers with a variety of product options while simultaneously increasing customer satisfaction and maintaining loyal customers (Fang, 2008; MacDuffie et al., 1996). Moreover, firms can generate high revenue by dominating markets through faster time to market innovative new products than their competitors leading to de facto product standardization. In addition, firms can improve their market competitiveness through a wider range of product portfolios and minimize revenue volatility due to economic fluctuations (Wonglimpiyarat, 2005; Yeoh, 1994).As product innovation rates and NPD investment increase, the number of NPD projects and product portfolio are increasing, as seen in the R3 Loop in Fig. 1 (Sheng et al., 2013). In addition, an increase in the number of commercial products creates a virtuous cycle of relationships where sales of new products increase along with the firm's revenue inflow. Accordingly, we test the following hypothesis linking product portfolio and revenue.H2Product portfolio complexity leads to increase in firm's revenue.As digital convergence grows rapidly due to technological advancements and there is greater diversity of consumer needs, various forms of “convergence products” have emerged and expanded. Convergence among IT products, which generates new values by creatively recombining previously qualified technologies and ideas, is in vogue, especially in electronics and high-tech industries. Digital convergence of products increases the complexity of product designs, architectures and structure as well as the product portfolio. Product architecture complexity refers to the intricacy of product design and manufacturing due to an increase in the number of components or assemblies, core technologies and product functions, the difficulty of product design, interdependency/compatibility among technologies, the newness of technology, the degree of interoperability among tasks, and the number of functional departments participating in product development (Kim & Wilemon, 2003; Novak & Eppinger, 2001; Wilson & Perumal, 2009).Therefore, rising product architecture complexity has led to an increase in product specific process adjustments and movements of components between in-house production and the supply chain. These changes inevitably require flexibility and multi-functionality in the manufacturing processes. Product architecture complexity is a burden to the manufacturing processes of large-scale electronics and high-tech industries that seek to reduce manufacturing costs through mass production with low variety (Kim & Wilemon, 2003). Due to this burden, the efficiency and stability of the manufacturing process decreases resulting in reduced labor and capital productivity. This increases the pressure to redesign and renovate manufacturing process and serves as a catalyst for process innovation (B1 loop in Fig. 2). We formalize the interrelationships between product architecture complexity and process innovation in the following hypotheses.H3Product architecture complexity leads to increase process innovation.To grasp the dynamics of technological innovation, it is essential to understand feedback relationships between product innovations and process innovations within the innovation cycle. In the dynamic model of product and process innovation of Utterback and Abernathy (1975), the heightened labor and capital productivity that has reached the highest point of the “process S-curve” are resistant to new changes in the manufacturing process due to asset specificity and automation in manufacturing processes. This, in turn, reduces pressure for changes in manufacturing processes, thereby exerting a downward pressure on process innovation rate. This refers to the presence of negative feedback relationships where the overall process innovation rate declines over a period of time (see B2 Loop in Fig. 2).Contrary to the case where product innovation induces process innovation, increased process standardization serves as a constraint, reducing product innovation. As process innovation reaches the maturity stage of the process lifecycle followed by the accumulation of process innovation, product innovation is affected due to lack of flexibility of the production processes. During the highest point of process S-curve, specific purpose facilities and automation push costs of changing processes extremely high, causing production process to be fixed (Utterback & Abernathy, 1975). Accordingly, firms tend to produce only those products that are producible with the existing manufacturing processes. This strong interconnectivity between product line and manufacturing processes leads to a decrease in product innovation (Lenox, Rockart, & Lewin, 2009; Maier, 1999; Milling & Stumpfe, 2000). The more effort that is made to keep manufacturing processes stable, the more the rate of product innovation decreases. Therefore, a balanced state of technological innovation is maintained by the negative feedback relationship from process innovation to product innovation (See B1 Loop in Fig. 2).Recently, improved manufacturing techniques and technologies have been developed to overcome the dependence between products and manufacturing processes. Manufacturing processes have been converted from the ‘captive’ to ‘modular’ type to easily integrate with other components and significantly reduce process complexity due to product architecture; platform-based production are designed to enhance the flexibility of manufacturing processes. The electronics and high-tech industries exploit rationalized modular approach for mass-customization production, or simplify manufacturing processes by adopting platform-based processes to improve labor and capital productivity throughout product lifecycles (Bordoloi & Guerrero, 2008; Jacobs & Swink, 2011; Jacobs et al., 2011; Sánchez & Pérez, 2003).Therefore, we analyze how rationalization and simplification of manufacturing processes affects both product innovation and firm's performance. We state this formally in the following hypothesis.H4Improving manufacturing process such as modularization and platform-based design for manufacture/assembly, leads to increase product innovation.Since technology changes show themselves over a long period of time, it is difficult to assess technological innovation at a certain point of time. Therefore, it is important to analyze such shifts with a focus on the behavior pattern over time rather than with a focus on events at a certain point in time (Kamath & Roy, 2007; Sterman, 2000). Moreover, increases in complexity, variety, dynamism and importance of interdependency of technological innovation make it necessary to analyze traits of a system and differences between subsystems (Lenox et al., 2009). Accordingly, this study uses the SD methodology that aims to achieve a realistic and reflective model for a greater understanding of the target system. SD is focused on a dynamic form of analysis that can support efficient resource allocation for technological innovation.Fig. 3utilizes standard conventions for depicting a SD model. The model equations linking stocks and flows are not presented for reasons of brevity.The reader is referred to Appendix for standard procedures and equations for SD modeling. The parameter values and initial values for the stock variables in the model were chosen so that the model starts in steady state (i.e. in equilibrium) until perturbed.This paper examined the equation check and unit check of VENSIM DSS 6.33 software to assess robustness of the SD simulation model. According to the test results, there was no logical abnormality in the equation and variable unit. We also carried out a multivariate sensitivity testing to verify robustness of major parameter values with a high uncertainty in Table 1. To analyze the sensitivity of the model, it was assumed that the parameters follow the distribution function within a given range as shown in Table 1. The revenue inflow of the Stock-and-Flow diagram exhibits a saw-toothed behavior with upward positive trend line; the vertical axis represents revenue amount whereas the horizontal axis refers to time in years.According to the results of the sensitivity analysis shown in Fig. 4, the variation in revenue inflow increases to a degree over time; however, the direction in which the revenue inflow changes is constant, and the behavior of revenue inflow has no significant difference from that of the base run. This analysis allows for refining the model specification when large discrepancies arise, until the model results accord well with the “reference behavior”. This gives assurance as to the correctness of SD model structure. This is standard protocol in developing SD models (Oliva, 2003; Sterman, 2000).The purpose of calibration is to estimate the value of parameters that are not determined in the SD simulation and to verify the objective validity of the model. If a model is simulated correctly, the behavior pattern of the main variables should reproduce the actual historical data. Thus, this paper compares a global electronic firm's historical sales data in Korea (Fig. 5(a)) and estimated sales data based on simulation by using the ‘Optimization’ function of VENSIM software (Fig. 5(b)).In the comparative analysis of the actual and estimated values of the revenue inflow variable, the value of R2 was 0.81, indicating that this SD model is relatively accurate. It was also ascertained that MAE (mean absolute error) was 3.465 and MAPE (mean absolute percentage error) was 10.65 percent. Based on this analysis, it was concluded that this SD model structure is reasonably valid.Product and process innovation have positive effect on firm performance in different ways (Cohen & Klepper, 1996; Huisman & Kort, 2003). Product innovation facilitates revenue growth by creating new demands and increasing product prices, while process innovation results in profit generation by reducing average manufacturing costs. One of the important policies related to technological innovation is to determine the technological innovation investment portfolio that will bring about maximum profits as the firm adjusts its investment policy on innovation.The principal question of interest is: which innovation capability, between product innovation and process innovation, can add greater corporate value? In the past, the electronics industry, whose products had considerably long lifecycles, could make an enormous investment in production processes, with enough time to withdraw those investments if necessary. Thus, companies in both Japan and Korea have achieved spectacular growth by taking advantage of excellent process innovation capabilities. However, given the recent trend of a shorter lifecycle for electronic products along with growth achieved by focusing on a segmented market rather than a massive single market, the time interval to withdraw such process innovation investments has decreased. Further, the size of the segmented market is making it difficult to justify investment in process innovation. Consequently, as continuous growth has become difficult to achieve only with process innovation capability, product innovation capability in high value-added industries has become a necessity. A firm should appropriately allocate investments between product and process innovation to maximize profits.To analyze how changes in the ratio of investment in technology innovation affect a firm's revenue, we analyzed SD simulation based on the following seven scenarios. It is assumed that product innovation intensive investment strategy (S7), which focuses on product innovation, is the investment ratio between product and process innovation at 0.8 to 0.2. On the other hand, process innovation intensive investment strategy (S1), which focuses on process innovation, is the investment ratio at 0.2 to 0.8 The investment ratios for the other five scenarios are S2: 0.3 to 0.7; S3: 0.4 to 0.6; S4: 0.5 to 0.5; S5: 0.6 to 0.4; S6: 0.7 to 0.3 respectively.According to the result of the SD simulation in left-hand side of Fig. 6, the product innovation intensive investment strategy has a short frequency of innovative new product introductions by increasing product innovation. Consequently, this leads to reduced time to market and revenue generation from new products and has relatively shorter product lifecycles than the process innovation intensive investment strategy (Fang, 2008; Yeoh, 1994). Furthermore, the product innovation intensive investment strategy can generate greater revenue than the process innovation intensive investment strategy in the long term, as shown in right-hand side of Fig. 6 and Table 2. Therefore, these results support H1 hypothesis.Cefis and Marsili (2006) suggested that the relationship between technological innovation and firm's performance depends on firm size. They argued that product innovation has a greater impact on firm's revenue in a small firm; process innovation is a very important factor for firm's performance in a large firm.Considering that the case firm of this research is the world's largest electronics firm that incurs a substantial fixed cost, it can be predicted that process innovation has a greater impact on the firm's revenue. However, the results of the simulation are different from Cefis and Marsili's (2006) findings. This result suggests that the first-mover with a dominant market position through product innovation achieves process innovation with the economies of scale simultaneously and, monopolizes market revenue in the long run.As product lifecycle is becoming much shorter and the competition for new product development among global firms is fierce, the pressure for developing new products is increasing. Therefore, firms try to generate revenue by developing and launching new products faster than their competitors do. Especially, in the electronics and high-tech industry where the faster time to market is the core to competitiveness, complexity of product portfolio has been rapidly increasing (Fang, 2008; Yeoh, 1994).Therefore, this study conducted a comparative scenario analysis assuming that product lifecycles are becoming shorter from 2 years (current) to 1 year (shortened product lifecycle), as seen in Fig. 7(a). According to the scenario analysis, the increasing product portfolio complexity caused by “shortened product lifecycle” scenario provokes more product innovation than the current scenario, as seen in Fig. 7(b). The increased product innovation enables a faster time to market of commercial products in Fig. 7(c), and it also reduces the firm's time to revenue in Fig. 7(d).The results suggest that the rush to product portfolio complexity leads to earlier market entrance time of commercial products, but does not affect the overall dynamic behavior (amplitude) of revenue. Therefore, hypothesis H2 that product portfolio complexity increases a firm's revenue is not supported. Consequently, while the market leader can achieve the benefit of the first-mover's advantages from pioneering products, this may not always be true given the risk of being the first to enter market. Therefore, a strategic product portfolio is required, which can maximize the firm's profits by appropriately adjusting both the product and process innovation lifecycles simultaneously.The complexity of product architecture is directly proportional to the complexity of the manufacturing process (Jacobs & Swink, 2011). Generally, increasing complexity of product architecture provokes a pressure for adjustment between products and manufacturing processes, and imputes a significant burden on the manufacturing processes.Therefore, this study conducts a comparative analysis to examine the relationship between product structure complexity and process innovation. The “increasing product feature complexity” scenario has twice the complexity of product architecture compared to the current strategy. The result of SD simulation in Fig. 7(b) shows that increasing product architecture complexity leads to a decrease in the innovation rate of the manufacturing process gradually. Therefore, H3 hypothesis that an increasing product architecture complexity leads to process innovation is not supported.This result suggests that increasing product architecture complexity leads to increases in lead-time and setup times and increases the difficulty of scheduling manufacturing process. This, in turn, diminishes productive capacity significantly. However, this does not increase the pressure for altering manufacturing processes, but rather, diminishes the innovation rate of the manufacturing process. We speculate that this result is caused by the use of multi-purpose facilities and outsourcing of manufacturing and/or assembly process compared to the past practice of employing specific-purpose facilities and the automation of the manufacturing processes in the electronics firms.Meanwhile, a reduction in the innovation rate of the manufacturing process diminishes the effect of cost reduction led by process innovation, and thus, increasing manufacturing costs. Increasing complexity of product architecture increases coordination costs between the new product and manufacturing process, gradually increasing the total manufacturing costs eventually.As shown in Fig. 7(c), increasing product architecture complexity delays the time to market for new products, and at the same time, lengthens the product lifecycles. The emergence of multi-functional products, such as digital convergence products, extends product lifecycles, thus refraining customers from switching to new products frequently, stabilizing revenue. Therefore, increasing complexity of product architecture hardly affects the dynamic behavior of a firm's revenue in the short term, but increases firm's revenue in the long term, as seen in Fig. 7(d).Consequently, when designing and developing digital convergence products that have more complex structure, firms should consider the tradeoff relation between changes in revenue and manufacturing cost caused by the complexity of product architecture.This research analyzes how manufacturing process improvement, such as the process modularization and platform-based design for manufacture/assembly, affects a firm's performance. We conducted a comparative analysis of the scenario of “improving manufacturing process”, by setting the value of “modularity and platform based interrelationship” to a value 50 percent higher to reflect the rationalization of manufacturing processes than the current scenario.As shown in Fig. 8(a), the simulation results suggest that eliminating the process complexity through manufacturing process improvement, such as the rationalization of SKU (stock keeping units), modularization of product components, and simplification of platform-based supply networks, increases process innovation and boosts product innovation in the long term. More product innovation enables faster time to market with innovative new product launch (Fig. 8(c)), and helps a firm achieve faster time to revenue (Fig. 8(d)). Moreover, manufacturing process improvement facilitates various product developments by offering options and combinations of products during the NPD project.As shown in Fig. 8(b), manufacturing process improvement reduces the overall manufacturing costs by augmenting the effects of process innovation. Furthermore, enhanced interrelationship between products and processes through process modularization and platform-based strategies triggers product innovation even more.Therefore, hypothesis H4 suggesting that improving manufacturing process leads to increase product innovation is supported.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
