@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modelling pollution-generating technologies in performance benchmarking: Recent developments, limits and future prospects in the nonparametric framework

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conduct an extended survey of DEA-based approaches that include bad outputs.The widely-used weak disposability assumption presents important shortcomings.Approaches considering multiple frontier technologies are more promising.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Bad outputs,Weak disposability,Weak-G disposability,By-production,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article is a critical review of methods integrating environmental aspects into productive efficiency. We describe the classic modelling approach relying on the weak disposability assumption, and explain the major recent developments around the inclusion of undesirable outputs in production technology modelling, namely the materials balance principles and the weak G-disposability, the by-production modelling and the cost disposability assumption, and the unified model under natural and managerial disposability concepts. We discuss the limits inherent in each methodology and suggest future research perspectives.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Externalities or spillovers arise in the presence of market failures where some actions of a group of agents generate social costs (or social benefits) that accrue to external parties not involved in the market transaction (McConnell & Brue, 2007). The case of pollution-generating activities is particularly relevant in this context. The question of the internalisation of the social costs arising from pollution has become an important area of interest for economists. In the presence of environmental regulations aimed at the internalisation of pollution costs by firms, some resources within firms might be diverted to mitigate pollution and, hence, best-practice comparisons (i.e. performance benchmarking) that do not account for this would inevitably lead to spurious results (Kopp, 1981). Besides, integrating environmental aspects into productive efficiency can provide policy-makers with helpful information on production systems that can lead to improving the design of new policies. Within this framework, Pittman (1983) used the index number theory of Caves, Christensen, and Diewert (1982) to develop a new productivity comparison methodology that incorporated undesirable outputs’11Hereafter, the expressions “bad”, “undesirable”, “detrimental”, “incidental”, “residual”, and “unwanted” goods, as well as “bads”, are used to qualify pollution or pollutants. By contrast, “good” outputs are also named “desirable” or “intended” outputs.control behaviour. However, this methodology was based on a translog transformation function which required information on prices for undesirable outputs. Pollution being a non-marketed good, computing Pittman's productivity indices may be challenging. By contrast, the development of activity analysis enables efficiency evaluation based on quantity information only.Two paradigms have been developed, one involving parametric models (econometric models which require the specification of a functional form) and one using mathematical programming methods (such as Data Envelopment Analysis—DEA). In this paper we focus on the latter, since such methods offer a large range of possibilities due to their flexibility and the less restrictive assumptions inherent in them. In the literature using such mathematical programming methods, the implicit positive correlation between pollution and desirable outputs has been formalised in different ways.(i)A first approach treats pollution as a free disposable input (Hailu & Veeman, 2001; Yang & Pollitt, 2009).22The free disposability (strong disposability) of inputs states that if any input is increased (whether proportionally or not), output does not decrease.The main argument behind this approach is that emissions of environmentally detrimental products can be viewed as the use of the environment's capacity that is necessary for their disposal (Considine & Larson, 2006; Paul, Ball, Felthoven, Grube, & Nehring, 2002). Thus, according to the advocates of this approach, considering these emissions as inputs is likely to be a good way of accounting for the consumption of natural resources. Some other scholars (Barbera & McConnell, 1990; Baumol, Panzar, & Willig, 1988; Cropper & Oates, 1992; Tahvonen & Kuuluvainen, 1993) believe in a positive relationship between good and bad outputs for a reason clearly expressed in Mahlberg and Sahoo (2011) as: “undesirable outputs incur costs for a firm because it requires the diversion of productive inputs from the production of desirable (good) outputs for abatement purposes in compliance with the environmental regulations”. However, as argued by Førsund (2009), this idea is more convincing at a macro level where “a single relation with residuals as inputs may be regarded as a reduced form of a larger system”, although at a micro level the author explicitly shows that treating a bad output as an input inevitably leads to zero production of bad output for a producer being an economic actor. From another perspective, Haynes, Ratick, Bowen, and Cummings-Saxton (1993) stated that undesirable outputs can be viewed as “unavoidable” residuals, which are subsets of pollution-generating inputs, and thus can be treated as inputs. The idea of considering undesirable outputs as additional inputs has, however, been seriously challenged as it deflects from the physical laws (Färe & Grosskopf, 2003) and the materials balance principles (Ayres, 1995; Ayres & Kneese, 1969). Rigorously speaking, undesirable outputs are not inputs, and treating them as additional inputs will not reflect the true production process (Seiford & Zhu, 2002). As summarised by Scheel (2001), when pollution is treated as an input “one abstracts from the underlying input-output structure which is usually defined by the nature of the production process. Instead, the only information needed is whether the data have to be minimized or maximized . . .” Moreover, by assuming free disposability of undesirable outputs, such modelling includes situations where “finite amount of input can produce an infinite amount of bad output, thus violating the law of mass conservation” (Podinovski & Kuosmanen, 2011). Considering bad as inputs is then physically unacceptable because of the violation of the boundedness of output sets. All these criticisms make the model that treats bad outputs as extra inputs unrealistic and thus to be avoided. Based on this situation, we do not discuss this case further in the paper.A second group of approaches extends models such as the frontier eco-efficiency models based on Korhonen and Luptacik (2004) and Lauwers (2009), which construct a production system where only undesirable outputs are used as inputs to produce the good output (Mahlberg, Luptacik, & Sahoo, 2011). This approach is not discussed here since it is based on an incomplete production process. Another approach known as the LCA+DEA approach associates Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and DEA (Iribarren, Vazquez-Rowe, Moreira, & Feijoo, 2010).33‘Environmental LCA is the compilation and evaluation of the material and energy flows as well as the potential environmental impacts of these throughout the life cycle of a product’ (Ekvall & Finnveden, 2001).We also ignore this model here because its objective is not the minimisation of undesirable outputs, but rather the potential reduction of these outputs in the case where all production units are technically efficient. The model fails to capture all the input's substitution possibilities that could help optimise the environmental performance. Another range of approaches relies on data transformation so that undesirable outputs can be equivalently treated as good outputs (Lovell, Pastor, & Turner, 1995;Sahoo, Luptacik, & Mahlberg, 2011). However, Färe and Grosskopf (2004a) showed that the results obtained from such data transformation are inconsistent. This is intuitive since the transformation distorts the real production process. Moreover, the model implies that undesirable outputs can be reduced without any cost, which is not realistic (Du, Lu, & Yu, 2014). Hence, we also do not consider this approach in our paper.A third approach considers pollution as outputs by assuming the weak disposability of these bad outputs and the null-jointness of both production types (good outputs and bad outputs) (Färe & Grosskopf, 2009; Färe, Grosskopf, & Pasurka, 1986; Färe, Grosskopf, Lundgren, Marklund, & Zhou, 2012). The weak disposability concept describes a situation where outputs are intimately linked and their amounts cannot be changed independently. In the case where bad outputs are present, it implies that reducing the levels of these outputs necessarily requires reducing the quantities of intended outputs in a proportional way. The null-jointness property accounts for situations where, if zero levels of bad outputs are generated, then zero levels of good outputs are produced. This approach relying on weak disposability and null-jointness is commonly used in the literature. However, as argued by Coelli, Lauwers, and Van Huylenbroeck (2007) and Hoang and Coelli (2011), the weak disposability assumption (WDA) violates the first law of thermodynamics.44This law can be related to one of the theses of the Greek philosopher Anaxagore and lately renewed as the famous saying of Antoine Lavoisier “Nothing is lost, nothing is created, everything is transformed”.It can be demonstrated that under certain conditions, such as the presence of end-of-pipe technologies to abate pollution, the WDA and the null-jointness assumption can become compatible with the materials balance principles (Hampf & Rødseth, 2014). Yet, in many situations end-of-pipe equipment is technologically unavailable or economically unaffordable (Rødseth & Romstad, 2013). In addition, making the WDA conform to the materials balance principles, does not mean that the approach is correct. We provide a thorough discussion of the limits of the WDA in the third section.With respect to the limits associated with the WDA, an approach based on the materials balance principles was introduced into production theory by Lauwers, Van Huylenbroeck, and Rogiers (1999) and later furthered by Coelli, Lauwers, and Van Huylenbroeck (2005) and Lauwers and Van Huylenbroeck (2003). Relying on the mass/energy balance equation—which is simply an accounting identity that links in an equivalent way the quantity of materials that goes into a production process to the amount of outputs including residual ones—enables the estimation of an iso-environmental line in the same vein as iso-cost lines. However, as explained by Ebert and Welsch (2007), it essentially focuses on materials inputs and ignores any interaction that might exist between these materials inputs and non-materials ones. The method will thus identify decision making units (DMUs)55DMUs are production entities which use inputs to produce outputs.that use few materials inputs as environmentally efficient, despite their reliance on non-materials inputs. In addition, recently Hoang and Rao (2010) underlined the problem of “the lack of universally accepted weights for various material inputs”. Taking the example of eutrophication and gas pollution in agriculture, the authors discussed the difficulties in aggregating these two impacts in the case of the materials balance.66As suggested by one reviewer, the issue here is the difficulty of assessing the environmental impacts of pollutants, and it is worth stressing that this is different from doing a mass balance. For this latter purpose weights may be the basis for the aggregation.They then proposed an extension based on the use of the cumulative exergy77Exergy reflects the maximal usefulness that can be obtained from any type of input. It refers to the maximal mechanical work that can be extracted from a form of energy or, reversely, the mechanical work that is necessary for a system to go back to its equilibrium state (dead state). The exergy can be evaluated as the gross energy value reduced by the losses that occur during the transformation process.balance (see also Hoang and Alauddin (2011)). However, the “premises and conclusions are still being strongly debated” (Dewulf et al., 2008), and the notion of exergy is complicated due to technical and theoretical limitations (Maes & Van Passel, 2014). Along the same lines, Hampf and Rødseth (2014) offered a new approach named the weak G-disposability, which relies on the first two laws of thermodynamics88The second law of thermodynamics indicates that residuals are generated with at least some consumption of inputs, and consequently suggests that not all inputs are transformed into good outputs because some residuals are necessarily generated.to model a pollution-generating technology without resorting to any transformation of the non-materials inputs. This approach combines the mass/energy identity equation and the G-disposability developed in Chung (1996) around the directional distance function (DDF; see Färe and Grosskopf, 2000 for a discussion of the theory and application of the DDF). We discuss this recent development in our paper.Finally, a more recent approach suggests modelling the firm's production technology by using two sub-technologies: one generating the intended outputs and a second generating the unintended outputs (Førsund, 2009; Murty, Russell, & Levkoff, 2012; Sueyoshi & Goto, 2010; Sueyoshi, Goto, & Ueno, 2010). Operational efficiency and environmental efficiency can then each be evaluated using the specific corresponding sub-frontier. Within this framework, Murty et al. (2012) proposed the by-production model which relies on the cost disposability assumption of the technology with respect to undesirable outputs (for more theory on this, see also Murty, 2012). Based on the idea of the unavoidability of residuals’ generation when using materials inputs (that is to say polluting inputs), the approach suggests that for given levels of these inputs there is an associated minimal amount of pollution, and the presence of inefficiency can yield more than this minimal amount. Another recent approach is provided by Sueyoshi and Goto, 2012a, b, c) who developed the concepts of natural and managerial disposability to characterise a firm's adaptation potential in the case of pollution mitigation. Natural disposability implies reducing pollution by simply decreasing the levels of (polluting) inputs, thus requiring no managerial effort. By contrast, managerial disposability implies managerial efforts in the form of the adoption of new technologies, such as high quality inputs or other innovative technology, that can mitigate pollution. These two recent and promising approaches are developed in our paper.Reviews of works on DEA and environmentally bad outputs can be found in Tyteca (1996), Zhou, Ang, and Poh (2008a), and Manello (2012). This literature focuses mainly on the classical approaches that consider residuals as inputs or as outputs under the WDA, or that use some data transformation functions. Our paper firstly provides an update of the existing reviews by outlining the major recent developments around the inclusion of undesirable outputs in production technology modelling, namely the weak G-disposability assumption, the by-production model and the natural and managerial disposability concepts. Secondly, we discuss the limits inherent in each methodology. In fact, most of the existing literature surveys focus on a simple description of the models without a clear insight into the drawbacks associated with each model. This paper contributes to filling this gap by synthesising the problems of the commonly-used models and discussing the challenges associated with the recent developments. Thus, the original contribution of our paper is that we provide in a single place a critical review of all models, not only the ones widely used and already criticised (such as the ones relying on the WDA), but also the recently advanced ones developed to circumvent the shortcomings of previous models, and we show how the different approaches are interrelated.The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. The next section explains the methodology followed for our review. The following two sections describe the methods in the order that they appeared in the literature, that is to say methods that were developed to circumvent problems of existing methods. The final section discusses future trends of research and concludes.The papers used here were identified firstly on the basis of searches on research engines, namely Web of Science (WoS), Scopus, and Google Scholar. Various keywords were used, such as “undesirable output AND data envelopment analysis”, “bad output AND data envelopment analysis”, “weak disposability”, “materials balance AND data envelopment analysis”, and “joint production AND data envelopment analysis”. The WoS gathers a multitude of well-known and quality academic journals. It is an international, multi-editor and multi-disciplinary database that collects a large amount of information in different research areas. This database, hosted by the Web of Knowledge platform of the group ISI Thomson Reuters, gives access to about 10,000 journals. Our request yielded 600 references on the WoS. We did a similar request on the Scopus database, owned by the scientific editor Elsevier as a direct competitor of the WoS and referencing 16,500 journals, and it gave similar results with a total of 509 references. With the WoS and the Scopus databases, we cover scientific production fairly well. In addition, we used the Google Scholar search engine to account for the grey literature and prevent publication bias. Google Scholar yielded more than 4588 references. Following the discussions in Linder, Kamath, Pratt, Saraykar, and Volk (2015), to increase the precision of the review we conducted a search of some cited references. The references used for this search were identified as the most cited studies identified in Google Scholar. Using a reference management software (Endnote X6), we narrowed the number of studies by removing duplicate references. This operation downsized the number of studies collected to 1400 references on energy and/or environmental efficiency or eco-efficiency. We then reduced this number further by selecting references on more precise keywords, providing a starting sample of 182 papers. Among these papers we retained mainly the ones that offered some theoretical and methodological improvements.Secondly, the own references of the papers found through these searches and retained for the analysis have also been used. Most of the papers used here have been published in operational research journals or other high quality scientific journals, or have been cited by such types of publications, which ensures their trustworthiness.In the next section, we start with the first trend of approaches considered in the paper, by presenting and discussing the limits inherent in the WDA.The WDA concept introduced in the neoclassical theory of firm and technology by Shephard (1970, 1974) has been used to characterise input and output variables that cannot be considered as freely disposable. The idea has been used to “model congestion and overutilization of inputs/outputs”99“Congestion” is an old theme in production economics that has been introduced to point out the possibility of reducing output by a partial increase in an input. This concept has been used more than 150 years ago by the first economists interested in production functions and doing experiments in agriculture, e.g. applying fertilizers and plotting the inverse U-shaped marginal productivity curve. See Borts and Mishan (1962) for a review.(Daraio & Simar, 2007, p. 22). In an input orientation, it describes a situation where, if all inputs increase proportionally, outputs might decrease (due to occurrence of congestion) and this reflects backward bending of the isoquant (Färe & Grosskopf, 1983; Färe & Svensson, 1980). In efficiency measurement the concept has been extended to characterise technology that includes undesirable outputs (Färe et al., 1986). In this case, the WDA implies that reducing undesirable outputs requires decreasing desirable outputs or increasing inputs by the same factor. More explicitly, the assumption reflects the general thinking that reducing undesirable outputs comes at a cost: good outputs must be simultaneously reduced and thus some revenues are foregone, or capital resources are diverted or reallocated from the production of desirable outputs to the mitigation of undesirable outputs. Thus, any regulation that intends to internalise pollution impacts will inevitably lead to economic losses (Palmer, Oates, & Portney, 1995). As summarised by Färe and Grosskopf (2004b, p. 47): “An alternative interpretation is that if we hold inputs constant, then 'cleaning up; undesirable outputs will occur at the margin through reallocation of inputs away from the production of desirable outputs”.Graphically (Fig. 1), if undesirable outputs are considered as freely (strongly) disposable (that is to say it is costless to mitigate them), the output set would be represented by (0ebcd0) where the dotted line (eb) specifically materialises this strong disposability by allowing some mix inefficiencies in bad outputs’ generation. Assuming weak disposability of the undesirable outputs restrains the output set to (0abcd0). Note that strong disposability is assumed for the good outputs and is represented by the segment [cd].Formally, let x represent a vector of inputs(x∈R+K), y a vector of good outputs(y∈R+Q), b a vector of bad outputs(b∈R+R)and N the number of DMUs (identified with subscript i in the following). The production technology including the bad output Ψbad is then defined by all (x, y, b) such that x can produce y and b. We posit that Ψbad verifies for the inputs and the good outputs the commonly-assumed axioms in production theory (Chambers, 1988; Färe & Primont, 1995; Färe, Grosskopf, & Lovell, 1985; Shephard, 1981, 1970, 1974; Varian, 1984) and that the DEA technology is represented under variable returns to scale (VRS), originally known as the BCC model developed in Banker, Charnes, and Cooper (1984).Undesirable outputs are said to be weakly disposable if:(1)(x,y,b)∈Ψbad,0≤θ≤1⇒(x,θy,θb)∈ΨbadThis property is also known as the radial disposability property. It should be noted that the WDA is generally accompanied by the null-jointness condition of desirable and undesirable outputs, formalised as:(2)(x,y,b)∈Ψbadandb=0theny=0∑i=1Nbi>0;∑r=1Rbr>0where the left inequality indicates that at least one DMU i generates some bad outputs, and the right inequality indicates that at least one bad output r is generated by some DMUs. These two constraints were suggested by Kemeny, Morgenstern, and Thompson (1956). This can be related to the idea that there is “no fire without smoke” (Färe & Grosskopf, 2012; Färe, Grosskopf, & Pasurka, 2007), and, consequently, the output set contains the origin.In this situation the technology Ψbad explicitly becomes:(3)Ψweak=[(x,y,b)∈R+K+Q+R|y≤θ∑i=1NγiYi;b=θ∑i=1NγiBi;x≥∑i=1NγiXi;∑i=1Nγi=1;γi≥0;0≤θ≤1;i=1,…,N]Hereafter, (x, y, b) represents the vector of inputs, good outputs and bad for the DMU under evaluation, and (X, Y, B) represents the vector of inputs, good outputs and bad of the reference set, i.e. all DMUs used to construct the frontier. γiis often referred to as the intensity variable and represents the weights associated with all the DMUs that serve as a benchmark (or reference) to the one under evaluation.Model (3) is non-linear. Its linearisation has been proposed by Zhou, Ang, and Poh (2008b) and Sahoo et al. (2011), based on a change of variablesφi=θγi. Practically, the WDA has been implemented through two main models: (i) the enhanced hyperbolic efficiency measure (HEM) developed by Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, and Pasurka (1989) which allows for a simultaneous equiproportionate expansion of the good outputs and a contraction of the bad outputs (and inputs) by the same radial factor, and; (ii) the DDF. The latter is the most commonly used for evaluating performance in the presence of unintended outputs.1010A simple search on Google Scholar (on 31st July 2014) with the key words “directional distance function” and “undesirable outputs” yielded more than 900 papers in 0.04 seconds. Yet, according to Leleu (2013a), many papers have incorrectly modelled the WDA, especially under VRS.It can be viewed as the generalisation of the Shephard's distance function and, as such, is more flexible and more powerful. The use of the DDF in the case of bad outputs was proposed by Chung, Fare, and Grosskopf (1997). The DDF approach searches for the maximisation of desirable outputs and simultaneously a minimisation of bad outputs, based on a chosen vector of directiong→. It can be specified as:(4)D→(x,y,b;g→)=sup[ϕ:(x,y+ϕg→y,b−ϕg→b)∈Ψweak]Using (3) and (4), the efficiency score over the directiong→for DMU n is given by:(5)DDF(xn,yn,bn)=max[ϕ|y+ϕg→y≤θ∑i=1NγiYi;b−ϕg→b=θ∑i=1NγiBi;x≥∑i=1NγiXi;∑i=1Nγi=1;γi≥0;i=1,…,N;0≤θ≤1;(x,y,b)∈R+P+Q+R]Chung et al. (1997) recommended the use of the directiong→=(y,−b).The first criticism of the traditional DDF was made by Kuosmanen (2005) and Kuosmanen and Podinovski (2009), who noticed that weak disposability, commonly defined as the proportional reduction of desirable and undesirable outputs, unintentionally assumes that all DMUs share the same uniform abatement effort θ.1111θ is simply the proportionality factor reducing a good output and a bad output for constant input, and has no formal relation at all with modelling abatement properly. We acknowledge one Reviewer for stressing this point.According to Kuosmanen (2005), “This is at odds with the usual environmental-economics wisdom of focusing abatement efforts in those firms where the abatement costs are lowest”. Besides, as pinpointed in Kuosmanen and Podinovski (2009), the technology Ψweak as defined in (3) does not verify the full convexity, which is an important assumption of the Shephard representation. However, the model is still convex on its output sets for any level of inputs (Podinovski & Kuosmanen, 2011). This situation may result in overestimating technical efficiency in (5), since the Kuosmanen technology is the classic WDA technology (Ψweak) to which “all missing convex combinations of its activities” are added. Further, this lack of convexity of the global technology may explain the unavailability of a dual interpretation so far (Kuosmanen & Matin, 2011).1212Leleu (2013b) has shown that under some conditions (use of the directional output distance function), one can derive dual formulation of the Shephard weakly disposable technology with interpretations similar to those in Kuosmanen and Matin (2011).The technology set in (3) with differing abatement efforts becomes:(6)ΨweakKuos=[(x,y,b)∈R+K+Q+R|y≤∑i=1NθiγiYi;b=∑i=1NθiγiBi;x≥∑i=1NγiXi;∑i=1Nγi=1;γi≥0;i=1,…,N;0≤θi≤1]ΨweakKuosis non-linear as θiis multiplied by γi. Kuosmanen (2005) suggested the transformationγi=μi+τi, whereτi=(1−θi)γiis the abated output through scaling down activity. Thenμi=θiγiis the remaining active output, andθi=μi/(μi+τi). The production possibility set can be re-written as:(7)ΨweakKuos=[(x,y,b)∈R+K+Q+R|y≤∑i=1NμiYi;b=∑i=1NμiBi;x≥∑i=1N(μi+τi)Xi;∑i=1N(μi+τi)=1;μi,τi≥0;i=1,…,N]Using the selective proportionality approach developed in Kuosmanen and Podinovski (2009) and Podinovski (2004) have shown that (7) is a full convex technology in contrast to the Shephard weakly disposable technology in (3).Applications of the Kuosmanen model can be found in Berre, Blancard, Boussemart, Leleu, and Tillard (2013), Berre, Boussemart, Leleu, and Tillard (2012), and Mekaroonreung and Johnson (2009). Yang and Pollitt (2010) proposed an improvement that is closely related to the nature of undesirable outputs: depending on the “technical features” of the bad outputs, different disposability assumptions should be considered. The authors took the example of a coal fired power plant that generates carbon dioxide (CO2) and sulphur dioxide (SO2), and noticed that CO2 cannot be reduced with the existing technology.1313CO2 can be reduced by Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). Although this technology may not be on the market in full scale yet, extensive testing has been performed.Any effort to abate CO2 would result in a reduction of the good output, namely electricity generation. This specific gas then perfectly fits the WDA. SO2 can be reduced through investment in desulphurisation equipment, which can offset more than 90 percent of this gas. SO2 then violates the weak disposability property as well as the null-jointness hypothesis. The authors then recommended considering SO2 as strongly disposable. But this would lead to the case where undesirable outputs are treated like inputs, and as previously argued in Introduction, this approach is not correct.Some studies have questioned the relevance of the WDA that is generally imposed when evaluating performance in the presence of detrimental outputs. Hailu and Veeman (2001) considered that the WDA, represented by the equality constraint in the technology (namely the second constraint in model (3)), treated pollutants as neutral rather than as an output or as an input, which is, as stated earlier, not a correct way of modelling pollution-generating technologies. Moreover, according to the authors, this equality allows for negative as well as positive shadow prices for residuals, and implies high efficiency inflation. Färe and Grosskopf (2003) argued that the use of an output-oriented DDF is sufficient to obtain the right sign of bad outputs’ shadow prices. Nevertheless Leleu (2013a) showed graphically that, depending on the direction vector, one might still obtain inappropriate signs for shadow prices. The author then developed a new approach that can ensure the right sign for the shadow values of undesirable outputs. However, he underlined that this implies imposing strong disposability for bad outputs as is the case for inputs.A crucial criticism comes from Murty et al. (2012) who showed that, under the WDA, the HEM and the DDF can produce inconsistent results that do not conform with the materials balance condition which states the inevitability of residuals’ generation. The reason is that such results are obtained from a single reduced equation form (that is to say, single side projection) of the production possibility set whereas some alternative projections are possible (Sueyoshi et al., 2010). Murty et al. (2012) stressed that “many commonly used models of pollution-generating technologies, which treat pollution as a freely disposable input or as a weakly disposable and null-joint output, may generate unacceptable implications for the trade-offs among inputs, outputs and pollution”. Using the implicit function theorem, the authors estimated the trade-offs between unintended outputs and intended ones on the one hand, and those between unintended outputs and the pollution-generating inputs on the other hand. However, results indicated large possibilities of(y^,b^)efficient combinations, violating the idea that there is only one minimal amount of undesirable outputs given the levels of inputs: the presence of inefficiencies can generate more than this minimal level. In addition, the negative relationship between pollution-generating inputs and undesirable outputs contradicts the fact that these inputs generate pollution. Moreover, pollution-generating inputs and pollution appear to be substitutes as in the case where undesirable outputs are considered as inputs, which is not realistic. Levkoff (2011) also highlighted that in the case of multiple undesirable outputs, a single representation allows for some trade-offs that are inconsistent with the fact that some specific inputs can only generate a particular undesirable output and not a rich menu of those outputs.More recently Chen (2014), using an illustrative example, demonstrated three major weaknesses of the WDA in the HEM and DDF efficiency measures. (i) Non-monotonicity in undesirable outputs: a firm's efficiency may increase while polluting more and vice-versa. The backward bending of the production frontier in Fig. 1 through the segment [bc] by imposing the WDA, violates the monotonicity in bad outputs’ generation. This has important implications for the efficiency score: an inefficient DMU might improve its efficiency score by increasing the levels of undesirable outputs by directing toward the right part of the frontier,1414Leleu (2013a) toned down this observation, arguing that the direction vector always seeks for the minimization of the bad outputs and thus all inefficient observations are projected toward the left part of the frontier.and conversely, might decrease its efficiency score by reducing the levels of undesirable outputs. In addition, non-monotonicity unrealistically gives the possibility of obtaining negative shadow prices for undesirable outputs. Negative shadow prices mean that the production of pollution creates some extra revenue, which contradicts with the widespread view that pollution imposes costs on society. (ii) Misclassification of efficiency status: strongly dominated firms may appear efficient. For example in Fig. 1 the DMU at point c produces lower levels of good output and higher levels of undesirable output than the DMU at point b, yet the DMU at c is deemed efficient because it is located on the boundary of the frontier. (iii) Strongly dominated projection targets: some efficiency scores may be computed with respect to strongly dominated points used as targets. An inefficient DMU located in the interior of the output set represented in Fig. 1 can be projected based on the choice of the directional vector on the dominated segment [bc]. This can be associated with situations depicted by Picazo-Tadeo and Prior (2005, 2009) as the ones “where the biggest producer is not the greatest polluter”. Heavy polluters in these cases can be viewed as outlier DMUs using dirtier production technologies or facing a drop in the production of good outputs in the short run that does not affect the levels of pollution. Picazo-Tadeo and Prior (2005, 2009) proposed a combination of the WDA and the model where pollution is treated as an input, to detect this “complex situation” and discard the negatively-sloped parts of the technology.Another range of arguments against the WDA relates to the laws of thermodynamics. It has been argued that, despite the above-mentioned criticisms, weak disposability is consistent with the physical laws in the presence of end-of-pipe technologies (Hampf & Rødseth, 2014; Rødseth, 2014).1515End-of-pipe options refer to the case where “lazy polluters” do not want to implement changes in the production process and prefer to adopt other methods (recycling for instance) to mitigate the produced pollution.But in many cases the end-of-pipe technology is not commercially available, and in reality there are three ways of meeting environmental regulations: reducing the good output production in the short run; investing in end-of-pipe technology; and investing in new and less polluting technology of the basic production process, usually a longer-term option than end-of-pipe. This implies that performance appraisal in the presence of undesirable outputs should be conducted in a dynamic situation where the different investments are accounted for. Ebert and Welsch (2007) recalled that, according to the second law of thermodynamics which states that pollution-generating inputs cannot be completely transformed into desirable outputs, a non-zero amount of detrimental outputs will be generated from a non-zero amount of pollution-generating inputs. The weak disposability model, assuming null-jointness of good and bad outputs as well as inactivity (where the use of inputs may generate zero pollution), contradicts this second law. Furthermore, the WDA implies a proportional reduction of good and bad outputs given the levels of inputs (including pollution-generating ones), which is inconsistent with the mass/energy conservation condition. From this perspective, Coelli et al. (2007) demonstrated the infeasibility of the solution generated by models under WDA. In addition, Yang, Hsiao, and Yu (2008) argued that the rare situation where weak disposability can apply is in the presence of “reverse outputs”. Reverse outputs or inputs reflect a situation where “higher numerical values represent lower input consumption or lower output production” (Lewis & Sexton, 2004). In the case of reverse outputs, the production of undesirable outputs might not be a joint production of (or accompany) “normal outputs”. As early as the end of the 1990s, Førsund (1998) proposed an “intuitive” solution to make a clear distinction between the two mechanisms that generate desirable outputs on the one hand and undesirable outputs on the other.Finally, Murty et al. (2012) argued that, in the presence of abatement technologies, generating a zero level of bad outputs is possible, thus violating the null-jointness hypothesis imposed in the WDA approach. Given all these drawbacks associated with the WDA model, new developments have been undertaken in modelling pollution-generating technologies.The materials balance principles (MBP) approach is based on the physical law of mass/energy conservation, namely that all materials’ flows used for economic production generate new flows of materials of equal weights. This condition perfectly describes the first law of thermodynamics which states that the amount of materials tied up in the inputs is equal to the amount of the flow of materials embedded in the outputs, plus the residuals (that is to say the bad outputs) (Ayres & Kneese, 1969). In special cases such as nitrogen or phosphorus surpluses, this law can be represented by the balance equation as follows:(8)b=W′x−H′ywhere x and y can be thought of as the vectors of materials inputs and outputs, respectively, and b represents the residual quantity. This equation is linear in inputs and outputs, but one can also formulate a non-linear relationship (Pethig, 2006). W is a (K × 1) vector (with non-negative scalars) representing the emission factors for the inputs, and H is a (Q × 1) vector (with non-negative scalars) representing the recuperation factors for the desirable outputs (that is, the ratios specifying the amount of materials inputs, such as wood in furniture, incorporated in the desirable outputs; and the greater the quantity of the materials that is directly part of a unit of the good, the lower the generation of unintended output). Due to non-homogeneity in the inputs and outputs and due to the role of some external factors, these two vectors of materials flow coefficients may differ from one DMU to another.The second law of thermodynamics should also be verified.This second law is probably one of the most difficult concepts in physics (Georgescu-Roegen, 1976, p. 7). It is related to the notion of entropy which characterises the disorder present in a production system. It has been used in ecological economics to represent the fact that some residuals (with high entropy) are necessarily generated with at least some consumption of inputs, that is to say not all inputs are transformed into good outputs because some residuals b are unavoidably generated (Baumgärtner, Dyckhoff, Faber, Proops, & Schiller, 2001; Ebert & Welsch, 2007). The law refers to the irreversibility of the production process, in contrast to the first law of energy conservation which does not account for the fact that after a transformation, part of the energy is unavailable. This second law is generally omitted in materials balance studies (Hoang & Rao, 2010). Mainly based on the first law, Coelli et al. (2005, 2007) introduced the MBP in performance evaluation, but ignored non-materials inputs. Another implication of the second law is that, taken together with the mass/energy conservation equation (8), it rules out the WDA which imposes a proportionate decrease in good and bad outputs at any given levels of inputs (Ebert & Welsch, 2007).A more novel approach in this MBP framework is the extension introduced by Hampf and Rødseth (2014) who proposed a new materials balance technology set ΨMB based on the usual properties of the production technology and augmented with the following postulates:MB1 Output essentiality for the unintended outputs:(x,y,b)∈ΨMB∧b=0⇒xP=0, where xPrepresents the vector of pollution-generating inputs.MB2 Input essentiality for the unintended outputs:(x,y,b)∈ΨMB∧xP=0⇒b=0. With MB1, MB2 ensures that the second law of thermodynamics is not violated.MB3 Weak-G disposability of inputs and outputs:(x,y,b)∈ΨMB∧W′gx+H′gy−gb=0⇒(x+gx,y−gy,b+gb)∈ΨMBwhere g(.) are direction vectors which show the direction of the disposability of the inputs and outputs. This postulate implies that “the increases in pollution due to increases in the use of inputs (that is to say W′gxabove) and/or the reduction of good outputs (that is to say H′gyabove) must equal the increases in the bad outputs (that is to say gbabove) when inputs and outputs are disposed” (Hampf & Rødseth, 2014). To better understand this concept let us recall the G-disposability axiom defined in Chung (1996), and assume that DMUnwith coordinates (x, y, b) belongs to the production technology ΨMB. For any specific direction vector (gx, gy, gb) we can write the following relationship, indicating that with more inputs it is possible to produce less good output and generate more pollution:(9)If(x,y,b)∈ΨMBthen(x+gx,y−gy,b+gb)∈ΨMBIn (9), inputs and outputs are said to be disposable in the G direction. Since the balance condition in (8) is still valid, all DMUs satisfying (9) must also verify (8). Thus we have:(10)W′(x+gx)−H′(y−gy)−(b+gb)=0From this, one can easily derive the following condition:(11)W′gx+H′gy−gb=0The disposability of the variables as expressed in (9) is constrained by equation (11), hence the name weak G-disposability. Hampf and Rødseth (2014) referred to equation (11) as the “summing-up” restrictions which impose some constraints on the disposability direction of the different factors and outputs. As opposed to the weak disposability model, inputs are not freely disposable here. Under the WDA, free disposability of inputs implies that, for a given input bundle and a produced output set, it is possible for a higher input bundle to produce the same amount of the output set. But this is technically infeasible under the MBP conditions. The MBP technology set can be defined as follows, where the directions gx, gy, gbare replaced by their empirical counterparts, the slacks (Sx, Sy, Sb):(12)ΨMB=[(x,y,b)∈R+K+Q+R|y+Sy=∑i=1NγiYi;b−Sb=∑i=1NγiBi;x−Sx=∑i=1NγiXi;W′Sx+H′Sy−Sb=0∑i=1Nγi=1;γi≥0;i=1,…,N]Ebert and Welsch (2007) criticised the MBP framework positively. Using a theoretical representation of the production function, they demonstrated that undesirable outputs “can be treated as a joint output or an input, or can be described by an emission function” and within the MBP framework all these approaches are equivalent. In addition, since the framework, accounting for the presence of non-materials inputs combined with the materials inputs, allows for the possibility of obtaining a higher level of good outputs with the same level of pollution-generating inputs, there is a possibility of substitution between materials and non-materials inputs.Despite the interesting features of this novel way of dealing with bad outputs, Hampf and Rødseth (2014) showed that under some conditions (constant returns to scale; free choice of good and bad outputs and pollution-generating inputs), the model collapses to the one assuming weak disposability of undesirable outputs. Moreover, the “summing-up” restriction in (11) implies that, under fixed levels of inputs,H′gy=gb; that is to say the materials balance is verified only if the direction vector of bad output (gb) equals the recuperation associated with the good output direction (H′gy). This suggests very little flexibility for producers in mitigating the generation of bad outputs. Practically, the direction for the reduction of the bad output is highly constrained if one wants to maintain the MBP. Another important practical limit of the MBP framework is the need for knowledge about the emission and recuperation factors (W and H, respectively). Also, in the presence of abatement strategies, the amount of pollution reduction due to abatement investment has to be clearly incorporated in the balance equation. Besides, as explained by Førsund (2009), the materials balance equation in (8) does not explicitly specify how the residuals are generated, but simply describes how these residuals are related to the use of materials inputs. In addition, as pointed out by the author, the MBP equation introduces “some limits on derivatives in the system of equations”. This may result (when using dual approaches) in, for example, counterintuitive results such as the fact that the use of additional inputs generates extra revenues to the firm, while in reality input consumption incurs costs. Finally, as underlined in Murty et al. (2012, p. 124), the identity in (8) requires all the variables to be measured in a common unit, but “examples exist where it may not be possible to measure intended outputs and material inputs in common mass units and where ‘harmless’ omissions of some commodities that are not considered relevant by the modeller may result in the violation of the mass-balance condition”.1616The “mass-balance condition” is equivalent to the mass/energy conservation equation in (8).As a conclusion to this section, despite its innovative approach, the weak G-disposability also fails to correctly represent and capture the different trade-offs in a pollution-generating technology. Alternative solutions have been proposed through the estimation of multiple sub-frontiers, discussed in the next sub-section.Although the terms “joint production” and “by-production” are used equivalently to qualify the generation of undesirable outputs in the production process (Färe, Grosskopf, & Pasurka, 2013), Murty and Russell (2002) made a clear distinction between these two expressions. According to these authors, joint production implies the existence of a rich “menu of possible output vector (that is, a production possibility set), possibly including zero amounts of some (all) outputs, given the amounts of the inputs”, while by-production accounts for the MBP because it “implies the inevitability of a certain amount of incidental output, given the quantities of certain inputs and/or certain intended outputs (possibly including abatement outputs)”.The by-production approach, introduced in Murty and Russell (2002) and generalised by Murty et al. (2012), appears to be one of the most promising methods in the modelling of pollution-generating technologies. Førsund (2009) indicated that it is a “better approach than operating with output couplings and factor bands”1717Product couplings refer to the introduction of additional constraints that depict the link between some outputs (here between good outputs and bad outputs), independently of the inputs. Reversely, factor bands refer to the relationship between inputs regardless of the outputs.to represent materials balance. The starting point of this approach is that the classical representation of treating bad outputs as inputs, or assuming weak disposability of undesirable outputs and null-jointness, moves away from the five attributes1818These attributes can be summarised as follows. First, using pollution-generating inputs necessarily produces pollution as an incidental output or as a by-product of the good output. Second, non-rivalness or jointness of pollution-generating inputs and their use for the production of one output do not exclude them from the production of the other output. Third, by-product technology does not satisfy the free disposability of bad outputs (the cost disposability is verified). Fourth, correlation between intended outputs and incidental ones is ensured by the previous attributes. Fifth, mitigation opportunities are present: for example, some of a firm's resources may be diverted from the production of good outputs toward cleaning-up activities.of the technology relative to the by-production of incidental outputs (Murty, 2010a). Following Frisch (1965) and Førsund (1998), trade-offs in by-production technologies cannot be represented by a single implicit production relationship. One should instead consider several relationships to describe a production system. This by-production approach assumes cost disposability of the technology regarding undesirable outputs, pollution-generating inputs, and some intended outputs. Given fixed levels of some inputs and/or some intended outputs, there is a minimal amount of pollution that can be by-produced by the technology. Of course, poor management might create inefficiencies in the production process that could yield more than this minimal level of undesirable outputs.In the by-production approach two production technology sets are estimated: an intended-production technology and a residual-generation technology. Let us divide the input vector x into two input sub-vectors where x1 represents the sub-vector of non-pollution-causing inputs and x2 the sub-vector of pollution-causing inputs. The general production technology Ψ can be represented by(13)Ψ=Ψ1∩Ψ2with(14)Ψ1=[(x1,x2,y,b)∈R+K1+K2+Q+R|f(x1,x2,y)≤0](15)Ψ2=[(x1,x2,y,b)∈R+K1+K2+Q+R|b≥u(x2)]where f and u are both continuously and differentiable functions.A rigorous modelling of technology Ψ2 under the materials balance conditions implies equality in the constraintb=u(x2)meaning that, given the quantity of polluting inputs, the level of undesirable outputs is fixed. The model also implies that there is no recuperation factor, but this possibility can nevertheless be allowed where desirable outputs enter the constraint.The cost disposability assumption with respect to the unintended outputs can be expressed as follows:(16)(x1,x2,y,b)∈Ψ∧b¯≥b∧x¯2≤x2⇒(x1,x¯2,y,b¯)∈ΨThis assumption implies that it is possible to pollute more given the levels of x2; in other words, it means that the set of technology Ψ2 is bounded below (Murty, 2010b).Ψ1 satisfies the standard disposability assumption, as follows:(17)(x1,x2,y,b)∈Ψ1∧x˜1≥x1∧x˜2≥x2∧y˜≤y⇒(x˜1,x˜2,y,b)∈Ψ1In the case of activity analysis we have:(18)Ψ1=[(x1,x2,y,b)∈R+K1+K2+Q+R|y≤∑i=1NνiYi;x1≥∑i=1NνiXi1;x2≥∑i=1NνiXi2;∑i=1Nνi=1;νi≥0;i=1,…,N(19)Ψ2=[(x1,x2,y,b)∈R+K1+K2+Q+R|x2≤∑i=1NξiXi2;b≥∑i=1NξiBi;∑i=1Nξi=1;ξi≥0;i=1,…,NThe first inequality in (19) reflects the cost disposability of pollution-causing inputs and the second the cost disposability of residual outputs. The unified technology Ψ is given by (20) with two intensity variables νiand ξiwhich represent the two different sub-technologies.(20)Ψ=[(x1,x2,y,b)∈R+K1+K2+Q+R|y≤∑i=1NνiYi;x1≥∑i=1NνiXi1;x2≥∑i=1NνiXi2;x2≤∑i=1NξiXi2;b≥∑i=1NξiBi;∑i=1Nνi=1;∑i=1Nξi=1;νi,ξi≥0;i=1,…,NMurty et al. (2012) suggested that an efficiency score (EFFby) can be derived as an extension of the Russell index proposed byFäre and Lovell (1978):(21)EFFby(x,y,b;Ψ)=12minϕ,ω[∑qϕqQ+∑rωrR|(x,y⊘ϕ,ω⊗b)∈Ψ]where 1/ϕqrepresents the potential increase in good output q, and ωris the potential decrease in order to reach the minimal level attainable for the undesirable output r;y⊘ϕ=(y1/ϕ1,…,yQ/ϕQ);γ⊗b=(ω1b1,…,ωRbR). More simply, 1/ϕq(which is greater than or equal to one) represents the efficiency score of the good output q, while ωr(which is less than or equal to one) is the efficiency score associated with the bad output r. The efficiency score can be simply rewritten as a sum of two scores:(22)EFFby(x,y,b;Ψ)=12minϕ[∑qϕqQ|(x,y⊘ϕ,b)∈Ψ1]+12minω[∑rωrR|(x,y,ω⊗b)∈Ψ2]A particularly interesting feature of the by-product technology modelling is that it is very close to the MBP approach explained above, since it obeys the aforementioned laws of thermodynamics. However, as seen in (8), the MBP requires some factors (W′ and H′) in order to aggregate in a common unit the inputs and the desirable outputs of the model. This can be very challenging since, as previously mentioned, desirable outputs and inputs often cannot be measured in a common unit. By-production modelling can help overcome this situation.Theoretically, the by-production technology, as the intersection of two sub-technologies (see formula (13)), provides a strong background and realism in modelling pollution-generating technology. However, as shown in equations (20)–(22), in the practical case of using DEA to estimate the efficiency scores, the model fails to maintain this intersection. Actually, in such non-parametric representation, independence between Ψ1 and Ψ2 is assumed. In Murty et al.'s (2012) words, the pollution generating sub-technology Ψ2 “operates independently of a firm's intended-production technology” represented by Ψ1. The proposed efficiency score is simply computed as a multiple goal programming with a weight of 50 percent given to each objective (see equation (22)). The direct implication of this set-up in the case of activity analysis is an inconsistency between the optimal levels of inputs under each separate sub-technology. Let us recall that both transformation processes operate in the same entity and not in two distinct ones. Another limit of the by-production model derives from the inputs’ separation into polluting and non-polluting ones. Such a separation would need to be made a priori before conducting any efficiency assessment, but it might be hard to decide whether some inputs can be classified into the polluting or non-polluting group. Besides, this categorisation of inputs excludes the possibility that some non-polluting inputs might directly affect the levels of undesirable outputs’ generation.In this multiple frontiers estimation framework, another approach has been developed around new disposability concepts, explained in the next sub-section.Sueyoshi et al. (2010) and Sueyoshi and Goto (2010) proposed two new efficiency models related to the two sub-technologies described above: an operational efficiency model (related to Ψ1); and an environmental efficiency model (related to Ψ2). These models use non-radial range-adjusted measures (RAM;Cooper, Park, & Pastor, 1999), and are based on two new disposability concepts aimed at analysing the adaptive behaviours of DMUs to changes in environmental regulations (Sueyoshi & Goto, 2012a,b). (i) The natural disposability concept (or negative adaptation): under this assumption, a decrease in the vector of inputs implies a decrease in the vectors of both desirable outputs and undesirable outputs. This disposability is also termed the “natural reduction” of pollution. The idea is that the aim of a manager is to increase his/her firm's operational efficiency in a way that, given a vector of reduced inputs, the firm increases the desirable outputs as much as possible. No environmental managerial effort needs to be undertaken in order to meet the objective of pollution reduction. (ii) The managerial disposability concept (or positive adaptation): here a firm increases its consumption of inputs in order to increase the volume of desirable outputs and simultaneously decrease the levels of undesirable outputs. This can be achieved through some managerial effort such as the adoption of new technologies that can mitigate pollution. The managerial disposability concept relates to the ideas of scholars such as Porter and van der Linde (1995) who saw in regulations the opportunity for firms to implement technology innovations which are compatible with both environmental and economic improvements. Graphically, the operational efficiency of DMU n is evaluated using the good outputs’ sub-frontier (the upper one in Fig. 2), and the environmental efficiency is defined with respect to the bad outputs’ sub-technology (the lower sub-frontier). Natural disposability is represented by all projections directed toward the southwest part of the figure along the segments defined by points G, H, D. Managerial disposability is defined by the potential increase in input consumption, and thus in Fig. 2 it is represented by all projections to the southeast part, namely points D, E, F. When taken separately, the operational efficiency of DMU n is evaluated using points A, B, C as benchmarks, and the environmental efficiency is evaluated relative to points D, E, F.Using activity analysis, the two disposability concepts can be estimated by (24) and (25):(23)Naturaldisposabilitymax1K+Q+R[∑qSnqyRANqy+∑kSnkxRANkx+∑rSnrbRANrb]subjecttoxnk−Snkx=∑i=1NγiXik,k=1,…,K;ynq+Snqy=∑i=1NγiYiq,q=1,…,Q;bnr−Snrb=∑i=1NγiBir,r=1,…,R;∑i=1Nγi=1;γi,Snkx,Snqy,Snrb,≥0foralli,k,qandr(24)Managerialdisposabilitymax1K+Q+R[∑qSnqyRANqy+∑kSnkxRANkx+∑rSorbRANrb]subjecttoxnk+Snkx=∑i=1NγiXik,k=1,…,K;ynq+Snqy=∑i=1NγiYiq,q=1,…,Q;bnr−Snrb=∑i=1NγiBir,r=1,…,R;∑i=1Nγi=1;γi,Snkx,Snqy,Snrb,≥0foralli,k,qandrwhereRANqy=y¯q−y̲q,y¯q=max[yq],y̲q=min[yq],q=1,….,QRANkx=x¯k−x̲k,x¯k=max[xk],x̲k=min[xk],k=1,….,KRANrb=b¯r−b̲r,b¯r=max[br],b̲r=min[br],r=1,….,RAn efficiency score Θ can be obtained as follows:(25)Θ=1−[∑qSnqyRANqy+∑kSnkxRANkx+∑rSorbRANrb]K+Q+RHowever, in the case of the natural disposability assumption, the undesirable outputs are simply treated like any input (same intensity variable γi), whereas in the case of the managerial disposability assumption, inputs are modelled as outputs and undesirable outputs are modelled as inputs. Hence, although these two new disposability concepts present some positive aspects, they may suffer from the above-mentioned limits (see previous sections) inherent in the conception of the models. In particular, treating undesirable outputs as inputs results in a wrong specification of the global technology. Besides, considering inputs as good outputs under the managerial disposability is counterintuitive given the fact that the consumption of inputs generates costs to firms.Sueyoshi et al. (2010) developed a unified framework that, in contrast to Murty et al. (2012), is based on a single intensity variable (although such a framework does not erase the above-mentioned limits). The unification strategy accounts not only for the managerial aspect linked to undesirable outputs, but also for the natural reduction of these outputs. This is possible by splitting the inputs slacksSnkxinto their positive (Snkx+) and negative (Snkx−) parts, as shown in (26):(26)Unifiedefficiencyestimationmax1K+Q+R[∑qSnqyRANqy+∑kSnkx++Snkx−RANkx+∑rSnrbRANrb]subjecttoxnk−Snkx−+Snkx+=∑i=1NγiXik,k=1,…,K;ynq+Snqy=∑i=1NγiYiq,q=1,…,Q;bnr−Snrb=∑i=1NγiBir,r=1,…,R;∑i=1Nγi=1;γi,Snkx+,Snkx−,Snqy,Snrb,≥0foralli,k,qandrTo prevent infeasibilities, the estimation of model (26) requires that the two input slacks must be mutually exclusive:Snkx+×Snkx−=0. This means that the simultaneous occurrence ofSnkx+>0andSnkx−>0is not possible. Model (26) can be estimated in two ways: by adding the constraintSnkx+×Snkx−=0and estimating a non-linear mathematical programming; or by transforming the model into a mixed integer linear programming model with the following additional constraints:Snkx+≤Lznk+,Snkx−≤Lznk−,znk++znk−≤1, whereznk+andznk−are binary for eachk=1,….,Kand L is a very large number that needs to be set.As pointed out in Manello (2012, p. 27), the non-linearity introduced in the unified framework may generate some dominated efficient DMUs. According to the author, there may be identification problems for the efficient DMUs since the two technology sets can generate contradictory results. Another issue is that the dual model of (26) is difficult to derive without using Second Order Cone Programming (SOCP) (Sueyoshi & Goto, 2011b). For an inefficient DMU, the solution of the problem in (26) may yield inefficiency on the input side. However, given the mutually exclusive characteristics of the input slacks, eitherSnkx−orSnkx+will arise. Then, the solution to the problem in (26) for an inefficient DMU simply results in the linear program (23) in the case ofSnkx−, or in (25) in the case ofSnkx+. We mentioned earlier the limits inherent in these models taken separately, which wrongly represent the nature of a pollution-generating technology. Moreover, using a single intensity variable (γi) is not an explicit way of representing two distinct sub-technologies.Although the idea of considering that a pollution-generating technology is made up of two sub-technologies (one for intended outputs and the other for unintended ones) may not be solid regarding the structure of a firm in reality, we believe that the multiple frontier approaches are very fruitful avenues for future research. Here also the implementation fails to fully capture the theory, proving that there are still challenges left in modelling pollution-generating technologies.In this paper we have extended previous reviews on performance benchmarking in the presence of undesirable outputs to include recent developments and to discuss the limits of each approach. We have discussed the classic WDA, and also the weak-G disposability assumption and the MBP, plus the by-production approach and the approach introducing natural and managerial disposability.The WDA, although commonly used, is largely questioned with regard to its ability to account for detrimental outputs. Based on the idea that reducing undesirable outputs comes at a cost for the DMUs, the WDA faces the important criticism that it does not comply with the laws of thermodynamics (and the MBP) in the way that there is a minimal amount of residual generation. In addition, negative shadow prices may be obtained, and several problems may appear when estimating efficiency; for example, in relation to strongly dominated firms or targets. However, despite all the drawbacks, this disposability assumption is still extensively used in many environmental performance evaluations. By contrast, methods such as the weak-G disposability are based on the laws of thermodynamics (which govern production processes), tied up in the MBP, and hence present a clear advantage over the WDA models. Discussing the notion of joint production, Baumgärtner et al. (2001) indeed stated that it is “intimately related to the laws of thermodynamics” where each production process is grounded by the transformation of energy and matter. This idea strengthens the MBP which simply states that “what goes in must come out” (Coelli et al., 2005). Yet the famous energy conservation axiom is introduced in the aforementioned model as a simple accounting identity, and therefore does not describe the way undesirable outputs are generated and is limited in the representation of trade-offs in the technology. In addition, from a theoretical point of view, derivatives in the problem may be constrained yielding counterintuitive results, and from a practical point of view the approach requires the measurement of inputs and outputs in common units.The problem of trade-offs mentioned above is partly circumvented by the by-production modelling. This approach provides a new way of representing pollution-generating technologies, by estimating several frontiers to characterise each process involved in a production system. In the simple case, two sub-technologies are represented: an intended-production technology and a residual-generation technology. Nevertheless, in the operationalisation of this approach in the DEA framework, Murty et al. (2012) assumed independence between the different sub-technologies. Hence, this does not fully capture the trade-offs between operational efficiency and environmental efficiency. In practice this can lead to inconsistent optimal levels of inputs identified under each separate sub-technology. In addition, inputs should be separated a priori into polluting and non-polluting ones, which may not always be possible.1919When doing a mass balance, one could expect that the separation may be easy: inputs that contain materials are all potentially polluting, while service flow inputs like labour, capital and electricity that do not lose any mass in the transformation process are not polluting. However, we want to underline here the situation where pollution is a result of the combination of materials and non-materials inputs. If capital or labour is removed from the system, no pollution is generated. In addition, there exist some situations where undesirable outputs are not always related to materials inputs, such as bad loans in the banking systems. In this latter situation it might be difficult to separate inputs that are associated to good loans from inputs related to bad loans.Still in this multiple frontier framework, Sueyoshi et al. (2010) developed a unification strategy that relies on two concepts: the natural disposability and the managerial disposability. The former represents the natural reduction of pollution in the production process without additional managerial effort, while the latter requires additional effort such as the adoption of new technologies. However, this unified model also fails to provide a proper representation of pollution-generating technologies, in particular because a single intensity variable is used.To summarise, the structure of our paper shows an incremental evolution of the different methods: the WDA is the most used approach, but some authors have cast doubt on its relevance given the violation of the MBP. These authors thus developed an approach grounded in the laws of thermodynamics (which govern production processes) and tied in the MBP. However, the famous mass/energy conservation axiom is introduced as a simple accounting identity and does not describe the way undesirable outputs are generated. From this point, the by-production modelling has emerged, providing a new way of representing pollution-generating technologies, considering one sub-frontier for each process involved in a production system. The approaches using several sub-technologies are the most recently developed in this area of research. In a sense, each method developed has attempted to circumvent problems of previous methods. All the existing models are, however, flawed in the way pollution-generating technologies are implemented in the case of non-parametric production modelling. They all fail to represent the theory. Despite this, the methods based on the estimation of multiple frontier technologies are more promising due to their strong theoretical background (Murty, 2012). For instance, the by-production approach does not theoretically violate the MBP. This approach will probably become the core of future research in eco-efficiency evaluation, and our first suggestion is that more effort should be devoted to addressing the remaining issues for this approach, such as the practical implementation.However, the fact that models relying on the WDA are still the most widely used despite the strong shortcomings publicly expressed, raises questions. Answers may lie in the complexity of the more advanced models. In this context, a second suggestion for further research is to undertake a data-based comparison of all these approaches to systematically identify convergent and divergent ones. A meta-analysis of existing empirical studies could also be carried out in this context. This data-driven comparison should be associated with expert knowledge on the observations under evaluation to help empirically validate (or invalidate) the different models. In fact, it may be that different models can yield practically approximately similar results, casting doubt on the necessity of mathematically complex formulations.A third suggestion is that these approaches should be extended to account for a longer time horizon. A decomposition of productivity indices into various components including eco-efficiency change could provide information on the most important sources of productivity change. This should be useful to policy-makers, since it may help assess the long term effects of environmental regulations. Indeed, the regulations may not be immediately followed by results since, for example, investment in cleaner or mitigating technologies may have delayed effectiveness.Fourth, in this paper we have not discussed in detail the estimation of shadow prices of bad outputs, although from a political perspective these prices can provide interesting information for the design of environmental regulations (e.g. taxes, a market of pollution rights). Attaching a monetary value to environmental outcomes is a current and controversial research topic, and would necessitate further research. As a first step, a review can be found in Zhou, Zhou, and Fan (2014)2020As emphasized by one reviewer, Zhou et al. (2014) reviewed shadow prices based on how changing constraints influence the objective function, hence only abatement costs interpreted in a general way can be estimated (assuming that the market price of a good exists). This may be far from a social evaluation of the marginal environmental cost generated by pollutants.and, for example, a recent application to the case of agriculture in Singbo, Lansink, and Emvalomatis (2015).Fifth, the eco-efficiency models may also be an opportunity to test the Porter Hypothesis (Porter & van der Linde, 1995). According to this hypothesis, more stringent environmental regulations may trigger innovations that can partially or fully offset the costs of complying with them. The idea behind this notion is that regulations can increase productive efficiency, although some authors such as Palmer et al. (1995) expressed their scepticism about this win–win opportunity. The Porter Hypothesis can be related to the natural and the managerial disposability concepts. In fact, the managerial disposability assumption is in line with the Porter Hypothesis, as it implies that firms have the opportunity to increase their good output production levels simultaneously with the reduction of undesirable outputs. Firms would gain with this strategy because the adoption of new technologies may offset the investment costs. Analysing the potential improvements of DMUs in their managerial efficiency can shed light on adequate environmental regulations.Finally, the classification of the approaches made in the Introduction part of this article could be augmented by considering a zeroth category where no disposability assumption is considered.2121We thank one reviewer for this suggestion.This has for example been addressed in Dyckhoff and Allen (2001) where the authors grounded their modelling strategies on “complex preference structure” and stated that “…in the ecological context the disposability assumption may come into conflict with assumption A7 on the preference structure of the inputs and outputs which we add here”. Dyckhoff and Allen (2001) then proposed “an ecologically extended additive model” where inputs and outputs can be classified into three different categories: “good”, “bad” and “neutral”. This is implemented by treating desirable inputs the same way as good outputs, while undesirable outputs are considered as classical inputs (namely production factors).2222Dyckhoff and Allen (2001) have written: “… reduct quantities are maximized by treating them as classical DEA outputs whereas pollutant quantities are minimized by treating them as classical DEA inputs.”However, this unusual way of treating desirable inputs (namely as good outputs) raises the question of the representation of the true production process. Besides, as we have discussed in the Introduction, considering pollutants as inputs is not a correct way of modelling pollution-generating technologies. In fact, the “no-disposability” assumption advocated by Dyckhoff and Allen (2001) can be accounted for by measuring a Pareto–Koopmans efficiency (non-radial measure) where all the slacks are considered given the preference structure of the technology. Our last recommendation is thus related to how this “no-disposability” assumption can be modelled and how it can be associated to the preference structure in the DEA framework. Let us recall that one way to increase some desirable inputs apart from technological change is through substitution (on the frontier of the production technology) with other inputs that need to be reduced ceteris paribus.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
