@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ensuring service levels in routing problems with time windows and stochastic travel times

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Guarantee feasibility of time windows in the environment of stochastic routing.A chance-constrained approach ensures a given service level for all customers.We show an enhanced feasibility check that can be “plugged” into any VRPTW algorithm.Experiments analyze the trade-off between service level and delivery costs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Vehicle routing,Stochastic travel times,Service level,Chance constraint,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the stochastic variant of the vehicle routing problem with time windows, known as the SVRPTW, travel times are assumed to be stochastic. In our chance-constrained approach to the problem, restrictions are placed on the probability that individual time window constraints are violated, while the objective remains based on traditional routing costs. In this paper, we propose a way to offer this probability, or service level, for all customers. Our approach carefully considers how to compute the start-service time and arrival time distributions for each customer. These distributions are used to create a feasibility check that can be “plugged” into any algorithm for the VRPTW and thus be used to solve large problems fairly quickly. Our computational experiments show how the solutions change for some well-known data sets across different levels of customer service, two travel time distributions, and several parameter settings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In times of increasing customer expectations and more customer-oriented business models, the consideration of delivery time windows has become much more common in the creation of delivery routes. For example, in attended home delivery applications, customers and service providers mutually agree on tight delivery time windows. It is not surprising that there have been a considerable number of recent papers on how to solve the vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW), including Baldacci, Mingozzi, and Roberti (2012), Vidal, Crainic, Gendreau, and Prins (2012), and Hashimoto, Yagiura, Imahori, and Ibaraki (2013). The classic VRPTW assumes deterministic travel times between stops on the route. However, in practice, the execution of delivery routes often differs from plans due to a variety of influences such as traffic jams, weather, customer availability, etc. These influences may cost the driver to miss customer time windows, which can create dissatisfaction and loss of future sales.While the predictability of some of these individual factors is nearly impossible, it is often possible to derive travel time distributions for the travel time between customers based on historical data. This idea is the foundation of a stochastic variant of the VRPTW, known as the SVRPTW, where travel times are assumed to be stochastic. As we will discuss in more detail in Section 2, many papers in this area take a recourse approach to the SVRPTW, putting a penalty in the objective function based on how much the expected arrivals at customers exceed the deadlines. While such an approach considers overall customer service, it does not guarantee a particular level of service at individual customers.In our chance-constrained approach, restrictions are placed on the probability that individual time window constraints are violated, while the objective remains based on traditional routing costs. Chance-constrained approaches guarantee a given service level for all customers, but are traditionally considered much more difficult to solve due to the use of restrictions. We have seen very little SVRPTW research that addresses how arrival time distributions should properly be propagated throughout a route given the presence of time windows. For example, if an arrival occurs before the opening of a customer’s time window, a vehicle must wait, and this impacts the arrival time distribution at future customers.In this paper, we propose a fairly straightforward way to guarantee a given service level at all customers. Our approach carefully considers how to compute the start-service time and arrival time distributions at each customer on the route, which enables us to verify if the given service level is maintained at individual customers. Our ideas can be “plugged” into any algorithm for the VRPTW and thus be used to solve large problems fairly quickly. In comparison to the limited literature on the SVRPTW that also considers a service level requirement, this is a key differentiation point and is a big part of our paper’s contribution.In Section 2, we review the relevant literature, while Section 3 formally defines the problem we solve. In Section 4, we describe how to estimate the mean and variance of the start-service time and arrival time distributions with careful consideration of the impact of time windows. The equations we derive are based on the assumption that travel time between customers follows a normal distribution, but we demonstrate via simulation that these equations work well with instances that have travel times that are not normally distributed. This is an important part of our contribution since travel time distributions are often not normal in practice. In Section 5, we discuss how these equations can be added to any VRPTW algorithm in the form of a feasibility check. Computational experiments in Section 6 show how the solutions change for different levels of customer service across two travel time distributions and several parameter settings.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
