@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Boundary properties of the inconsistency of pairwise comparisons in group decisions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the inconsistency of pairwise comparisons in group decision making.We study the effect of the aggregation of pairwise comparisons on their consistency.We derive general results and provide a complete study for well-known inconsistency indices.We start a discussion on the meaning of inconsistency of aggregated preferences.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pairwise comparison matrix,Inconsistency indices,Boundary properties,Group decision making,Analytic hierarchy process,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an analysis of the effects of consensus and preference aggregation on the consistency of pairwise comparisons. We define some boundary properties for the inconsistency of group preferences and investigate their relation with different inconsistency indices. Some results are presented on more general dependencies between properties of inconsistency indices and the satisfaction of boundary properties. In the end, given three boundary properties and nine indices among the most relevant ones, we will be able to present a complete analysis of what indices satisfy what properties and offer a reflection on the interpretation of the inconsistency of group preferences.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a wide range of decision making problems, it occurs that an expert, or a group of experts, is asked to rate some alternatives. Selecting the best alternative is trivial when the number of considered alternatives is very small, but complexity arises as the number of alternatives, and criteria with respect to which alternatives are judged, grows. Techniques based on pairwise comparisons allow the expert to discriminate between two alternatives at a time, thus decomposing the problem into more simple and easily tractable sub-problems.The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) by Saaty (1977, 1980) is probably the best known among all the methods using pairwise comparisons. In a recent survey by Ishizaka and Labib (2011) on the latest developments of the AHP, consistency of preferences and group decisions have been considered hot topics, and the possibility of estimating inconsistency been regarded as a valuable asset for techniques adopting pairwise comparison matrices.Consistency has been widely regarded as a desirable, yet hardly ever achievable, property of preferences in decision making problems. Following the thesis of Irwin (1958), which links the concepts of preference and discrimination, being consistent in expressing preferences means being rational in discriminating between alternatives. Although one might argue that consistency does not necessarily imply expertise of the decision maker (consistent preferences could possibly be obtained randomly), it is undebatable that a good expert should always be able to state his preferences in a non-contradictory way. Hence, although consistency alone does not guarantee the expertise of a decision maker, the existence of inconsistencies should be symptomatic of the decision maker’s scarce preparation or lack of knowledge of the problem. Going back in time, even in the fundamental contribution by Savage (1972) consistency of preferences was regarded as a desideratum. More recently, Gass (2005) recalled that also Luce and Raiffa (1957) and Fishburn (1991) regarded transitivity of preferences, and consequently their consistency, as an auspicable, but not necessary, condition for the preferences of a decision maker.Note that the use of the concept of consistency has not been limited to the quantification of inconsistency. For example, just to cite the most recent results, it has been used to improve consistency of preferences in the framework of a model based on Hadamard product between matrices (Kou, Ergu, & Shang, 2014), to detect the most inconsistent comparisons (Ergu, Kou, Peng, & Shi, 2011), and to derive the priority vector by means of a geometric similarity measure (Kou & Lin, 2014). On the other hand, also the concept of group decisions with pairwise comparisons has been studied; for example Altuzarra, Moreno-Jiménez, and Salvador (2010) proposed a statistical model for consensus in the AHP including assumptions on group consistency, and Bernasconi, Choirat, and Seri (2014) studied, from the empirical point of view, different aggregation methods for preferences.Consistency has been a widely studied research topic in decision sciences, but, in spite of the growing effort in studying group decisions, most of the research on consistency of preference relations has focused on the reliable assessment of the degree of inconsistency of single pairwise comparison matrices. Only few, and more recent, studies (Escobar, Aguarón, & Moreno-Jiménez, 2004; Grošelj & Zadnik Stirn, 2012; Lin et al., 2008; Liu, Zhang, & Wang, 2012) have tried to extend the issue of inconsistency quantification to the case with multiple decision makers by examining single measures of inconsistency but never proposing a more general reasoning on the matter. Furthermore, very few studies have investigated the connection between consensus and consistency. In a qualitative study, Weiss and Shanteau (2004) highlighted how consensus alone does not necessarily lead to better decisions and, instead, emphasized the fundamental role of the expertise of decision makers, which they called consistency.In this paper we will provide further results on the connection between group decisions and inconsistency, in particular on how the former affects the latter. More specifically we shall define some general boundary properties for the inconsistency of a group of decision makers and see whether different inconsistency indices satisfy them or not. In doing so, we shall be able to derive and use some more general results starting from some axiomatic properties of inconsistency indices (Brunelli & Fedrizzi, 2013).The paper is outlined as follows. In Section 2 we recall the definitions of pairwise comparison matrices and inconsistency, and we summarize the axioms which were proposed to characterize inconsistency indices. In Section 3 we define the boundary properties and, within the same section, in Subsections 3.1 and 3.2 we study the satisfaction of lower and upper boundary properties. In Section 4 we discuss the implications of the results, and in Section 5 we draw the conclusions.The intensity of pairwise preferences of a decision maker can be represented on bipolar scales. The approach proposed by Fishburn (1991) based on skew symmetric additive preferences considers the opinions of a decision maker to be expressed on the real line with the value 0 representing indifference between two alternatives. Conversely, Luce and Suppes (1965) and part of the fuzzy sets community (De Baets, De Meyer, De Schuymer, & Jenei, 2006) studied judgments expressed on the scale]0,1[with the indifference represented by the value0.5. Hereafter, due to its popularity, we shall instead consider the approach offered by Saaty (1977, 1980), where pairwise judgments are expressed as entries of positive reciprocal matrices, often called pairwise comparison matrices. Even so, our conclusions should not lose in generality as it was proven that all the above mentioned approaches are group isomorphic to each other (Cavallo & D’Apuzzo, 2009). Given a set of n alternatives, a pairwise comparison matrix is a positive square matrixA=(aij)n×nsuch thataijaji=1∀i,j, whereaijis the subjective assessment of the relative importance of the i-th alternative with respect to the j-th. For instance,aij=2means that, for the decision maker, the i-th alternative is two times better than the j-th. A pairwise comparison matrix is consistent if and only if(1)aik=aijajk∀i,j,k.Furthermore, if and only if a pairwise comparison matrixAis consistent, there exists a vectorw=(w1,…,wn)such thataij=wiwj∀i,j.A possible way of finding vectorwfrom a consistent pairwise comparison matrix is the geometric mean methodwi=∏j=1naij1n.The same method is also commonly used to estimate reliable vectors from inconsistent pairwise comparison matrices.For notational convenience, we define the set of all pairwise comparison matrices asA=A=(aij)n×n|aij>0,aijaji=1∀i,j,n>2.Similarly, the set of all consistent pairwise comparison matricesA∗⊂Ais defined asA∗={A=(aij)n×n|A∈A,aik=aijajk∀i,j,k}.A very precise definition of consistency was given in (1), but in the literature there is not a meeting of minds on how inconsistency should be quantified. In fact, inconsistency is generally regarded as a lack of consistency, i.e. a deviation from (1), but there is not a unique formula to quantify it. To overcome this problem, inconsistency indices have been introduced. Inconsistency indices are functions(2)I:A→R,where the valueI(A)is an estimation of the degree of inconsistency of the pairwise comparison matrixA. It is important to note that each inconsistency index is in fact a different definition of inconsistency measuring. Establishing if a function returns a reasonable estimation of inconsistency—i.e. if a function is a good definition of inconsistency—is a crucial point indeed. In fact, there exist infinitely many functions (2) whose behavior is obviously meaningless when it comes to estimate the degree of inconsistency of a pairwise comparison matrix. This is the reason which motivated the introduction of some minimal reasonable properties that any inconsistency index should satisfy (Brunelli & Fedrizzi, 2013). The five axiomatic properties are summarized and justified in the following and will later be used to derive some results. We refer to the original paper (Brunelli & Fedrizzi, 2013) for more detailed descriptions and comments.A1:There exists a uniqueν∈Rrepresenting the situation of full consistency, i.e.∃!ν∈Rsuch thatI(A)=ν⇔A∈A∗.Hence, every inconsistency index should at least be able to distinguish between fully consistent and inconsistent matrices.Changing the order of the alternatives does not affect the inconsistency of preferences. That is,I(PAPT)=I(A),for any permutation matrixP. Thus, inconsistency remains unchanged when the names of alternatives are exchanged.If preferences of a matrixAare properly intensified obtaining a new matrix which we denote byA(b), then the inconsistency ofA(b)cannot be smaller than the inconsistency ofA. In fact, if all the expressed preferences indicate indifference between alternatives, it isaij=1∀i,j, andAis consistent. Going farther from this uniformity means having sharper and stronger judgments, and this should not make their possible inconsistency less evident. In other words, intensifying the preferences (pushing them away from indifference) should not de-emphasize the characteristics of these preferences and their possible contradictions. More formally, it was proved by Saaty (1977) that the exponential is the only non-trivial function preserving reciprocity and consistency (whenAis consistent). Thus, the intensification of preferences is obtained definingA(b)=aijbn×nwithb>1. Then, the property is as followsI(A(b))⩾I(A)∀A∈A,b>1.Given a consistent pairwise comparison matrix and considering a single arbitrary comparison between two alternatives, then as we push its value far from its original one, we clearly increase the distance from consistency. Axiom 4 requires that the inconsistency of the matrix should not decrease. More formally, given a consistent matrixA∈A∗, and considering any arbitrary non-diagonal elementapq(and its reciprocalaqp) such thatapq≠1, letA(δ)be the inconsistent matrix obtained from A by replacing the entryapqwithapqδ, whereδ≠1. Necessarily,aqpmust be replaced byaqpδin order to preserve reciprocity. LetA(δ′)be the inconsistent matrix obtained from A by replacing entriesapqandaqpwithapqδ′andaqpδ′respectively. The property can then be formulated for allA∈A∗as(3)δ′>δ>1⇒I(A(δ′))⩾I(A(δ)),δ′<δ<1⇒I(A(δ′))⩾I(A(δ)).Function I is continuous with respect to the entries ofA. This is required, as infinitesimally small variations of the preferences should cause infinitesimally small changes of the value of the inconsistency.We remark that all the indices described in this paper measure the inconsistency of the preferences. Nevertheless, in order to avoid multiple labels, we maintain the original names for the most popular indices, e.g. ‘Consistency Index’ and ‘Geometric Consistency Index’.In the typical group decision framework, there arem(m⩾2)decision makers, each associated with a set of preferences. Hence, there exist m pairwise comparison matrices in the formA1=(aij(1))n×n,…,Am=(aij(m))n×n.In our opinion, it would be interesting to study if, and how, the inconsistency of the pairwise comparisons changes under some circumstances. When studying the connection between consensus and inconsistency, some natural questions could be the following:•How does the inconsistency of the preferences of the single decision makers react when they negotiate and their preferences converge to a consensual solution?Is the group inconsistency of the aggregated preferences a weighted mean of the inconsistencies of the original preference relations or systematically higher/lower?In some recent papers, the problem of computing an upper bound for group inconsistency has been addressed only for a couple of inconsistency indices. In particular, Xu (2000) allegedly proved that Saaty’s Consistency Index CI of a combination of pairwise comparison matrices cannot be greater that the maximum CI of the single pairwise comparison matrices. However, Lin et al. (2008) showed that the proof was not satisfactory and that Xu’s result was a conjecture. Finally, Liu et al. (2012) provided a proof showing that Xu’s conjecture was, in effect, true. Grošelj and Zadnik Stirn (2012) noted that the whole controversy was based on the unawareness that a more general problem had already been solved before by Elsner, Johnson, and Dias da Silva (1988). Some studies have been proposed for another inconsistency index; Escobar et al. (2004) investigated the upper boundary of the Geometric Consistency Index, GCI.The question of how the pairwise comparison matrices of different decision makers should be aggregated was answered when Aczel and Saaty (1983) proved that the weighted geometric mean is the only reasonable function to do so. Hence, when it comes to synthesize m pairwise comparison matrices into a single oneA★=(aij★)n×n, then its entries should be obtained as the weighted geometric means of the corresponding entries of the decision makers’ pairwise comparison matrices, e.g.(4)aij★=∏h=1maij(h)λh,whereλ=(λ1,…,λm)such thatλh⩾0∀hand∑h=1mλh=1is the weight vector of relative importances of the decision makers. We useLmto denote the set of all the weight vectors with m components. That is,(5)Lm=(λ1,…,λm)|λh⩾0∀h,∑h=1mλh=1.Let us then define some properties which will play a pivotal role in the rest of the paper.Definition 1Boundary propertiesLetA★be the aggregated pairwise comparison matrix as in (4). A functionI:A→Ris lower bounded (w.r.t the geometric mean) if:(6)IA★⩾minIA1,…,IAm∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm,and upper bounded (w.r.t. the geometric mean) if(7)IA★⩽maxIA1,…,IAm∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm.A functionI:A→Ris strongly upper bounded (w.r.t the geometric mean) if and only if(8)I(A★)⩽∑h=1mλhI(Ah)∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm.Note that, even if not specified, the previous definition is for alln,m⩾2. Furthermore, Fig. 1provides a graphical interpretation of these properties in the case of two pairwise comparison matrices.Remark 1Given a set of m matricesA1,…,Am, if a function I is strongly upper bounded, then it is also convex w.r.t. the variables(λ1,…,λm)∈Lm. In fact, if a function I is not convex, then, there exists a subset{A1,…,As}⊂Aand a vector(λ1′,…,λs′)∈Lssuch thatI(A★)>∑i=1sλiI(Ai), which contradicts the definition of strongly upper bounded inconsistency index.We believe that it is important to study the phenomenon of inconsistency in the wider context of group decisions and raise the level of the discussion from single indices to their properties A1–A5. In fact, at this point some questions may arise concerning the connection between the axiomatic properties A1–A5, here recalled in Section 2, and the boundary properties of Definition 1. Namely, before trying to prove whether or not each single inconsistency index satisfies the boundary properties, we shall use the axiomatic framework A1–A5 to derive more general results. For instance, one type of more general result would be that, if some axiomatic properties hold for one index I, then it is guaranteed that also some of the boundary conditions in Definition 1 must hold/not hold for I.If an inconsistency index is lower bounded, then it is impossible to achieve a group inconsistency lower than the lowest inconsistency of all the decision makers, by aggregating their preferences. With the following proposition, we shall show that an inconsistency index satisfying the simple axiom A1 cannot be lower bounded. Perhaps due to the previous lack of an axiomatic framework which allowed the derivation of general results, to our best knowledge, this result has never been explicitly spelled out.Proposition 1If an inconsistency index satisfies A1, then it cannot be lower bounded.It is sufficient to consider a matrixA∉A∗and its transposeAT. Since they are both inconsistent, A1 impliesI(A)>0andI(AT)>0, but the new matrix obtained as their element-wise geometric meanaijajin×nis always consistent. As an inconsistency index respects A1, then the result thatIaijajin×n=0<min{I(A),I(AT)}∀A∉A∗concludes the proof.□Let us remark the importance of this result: for any inconsistency index satisfying the extremely weak axiom A1, it is possible that, given some pairwise comparison matrices, the inconsistency index calculated on their geometric mean-based combination be smaller than the minimum of their inconsistencies. This suggests that negotiation and convergence towards consensus might have a good effect on consistency of preferences. Furthermore, it can happen that two decision makers, initially completely inconsistent could, by negotiating, converge towards a consensual and fully consistent solution. Consider, for instance, the case(9)A1=11/99911/91/991A2=191/91/91991/91,whose combination with weightsλ1=λ2=0.5is the matrix(10)A★=111111111∈A∗.This should make clear that, if the reliability of a decision should depend on the expertise of the decision makers, the evaluation of inconsistency of a consensual matrix should not be considered as a substitute for the evaluation of single pairwise comparison matrices. Therefore, if what we want to asses by means of inconsistency tests is the ability of a decision maker, then the inconsistency of their initial preferences is more appropriate than the inconsistency of their modified/aggregated preferences. Clearly, moving towards consensus, or to an ever greater extent having his preferences aggregated with someone else’s, does not make the decision maker a better and more capable expert.To further dwell on this topic, we shall now focus on upper boundaries of inconsistency indices.We start examining the properties of upper boundary and strong upper boundary by considering their connections with the five axioms A1–A5.Proposition 2If an index satisfies A1 but not A3 or A4, then the index is not upper bounded.Let us assume that index I satisfies A1 but not A3. Then there exists a matrixAsuch thatI(A(b′))<I(A(b))>I(A(b″))for someb′<b<b″. On the other side,A(b)can be written as the weighted geometric mean ofA(b′)andA(b″), i.e.A(b)=aijb=aij(λb′+(1-λ)b″)=aijb′λaijb″1-λ,for a suitableλ∈]0,1[as in (4). Then it isI(A(b))>max{I(A(b′)),I(A(b″))}and (7) is violated. Therefore, I is not upper bounded.The proof for the case of A1 holding and A4 not holding is similar, and thus omitted.□In other words, Proposition 2 states that axioms A3 and A4 are necessary conditions for an index to be upper bounded. Moreover, considering that the strong upper boundary property is tighter than the upper boundary property, we can formulate the following corollary.Corollary 1If an index satisfies A1 but not A3 or A4, then the index is not strongly upper bounded.Building on Proposition 2, and drawing on previous results showing that a number of indices do not satisfy A3 or A4 (see Brunelli & Fedrizzi, 2013), we can formalize the fact that these same indices are not upper bounded. For brevity, their definitions are omitted and the reader can refer to the original works as well as to a survey paper by Brunelli, Canal, and Fedrizzi (2013a).Corollary 2Indices GW(Golden & Wang, 1989),HCI(Stein & Mizzi, 2007),NInσ(Ramík & Korviny, 2010)andRE(Barzilai, 1998)are not upper bounded.Consider two decision makers and the corresponding two pairwise comparison matricesA=1411/4111/111B=1211/21711/71.Their preferences are aggregated according to (4) obtaining the aggregated pairwise comparison matrixA★(λ)=aijλbij1-λ. Then, the index RE proposed by Barzilai (1998) is computed forλ∈[0,1]. In Fig. 2is reported the plot of this inconsistency index, i.e.REA★(λ), as a function ofλ. It can be noted, for example, that the inconsistency of the aggregated preferencesREA★(0.5)is greater than the inconsistency ofAand greater than the inconsistency ofB, i.e.REA★(0.5)>max{RE(A),RE(B)}. Thus, in this example, group preferences can be more inconsistent than the preferences of all decision makers, as index RE is not upper bounded.Hereafter, until the end of the section, we shall analyze the upper boundaries of some other inconsistency indices. Saaty’s CI remains the most popular inconsistency index in the literature and thus any analysis which does not take it into account, would be incomplete.Definition 2Consistency Index CIGiven a pairwise comparison matrixAof order n, its Consistency Index (CI) is defined as:(11)CI(A)=λmax(A)-nn-1.whereλmax(A)is the maximum eigenvalue ofA.To avoid possible confusion, we remark that the symbolλmaxhas been used here, as usual, to denote the largest eigenvalue and should not be confused with the coefficientsλh.Liu et al. (2012) already proved that CI is upper bounded. Here we extend their findings and show that it is strongly upper bounded. Let us first recall, in the following Lemma, a result by Elsner et al. (1988).Lemma 1Elsner et al., 1988Given m matricesM1,…,Mm∈R+n×nand a vectorλ∈Lm, then(12)ρ(M★)⩽∏h=1mρ(Mh)λh,whereρdenotes the spectral radius, andM★is the weighted geometric mean ofM1,…,Mmas in(4).Taking into account Lemma 1, and the inequality between arithmetic and geometric means, one derives that(13)ρ(A★)⩽∑h=1mλhρ(Ah).Since the Perron–Frobenius theorem guarantees that the spectral radius of a positive matrix equals its maximum eigenvalue,ρ(A)=λmax(A), by noting thatCI(A)is a positive affine transformation ofλmax(A), the following corollary, stating the strong upper boundedness of CI, can be derived.Corollary 3Index CI is strongly upper bounded, i.e. the pairwise comparison matrixA★as in(4)satisfies(14)CI(A★)⩽∑h=1mλhCI(Ah)∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm.Among other indices, the Geometric Consistency Index (GCI) has probably been the most widely studied.Definition 3Geometric Consistency Index GCI (Crawford & Williams, 1985)Given a pairwise comparison matrixAof order n, its Geometric Consistency Index (GCI) is defined as:(15)GCI(A)=2(n-1)(n-2)∑i=1n-1∑j=i+1nln2aij∏k=1najk1n∏k=1naik1n.Escobar et al. (2004) proved that index GCI is upper bounded. Nevertheless, here we shall prove that GCI is strongly upper bounded.Proposition 3Index GCI is strongly upper bounded, i.e. the pairwise comparison matrixA★as in(4)satisfies(16)GCI(A★)⩽∑h=1mλhGCI(Ah)∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm.As observed by Brunelli, Critch, and Fedrizzi (2013b),GCI(A)is proportional to the following quantity(17)∑i<j<knlnaijajkaki2.Therefore, by expanding and rearranging (16) in the form (17) one obtains(18)∑i<j<knln∏h=1maij(h)λh∏h=1majk(h)λh∏h=1maki(h)λh2⩽∑i<j<kn∑h=1mλhlnaij(h)ajk(h)aki(h)2.If we analyze a single transitivity(i,j,k), then we shall drop∑i<j<knand, for notational convenience, usexh:=aij(h)ajk(h)aki(h). Then, we can rewrite it as(19)ln∏h=1mxhλh2⩽∑h=1mλhlnxh2.Considering thatlna+lnb=lnabandlnab=blna, it becomes∑h=1mλhlnxh2⩽∑h=1mλhlnxh2.Now by puttingyh≔lnxh, we can rewrite it as∑h=1mλhyh2⩽∑h=1mλhyh2.which holds thanks to the convexity of the quadratic function. Thus, (19) is satisfied. Extending it to the sum for all the transitivity is straightforward as we know that, as it holds for all transitivities, then it must hold for their sum too.□Another index,CI∗, was proposed by Peláez and Lamata (2003) and used to improve the consistency of judgments.Definition 4CI∗(Peláez & Lamata, 2003)Given a pairwise comparison matrixAof ordern,CI∗is defined as:(20)CI∗(A)=∑i=1n-2∑j=i+1n-1∑k=j+1naijajkaik+aikaijajk-2n3.The validity of such an index has been corroborated by the fact that Shiraishi, Obata, and Daigo (1998) independently suggested another inconsistency index (c3) which was in effect proved to be proportional toCI∗by Brunelli et al. (2013b). Notably, both indicesCI∗andc3were also used as an objective function in order to estimate missing elements in incomplete pairwise comparison matrices (Shiraishi, Obata, Daigo, & Nakajima, 1999; Lamata & Peláez, 2002). With the following proposition we prove thatCI∗, and consequently alsoc3, are strongly upper bounded.Proposition 4IndexCI∗is strongly upper bounded, i.e. the pairwise comparison matrixA★as in(4)satisfies(21)CI∗(A★)⩽∑h=1mλhCI∗(Ah)∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm.By expanding and rearranging (21) one obtains(22)∑i<j<kn∏h=1maij(h)λh∏h=1majk(h)λh∏h=1maki(h)λh+1∏h=1maij(h)λh∏h=1majk(h)λh∏h=1maki(h)λh-2⩽∑h=1m∑i<j<knλhaij(h)ajk(h)aki(h)+1aij(h)ajk(h)aki(h)-2.Now, similarly to what was done in the previous proof, we consider the single transitivity(i,j,k)and rename the comparisons as follows:xh:=aij(h)ajk(h)aki(h). Thus, we obtain(23)∏h=1mxhλh+1∏h=1mxhλh-2⩽∑h=1mλhxh+1xh-2,which can be rewritten as(24)∏h=1mxhλh︸I+∏h=1m1xhλh︸II⩽∑h=1mλhxh︸III+∑h=1mλh1xh︸IV.Then, it is sufficient to prove thatI⩽IIIandII⩽IV. Namely, the following two inequalities must hold simultaneously.∏h=1mxhλh⩽∑h=1mλhxhand∏h=1m1xhλh⩽∑h=1mλh1xh.The fact that they hold derives from the inequality between the geometric and the arithmetic mean. At this stage it is proved that inequality (23) is true for single transitivities, but its extension for the sum∑i<j<knis straightforward.□More recently, another index, here denoted byICD, was proposed and grounded in the theory of Abelian linearly ordered groups (Cavallo & D’Apuzzo, 2009; Cavallo & D’Apuzzo, 2010). This index can be equivalently formulated for different types of preference relations where judgments are expressed on different scales.Definition 5ICD(Cavallo & D’Apuzzo, 2009)Given a pairwise comparison matrixAof ordern,ICDis defined as:(25)ICD(A)=∏i=1n-2∏j=i+1n-1∏k=j+1nmaxaijajkaik,aikaijajk1n3.With the following proposition, we state that also indexICDis strongly upper bounded.Proposition 5IndexICDis strongly upper bounded, i.e. the pairwise comparison matrixA★as in(4)satisfies(26)ICD(A★)⩽∑h=1mλhICD(Ah)∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm.If we neglect the exponent, then we can expand and rearrange (26) as follows:(27)∏i<j<knmax∏h=1maij(h)λh∏h=1majk(h)λh∏h=1maki(h)λh,1∏h=1maij(h)λh∏h=1majk(h)λh∏h=1maki(h)λh⩽∑h=1mλh∏i<j<knmaxaij(h)ajk(h)aki(h),1aij(h)ajk(h)aki(h).Now, by dropping∏i<j<knwe consider the single transitivity(i,j,k). Moreover, by means ofxh≔aij(h)ajk(h)aki(h)we briefly obtain(28)max∏h=1mxhλh,∏h=1m1xhλh⩽∑h=1mλhmaxxh,1xh.Now, in order to prove the previous inequality, we conjecture that there exists a quantity as follows(29)max∑h=1mλhxh,∑h=1mλh1xh,whose value is always bounded by the left and right hand sides of (28), i.e.max∏h=1mxhλh,∏h=1m1xhλh⩽(29)⩽∑h=1mλhmaxxh,1xh.Hence, it is sufficient to prove the following two inequalities,(30)max∏h=1mxhλh,∏h=1m1xhλh⩽max∑h=1mλhxh,∑h=1mλh1xh,(31)max∑h=1mλhxh,∑h=1mλh1xh⩽∑h=1mλhmaxxh,1xh.Inequality (30) holds thanks to the inequality between arithmetic and geometric mean and arguments similar to those used in the proof of (24). Conversely, (31) holds since it can be verified that both the arguments of themaxoperator in the left hand side of (31) cannot be greater than the right hand side of the same inequality.□Another index was introduced by Koczkodaj (1993) and later studied (Duszak & Koczkodaj, 1994) and compared with other indices, for example with CI (Bozóki & Rapcsák, 2008).Definition 6Index K (Duszak & Koczkodaj, 1994)Given a pairwise comparison matrixAof order n, the inconsistency index K is defined as:(32)K(A)=maxi<j<kmin|1-aijajkaki|,1-1aijajkaki.The inconsistency index K is upper bounded, i.e. the pairwise comparison matrixA★as in(4)satisfiesK(A★)⩽max{K(A1),…,K(Am)}∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm.Here again we consider the case with only one transitivity(i,j,k). Then we can start by writing(33)min1-∏h=1maij(h)λh∏h=1majk(h)λh∏h=1maki(h)λh,1-1∏h=1maij(h)λh∏h=1majk(h)λh∏h=1maki(h)λh⩽maxhmin1-aij(h)ajk(h)aki(h),1-1aij(h)ajk(h)aki(h),now withxh≔aij(h)ajk(h)aki(h), we have(34)min1-∏h=1mxhλh,1-1∏h=1mxhλh⩽maxhmin|1-xh|,1-1xh.By using the following notational change,f(x)≔min|1-x|,1-1x, it is possible to rewrite the previous inequality as(35)f∏h=1mxhλh⩽maxf(x1),…,f(xm).Now we shall prove it by contradiction. Let us suppose that the proposition is wrong and that there existx1,…,xmandλ1,…,λmsuch thatf∏h=1mxhλh>maxf(x1),…,f(xm).Then, by examining the functionf(x)one can see that it is decreasing forx∈]0,1[and increasing forx∈]1,∞[with a minimum in 1 and then deduce that either∏h=1mxhλh>max{x1,…,xm}or∏h=1mxhλh<min{x1,…,xm}. However, this cannot be possible, as we know that the weighted geometric mean is an averaging aggregation function, i.e.min{x1,…,xm}⩽∏h=1mxhλh⩽max{x1,…,xm}. Having proved (33) for each triplet(i,j,k), the original inequality in the proposition holds in particular for the maximum, since the maximum of quasiconvex functions is quasiconvex.□Although index K is upper bounded, it is not strongly upper bounded. Namely, given a pairwise comparison matrixA★as in (4) the following property does not hold(36)K(A★)⩽∑h=1mλhK(Ah)∀A1,…,Am∈A,λ∈Lm.In order to prove that (36) does not hold in general, let us present the following counterexample. Consider two decision makers and the corresponding two pairwise comparison matricesA1=11/99911/91/991A2=1391/3131/91/31.As in Example 1, the preferences are aggregated according to (4) obtaining matrixA★(λ). Then, the indexK(A★(λ))is computed forλ∈[0,1]. As illustrated in Fig. 3, K is not strongly upper bounded. For instance, takingλ=0.5,K(A★(0.5))≈0.96>0.5K(A1)+0.5K(A2)≈0.5.Thus, in this example, the inconsistency of the aggregated preferences is greater than the average inconsistency of the decision makers, as index K is not strongly upper bounded.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
From our investigation on the connection between consensus and inconsistency, we can summarize some relevant findings. First, the effect of the preference aggregation among different decision makers on the inconsistency of the group preferences depends crucially on the inconsistency index that is used. More precisely, we proved that a certain number of already known indices satisfy the upper boundary property and/or the strong upper boundary property. As a consequence, for some indices the inconsistency of the aggregated preferences is always lower than a weighted mean of the inconsistencies of the original preference relations. This effect can be synthesized by saying that preference aggregation is consistency improving. On the other hand, if the inconsistency is evaluated by means of other indices, then the opposite result can be obtained. Therefore, as pointed out in Brunelli and Fedrizzi (2013), a suitable choice of an inconsistency index is a crucial phase in decision-making processes, since the use of different methods for measuring consistency can lead to different conclusions and can affect the decision outcome in practical applications. Interestingly, some more general results have been derived from the axiomatic system proposed by Brunelli and Fedrizzi (2013). If it is true that one of the merits of an axiomatic system is its fertility, i.e. the capacity to produce propositions, then Propositions 1 and 2 and Corollaries 1 and 2 are positive signs in this direction and seem to indicate that the axiomatic system can be used to derive interesting results. Hence, we believe that future research on inconsistency of pairwise comparisons (i) can build upon the axiomatic system A1–A5 and (ii) further investigate the relation between consensus and consistency, perhaps clarifying the open issues exposed in the previous section.