@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ranking trade resistance variables using data envelopment analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Unique application of Data Envelopment Analysis to International Trade.Trade resistance and trade barriers modeled as an undesirable production process.Trade barriers ranked via Data Envelopment Analysis.Results suggest Port Logistics, then Distance, as the most limiting trade barriers.Results suggest Tariffs as the least limiting trade barriers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
DEA,Trade barriers,Production,Efficiency,Capacity utilization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the context of Justus von Liebig's Law of the Minimum, this study assesses the impacts that trade barriers have on trade resistance between United States (U.S.) manufacturing industries and their trade partners. An undesirable trade resistance model is presented, where trade barriers are (undesirable) inputs into the production of the (undesirable) output, trade resistance. It is then presented how Johansen's notion of Capacity is utilized to assess trade barriers’ impacts. Estimation takes place by employing Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). Results suggest that U.S. trade partners’ port logistics are the most limiting trade barrier for the U.S. manufacturing industries, followed by the distance between the U.S. and its trade partners, the tariff imposed by the U.S., and the tariff imposed by the trading partner.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
World Trade Organization statistics show world merchandise exports’ value varying from about 2 trillion dollars in 1980 to over 18 trillion dollars in 2012. In terms of the United States (U.S.), according to the Census Bureau's Foreign Trade Division, U.S.’s exports value has increased from approximately 271 billion dollars in 1980 to about 2.2 trillion dollars in 2012 while the value of imports has increased from about 291 billion dollars in 1980 to approximately 2.7 trillion dollars in 2012. Although the U.S. is increasingly dependent on trade with other countries, impediments to trading goods and services, or trade resistance, still exist. In an effort to lessen these impediments, mutually beneficial trade agreements between the U.S. and other nations are negotiated and agreed upon. Even so, trade resistance still persists. Therefore, when commencing trade negotiations, or refining existing trade agreements, it is essential for policy makers to be well informed of the factors that impact trade the most, in order to maximize the welfare gains from trade.Drawing upon trade data for U.S. manufacturing industries, this study seeks to investigate which trade resistance variable, or trade barrier, impacts trade resistance the most between the U.S. manufacturing industries and their trading partners. A desired outcome is to rank the trade resistance variables from the most impactful to the least impactful in terms of trade resistance. The main objective is to shed light on the trade barriers that would generate the largest increases in trade flows when lessened. Why are increases in trade desirable? Standard International Economics theory suggests that when countries engage in trade with each other, each country's production possibilities frontier expands, in essence improving standards of living.In this study a theoretical model of trade resistance is formulated in a production framework. Trade resistance variables, or trade barriers, are considered undesirable inputs that yield the undesirable output, trade resistance. Then, in the spirit of Justus von Liebig's Law of the Minimum, Johansen's notion of Capacity is placed into this framework. Estimation takes place via non-parametric Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), which will show which trade resistance variable, or trade barrier, yields the most trade resistance. Using this methodology, a ranking of trade resistance variables is obtained based on their respective impacts on trade resistance. Before proceeding to the main body of this paper, additional details will be presented on Justus von Liebig's Law of the Minimum and Johansen's concept of Capacity along with their significance for this paper.To comprehend the implications and conclusions of this study is to understand Justus von Liebig's Law of the Minimum. The Law of the Minimum states that growth (of a biological plant) is given by the scarcest or most limiting nutrient, or alternatively, that increasing abundant nutrients does not yield as much growth as increasing the scarcest nutrients. This law is applied here but in the international trade arena, where the goal is to explore which undesirable trade resistance variable (“nutrient”) is the most limiting in terms of undesirable trade resistance (“plant growth”), or alternatively, which variable creates the most trade resistance.In order to apply the Law of the Minimum to this study, this paper makes use of the concept of Capacity which is defined by Johansen (1987) as “ … the maximum amount that can be produced per unit of time with the existing plant and equipment provided that the availability of variable factors is not restricted.” In other words, in a production framework, inputs will be divided into two categories-fixed and variable. The maximum potential output will therefore be given by the variable inputs, which can vary to any level. In a Law of the Minimum context, variable inputs can be seen as the limiting factors, the ones that can cause increases in output growth the most. In a similar fashion, in this paper, trade resistance variables are separated into fixed and variable. For example, the distance variable could be held as a fixed input, while the variable tariff would be an input that is variable. Through DEA estimation the impact of the variable tariff on trade resistance would be assessed. The roles could then be reversed to investigate distance’s impact. In the end, a ranking of trade resistance variables would be established based on the impacts that each of these variables have on trade resistance.Knowing which trade resistance variable is the most restrictive is important because U.S. trade policy could then be appropriately targeted. For example, previous studies (Anderson & van Wincoop, 2004; Novy, 2006; Novy, 2009) have found that the trade resistance variable, tariff, does not affect trade resistance greatly. Wu (2012) found similar results in the case of tariffs, but the trade resistance variable distance was found to be the most impactful on trade resistance. As a result, it would be unwise to direct policy efforts towards tariffs, when other trade resistance variables have relatively greater economic impacts.The research in this paper could also benefit institutions in the world trade arena devoted to reducing trade resistance. For example, if distance between the U.S. and its trading partners is a major factor influencing bilateral trade, then Research & Development efforts could be directed to things such as improvements in infrastructure, and advances in transportation technologies, i.e. fuel efficiency. At the same time, this study's findings could also steer academic research in a new direction, by incentivizing university research to focus on areas with the greatest potential impact on reducing trade resistance, research that could be beneficial to policy makers when deliberating trade negotiations and trade agreements.According to the International Trading Centre, there are some interesting trade patterns to notice around the world. India's exports to the United States are 13 percent of its total exports, to Brazil 2 percent, to the United Kingdom 3 percent, but to Pakistan, Myanmar, Nepal, Bhutan (some neighboring countries) exports are a total of 2 percent combined. In India's case, distance does not seem to be an important trade resistance factor. In contrast, Mexico's exports to the United States are 78 percent of its total exports, while exports to Western Europe less than 4 percent. In these cases, and possibly others, the patterns of trade could be associated with the history between nations. For example, India's colonial ties to the United Kingdom and its historical relationship with Pakistan are extensive, and its trade patterns may be a reflection of this. Inducing India to trade with relatively closer nations might be better addressed through political and social avenues, rather than policy instruments such as tariffs. Therefore, it is important for policy makers to know which trade resistance variables are the most restrictive, so that trade policy could then be formulated in a way that it could have the greatest potential impact on trade, and in turn on standards of living.Trade resistance as an international trade concept has its roots in the gravity equation which itself has its beginnings in Tinbergen (1962). The author specified bilateral trade flows as a function of country sizes (given by their gross national product) and trade resistance between the countries in question (Helpman, Melitz & Rubinstein, 2008). Therefore, trade resistance can be seen as all other factors that influence bilateral trade flows, excluding country sizes. Trade resistance factors may include the distance between countries, geographic variables such as common borders, whether the nation is an island, whether the nation is landlocked, tariffs, political and institutional variables, and any other factors that could influence bilateral trade flows.Past studies investigating trade resistance included Hausman, Lee and Subramanian (2005) and Wu (2012). These papers have analyzed the impacts of trade resistance variables on calculated trade costs indices. Econometric estimates in these papers yield statistically significant results in line with theoretical predictions, i.e. positive relationships between trade costs and these variables. Wu (2012) also calculated elasticities of the impacts on trade costs, which show the economic significance of the statistical results. This study, by employing a different methodology i.e., Data Envelopment Analysis, will also seek to investigate which trade resistance variables are the most restrictive, with the goal of ranking these variables and relating them with past studies.Studies that have used similar methodology as this paper's extend across diverse topics of research. For example, Wang, Färe and Seavert (2006) looked at the revenue capacity efficiency of pear trees. Färe, Wang, Schubert, Bronson, Johnson (2009) analyzed the limiting nutrients in peanut production, and Färe, Grosskopf, Lundgren, Marklund, Zhou (2013) looked at the limiting capacity of pollutants with an application to the Swedish paper producing industry. Additionally, Subhash (2015) investigated the minimum long run average cost along with the output level where this minimum is achieved utilizing U.S. state level manufacturing production data. Sahoo and Tone (2009) used capacity utilization and DEA with an application to Indian banks, and Valdmanis, Bernet and Moises (2010) assessed emergency preparedness of Florida hospitals.The literature on DEA is extensive, and to conserve time and stay on point, only a handful of studies will be mentioned here. For example, Färe and Grosskopf (1983) have presented two measures of output efficiency and illustrated those using DEA techniques. Färe and Li (1998) presented a discussion on inner approximations to technology using DEA, and Färe and Grosskopf (2004) showed an approach to modeling a polluting technology using DEA.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical framework. The estimation procedure is laid out in Section 3. The data used in this study is presented in Section 4. Section 5 presents the estimation results and discusses them, while Section 6 summarizes and concludes.Undesirable trade resistance will be specified as a function of the undesirable trade resistance variables, meaning these variables will yield the level of trade resistance. The trade resistance level will be represented byr∈ℜ+, and the trade resistance variables will be represented by a vectorq,(q1,…,qn),withq∈ℜ+N. A trade resistance function, T(q), can then be specified as a function of the trade resistance variables as follows,(1)T(q)=maxr{r:qgeneratesr,q∈ℜ+N,r∈R+}This function therefore represents the bilateral trade resistance level given by the trade resistance variables. Also, the set bounded from above by T(q) can be defined as,(2)S={(q,r):T(q)≥r,q∈ℜ+N,r∈R+}As an illustration and assuming a linear trade resistance function, Fig. 1portrays the relationship between trade resistance, r, and the trade resistance variable, q. In the figure, r1is the level of trade resistance given by the q1level of the resistance variable q. Set S (given by q and r) is also portrayed in this figure, as the space up to and including the trade resistance line.Certain properties are imposed on this framework. These properties, are outlined next as follows:(i)The set S is convex and nonemptyConvexity implies averages are possible in this set. Non-emptiness says that trade resistance exists or that it is feasible.(ii)Doing nothing is feasible: 0 ∈ SA customs district can always choose to remain in the state of autarky and incur no trade resistance.(iii)No free lunch: ifr > 0, thenq > 0Trade resistance cannot be positive without the trade resistance variables being positive. For example, the distance between customs districts and their trading partners will always be positive; hence trade resistance will be positive.(iv)Trade resistance variables are freely disposable:if(q,r)∈Sand(q′,r)≥(q,r)then(q′,r)∈SA higher level of trade resistance variables will generate a higher level of trade resistance, but the old level of trade resistance is achievable given the higher level of the resistance variables. For example, distance generates a certain level of trade resistance, but also all lower levels. This property rules out congestion in the system.(v)Trade resistance levels are freely disposable:if(q,r)∈Sand(q,r′)≤(q,r),then(q,r′)∈SThis property states that lower levels of trade resistance are part of the set given by a certain level of trade resistance variables.For illustrative purposes, the free disposability properties in (iv) and (v) are presented in Fig. 2. Property (iv) says that q2 which is greater than q1 generates r2 but could also generate r1. Property (v) says that q2, which gives r2 can also give r1, a lower level than r2. Monotonicity is a result of the disposability properties.Based on trade theory and the disposability properties, monotonicity, ∂T(q)/∂qn≥ 0, can be incorporated into this paper's theoretical formulation, as long as T(q) is assumed to be differentiable. Therefore, this model can be interpreted as an undesirable output production model, where the undesirable inputs yield an output that is undesirable, i.e. more undesirable inputs yield more undesirable output. There is a positive relationship between the trade resistance variables and the trade resistance level. Given the aforementioned properties of this model, Shephard (1970) showed that activity analysis models of distance functions accommodate these properties, models which are equivalent to DEA models.11I would like to thank one of the referees for clarifying this.Recall capacity being defined by Johansen (1987) as “ … the maximum amount that can be produced per unit of time with the existing plant and equipment provided that the availability of variable factors is not restricted.” Recall the definition of trade resistance presented in (1), i.e.(3)T(q)=max{r:(r,q)∈S}Given the capacity framework, allowing one of the trade resistance variable to fluctuate or to not be restricted to observed levels while keeping the others fixed, a new trade resistance function can then be defined as,(3')T(q−1)=max{r:(r,q−1)∈Sq−1}where the subscript (−1) in (3’) represents the state when one trade resistance variable is not restricted to its observed levels, while the remaining trade resistance variables are kept fixed.For added clarity and simplicity, the capacity utilization notion is presented in Fig. 3for a particular trade resistance variable, while the others are kept fixed. There is an initial situation where the trade resistance variable level q1 generates trade resistance level r1.Then, allowing the trade resistance variable to fluctuate beyond the observed level, the optimal level of q that yields the highest trade resistance r is estimated. In Fig. 3 the optimal level is q2 yielding the new, higher trade resistance level r2. Additional increases in the level of q−1 beyond level q2 will not generate additional trade resistance, notion consistent with the Law of the Minimum and portrayed in Fig. 3 as the horizontal portion of the trade resistance functionT(q−1). Repeating this process for every available trade resistance variable, i.e. alternating which variable is unrestricted while the others are kept fixed, a ranking could then be obtained. The ranking will then be based on the following capacity utilization formula,(4)CUi=riri,−1≤1where i represents a certain trade resistance variable whose level is allowed to fluctuate beyond its observed value. Then, riwill represent the observed, restricted trade resistance level given by variable i, and ri,−1 represents the unrestricted maximal trade resistance level given by the “capacity” level of the trade resistance variable i, holding all the others fixed. Eq. (4) will be less than or equal to one due to the features of the model and the estimation procedure. When estimating the denominator in (4), one of the constraints will be removed from the trade resistance function (see Eq. 7) which inevitably makes the trade resistance level ri,−1 be at least equal to or greater than the observed level ri. The trade resistance variable that yields the lowest value in Eq. (4) will be interpreted as the most restrictive, or the one that induces the most trade resistance.Answering the research question will be achieved through the use of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) following Färe et al. (2013). To note is that the analysis here should not to be confused with negative DEA models. First, for every observation k’, the restricted maximal trade resistance levelr^k′is calculated given that the trade resistance variables are at their observed values, as follows(5)r^k′=maxrs.t.∑k=1Kzkrk≥r,∑k=1Kzkqk1≤qk′1,n=1,∑k=1Kzkqkn≤qk′n,n=2,…,N,zk≥0,k=1,…,Kwhere the first three inequalities represent the disposability properties outlined earlier, while the last inequality represents S (q, r) characterized by constant returns to scale. The second and third inequalities could be combined into one inequality reflecting the free disposability assumption of the inputs (trade resistance variables), but (5) is written this way for greater clarity and understanding of (7) where the capacity notion is estimated. In essence, (5) will yield inefficiency scores for every observation. A departure from traditional interpretations of efficiency is in order here. In this paper, because trade resistance is interpreted as an undesirable output, the observation that the calculations yield as the most efficient is actually interpreted as the least efficient. Efficiency will be given by a Farrell Output-Oriented Measure of Technical Efficiency as,(6)Fok′=r^k′rk′≥1where rk′represents the observed trade resistance level for observation k’, and it is also the numerator in (4).If (6) equals one, then observation k’ is relatively doing the worst it can in terms of trade resistance level, i.e. it is technically the most inefficient. Potential for improvements, i.e. reductions in trade resistance, exist. If (6) is greater than one, then k’ is technically more efficient, or doing better, relative to an observation for which (6) has values less than the value for k’.The second step is to calculate the denominator of Eq. (4). For every observation, k’, the unrestricted maximal trade resistance levelr¯k′is calculated given that one of the trade resistance variables is not at its observed value, i.e. it is allowed to vary, as follows:(7)r¯k′=maxr,q1s.t.∑k=1Kzkrk≥r,∑k=1Kzkqk1≤q1,n=1,∑k=1Kzkqkn≤qk′n,n=2,…,N,zk≥0,k=1,…,KThe second inequality represents a particular trade resistance variable that is unconstrained, i.e. that is allowed to vary. Note the difference with (5), where the variable is constrained to its observed values. The problem in (7) seeks to find the optimal value for the unconstrained variable that yields the maximum level of trade resistance. By choosing different trade resistance variables to vary in (7), a ranking of the trade resistance variables could then be established. The trade resistance variable that generates the highest values for (7) or lowest values for (4) will signify that that particular variable yields the most trade resistance.This study uses data collected and compiled in Wu (2012). For the purpose of this study, a quick exposition of the data is given here. For greater detail on the sources of the data and the computation of variables Wu (2012) should be consulted. There is data for one time period on 25 three-digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) level industries trading with 72 countries out of 38 U.S. customs districts. One observation represents a particular manufacturing industry, trading with a particular country, out of a particular U.S. customs district. In Wu (2012), the author derived a bilateral trade resistance index (TRI) by industry. Additional details on the formulation of the trade resistance index are presented in Appendix A. The index represents the international trade resistance that an industry trading out of a particular U.S. customs port with a certain country is facing relative to domestic trade resistance. The trade resistance index (the average for the time period 2005–2009) is being specified as a function of the following trade resistance variables:•Distance (Distance) between the U.S. customs district and the trading partner (in miles)U.S. domestic tariffs (TariffUS) by industry (in percentages, for year 2004)trading partner's tariffs (TariffCty) by industry (in percentages, for year 2004)whether or not there is a common border between trading partners (indicator variable)whether or not there is a common language between trading partners (indicator variable)whether the trading partner is landlocked (indicator variable)time required to import goods (TimeImp) (in calendar days, for year 2006).Wu (2012) estimated the following econometric specification with the trade resistance index as the dependent variable and the trade resistance variables as independent variables as follows:TRIijs=α0+β1*Distij+β2*USTariffis+β3*TradingPartnerTariffjs+β4*Borderij+β5*CommonLanguageij+β6*LandLockedj+β7*IMportTimej+ɛijswhere i stands for U.S. customs district, j for U.S. trade partners, and s stands for industry. Wu (2012) found distance, trading partner's tariffs and importer's time to have a statistically positive relationship with the trade resistance index, meaning reductions in any of these variables could lower bilateral trade resistance. The trade resistance variables specified above, excluding the indicator variables border, common language, and landlocked, will be used in this paper along with the trade resistance index.Before estimation, the data was inspected and some inconsistencies, i.e. negative values for the trade resistance index, the distance variable, and extreme outliers were found. This could have been a result of data entry error or calculation of variables especially for the negative values just mentioned. As a result, observations with negative values associated with the trade resistance index and distance variable were deleted as well as observations with extreme tariff values (based on the density of tariffs, tariff rates for both U.S. and trading partners fluctuate generally between 0 to 20 percent). This deletion of observations reduced the dataset by less than 0.4 percent of the original size. All estimations were performed using the software OnFront2.Table 1displays summary statistics for all variables used in the estimation process. Overall, average international trade resistance (TRI) is 158.05 percent of domestic trade resistance, with a high of 981.22 percent that corresponds to the Crop Production industry (NAICS 111) trading out of Houston, Texas with South Africa and a low of 0.64 percent corresponding to the Electrical Equipment and Appliances industry (NAICS 335) trading out of Miami, FL to Mexico, The average U.S. tariff (TariffUS) is 2.16 percent with a high of 51.31 percent corresponding to the Crop Production Industry trading out of Baltimore, M.D., New York City, N.Y., and Houston, TX with South Africa. The average trading partner's tariff (TariffCty) is 5.39 percent with a high of 20 percent corresponding to the Leather and allied product industry (NAICS 316) for Senegal, Australia, and Egypt. The average distance (Distance) between U.S. industries and their trading partners is 5417.71 miles, while the average time it takes to import goods by a particular U.S. trading partner (TimeImp) is 17.69 days. In the interest of time and space, additional descriptive statistics by industry, trading country, and U.S. customs districts are presented in Appendix B.Table 2presents estimation results for Eq. 6, or inefficiency estimates. It also includes results for Eq. 5, ȓ, and the trade resistance index (TRI) for comparison purposes. The average Farrell Output-Oriented Measure of Technical Efficiency, Fo, is 13.51, which says that the average observation (average industry trading out of the average port with the average trading partner) is 13.51 times more efficient (or has less trade resistance) than the least efficient observation, which equals one. The most efficient observation, or the best one in terms of lowest trade resistance for which Fo= 959.05, corresponds to the Electrical Equipment and Appliances industry (NAICS 335) trading out of Miami, FL to Mexico. In Table 2, the averager^or the restricted maximal trade resistance level given Fo, is 15.79. That signifies that for the average observation to become the least efficient observation the average trade resistance level would have to increase from 1.5805 to 15.79.Eq. 7 results, orr¯calculated for every trade resistance variable, are presented in Table 3. Recall, that the variable producing the largest increase will be the most restrictive in terms of trade resistance, i.e. it increases trade resistance the most. By allowing the trade resistance variables to take any value, the most restrictive variable is TimeImp (it raises trade resistance to an average level of 6.96), followed by Distance (it raises trade resistance to an average level of 6.19), the U.S. tariff (it raises trade resistance to an average level of 1.75), and the least restrictive variable being the tariff of the trading partner (it raises trade resistance to an average level of 1.61). Therefore, Table 3 results indicate that, on average, bilateral trade resistance is affected most by the time it takes to import goods, or port logistics, followed by the distance between trade partners, with relatively and considerably lower effects by tariffs.With the results of Eq. (7) in hand, the results for Eq. (4) are calculated and presented in Table 4. Recall, Eq. (4) will be less than or equal to one. The trade resistance variable that yields the lowest values for this equation is interpreted as the most restrictive. Evidently, the same conclusions can be drawn from Table 4 as they were from Table 3. On the average, the variables Distance and TimeImp are the most limiting while the tariff variables are the least limiting, results consistent with previous studies of trade resistance. In contrast to Wu (2012), in this study, TimeImp is found to be the most restrictive trade barrier as opposed to Distance. Since this is the main finding of this study, some additional discussion on the statistical distributions of these variables is in order, especially since this study employed linear programming techniques and no statistical estimation.From Table 4, the average capacity utilization is 0.28 for TimeImp and 0.37 for Distance. The median for TimeImp is 0.26, while for Distance is 0.38. The skewness coefficients indicate that Distance has a more symmetrical distribution with a value of 0.26, while TimeImp has a more asymmetrical distribution with a longer tail to the right, with a value of 1.15. The coefficient of variation indicates that there is higher variation in the distribution of Distance relative to TimeImp. The data did not support a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, but a visual of the distributions is provided in Fig. 4. Although Distance has the lowest capacity utilization at 0.01, Fig. 4 does support the conclusion that, overall, TimeImp’s results are different than Distance’s, hence providing support to the conclusion that TimeImp is the most limiting trade resistance variable.For illustrative purposes and given that trade policy could be directed at certain regions of the U.S., industries or customs districts depending on policy makers’ goals, the results are also presented by U.S. region, by industry and by customs district. Due to Distance and TimeImp being found as the most limiting variables, with tariffs having relatively negligible impacts, the subsequent discussion will focus on the former variables.Table 5presents results by U.S. regions. From an efficiency perspective, the most efficient (highest Fo) region is the East Coast, followed by the Gulf Coast, West Coast, Midwest and then Southwest. This is as expected, seeing how the coast regions have ports where large, ocean transport ships have relatively easy access. Also, the Midwest is more efficient than the Southwest and this is as expected as well. The Midwest includes the ports of Chicago, Detroit and Cleveland, which are all located on the Great Lakes where big transport ships from all over the world have access to these ports through the St. Lawrence River, Niagara River, Detroit River and other connecting waterways that can accommodate large ships.Looking only at the Distance variable in Table 5, it is most restrictive for the Midwest, the East Coast, and the Southwest, and least restrictive for the Gulf Coast and the West Coast. This is expected seeing how the Midwest, the East Coast and the Southwest are relatively further away from trade routes from Eastern Asia, and U.S. trade with Eastern Asia, especially China, has increased greatly in the past decade according to the U.S. Census. Looking only at the TimeImp variable in Table 8, it is most restrictive for the West Coast and the Midwest and least restrictive for the East Coast, Gulf Coast, and Southwest. It could be argued that, for example, the East Coast ports have a longer history of operation implying more experience in port procedures and better rapport with other trading nations, which could be also reflected in the East Coast being the most efficient region given the results in Table 5.Table 6presents the results by industry. Crop production, Animal production, Forestry and Logging, Fishing, Hunting and Trapping, and Paper manufacturing seem to be the least efficient industries in terms of trade resistance, while Fabricated Metal Product and Machinery Manufacturing seem to be the most efficient industries. Looking at the Distance variable only, it is most restrictive for Food Manufacturing and Apparel Manufacturing, and least restrictive for the Forestry and Logging and the Petroleum and Coal Products industries. Looking at the TimeImp variable only, it is most restrictive for the Forestry and Logging, Petroleum and Coal Products, and the Furniture and Related Product industries, and least restrictive for the Crop Production, and Food Manufacturing industries. Although the overall results identified the TimeImp variable as the most restrictive, to note in Table 6 is that Distance is more restrictive than TimeImp for the Crop Production, Food Manufacturing, Textile Mills, Textile Product Mills, Apparel Manufacturing, Leather and Allied Product, Plastics and Rubber Products, and Nonmetallic Mineral Product industries.Lastly, the estimation results are presented for select U.S. customs districts in Table 7. The most efficient ports include New York City, Miami, FL, Detroit, MI and Seattle, WA, while the most inefficient ports include El Paso, TX, New Orleans, LA, and San Francisco, CA. Looking only at the Distance variable, it is most restrictive (lowest capacity utilization value at 0.23) for New York City, and least restrictive for Detroit, MI and El Paso, TX. Looking only at the TimeImp variable, it is most restrictive for trade out of San Francisco, CA, and least restrictive for trade out of New York City and Washington, D.C. Comparing Distance and TimeImp in Table 7, for New York City, Distance is actually more restrictive than TimeImp.Overall, the estimation results showed that the ranking of trade resistance variables consists of the time required to import goods by the U.S.’s trade partners, or port logistics, as the most limiting variable in terms of the impact on the level of trade resistance, followed by the distance between trade partners, the tariff imposed by the U.S., and the tariff imposed by the trading partner. Depending on what the policy goals are, trade policy could also be directed at a more micro level targeting certain industries, regions of the country, or certain U.S. ports.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
