@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Income drawdown option with minimum guarantee

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study a constrained investment problem for a defined contribution pension fund.Retirees are allowed to defer the purchase of the annuity after retirement.Novelty: constraints on the strategies and on the state variable are present.Solve explicitly the associated stochastic control problem by dynamic programming.Behavior of optimal strategies by numerical approximations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pension fund,Decumulation phase,Constrained portfolio,Stochastic optimal control,Dynamic programming,Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper deals with a constrained investment problem for a defined contribution (DC) pension fund where retirees are allowed to defer the purchase of the annuity at some future time after retirement.This problem has already been treated in the unconstrained case in a number of papers. The aim of this work is to deal with the more realistic case when constraints on the investment strategies and on the state variable are present. Due to the difficulty of the task, we consider, as a first step, the basic model of Gerrard, Haberman and Vigna (2004), where interim consumption and annuitization time are fixed. We extend their model by adding a no short-selling constraint on the control variable and a final capital requirement constraint on the state variable. This implies, in particular, no ruin.The mathematical problem is naturally formulated as a stochastic control problem with constraints on the control and the state variable, and is approached by the dynamic programming method. We write the non-linear Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation for the problem and transform it into a dual one that is semi-linear, following a well-established duality procedure. In the special relevant case without running cost, we explicitly compute the value function for the problem and give the optimal strategy in feedback form. A numerical application ends the paper and shows the extent of applicability of the model to a DC pension fund in the decumulation phase.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In countries where immediate annuitization is the only option available in defined contribution (DC) pension schemes, members who retire at a time of low bond yield rates have to accept a pension lower than the one available with higher bond yields (so-called annuity risk). In many countries, including Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, El Salvador, Japan, Peru, UK, US, the retiree is allowed to defer annuitization until some time after retirement, withdraw periodic income from the fund, and invest the rest of it in the period between retirement and annuitization. This allows the retiree to postpone the decision to purchase an annuity until a more propitious time. This flexibility is usually referred to as “income drawdown option” or “programmed withdrawal (option)”.1Other equivalent expressions are: phased withdrawal, scheduled withdrawal, allocated annuities, allocated pensions, allocated income streams.1For a detailed survey on the several forms of benefits provided by the programmed withdrawal option, we refer the interested reader to Antolin, Pugh, and Stewart (2008). There are often limits imposed on both the consumption and on how long the annuity purchase can be deferred. On the other hand, there is virtually unlimited freedom to invest the fund in a broad range of assets. While this option allows the retiree to aim for a final annuity higher than that purchasable at retirement, the evident drawback consists in the possibility of ruin, i.e. exhausting the fund while still alive. The three degrees of freedom of the retiree (amount of consumption, investment allocation, and time of annuitization), together with the important issue of ruin possibility, have been investigated in the actuarial and financial literature in many papers. Among others, we recall Albrecht and Maurer (2002), Blake, Cairns, and Dowd (2003), Di Giacinto and Vigna (2012), Gerrard, Haberman, and Vigna (2006), Gerrard, Højgaard, and Vigna (2012), Milevsky (2001), Milevsky, Moore, and Young (2006), Milevsky and Young (2007).While the issue of ruin has been tackled in many papers, the problem of providing a minimum guarantee to the pensioner who takes the income drawdown option has not been considered in the literature, up to our knowledge. Nevertheless, the guarantee of a minimum level of ultimate annuity should be strong reason for taking programmed withdrawals. Moreover, the introduction of restrictions – which is more consistent with the financial regulatory environment – makes possible a more accurate judgement on the effective tradeoff between the risks and the benefits provided by the income drawdown option. Motivated by these considerations, in this paper we fill in this gap in the literature, by defining and solving an optimal investment problem for the decumulation phase of a DC plan, where a minimum guarantee is provided and short-selling is forbidden.The natural way of dealing with this problem is to formulate it as a stochastic optimal control problem with an appropriate choice of the state and control variables, of the constraints that they must satisfy, and of the optimizing criterion (utility or loss function). We choose the framework of Gerrard, Haberman, and Vigna (2004) and Gerrard et al. (2006, 2012) taking a quadratic target-based loss function. Indeed our approach could be used also to treat different objective functions. The three mentioned works consider similar models with an increasing number of degrees of freedom (i.e. control variables) but they do not solve the problems when constraints on the wealth and on the investment strategies are present.2In Gerrard et al. (2004), the only control variable is the investment strategy, in Gerrard et al. (2006) the control variables are the investment and the consumption policies, while in Gerrard et al. (2012) the retiree is allowed to choose the annuitization time, together with the investment-consumption policies.2Since the introduction of these constraints makes the problem very hard to attack and non treatable in the general case with the results of the known literature, we consider the simplest model (Gerrard et al., 2004), where the retiree is given only one degree of freedom, namely the investment allocation. The income withdrawn from the fund in the unit time is assumed to be fixed and the retiree is obliged to annuitize at a fixed future time T. In view of this fact, this paper must be considered as a first step towards a satisfactory treatment of the problem.From the methodological point of view, following the approach of the papers mentioned above, we tackle the problem by the dynamic programming approach studying the associated Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) equation.Notice that other methods can be used to deal with the same problem. In particular, in the case of optimal portfolio problems with capital constraints, both probabilistic duality methods and methods based on backward stochastic differential equations (BSDE) have been successfully employed in the literature. In this respect we observe that, among others, Basak and Shapiro (2001), Bielecki, Jin, Pliska, and Zhou (2005), El Karoui, Jeanblanc, and Lacoste (2005), Korn (1997), and Tepla (2001) are concerned with this kind of problem. More precisely, Basak and Shapiro (2001), Korn (1997), and Tepla (2001) deal with direct duality methods on the control problem – while we use duality at an analytic stage applying it to the HJB equation. However, differently from our case, in Korn (1997) the constraint is on the final average of the wealth, while in Basak and Shapiro (2001) there is a VaR-type constraint. The paper closest to ours seems to be Tepla (2001), where, as in our case, an almost sure constraint on the terminal wealth is imposed. What we get is from a purely analytic point of view the same result as in Tepla (2001).Moreover, we should mention also the link of our problem with the rich class of mean–variance (MV) optimization problems in continuous-time. The well-known equivalence between MV-problems and expected utility maximization problems with quadratic utility function in the single-period framework can be extended to the continuous-time case (see for instance Bielecki et al., 2005; Korn, 1997; Vigna, in press; Zhou and Li, 2000). In the rich stream of literature on MV-optimization originating by the seminal paper Zhou and Li (2000), the work by Bielecki et al. (2005) solves a problem similar to ours, in a more general setting regarding the financial market. Their methodology is an extension of the risk neutral approach introduced by Pliska (1986) and boils down in presenting the optimal portfolio as the solution of a linear backward stochastic differential equation (BSDE). Related work can be found in Lim and Zhou (2002), who also use BSDEs to solve a mean–variance portfolio selection problem with random interest rate, appreciation rates and volatility coefficients. We mention also the paper Fu, Lari-Lavassani, and Li (2010) dealing with a MV portfolio selection problem with a borrowing constraint given by the presence of different interest rates for borrowing and lending.If one chooses to deal with a dynamic programming approach – as we do – it turns out that the presence of a state constraint leads to proper boundary conditions for the HJB equation that prevent the possibility of finding simple explicit solutions to such an equation, unlike the papers mentioned above. Also a straight theoretical approach to the HJB equation – dealing, for instance, with a characterization of the value function as the unique viscosity solution and then with the proof of the regularity of viscosity solutions – is very problematic, since the HJB equation is a fully nonlinear, degenerate, non autonomous parabolic PDE. Therefore, we use a known procedure from portfolio optimization, which allows us to transform the original equation into a nicer looking dual one. This procedure has been used, e.g., in Elie and Touzi (2008), Gao (2008), Gerrard et al. (2012), Milevsky et al. (2006), Milevsky and Young (2007), Xiao, Zhai, and Qin (2007). In all such papers the dual equation is always linear.3To this regard, it is worth stressing that in Schwartz and Tebaldi (2006) this procedure is applied in an incomplete market (due to the presence of an uninsurable income) giving rise to a dual equation which is still fully nonlinear. The authors approach this dual equation by means of a series expansion.3In our case the dual equation is in general semilinear and becomes linear when the current cost is zero. The general semilinear case is studied in the extended version of this paper (Di Giacinto, Federico, Gozzi, & Vigna, 2010) (to which the interested reader is referred) proving regularity of solutions to the dual equation and, consequently, to the original one. In this paper, for brevity, we set up the general model and then focus on the special and still significant case with no running cost, which allows, with a procedure similar to the above quoted papers, to find an explicit solution to the dual problem and come back with an explicit solution to the original one. So we can characterize the optimal strategy and wealth and perform a numerical simulation which allows to get some insights on the effects of the constraints on the optimal paths.The availability of closed-form solutions to this problem is particularly important in the context of DC pension schemes. Indeed, using this model the retiree who takes the income drawdown option can decide about both the level of the minimum guarantee and that of a desired target. These levels are driven by the retiree’s risk profile, the determination of which is typically an issue. Application of closed-form optimal policies coupled with numerical simulations for the risky asset provide the distribution of the annuity received upon ultimate annuitization, which helps the retiree to determine her own risk profile. All these features make this model – or possible evolutions of it – applicable by pension fund advisors in the decision-making process of retirees entering the decumulation phase of a DC scheme.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the model and define the problem to be solved. Section 3 represents the theoretical core of the paper. Therein, we consider the problem, pass to the dual formulation, and show equivalence between the dual and the original problem. We then find closed-form solutions for the special case with no running cost. In Section 4, we show a numerical application that highlights the potential applicability to a DC pension plan. Section 5 concludes and outlines further research.In this section, we outline the model and describe the problem faced by a representative member of a pension scheme.We consider the position of an individual who chooses the income drawdown option at retirement. We assume that final annuitization is compulsory at a certain age. Thus, the individual withdraws a certain fixed income until she achieves the age when the purchase of the annuity is compulsory. Without loss of generality, we assume that the individual retires at times=0and that compulsory annuitization occurs at times=T. In a real context the pensioner could annuitize at any time betweens=0ands=T. Here, for mathematical convenience and as in Gerrard et al. (2004), we assume that the pensioner annuitizes exactly at time T. Introducing the possibility of choosing the annuitization time would increase the difficulty of the problem substantially. The problem of finding the optimal investment-consumption couple as well as optimal annuitization time has been treated rigorously as a combined stochastic control and optimal stopping problem in Milevsky et al. (2006), Milevsky and Young (2007), and Gerrard et al. (2012). However, none of these papers treats the case with constraints on the investment strategy and the state variable.The fund is invested in two assets: a riskless asset with constant instantaneous rate of returnr⩾0, and a risky asset whose price follows a geometric Brownian motion with constant volatilityσ>0and driftμ≔r+σβ, whereβ>0is the so-called Sharpe ratio or risk premium. The random variableTDrepresenting the remaining lifetime of the pensioner is assumed to be exponentially distributed with parameterδ>0, and is assumed to be independent of the Brownian motion. The pensioner withdraws a fixed amountb0>0in the unit of time. Bequest motives are absent and the only reason for deferred annuitization and programmed withdrawal is the hope that they leave the investor better off. Indeed, the basic idea driving this option (see also Milevsky, 2001) is that, since the annuity price is calculated with the riskfree rate, in the years after retirement the equity risk premium pays more than the mortality credits (due to annuitants who die earlier than average). To support this intuition Gerrard et al. (2006) have also found that in the presence of sufficiently good risky assets the income drawdown option should be preferred to immediate annuitization. The choice of a fixed consumption rate throughout the decumulation phase, made mainly for mathematical convenience, is consistent with the hope of being better off with deferred annuitization. In fact, by selectingb0equal to the pension rate produced by immediate annuitization, the comparison between immediate annuitization and programmed withdrawal is then straightforward, the former producing a fixed income ofb0until death, the latter producing an income ofb0until time T and a different (hopefully higher) pension rate from T until death.According to Merton (1969) the state equation that describes the dynamics of the fund wealthX(·)is the following(1)dX(s)=[rX(s)+(μ-r)π(s)-b0]ds+σπ(s)dB(s),s∈[0,T],X(0)=x0,wherex0>0is the fund wealth at the retirement dates=0,B(·)is a standard Brownian motion on the filtered probability space(Ω,F,F,P)whereFis the completed filtration generated byB(·)andπ(·)is the investment strategy representing the amount of portfolio invested in the risky asset.4Fis the Brownian filtration augmented with the P-null sets, so it satisfies the usual conditions.4We consider the problem where short-selling is not allowed and the final fund cannot be lower than a certain pre-determined levelS⩾0. Therefore, S is the minimum guarantee and the set of admissible strategies is(2)π(·)⩾0:X(T)⩾Sa.s..As we will show in Proposition 3.1, the final capital requirementX(T)⩾S⩾0almost surely implies in particular no ruin, i.e.X(t)⩾0almost surely for everyt∈[0,T].Almost all works of the literature on optimization problems in DC pension schemes have been solved without constraints on the control variables and the state variable.5It is worth recalling that Di Giacinto, Federico, and Gozzi (2011) solve a constrained portfolio selection problem in a DC pension scheme, but in a different context, adopting the point of view of the fund manager.5This is due to the mathematical difficulty of the problem with constraints and justifies the choice of simplifying assumptions in this setup, such as the fixed consumption rate and the fixed annuitization time. We intend to relax these assumptions in future work. Given the hard mathematical tractability of this kind of problem, here we do not tackle the no-borrowing constraint, that is also left to future research.The preferences of the pensioner are described by the loss function(3)L(s,x)≔F(s)-x2,where the target functionF(·), i.e. the target that the agent wishes to track at any times∈0,T, is given byF(s)≔b0r+F-b0re-r(T-s).The quantityF∈(0,b0/r)is the target fund desired at terminal time T and can be chosen arbitrarily. Then, the interpretation ofF(s)is pretty clear. Should the fund hitF(s)at times⩽T, the pensioner would be able to consumeb0from s to T by investing the whole portfolio in the riskless asset, and achieve the desired target F at time T of compulsory annuitization. Clearly, in this case the loss function computed on the state trajectory corresponding to this riskless strategy would be 0 at any times⩽t⩽T. As a matter of fact, it will be shown that if the fund is equal to the target, the optimal strategy is the null one. Typically, the final target F as well as the fixed consumption rateb0will depend on the initial wealthx0or on the replacement ratio achievable with it. The quantity F is also associated to the risk profile of the member: a high F is associated to a less risk averse retiree, and vice versa.The importance of benchmarks and reference points in decision making was introduced by the seminal paper on Prospect Theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). Use of benchmark tracking in portfolio selection and management can be found in Gaivoronski, Krylov, and van der Wijst (2005) and Lioui and Poncet (2013). Similarly, use of reference points in portfolio selection and dependence of the optimal risky exposure on the reference point is in He and Zhou (2011). Penalty costs and benchmark targets in pension funds optimization appear in Geyer and Ziemba (2008). In the context of decision-making in DC schemes recent papers proposing and implementing the use of targets are Blake, Wright, and Zhang (2013) and Emms (2010).Moreover, the use of targets is particularly important nowadays for pension provision systems, given the evident switch from defined benefit (DB) pension schemes to DC plans occurring in most industrialized countries. It is well known that, contrary to DB schemes, the pension rate in DC plans is not earning-related and the financial risk is borne by the member. The evident loss in welfare experienced by members in the passage from DB to DC can be counterbalanced by the possibility of selecting a target that might make them able to reach the desired replacement ratio (meant as the ratio between pension rate and last salary). This is made possible by the present model that incorporates the selection of a target F. The only selection of the safety level S does not provide the member with this possibility, because S must be intended as a floor capital, and cannot be chosen too big for the restrictions imposed in the paper. Given the appropriateness of targets in the model, a natural candidate for a proper utility function is the quadratic loss function such as the one in (3).It is important to underline at this stage the fundamental difference between S and F. Clearly,S<F. While the latter is the target desired by the pensioner, the former is the minimum wealth guaranteed by the pension fund at time T. In other words, S is guaranteed, F is not. In real applications, the selection of both S and F should be made by the retiree and should reflect her risk attitude. Intuitively, the lower the gap between them, the higher the risk aversion, and vice versa. Notice that, while the presence of a minimum guarantee S is not new in the literature on portfolio selection of a DC pension plan (see, for example, Deelstra, Grasselli, and Koehl, 2003), the coexistence of both a safety level S and a target F is a novelty for DC schemes, up to our knowledge. Note that the inclusion of F and S in the model make the problem difficult to be solved from the mathematical point of view, so, to solve it, we need to pass to a dual problem that will be introduced in Section 3.4.1. A relevant example of the use of safety level and targets in an insurance context is provided by Browne (1995), who derives optimal investment policies by minimizing the probability that the wealth hits a certain bottom level (safety level) before hitting a certain upper level (target).Notice that minimizing the loss functionL(s,x)is equivalent to maximizing the utility functionU(s,x)=-F(s)-x2. Thus, this optimization problem is apparently based on the assumption that there exists a wealth level that maximizes the utility. This drawback is only apparent, since we prove that the wealth levelF(s)cannot be reached by the fund under optimal control by construction of the model. Another important implication of this result is the fact that this utility function in the region of interest is strictly increasing and strictly concave, that are the standard requirements for a well-behaved utility function (see Remark 3.5).The choice of this quadratic loss function is also motivated by the fact that, expectedly, it has been shown to produce an optimal portfolio that is mean–variance efficient (see, in general, Zhou and Li, 2000; in the context of DC plans, Vigna, in press). Indeed, there is no other portfolio that provides a (strictly) higher expected value with the same variance, and no other portfolio that provides a (strictly) lower variance with the same mean. Although mean–variance is not the only criterion available for decision-making in pension funds, we regard it as appropriate for a variety of reasons, including the fact that it is still one of the most common criteria used to assess and compare funds performances (see Chiu and Zhou, 2011). The optimization of quadratic loss functions is not new in the literature on pension funds: in the context of defined benefit pension funds Josa-Fombellida and Rincón-Zapatero (2008, 2010, 2012) minimize quadratic loss functions corresponding to solvency risk and contribution risk.Furthermore, this choice of the target function has several advantages.Firstly, as noted above, the interpretation ofF(s)is pretty clear.Secondly, as mentioned above, the possibility that deviations above the target can produce unreasonable positive loss is prevented. Gerrard et al. (2004) show that the optimal fund never reaches the target, provided that at initial times=0the fundx0is lower than the targetF(0); the same holds true in our constrained context (see Section 3.2).Thirdly, it can be shown that, by choosing a loss function that does not penalize deviations above the target, such as(4)L∼(s,x)≔F(s)-x2,ifx⩽F(s),0,ifx>F(s),the optimal policy in the region of interest (i.e. below the target level) is equal to that found with the loss function (3). This feature is desirable, as stressed in Remark 3.5.The general optimization problem consists in minimizing over the set of admissible strategies (2) the functional(5)E∫0TDκe-θsL(s,X(s))1{s⩽T}ds+e-θTL(T,X(T))1{T<TD}whereθis the subjective discount factor,κ⩾0is a weighting constant which measures the importance of the running cost in the period before annuitization relative to the final cost at time T, andTDis the random variable representing the remaining lifetime. Whenκ>0, the presence of a running cost keeps the trajectory of the wealth closer to the target at any timet⩽T, thus limiting the occurrence of undesirable events – as getting close to the terminal minimum capital requirement S.Due to the assumed exponential distribution ofTDand its independence from the Brownian motion, it is easy to show that minimizing the functional (5) is equivalent to minimizing(6)E∫0Tκe-ρsL(s,X(s))ds+e-ρTL(T,X(T)),whereρ=θ+δ, i.e.ρis the sum of the subjective discount factor and the force of mortality.We apply the Dynamic Programming technique to approach the problem of minimizing (6). The first step consists in writing the problem for generic initial data(t,x). So, given the probability space(Ω,F,P)and the Brownian motion of the previous section, let us define fort∈[0,T]the filtrationFt≔(Fst)s∈[t,T], whereFstis theσ-algebra generated by(B(u)-B(t))u∈[t,s]and completed by the P-null sets. Consider the equationdX(s)=rX(s)+(μ-r)π(s)-b0ds+σπ(s)dB(s),s∈[t,T],X(t)=x,wherex∈Randπ(·)∈L2(Ω×[t,T];R)is progressively measurable with respect toFt. This equation admits a unique strong solution on(Ω,F,P)(see Karatzas and Shreve, 1998, Section 5.6.C) that we denote byX(·;s,x,π(·)). Let us define the set of the admissible strategies depending on the initial(t,x)byΠad0(t,x)≔π(·)∈L2(Ω×[t,T];R)|π(·)prog.meas.w.r.t.Ft,π(·)⩾0,X(T;t,x,π(·))⩾S.We are interested in the following optimization problem: for given(t,x)∈[0,T]×R+,(7)minimizeJ(t,x;π(·))≔E∫tTκe-ρsF(s)-X(s)2ds+e-ρTF(T)-X(T)2over the set of admissible strategiesΠad0(x,t), where we have setX(s)≔X(s;t,x,π(·))in (7).We denote the value function associated to this optimization problem by V, i.e.V(t,x)≔infπ(·)∈Πad0(t,x)J(t,x;π(·)),t∈[0,T],x∈R,with the agreement thatinf∅=+∞. Clearly we haveV⩾0.Let us set(8)S(t)≔b0r-b0r-Se-r(T-t),t∈[0,T].The functionS(·)represents a sort of safety level for the wealth. Should the fund hit this barrier at time t, the null strategy (i.e.π(·)≡0) from t onwards would guarantee the fulfillment of the capital requirement. Moreover, it will be shown that the null strategy is indeed the only admissible one forx=S(t), and therefore the optimal one. In the next proposition we formalize this intuition.Proposition 3.1Lett∈[0,T],x∈R. Then(1)Πad0(t,x)≠∅if and only if0∈Πad0(t,x). This happens if and only ifx⩾S(t).Ifx=S(t), thenΠad0(t,x)={0}andX(s;t,x,0)=S(s)on[t,T].Letx⩾S(t). Thenπ(·)∈Πad0(t,x)if and only ifπ(s)=π(s)1{t⩽s<τ},whereτ≔infs∈[t,T]|X(s;t,x,π(·))=S(s)with the convention thatinf∅=T.Ifx>S(t), thenΠad0(s,x)⊋{0}.The state constraintX(T)⩾Sis equivalent toX(t)⩾S(t),P-a.s.∀t∈[0,T].The proof is in the Appendix. □Proposition 3.1 states some intuitive properties, in particular the fact that the “European guarantee”X(T)⩾Sis equivalent to the “American guarantee”X(t)⩾S(t)for allt∈[0,T](see Remark 2.1 in Karoui et al. (2005), or also Proposition 2.1 in Bielecki et al. (2005)). Hence, the problem makes sense only when the fund lies above the barrier given byS(t),t∈[0,T]. The safety level is an absorbing barrier. As a relevant consequence, occurrence of ruin – which is one of the major risks implied by programmed withdrawal – is prevented a priori. Finally, another consequence in the application of the model is that the subjective choice of the guaranteed final fund S cannot be too high. In fact, due to (8) and tox⩾S(t), it must be(9)S⩽xer(T-t)-b0rer(T-t)-1.This restriction plays a role in the numerical application (see Remark 4.1).Due to Proposition 3.1, the value function V is finite (and non-negative) on the setD={(t,x)∈[0,T]×R|x⩾S(t)}.Due to the specific structure of the target levelF(·)and since we are interested to start from initialx0<F(0), we can restrict the problem to a bounded domain. This is due basically to the following lemma, which shows what happens to the value function and to the optimal strategy when the fund reaches the targetF(t).Lemma 3.2Lett∈[0,T]andx=F(t). ThenX(s;t,x,0)=F(s)for alls∈[t,T]. Moreover,V(t,x)=0and the optimal strategy isπ(·)≡0.Lett∈[0,T],x∈R, and setX(·)≔X(·;t,x,0). The dynamics ofX(·)are given bydX(s)=rX(s)-b0ds,s∈[t,T],X(t)=x.The dynamics of the targetF(·)after t is given bydF(s)=rF(s)-b0ds,s∈[t,T],F(t)=F(t).ThereforeX(·)andF(·)solve the same initial value problem, so they coincide.Moreover, since we haveJ(t,x;0)=0andV(·,·)⩾0, we get thatπ(·)≡0is optimal for the initial(t,x)andV(t,x)=0.□Lemma 3.2 suggests that the graph ofF(·)works as a barrier for the problem, so that we are led to consider the region(10)C={(t,x)|t∈[0,T],S(t)⩽x⩽F(t)}⊂D.As a matter of fact we are interested to start from an initial(t,x)∈C. In this case, the optimal strategy keeps the state always inC. This is a consequence of the following proposition.Proposition 3.3Let(t,x)∈C,π(·)∈Πad0(t,x). SetX(·)≔X(·;t,x,π(·))and define the stopping timeτ≔infs⩾t|X(s)=F(s),with the conventioninf∅=T. Define the strategyπτ(s)≔π(s),ifs<τ,0,ifs⩾τ.ThenJ(t,x;πτ(·))⩽J(t,x;π(·)). As a consequence, onCthe value function admits the representationV(t,x)=infπ(·)∈Πad(t,x)J(t,x;π(·)),whereΠad(t,x)=π(·)∈Πad0(t,x)|S(s)⩽X(s;t,x,π(·))⩽F(s),s∈[t,T]⊂Πad0(t,x).It follows straightly from Lemma 3.2. □Proposition 3.3 says that on the setCthe original problem is equivalent to the problem with state constraintS(s)⩽X(s)⩽F(s),s∈[t,T].The equivalent of Proposition 3.1 is the following.Proposition 3.4Let(t,x)∈C. Then(1)0∈Πad(t,x).Ifx=S(t)(respectively,x=F(t)), thenΠad(t,x)={0}andX(s;t,x,0)=S(s)(respectively,X(s;t,x,0)=F(s)) on[t,T].π(·)∈Πad(t,x)if and only ifπ(s)=π(s)1{t⩽s<τ},whereτ≔inf{s∈[t,T]|X(s;t,x,π(·))∈S(s),F(s)}with the convention thatinf∅=T.IfS(t)<x<F(t), thenΠad(s,x)⊋{0}.The claims can be obtained exactly as in the proof of Proposition 3.1. □Notice that, rephrasing the problem in these new terms, both the lateral boundaries∂F∗C≔{(t,x)∈[0,T]×R|x=F(t)},∂S∗C≔{(t,x)∈[0,T]×R|x=S(t)}are absorbing for the problem, in the sense that ifx=S(t)(respectively,x=F(t)), then the only admissible strategy isπ(·)≡0andX(s;t,x,0)=S(s)fors∈[t,T](respectively,X(s;t,x,0)=F(s)fors∈[t,T]).Remark 3.5Two relevant (and connected) consequences of Proposition 3.3 are the following.1.Starting from(t,x)∈C(which is the case of interest), the problem can be written as a utility maximization problem with an increasing and concave utility function, i.e. asmaxπ(·)∈Πad(t,x)-∫tTκ(F(s)-X(s))2ds-(F(T)-X(T))2,wherex↦-(F(s)-x)2is indeed increasing and concave on[S(s),F(s)]for everys∈[t,T].If we replace the loss function (3) with (4), i.e. with(11)L∼(s,x)=F(s)-x2,ifx⩽F(s),0,ifx>F(s),and callV∼the value function associated to such loss function, we haveV∼=VonCand, starting from(t,x)∈C, we have the same optimal feedback strategy. This different formulation of the problem might be more appealing to financial advisors of pension funds. In fact, a model based on a loss function such as (11) can be immediately understood and accepted by any pensioner, without entering the mathematical technicalities of the model.Here we perform a change of variable in order to work with a simpler stochastic control problem. The domainCwill be transformed into a rectangle and the value function V will be related to the value function H of this new control problem.Let us consider the diffeomorphismL:[0,T]×[S,F]→C,(t,z)↦(t,x)=L(t,z)=(t,L1(t,z))≔t,ze-r(T-t)+b0r1-e-r(T-t).Remark 3.6The relationship between x and z given byx=L1(t,z)is clear: z is the fund that one would have at time T with the riskless strategy from t onwards. In other words,z=X(T;t,x,0). In particular,F(t)=L1(t,F)andS(t)=L1(t,S).Let(t,x)∈Candπ(·)∈Πad(t,x). By application of Ito’s formula to the process(12)Z(s)=L1(s,·)-1X(s;t,x,π(·)),s∈[t,T],we see that Z solves(13)dZ(s)=σπ̃(s)βdt+dB(s),s∈[t,T],Z(t)=z≔[L1(t,·)]-1(x),whereπ̃(s)=er(T-s)π(s). For(t,z)∈[0,T]×[S,F]defineΠ∼ad(t,z)≔{π̃(·)∈L2(Ω×[t,T];R)|π̃(·)is prog. meas. w.r.t.Ft,S⩽Z(s;t,z,π̃(·))⩽F,s∈[t,T]}.Due to (12), we haveΠ∼ad(t,z)=Πad(t,L1(t,z)).Consider the objective functional(14)J∼(t,z;π̃(·))≔E∫tTκη(s)(F-Z(s))2ds+η(T)(F-Z(T))2,whereη(s)≔e-ρs-2r(T-s)andZ(·)≔Z(·;t,z,π̃(·))follows the dynamics (13). Then consider the associated optimization problem: for given(t,z)∈[0,T]×[S,F],(15)minimizeJ∼(t,z;π̃(·))overπ̃(·)∈Π∼ad(t,z).As usual, define the value function for this problem as(16)H(t,z)≔infπ̃(·)∈Π∼ad(t,z)J∼(t,z;π̃(·)),(t,z)∈[0,T]×[S,F].We can easily see that(17)H(t,z)=V(t,L1(t,z)).It follows that all the analysis which will be done for the problem (15) and for its associated value function H can be suitably rephrased for the problem (7) and for its associated value function V. Therefore, from now on within this section, we will study the problem (15) and the associated value function H, which is simpler. The advantage is that the lateral boundaries are now[0,T)×{S},[0,T)×{F}.They are absorbing for this new problem, in the sense that ifz=S(respectively,z=F), then the only admissible strategy isπ̃(·)≡0andZ(s;t,S,0)=Sfor alls∈[t,T](respectively,Z(s;t,F,0)=Ffor alls∈[t,T]).It can be shown that the value function H is convex, nonincreasing and continuous. In particular, it has minimum at F. The proofs are standard and can be found in the extended version of the paper Di Giacinto et al. (2010).Concerning the value of H at the lateral boundaries, as immediate consequence of the absorbing property of the lateral boundaries we have(18)H(t,F)=0,∀t∈[0,T),(19)H(t,S)=ψ(t)+η(T)(F-S)2,∀t∈[0,T),where(20)ψ(t)=∫tTκη(s)(F-S)2ds.In this section we write down the HJB equation for the value function H. Despite the change of variable of the previous subsection, the difference between the differential problem we are going to set defining the HJB equation and the one studied in Gerrard et al. (2004) is that the domain is smaller in space and suitable boundary conditions must be imposed. The presence of boundary conditions is due to the state constraint that we are imposing here. As usual, the presence of boundary conditions makes the HJB equation much more difficult to treat.The current value Hamiltonian isHcv:R2×[0,+∞)→R,(p,P;π̃)↦12σ2Pπ̃2+σβpπ̃and the Hamiltonian isH:R2→R∪{-∞},(p,P)↦infπ̃⩾0Hcv(p,P;π̃).If(p,P)∈×R×(0,+∞), the functionπ̃↦Hcv(p,P;π̃)has a unique minimum point on[0,+∞)given by(21)π̃max(p,P)=-βpσP∨0,hence in this case the Hamiltonian can be written as(22)H(p,P)=-β2p22P,ifp<0,0,ifp⩾0.IfP⩽0the Hamiltonian isH(p,P)=-∞,ifp<0,0,ifp⩾0.We recall that in the Hamiltonian, p is the formal argument where to insertHz, and P is the formal argument where to insertHzz(if these derivatives exist). However, as mentioned, it can be proved in standard way that the value function H is convex and nonincreasing. Therefore, only negative values of p and positive values of P are consistent withHz,Hzz. Nevertheless, we allow in principle the formal argumentsp,PofHto range in the wholeR2.The HJB equation (see, e.g., Yong and Zhou, 1999, Ch. 4) reads as(23)ht(t,z)+κη(t)(F-z)2+H(hz(t,z),hzz(t,z))=0,(t,z)∈[0,T)×(S,F).Now we associate a semilinear PDE to the fully nonlinear PDE (23), by means of a dual transformation of the state variable. This technique has been already used in the case of HJB equations coming from optimal portfolio allocation problems (for which the nonlinearity in the second order term takes the formvx2/vxx). We refer, e.g., to Elie and Touzi (2008) and Schwartz and Tebaldi (2006) in a lifetime consumption and investment problem, to Gao (2008) and Xiao et al. (2007) in the accumulation phase of a pension fund, to Milevsky et al. (2006), Milevsky and Young (2007), and Gerrard et al. (2012) in the decumulation phase of a pension fund. As mentioned in Section 2, the passage to the dual problem is made necessary by the coexistence of S and F in the same model, together with the quadratic loss function.Whenκ=0, like in all the above quoted papers6Apart from Schwartz and Tebaldi (2006) where the dual equation is still fully nonlinear.6the resulting dual PDE is linear and we can find an explicit solution that will be presented in Section 3.5. In the general caseκ≠0the resulting dual PDE is just semilinear and we are not able to find explicit solutions, so it becomes necessary to study the regularity of its solutions. We perform this analysis in the extended paper Di Giacinto et al. (2010), while in the remainder of this section we limit ourselves to show, in the general caseκ⩾0, the formal connection between the original and the dual problem.Consider the following formal argument. For every(t,y)∈[0,T)×(0,+∞), take the function[S,F]→R+,z↦H(t,z)+zy.Assume that for each(t,y)∈[0,T)×(0,+∞)such function has a unique minimizerg(t,y)∈(S,F). Then, if H isC1in the space variable, such minimizer is characterized by the relation(24)Hz(t,g(t,y))=-y.We want to write an equation for g. To do that suppose that the value function H belongs toC1,3([0,T)×(S,F);R). Then, by standard arguments (see Yong and Zhou, 1999), H is a solution of the HJB equation (23). Differentiating (23) we get(25)Htz(t,z)=2κη(t)(F-z)+β222Hz(t,z)Hzz(t,z)2-Hz2Hzzz(t,z)Hzz(t,z)2,(t,z)∈[0,T)×(S,F).Moreover, ifg∈C1,2([0,T)×(0,+∞);R), differentiating (24) with respect to t, with respect to y, and twice with respect to y, we obtain(26)Htz(t,g(t,y))+Hzz(t,g(t,y))gt(t,y)=0,(27)Hzz(t,g(t,y))gy(t,y)=-1,(28)Hzzz(t,g(t,y))gy2(t,y)+Hzz(t,g(t,y))gyy(t,y)=0.Plugging (26), (27), and (28) into (25) we get the following semilinear equation for g(29)gt(t,y)+β2ygy(t,y)+β22y2gyy(t,y)-2κη(t)(F-g(t,y))gy(t,y)=0,on[0,T)×(0,+∞).A natural set of boundary conditions for g is to take Dirichlet conditions at the space state boundary and a terminal condition at time T. Concerning the terminal boundary condition, it is easy to find it using the terminal boundary condition for H. Indeed by (24) it has to beg(T,y)=F-y2η(T)∨S.Concerning the Dirichlet boundary conditions, it follows from (24) that they have to be related to Dirichlet boundary conditions onHz. Such conditions are the following7Concerning these conditions we notice that the first one can be proved directly (see Di Giacinto et al., 2010), while the second one is more difficult to prove, but it has the following intuition behind. The marginal loss when the fund approaches the safety level is huge. This is clear if one thinks to the main idea of this paper. The retiree takes the income drawdown option in order to be better off than immediate annuitization, and therefore she aims at reaching the target. Her worst scenario is (and has to be) falling into the safety level.7(30)(i)Hz(t,F)=0,(ii)limz↓SHz(t,z)=-∞,∀t∈[0,T).If(31)Hzz(t,·)>0,thenHz(t,·)is invertible and the latter boundary conditions onHzimply the following ones for g:(32)(i)g(t,F)=0,(ii)limy→+∞g(t,y)=S.All these arguments can be made rigorous ending up with the following proposition.Proposition 3.7Suppose that the value function H belongs to the classC1,3([0,T)×(S,F);R), that it satisfies(30)–(31). Let g be defined by(24). Theng∈C1,2([0,T)×(0,+∞);R)and it is a solution of(29)–(32).The converse passage, i.e. the passage from a solution g of (29)–(32) to a solution h of (23) satisfying (30)–(31) with h instead of H is much more technical and is proven in the general caseκ⩾0in Di Giacinto et al. (2010). However, when explicit solutions are available for (29)–(32), the proof becomes easier. This happens in the special caseκ=0, as it is shown in the next subsection.It is very hard – maybe impossible – to find explicit solutions to (29)–(32) whenκ≠0. In this paper, we treat only the caseκ=0, while the general caseκ≠0– that needs the viscosity approach and a remarkably more technical analysis as well as non-standard results – is treated in the extended paper Di Giacinto et al. (2010). Notice that, in this context, the caseκ≠0is mainly interesting from the mathematical point of view. Indeed, we observe that the main assumption of this paper is that the retiree enters retirement at timet=0and takes the income drawdown option until compulsory annuitization at timet=T, with no action in the intervening period. Therefore, the desire of closeness to a target fund over time, although perfectly reasonable, does not seem to be strictly necessary and can be dropped without rendering the problem unrealistic or less interesting.On the other hand, we notice that finding optimal strategies that avoid ruin a priori is of great interest in itself, given that a substantial stream of literature addresses the relevant issue of avoiding ruin or minimizing its probability in income drawdown problems. See, among others, Albrecht and Maurer (2002), Gerrard et al. (2012), Milevsky et al. (2006) and Milevsky and Robinson (2000). In these papers the flexibility of choosing a guaranteed final fundS>0and the guarantee of a positive incomeb0from retirement to final annuitization – that is the motivation of this paper – are missing. Indeed, up to our knowledge, this is the first model in the literature on income drawdown option that allows the pensioner to choose a minimum guaranteed level of wealth at the time T of ultimate annuitization, while guaranteeing a fixed consumption rate up to time T.So, letκ=0. In this case (29) becomes(33)gt(t,y)+β2ygy(t,y)+β22y2gyy(t,y)=0,on[0,T)×(0,+∞)with boundary conditions (32). This is a linear PDE of Black-Scholes type and, as known, its (classical) solution admits the Kolmogorov probabilistic representationg(t,y)=Eg(T,Y(T;t,y)),(t,y)∈[0,T]×[0,+∞),whereY(·;t,y)is the solution of(34)dY(s)=β2Y(s)ds+βY(s)dB(s),s∈[t,T],Y(t)=y,Since the law ofY(T;t,y)is known (it is the log-normal law), we can explicitly compute g. Indeed, the unique classical solution of (33) with boundary conditions (32) is the function(35)g(t,y)=(F-S)Φ(k(t,y))-y2η(T)eβ2(T-t)Φ(k(t,y)-βT-t)+S,(t,y)∈[0,T)×[0,+∞),g(T,y)=F-y2η(T)∨S,wherek(t,y)=-lny2η(T)(F-S)-β22(T-t)βT-tand whereΦis the cumulative distribution function of a standard Gaussian random variable, i.e.Φ(x)=12π∫-∞xe-ξ22dξ. Having at disposal the closed-form solution forg(t,y), we can now complete Proposition 3.7 and prove the second half of the equivalence between the original problem and the dual one.Proposition 3.8Let g be defined by(35). Then(36)[g(t,·)]-1is integrable atS+,∀t∈[0,T).Moreover let(37)h(t,z)=η(T)(F-S)2-∫Sz[g(t,·)]-1(ξ)dξ,(t,z)∈[0,T)×[S,F],h(T,z)=η(T)(F-z)2,z∈[S,F].Then h is a classical solution of(23)–(30)withκ=0.It follows by direct computations. It can be seen also as a particular case of Proposition 4.18 of Di Giacinto et al. (2010). □Proposition 3.8 provides a function h which is a good candidate to be the value function H. We are going to show that it is actually the value function through a verification theorem and use it to construct optimal feedback strategies for the problem. First we associate to the function h provided by Proposition 3.8 a feedback map which formally describes the optimal strategy in feedback form. Straightforward computations show thath′<0andh″>0on[0,T)×(S,F). This result jointly with (21) lead to define the following feedback map(38)G(t,z)≔-βσhz(t,z)hzz(t,z),(t,z)∈[0,T)×(S,F),0,(t,z)∈[0,T)×{S,F},where h is defined in (37). It is more convenient to rewrite it in terms of the solution g provided by (35). Using (26), (27) and (28), it reads asG(t,z)=-βσ[g(t,·)]-1zgyt,g(t,·)-1(z),on[0,T)×(S,F).Then, taking into account the explicit expression (35), we see that G is continuous and bounded on[0,T)×[S,F]. It can also be shown (see Di Giacinto et al., 2010) that the map G defined in (38) is not Lipschitz continuous with respect to z, but isα-Hölder continuous with respect to z uniformly int∈[0,t0]for everyt0∈[0,T)andα∈(0,1). This result would be suitable to study directly the closed loop equation, proving existence and uniqueness of a strong solution.8In this case, we would use the theory treated in Yamada and Watanabe (1971) to prove pathwise uniqueness and then existence of strong solutions. For a similar approach see, e.g., Di Giacinto et al. (2011).8However, here we follow a different approach, and prove existence and uniqueness of a strong solution by means of the processY∗,t,y-1=(Yt,y)-1; this process will play a role on the interpretation of the optimal wealth in Remark 3.12. Lety≔[[g(t,·)]-1(z)]-1, i.e.y-1≔[g(t,·)]-1(z). ThenY∗,t,y-1solves(39)dY∗,t,y-1(s)=-βY∗,t,y-1(s)dB(s),s∈[t,T],Y∗,t,y-1(t)=[g(t,·)]-1(z).Consider the process(40)Z∗(s;t,z)≔gs,Y∗,t,y-1(s),y-1≔[g(t,·)]-1(z).We notice that by definition ofZ∗(·;t,z), sinceY∗,t,z(s)>0andg(t,·)∈(S,F)on(0,+∞)for everyt∈[0,T), we have(41)Z∗(s;t,z)∈(S,F),∀s∈[t,T].Ito’s formula and the fact that g solves (33) yield thatZ∗(·;t,z)solves the closed loop equation associated with the map G, i.e.(42)dZ(s)=σG(s,Z(s))βds+dB(s),s∈[t,T],Z(t)=z∈(S,F),on the interval[t,T]. Furthermore, (42) admits the solutionZ(·)≡F(respectively,Z(·)≡S) ifz=F(respectively, ifz=S). So we also setZ∗(·;t,S)≡SandZ∗(·;t,F)≡F. Then define the feedback strategy(43)π̃t,z∗(s)=G(s,Z∗(s;t,z)),s∈[t,T),0,s=T.Of courseπ̃t,z∗(s)∈L2(Ω×[t,T])as G is bounded. Moreover(44)Z∗(s)=Z(s;t,z,π̃t,z∗(·)).Indeed, bothZ(·;t,z,π̃t,z∗(·))andZ∗(·;t,z)solve the state equation under the controlπ̃t,z∗(·). Therefore we conclude thatπ̃t,z∗(·)is admissible. We now show that it is indeed the unique optimal strategy starting from(t,z). To prove the uniqueness, first we need to prove that the functional (14) is strictly convex onΠ∼ad(t,z). This is the result of the following proposition.Proposition 3.9Let(t,z)∈[0,T)×[S,F]. Then the functionalΠ∼ad(t,z)→R,π̃(·)↦J∼(t,z;π̃(·))is strictly convex.Let(t,z)∈[0,T)×[S,F]and takeπ̃1(·),π̃2(·)∈Π∼ad(t,z). Further, forλ∈(0,1)letπ̃λ(·)≔λπ̃1(·)+(1-λ)π̃2(·). DefiningZ1(·)≔Z(·;t,z,π̃1(·)),Z2(·)≔Z(·;t,z,π̃2(·)), andZλ(·)=λZ1(·)+(1-λ)Z2(·)we see thatZλ(·)≔Z(·;t,z,π̃λ(·)). Therefore, due to the convexity ofz↦(F-z)2we haveJ∼(t,z;π̃λ(·))=E(F-Zλ(T))2⩽λE(F-Z1(T))2+(1-λ)E(F-Z2(T))2=λJ∼(t,z;π̃1(·))+(1-λ)J∼(t,z;π̃2(·)).Moreover, by linearity of the state equation we haveZ1≠Z2whenπ̃1≠π̃2and by the strict convexity ofz↦(F-z)2the above inequality is strict; so the claim is proved. □Let h be the function defined in(37). Thenh=Hand for each(t,z)∈[0,T)×[S,F]the strategyπ̃t,z∗(·)defined by(43) is the unique optimal strategy for the problem(15)withκ=0.We distinguish the two cases(i)(t,z)∈[0,T)×(S,F);(t,z)∈[0,T)×S,F.In case (ii) the only admissible strategy is the null one and the claim is trivial.Let us consider case (i). Given an admissible strategyπ̃(·)∈Π∼ad(t,z)and using the fact that h solves (33) we can show by standard verification arguments thatJ∼(t,z;π(·))⩾h(t,z).On the other hand considerπ̃t,z∗(·). As we have observedπ̃t,z∗(·)is admissible. Moreover (41) ensures thatZ(·;t,z,π̃t,z∗(·))∈(S,F). Then the fact that h is a classical solution of the HJB equation (23) on[0,T)×(S,F)yields (again by standard verification arguments)J∼(t,z;π̃(·))=h(t,z).Therefore as a byproduct we can conclude thath(t,z)=H(t,z)and thatπ̃s,z∗(·)is optimal.The uniqueness of this optimal strategy follows from the strict convexity ofJ∼(t,z;·)proved in Proposition 3.9. □The uniqueness of the optimal strategy yields uniqueness of solution for the closed loop equation (42). Indeed, suppose to have another solutionZ∼of the closed loop equation. Applying the Dynamic Programming Principle with the stopping timeτ≔infs∈[t,T]|Z∼(s)∈{S,F}(with the agreement thatinf∅=T), and using the fact that H is a smooth solution of the HJB equation (23) in[0,T)×(S,F), we can see that the strategyπ̃t,z(s)=G(s,Z∼(s)),s∈[t,τ),0,s⩾τ,is optimal for the problem. By uniqueness of optimal strategies (Proposition 3.9) it must beπ̃t,z=πt,z∗. Moreover we can see that G is monotone in z. Hence we have alsoZ∼=Z∗, whereZ∗is defined in (40).By a different approach, we have obtained the same result as in Tepla (2001). Indeed, let us look at the optimization problem we have defined in Section 3.3.9In this case, the interest rate has been removed – as well as the benefit streamingb0dt– so we are in presence of a market composed by a riskless asset with vanishing return rate and a risky asset with volatilityσand risk premiumβ. We consider this problem in place of the original one just for convenience.9Consider the definition of the optimal wealthZ∗we have given in (40) for initial data(0,z0)and the risk neutral probability measureQ, the processBQ(t)=βt+B(t)is a Brownian motion, therefore, due to (42), the processZ∗is a Q-martingale. So, settingY∗=Y∗,0,y-1, withy-1=[g(0,·)]-1(z0), we haveZ∗(t)=EQZ∗(T)|Ft=EQg(T,Y∗(T))|Ft=S+EQg(T,Y∗(T))-S|Ft.Hence, the value of the optimal wealth at time t is equal to the minimum guarantee S plus the value of an option with underlyingY∗and with payoff functiong(T,y)-S. This is indeed the same result obtained in Tepla (2001). We observe that there is also an insurance interpretation to the solution found, as mentioned in Tepla (2001) and widely described in Karoui et al. (2005): it is the so-called Option Based Portfolio Insurance method introduced by Leland and Rubinstein (1976).In this section we show a numerical application of the model presented so far using a MATLAB code. We consider the position of a male retiree aged 60 with initial wealthx0=100. Consistently with Gerrard et al. (2004), we setT=15. The market parameters arer=0.03,μ=0.08,σ=0.15, implying a Sharpe ratio equal toβ=0.33. The amount withdrawn in the unit time,b0, is set equal to the pension rate purchasable at retirement, using Italian projected mortality tables (RG48). Thus, we setb0=6.22. This choice is consistent with previous literature on the topic.The choice of the final target F and the final guarantee S are evidently subjective and depend on the member’s risk aversion. High risk aversion will lead to a high guarantee and a low level of the target, while a high target and a low guarantee will be driven by low risk aversion. We have tested three levels of risk aversion. Thus, high risk aversion is associated to terminal safety levelS=23b0a75and final target equal toF=1.5b0a75, wherea75is the actuarial value of a unitary lifetime annuity issued to an individual aged 75; medium risk aversion is associated to terminal safety levelS=12b0a75and final target equal toF=1.75b0a75; low risk aversion is associated to terminal safety level equal toS=0and final target equal toF=2b0a75. These values are reported in Table 1below.The interpretation of these choices is immediate. With high and medium risk aversion, the minimum pension rate guaranteed is, respectively, two third and half of the annuity rate that was possible to have on immediate annuitization at retirement,b0a75; the targeted wealth is sufficient to fund a final pension that amounts to, respectively, 1.5 and 1.75 ofb0. With low risk aversion, ruin is always avoided but in the worst scenario no money is left for annuitization at age 75; on the other hand, the targeted pension pursued is twiceb0.Remark 4.1It is worth mentioning that even the most risk averse individual has some restrictions in choosing the minimum income guaranteed. Indeed, from the formulation of the problem (see restriction (9) on S) we have that the value of S has to satisfyS⩽z0=x0erT-b0r(erT-1). The most risk averse choice would beS=z0, but in this case the only admissible strategy would beπ(·)≡0, i.e. the whole fund wealth must be invested in the riskless asset (see Proposition 3.1), and one would end up after 15 years with an annuity lower than that purchasable at retirement.10This is clear, considering that the investment in an insurance product benefits from mortality credits, that enhance the riskless rate.10This choice makes little sense in a realistic framework, given that here the bequest motive is disregarded and the individual takes the income drawdown option only in the hope of being able to buy a better annuity thanb0. For this reason, we here consider only cases whereS<z0, which in this particular example translates intoS<23b0a75.We have carried out 1000 Monte Carlo simulations for the behavior of the risky asset, with discretization step equal to one week. In order to do so, we have simulated the processY∗given by (39) with starting pointY∗(0)=[g(0,·)]-1(z0)and inserting the corresponding values ofS,Fandz0as above. With each risk aversion we have generated the same 1000 scenarios, by applying in each case the same stream of pseudo random numbers.For each risk aversion choice, we report the following results:•Evolution of the fund under optimal control during the 15 years time, by showing a graph with mean and standard deviation and a graph with some percentiles.Behavior of the optimal investment strategy over the 15 years time, by showing a graph with some percentiles. Notice that we report the optimal share of portfolio invested in the risky assetπ∗(·)/X∗(·), rather than the optimal amountπ∗(·). This is standard, and is done in order to facilitate comparisons between different situations.Distribution of the final annuity that can be bought with the final fund at age 75 and comparison with the annuity purchasable at retirement. The conversion of the final fund into annuity has been done with the same basis as above.Figs. 1–4report results for high risk aversion, Figs. 5–8those for medium risk aversion, Figs. 9–12those for low risk aversion. In particular, Figs. 1, 5 and 9 report, over 15 years time, the mean and dispersion of the fund trajectories, while Figs. 2, 6 and 10 report their percentiles. Figs. 3, 7 and 11 report some percentiles of the distribution of the optimal investment allocationπ∗(·)/X∗(·)over 15 years. Finally, Figs. 4, 8 and 12 report the distribution of the final annuity upon annuitization at time T.From the graphs we can make the following comments:•The wealth trajectories lie strictly between the two barriersS(t)andF(t)fort<T. In fact, due to (40) and (41), the two bottom and upper absorbing barriers cannot be reached before time T.11Looking at the graphs reporting the percentiles of the trajectories, however, it seems that in some cases the fund touches the bottom targetS(t). This is due to the approximation error made by the machine, that is unavoidable. In fact, for not too low values ofx,Φ(x)is so close to 0 that it cannot be distinguished from it. The result is that in the practical applications for not too high values ofy∗one hasΦk(t,y∗)=Φkt,y∗-βT-t=0. This impliesg(t,y∗)=S, meaning that the fund is on the safety levelS(t), which is theoretically impossible.11Due to our choice of S and F, when the risk aversion decreases, the boundaries for the wealth process become larger. Also the simulated wealth process results to be more spread out around the mean. This is due to the intuitive fact that the optimal strategies are more aggressive (see next item) and the range of final outcomes increases, both in the positive and in the negative direction.Inspection of Figs. 3, 7 and 11 shows that when the risk aversion decreases, the optimal strategies become riskier. In fact, with high risk aversion the 95th percentile of the optimal investment allocationπ∗(·)/X∗(·)stays below 2 even immediately prior to time T, whereas with low risk aversion it lies between 5 and 6 close to T. On the other hand, clearly, all strategies are bounded away from 0.Comparing Figs. 4, 8 and 12 it is immediate to see that the distribution of the final annuity becomes more and more spread when the risk aversion decreases. Moreover, with high risk aversion one can observe a considerable concentration around the guaranteed income23b0=4.15. In fact, in almost50%of the cases, the fund approachesS(t)and stays close to it until T (this can be noticed also by thorough inspection of Fig. 2). On the contrary, the distribution of final annuity looks very favorable in the case of low risk aversion, where in most of the cases the annuity lies between 9 and 12, and unfavorable scenarios leading to final income equal to 0 happen in about5%of the cases.We observe that the standard deviation of the investment allocation increases over time, especially towards time T. This can be observed in Figs. 3, 7 and 11. The optimal share of portfolio becomes very variable in the 2–3years before time T. This feature makes this case substantially different from the (state) unconstrained one, where the higher variability of the investment strategy is experienced in the first years after retirement. This interesting difference is evidently due to the inclusion of the absorbing lower barrierS(t). The explanation can be the following: when time T approaches the risk of collapsing onto the safety level reduces remarkably, and many pensioners may be willing to take more risk than in previous years when the risk of locking their position into the safety level is more important.One should not forget that the real goal of the pensioner who opts for phased withdrawal is to be better off than immediate annuitization when final annuitization takes place. Thus, it is of greatest interest to provide her with detailed information regarding the distribution of the final annuity achieved. The importance of full information to the pension fund member is noted also by Looney and Hardin (2009), who find that retirement portfolio of occupational pension funds are overly conservative, and that conservatism diminishes when the investor is provided prospective probabilities and payoffs over long time horizons. To some extent, information on annuity distribution has been already provided in Figs. 4, 8 and 12. However, the histograms cannot report relevant information that are of immediate use for the member who has to choose a risk profile. In particular, for the member’s decision making the comparison between the final annuity achievable by taking income drawdown option andb0(the pension rate purchasable at retirement) is relevant. Table 2reports useful statistics of the distribution of the final annuity achieved at age 75, for each risk aversion. The first nine lines report mean, standard deviation, min, max and some percentiles of the distribution of the final annuity. Lines 10 and 11 report, respectively, the guaranteed incomeS/a75and the targeted incomeF/a75(as chosen in Table 1), while the last line reports the probability (i.e. the frequency over 1000 scenarios) that the final annuity is higher thanb0.The following comments can be made:12Notice that, due to the approximation error made by the machine (see previous footnote) the values indicated by the minimum and by the first low percentiles coincide with the guaranteed income.12•The mean of the final annuity is 5.70, 7.44, 9.40 with high, medium and low risk aversion, respectively. The probability of being able to afford a final annuity higher thanb0=6.22is39.20%,68.80%and84.10%with high, medium and low risk aversion, respectively.This shows that if the risk aversion is too high,13Observe, in fact, that the value ofS=0.67b0a75is chosen to be very close to the upper boundaryz0=0.70b0a75.13the price for having a high guarantee on the final income is that the chances of reaching the desired annuity reduce dramatically. In fact, in60%of the cases the individual ends up with a final annuity lower thanb0and, even worse, in almost50%of the cases the individual receives exactly the guaranteed income, that is only two third ofb0. This is likely to be an undesirable result for the pensioner and it seems to indicate that if the member’s risk aversion is too high, it is not convenient to take the income drawdown option. This feature was already observed by Gerrard et al. (2006).On the other hand, with medium and low risk aversion the chances of being better off with annuitization at time T are almost70%and85%, respectively. This is an encouraging result, given that from retirement to T the pensioner has withdrawn the prescribed rate ofb0and that she was also guaranteed with a minimum lifetime income at retirement, or at worst against ruin.The low risk aversion profile could turn out to be particularly attractive to a member whose global post-retirement income is not heavily affected by the second pillar provision. In fact:–the chances of exceeding the immediate annuitization incomeb0are extremely high (84%);in 750 cases out of 1000 the member ends up with an annuity higher than 8.45, that is well aboveb0=6.22;in about 50 cases out of 1000 the final annuity is null (see also Fig. 12);ruin never occurs.Clearly, the price to pay for having a favorable distribution of final income is to take more risk, which translates into more aggressive investment policies. This is highlighted by Fig.11, that reports the optimal investment strategies for low risk aversion. In more than25%of the cases, the optimal strategy consists in borrowing considerable amounts of money to be invested in the risky asset. This kind of strategy is evidently not feasible in the presence of real world constraints. Hence, the importance and the need of approaching the problem with a no-borrowing constraint in future research.In this paper we have considered the investment allocation problem for a member of a DC pension scheme in the decumulation phase. We have extended the basic unconstrained model of Gerrard et al. (2004) by introducing a no short-selling constraint and a final capital requirement. It turns out that the wealth process must lie between two barriers: the bottom one representing a natural safety level for the fund, and the upper one representing a sort of target to be pursued. In particular, the presence of the bottom safety level implies that the undesirable event of ruin is avoided. The problem has been formulated in general through the dynamic programming approach and the associated HJB equation. We have transformed the original problem into a dual one and have shown equivalence between the two problems. In the special but relevant case without running cost, we have solved the dual problem, finding closed-form solution for the value function and the optimal strategy. A numerical application shows the impact of the model on retiree’s choices.Some remarks on the practical relevance of our analysis are the following. To the best of our knowledge this is the first model in the literature on this topic that allows the pensioner to choose a minimum guaranteed level of wealth at the time of ultimate annuitization. The introduction of a minimum guaranteed wealth in the income drawdown scheme should further encourage the selection of this option by retirees. The model is quite flexible for it allows for subjective choices regarding both the safety and the target levels. These choices are typically driven by the needs and the risk profile of the pensioner. In particular, the less risk-averse pensioner can aim to a high target such as double the annuity, while still keeping the guarantee of avoiding ruin; the most risk-averse individual can aim to a lower target, while still guaranteeing a minimum income level upon final annuitization. Moreover, the availability of closed-form expressions for the optimal policy makes the model quite useful for practical purposes. Indeed, supported by encouraging results of the numerical application performed, we think that this model can provide a number of information useful for the setup of a decision-making tool in the decumulation phase of a DC pension plan.Due to the difficulty of the task, we have not analyzed the more important problem of short-selling and borrowing constraints plus final capital requirement and the case when the investor can choose the consumption rate and the annuitization date. This problem could be tackled at theoretical level with the viscosity approach coupled with the dual transformation – similarly to what done in the extended paper Di Giacinto et al. (2010). The search for explicit solutions, at least in some special case, seems to be very challenging and is in the agenda for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
