@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Benders decomposition and an IP-based heuristic for selecting IMRT treatment beam angles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We apply two Bender decomposition algorithms for intensity modulated radiation therapy treatment planning.We develop a novel two-stage heuristic for intensity modulated radiation therapy treatment planning.All methods are tested using real patient data to evaluate their effectiveness.Best results were provided by our two-stage heuristic with local branching.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT),Radiation therapy,Benders decomposition,Local branching,Integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, two Benders decomposition algorithms and a novel two-stage integer programming-based heuristic are presented to optimize the beam angle and fluence map in Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT) planning. Benders decomposition is first implemented in the traditional manner by iteratively solving the restricted master problem and then identifying and adding the violated Benders cuts. We also implemented Benders decomposition using the “lazy constraint” feature included in CPLEX. In contrast, the two-stage heuristic first seeks to find a good solution by iteratively eliminating the least used angles in the linear programming relaxation solution until the size of the formulation is manageable. In the second stage of the heuristic, the solution is improved by applying local branching. The various methods were tested on real patient data to evaluate their effectiveness and runtime characteristics. The results indicated that implementing Benders using the lazy constraint usually led to better feasible solutions than the traditional approach. Moreover, the LP rounding heuristic was seen to generate high-quality solutions within a short amount of time, with further improvement obtained with the local branching search.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is one of the most commonly used procedures to treat cancer patients because of its demonstrated capability to deliver a highly conformal dose of radiation to tumors while minimizing damage to nearby healthy organs. During the procedure, the patient lies on a specially designed couch while a linear accelerator (LINAC) generates photon beams to irradiate the target volume. The movable arm, called the gantry, of the LINAC can rotate 360º in a plane perpendicular to the couch. In sequence, it stops at a predetermined set of angles to deliver the radiation. If need be the couch can also rotate. At each angle, various two-dimensional beam shapes are constructed by a computer controlled multi-leaf collimator (MLC) in the LINAC to conform to the beam's-eye-view of the target volume. An open radiation beam consists of hundreds of beamlets or pencil beams that are defined by the specification of the MLC. Each beamlet is assigned a radiation intensity level called a beamlet weight, which can be modulated (the result is a fluence intensity map). Because it can be time consuming to control one beamlet at a time for radiation delivery, subfields are often constructed and the same intensity is assigned so that the resulting dose delivery is close to the optimized fluence map. For more detail about the procedure and equipment, see Lim, Choi, and Mohan (2008).Before designing an IMRT treatment plan, the geometry of the tumor region is captured using a medical imaging technique such as computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging, depending on the type of tumor. The three-dimensional information obtained from the digital image representing the tumor as well as the surrounding healthy organs is then used for developing the treatment plan. Two types of volumes are typically considered at this stage. The first is the planning target volume (PTV), which consists of the gross tumor volume and a fixed margin around the tumor to account for treatment planning parameter and data uncertainties. Unfortunately, some healthy organs can be damaged by the radiation due to their proximity to the tumor. These are referred to as organs-at-risk (OARs), the second type of volume. The PTV corresponds to the area of the cancer while the OARs are healthy organs or tissues of the body. A well-designed IMRT plan should deliver the desired amount of radiation to the tumor while limiting the amount to the healthy organs.For planning purposes, the PTV and the involved OARs are divided into three-dimensional treatment cubes called voxels (for more detail, see Lim, Ferris, Wright, Shepard, & Earl, 2007). The total dose that each voxel receives is defined by the weighted sum of the beamlet dose delivered to the voxel. In IMRT plans, a hot spot is the region that receives a higher dose than the desired level, and a cold spot is the region receiving a dose below its desired level. For voxels in the PTV, we want to control both the hot spots and cold spots to guarantee the desired treatment effect. For voxels in OARs, we only control hot spots in an effort to spare the healthy organs. Both hot and cold spot control can be modeled by either enforcing hard constraints or by penalizing deviations from the desired dose.The purpose of this study is to explore solution techniques that can help planners select the optimal radiation delivery angles and fluence intensity maps. Various mixed-integer programming (MIP) formulations have been proposed to solve this problem (e.g., see Aleman et al., 2013; Lee, Fox, & Crocker, 2000; Lim et al., 2007; Yarmand et al. 2013). Because solving the MIPs with commercial software has proven difficult, if not impossible, researchers have proposed various heuristics. Decomposition methods such as Lagrangian relaxation and Benders, which have been successfully applied in other areas, have not been applied to the treatment angle selection problem associated with IMRT planning to the best of our knowledge. In this study, we show that Benders decomposition may find better solutions than a standard MIP solver when the computation time is limited. In addition, we develop a two-stage heuristic that uses (i) a standard MIP solver to construct a good initial solution in the first stage, and (ii) local branching (Fischetti & Lodi, 2003) to improve the incumbent in the second stage. The first stage of the heuristic reduces the solution space of the original problem by iteratively eliminating unpromising angles identified in the linear programming solution until the remaining problem is easy to solve. In the second stage, the solution is used as a starting point for local branching. Our results show that the LP rounding heuristic is fast and can generate good feasible solutions, which may be further improved by local branching in the second stage.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we summarize the related literature concentrating on algorithm methods for obtaining solutions. Section 3 introduces the problem formulation and Section 4 discusses our Benders implementations. In Section 5, we develop an LP rounding heuristic and couple it with local branching to improve the solution. Section 6 presents the computational results and Section 7 concludes with a number of observations from the research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
