@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-criteria Police Districting Problem for the efficient and effective design of patrol sector

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Police Districting Problem for the design of patrol sectors is presented.The model has been defined in collaboration with the Spanish National Police Corps.It considers multiple performance attributes: workload, efficiency, and support.The solutions are compared to patrol sector configurations currently in use.According to practitioners, model configurations are better than the current ones.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Location,Police Districting Problem,Multi-criteria decision making,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Police Districting Problem (PDP) concerns the efficient and effective design of patrol sectors in terms of performance attributes such as workload, response time, etc. A balanced definition of the patrol sector is desirable as it results in crime reduction and in better service. In this paper, a multi-criteria Police Districting Problem defined in collaboration with the Spanish National Police Corps is presented. This is the first model for the PDP that considers the attributes of area, risk, compactness, and mutual support. The decision-maker can specify his/her preferences on the attributes, on workload balance, and efficiency. The model is solved by means of a heuristic algorithm that is empirically tested on a case study of the Central District of Madrid. The solutions identified by the model are compared to patrol sector configurations currently in use and their quality is evaluated by public safety service coordinators. The model and the algorithm produce designs that significantly improve on the current ones.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For most of the 20th century, police districts have been drawn by police officers on a road map with a marker, just by following the major streets in the area, without making too much of an effort to accomplish geographic or workload balance (Bruce, 2009). Since the seminal paper by Mitchell (1972), a number of mathematical optimization models have been proposed and the Police Districting Problem (PDP) was born. The PDP aims at partitioning the territory under the jurisdiction of a Police Department in the best possible way, with respect to several time, cost, performance, and topological attributes. Only after recent advances in Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and computer technology, which have allowed reasonable computational times and ease of representation and manipulation, have automatic methodologies for the definition of police districts gained popularity among practitioners (Wang, 2012). However, studies integrating GIS and sophisticated mathematical modeling for police districting remain a rarity (Bruce, 2009), and the “map-and-marker method” is still one of the most widely used redistricting procedures. Nevertheless, the importance of a balanced definition of the police districts is unquestioned and the implementation of tools for aiding in making the decisions about the allocation of police resources has proven to be extremely beneficial, as shown by the substantial academic literature on this topic in the last decades (D’Amico, Wang, Batta, & Rump, 2002). In fact, all the works report a dramatic improvement in workload distribution compared to hand-made districts which, in turn, results in enhanced performance and efficiency.In Spain, the security of towns is the responsibility of the Spanish National Police Corps (SNPC), usually sharing territory with other local security forces. The SNPC is an armed Institute of a civil nature, dependent on the Ministry of Home Affairs. Among its duties are: keeping and restoring order and public safety and preventing the commission of criminal acts. The SNPC is one of the country’s most valued institutions and is located at the global forefront of the fight against crime, with the aim of constant innovation. The socio-economic context in recent years in Spain has been that of a serious crisis, which has reduced the resources and the number of police officers available to the SNPC. In order to continue providing the same level of security, the SNPC is taking cutting-edge steps to increase its competitiveness. Under the current system, the distribution of patrols is the responsibility of the inspectors who, under normal conditions, locate the agents according to the neighborhood borders defined more than 50 years ago. To improve the effectiveness of patrolling operations and increase the efficiency in the use of scarce resources, the SNPC has started to develop a Decision Support System (DSS) comprising tools and models to assist in various public security tasks (Camacho-Collados & Liberatore, 2015). One of the main objectives of the system is the implementation of a predictive patrolling policy to increase the presence of agents in the areas where they are most needed, to reduce the probability of the occurrence of crime. To this end, the authors have developed, in collaboration with professionals from the SNPC, an optimization model for the definition of patrolling sector configurations, tailored to suit the requirements of the SNPC. As the model is to be included in the DSS and, therefore, should be sufficiently interactive, the authors implemented a heuristic algorithm that provides good solutions quickly. By combining the proposed algorithm with a crime risk forecasting model (Perry, McInnis, Price, Smith, & Hollywood, 2013; Short, Bertozzi, & Brantingham, 2010), a predictive patrolling system is obtained. For the SNPC, the implementation of a predictive patrolling system also represents a paradigm shift, from detention to prevention, resulting in reductions in the costs of detention and in an improvement in the actual, subjective, and social level of safety.The contributions of this article are the following. An extensive literature review on the PDP is presented. This review includes the identification of the main aspects revised in related reports and a categorized description of methodological approaches. In summary, a broad range of references is classified to identify lacks in the literature. The main contribution of this paper lies in the optimization model for the PDP designed in collaboration with the SNPC. The model is multi-criteria in nature as it includes in the optimization process four different attributes. Also, the model allows the decision maker to define her preference between global optimality and workload balance among the patrol districts. The model is solved by means of a fast local search algorithm, to comply with the strict time requirements given by its inclusion as a tool in a DSS. The model and the algorithm are tested on a case study on the Central District of Madrid. We show empirically that the optimization methodology proposed generates solutions that outperform the current patrolling configurations adopted by the SNPC. Finally, concluding remarks and research guidelines are given.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we briefly introduce the generic districting problem and we review more in detail the literature on the PDP. In Section 3 we present the proposed multi-criteria PDP model and the algorithm devised to solve it. Next, we test the algorithm on a case study of the Central District of Madrid and compare the quality of the solutions with the patrolling configurations currently used in the district. We conclude with some insights and guidelines for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The purpose of this paper was to introduce a model for the optimization of patrolling sectors, specifically tailored to suit the requirements of the Spanish National Police Corps (SNPC). This model will be part of a Decision Support System (DSS) for the implementation of a predictive patrolling policing. The model proposed is multi-criteria in nature. Given the non-linear nature of its restrictions, we propose a local search heuristic algorithm for its solution. A case study of the Central District of Madrid was presented and the performance of the algorithm was assessed. We showed empirically that the algorithm rapidly generates patrolling configurations that are more efficient than those currently adopted by the SNPC. However, this research is just a scratch on the surface and several lines of research can be pursued, as explained in the following.•The model could be improved to increase its realism. As suggested by Sarac et al. (1999), census cell blocks could substitute for the current grid structure. Unfortunately, adopting this structure would increase the complexity of the model and the time necessary for its solution. In fact, the convexity restriction on the subsets’ geometry would require the implementation of specific data structures, such as those proposed by King et al. (2012, 2014). In this case, finding a balance between realism and solvability would be imperative, as the model should be solved in real-time.The approximation introduced by the current area measure could be improved by considering other more realistic measures. A previous implementation of the model computed the minimum length Hamiltonian Cycle. However, initial computational experiments showed that that was computationally inefficient. Further research could focus on its time-efficient implementation, or on alternative representative measures (Opasanon & Miller-Hooks, 2006; Pal & Bose, 2009).The effectiveness of other heuristic and metaheuristic algorithms such as tabu search, ant colonies, and genetic algorithms could be investigated.Although the model is intrinsically non-linear, decomposition methods such as Column Generation or Benders’ Decomposition could be applied to solve the problem to optimality. Also, these methodologies could still be used to generate good heuristic solutions should the solution process take longer than the allowed computational time.Recent papers have analyzed the statistical effect of law enforcement actions on crime patterns (Jones, Brantingham, & Chayes, 2010). By including these effects in an optimization problem it would be possible to formulate a model for the design of patrol configurations that result in a reduction of the future level of criminality. The model would be similar in nature to theoretical games (Hohzaki & Maehara, 2010) and to fortification/interdiction problems used to hedge against intentional attacks (Kress, Royset, & Rozen, 2012; Scaparra & Church, 2008; Zoroa, Fernandez-Saez, & Zoroa, 2012) and natural disasters (Liberatore, Scaparra, & Daskin, 2012).A service coordinator in charge of the patrolling operations in the Central District of Madrid pointed out that an important component is ensuring that the agents’ job is “entertaining,” as opposed to dull and boring. It could be an interesting challenge for modelers to come up with an “entertainment” attribute to be included during the optimization process.Finally, the model and algorithm presented in this work will be included in an integrated DSS for the implementation of a smart patrolling policing that we are currently developing in collaboration with the SNPC. Certainly, this research will open new opportunities for the application of OR methods and models in the police sector.We hope that this paper will be a useful source of ideas for future research on policing models and will contribute further to the development and solution of more complex models for the PDP.