@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A cardinality-constrained robust model for the assignment problem in Home Care services

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cardinality-constrained robust model.Innovative application in the healthcare field: the Home Care case.Nurse-to-patient assignment model with cardinality-constrained robustness.Results improve if robustness is taken into account.Robustness without generating scenarios.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Home Care,Robust optimization,Nurse-to-patient assignment,Continuity of care,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Home Care includes medical, paramedical and social services which are delivered to patients at their domicile rather than in hospital. Managing human and material resources in Home Care services is a difficult task, as the provider has to deal with peculiar constraints (e.g., the continuity of care, which imposes that a patient is always cared for by the same nurse) and to manage the high variability of patients’ demands. One of the main issues encountered in planning Home Care services under continuity of care requirement is the nurse-to-patient assignment. Despite the importance of this topic, the problem is only marginally addressed in the literature, where continuity of care is usually treated as a soft-constraint rather than as a hard one. Uncertainty is another relevant feature of nurse-to-patient assignment problem, and it is usually managed adopting stochastic programming or analytical policies. However, both these approaches proved to be limited, even if they improve the quality of the assignments upon those actually provided in practice. In this paper, we develop a cardinality-constrained robust assignment model, which allows exploiting the potentialities of a mathematical programming model without the necessity of generating scenarios. The developed model is tested on real-life instances related to a relevant Home Care provider operating in Italy, in order to evaluate its capability of reducing the costs related to nurses’ overtimes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Randomness in data and parameters is a common feature of several optimization problems. It arises in many applications, such as telecommunications, where uncertainty is usually associated with traffic demands, and health care, where a high uncertainty is related to patients’ conditions and demands.Indeed, uncertainty is inherent in many health care optimization problems and cannot be neglected, as it may have a significant impact on quality and feasibility of problem solution. For instance, in emergency vehicle location problems, uncertainty is associated with the availability of ambulances (Brotcorne, Laporte, & Semet, 2003), whereas in planning and scheduling operating room theaters uncertainty is due to surgery durations (Denton, Miller, Balasubramanian, & Huschka, 2010) or care demands in different specialties (Holte & Mannino, 2013). Uncertainty also occurs in managing Home Care (HC) services.HC providers must synchronize the use of resources at patient’s domicile, while usually delivering the service to a large number of patients in a vast territory. Furthermore, random events may affect service delivery, undermine feasibility of plans, and cause a high variability in nurses’ workloads and, consequently, in the cost of service. One of the most critical and frequent of such events is a sudden variation in the amount of service required by patients, which is in general highly variable. Hence, managing human resources in HC services is a difficult task, which is made more complex by uncertain patient demands.Different approaches are usually applied to deal with uncertainty in health care problems, such as probabilistic models or stochastic optimization approaches.Recently, an innovative robust optimization approach, named cardinality-constrained approach, has been proposed in Bertsimas and Sim (2004) and already applied in several fields, such as portfolio optimization or network design. It allows to account for a certain degree of uncertainty with a reasonable computational effort, providing a trade-off between computational time and robustness. In addition, it can be tuned to take into account the specific degree of risk the decision maker accepts. Although the approach seems to fit well to many health care problems, and in particular to the HC planning, to the best of our knowledge it has not been applied to many health care problems so far.1There are the only five papers (i.e., Banditori, Cappanera, & Visintin, 2013; Chan, Bortfeld, & Tsitsiklis, 2006; Denton et al., 2010; Holte & Mannino, 2013; Mannino, Nilssen, & Nordlander, 2012) found in September 2013 through a search on ISI web of knowledge and Scopus, referring to Health Care, among the papers citing Bertsimas and Sim (2004). However, none deals with HC management.1In this paper we present an application of the above mentioned robust approach to the nurse-to-patient assignment problem in HC, which is an interesting and meaningful example of health care optimization problem. The approach can be easily applied to the problem and proved to be able to produce good quality solutions with a reasonable computational effort. Hence, it is also worth being tested on other health care problems.HC consists of delivering medical, paramedical and social services to patients at their domicile rather than in a hospital. On the one hand this leads to a significant improvement in the quality of life for patients, as they continue to live at their home in a familiar environment. On the other hand it leads to considerable cost savings for the health care system, as hospitalization costs are avoided. HC is a relevant and growing sector in western countries, due to population aging, increase in chronic pathologies, introduction of innovative technologies, and pressure of governments to contain health care costs.HC services involve different professional figures. Patients are usually assisted by nurses and, according to the case, may require also other figures, such as physiotherapist, physician, or psychologist. In some cases, they may require specific facilities to be brought and managed at home.Hence, many resources are involved in delivering HC services, including nurses and other categories of operators, support staff and material resources. HC providers must carefully optimize limited human resources. In addition some features, such as the continuity of care and the risk of incurring in operator burnout, make the HC resource planning different from the planning problems that occur in other services within the health care domain. Besides, as HC patients have to be cared after for weeks, middle and long-term planning are key issues in providing a good quality of service, while keeping balanced personnel workloads over the whole considered time horizon.In this work, we focus on the nurse-to-patient assignment under continuity of care. Continuity of care means that an HC provider assigns only one nurse to each patient, named the reference nurse, and the assignment is kept for a long period. Continuity of care is an important factor in service provision in all health care facilities (Haggerty et al., 2003; Heffernan & Husni, 2009). Two main aspects are preserved when continuity of care is pursued. On the one hand, continuity of care preserves the quality of service perceived by patients, as patients receive care from the same operator and do not have to continuously develop new relationships with new operators. On the other hand, potential loss of information among operators is avoided. Both these aspects are extremely important in HC, where the patient is assisted for a long period, patient’s family and domestic context are involved in providing care, and, for palliative care, very serious pathologies are treated. Hence, many HC providers pursue continuity of care. However, continuity of care constraint limits service flexibility and, despite of quality of care, some providers do not adopt reference nurses to increase operational efficiency. In general, in order to guarantee a good tradeoff between quality and flexibility, continuity of care should be preserved at least for critical patients (e.g., palliative patients) or patients with particular needs. In other words, patients should be classified according to their needs and continuity of care should be guaranteed for a subset of them.Nurses are usually divided into districts depending on skills and territory. Patients are divided into classes, according to the type of service required (e.g., the main classification is between palliative and non-palliative patients), and nurses take care of patients they are skilled for. Furthermore, in large HC providers, nurses are divided into territorial groups and take care of patients who are resident in their territory. Districts are usually assumed to be independent in planning the assignments, i.e., each patient is cared for by nurses with a skill compatible to his/her pathology and working in his/her geographical area.Each patient requires a number of visits per week from each professional figure, which is described by an uncertain parameter. Each operator has an amount of contracted working time per time period for providing visits. If the care volume exceeds the operator contract capacity, overtime has an extra cost that providers want to minimize. Hence, the assignment aims at reducing the visits that each operator provides above his/her contracted time.Home Care involves the management of several resources and must take into account many requirements and constraints. It is related to nurse rostering in hospitals (see Burke, De Causmaecker, Vanden Berghe, & Van Landeghem, 2004; Cheang, Li, Lim, & Rodrigues, 2003) as it deals with nurse management. However, HC management involves several issues which are not usually addressed in nurse rostering problems, such as the continuity of care (Haggerty et al., 2003) or the burnout risk (Borsani, Matta, Beschi, & Sommaruga, 2006), which make the HC nurse management peculiar. The main issues to be considered are the partitioning of a territory into districts, the dimensioning of human resources, the assignment of visits to operators (or patients to operators in case of continuity of care), the scheduling of nurses’ duties and the routing optimization.Literature about HC can be mainly divided into two groups: a first group deals with daily schedule of visits and routing of nurses, and a second group deals with staff planning and management in a mid-term and long-term perspective. The nurse-to-patient assignment under continuity of care analyzed in this paper is related to the mid-term management.From a long-term point of view, the districting problem consists of grouping patients and nurses according to geographical and skill compatibility, usually aiming at balancing workload among different groups (Blais, Lapierre, & Laporte, 2003; Lahrichi, Lapierre, Hertz, Talib, & Bouvier, 2006).Dimensioning of human resources consists of determining the number of operators, together with their skills, to meet patient demand in each part of the territory. Patient demand uncertainty may be taken into account (De Angelis, 1998). Funding has to be taken into account in dimensioning HC resources, as well (Busby & Carter, 2006).The nurse-to-patient assignment problem consists of assigning personnel to visits in a fair way. Different features can be considered, such as the continuity of care and the uncertainty in patients’ demands. It has been rarely studied as a stand-alone problem, i.e. not considering scheduling (Boldy & Howell, 1980), and, to the best of our knowledge, the assignment problem taking into account the continuity of care issue is only marginally addressed in literature (Borsani et al., 2006; Hertz & Lahrichi, 2009; Lanzarone, Matta, & Sahin, 2012). Besides, continuity of care is often considered as an objective rather than a strict requirement and, therefore, dealt with as a soft-constraint rather than as a hard one, see for instance Nickel, Schroder, and Steeg (2012).If continuity of care is not considered, the assignment problem turns out to be an assignment of operators to visits rather than patients; in this case the aim is to jointly optimize the assignment of operators to visits and the scheduling and routing problem (see Rasmussen, Justesen, Dohn, & Larsen, 2012; Trautsamwieser & Hirsch, 2011). However, this approach has two drawbacks. On the one hand, if the districts are given and have a limited extensions, as it usually is the case in Europe, the travel distances can be considered as constant and therefore the impact of scheduling and routing is not very significant. On the other hand, joint optimization requires significant computational effort, thus reducing the length of the considered time horizon and reducing the possibility of long-term workload balancing.As mentioned, uncertainty inherently arises in HC due to unpredictable changes in patients’ needs. It affects personnel workloads and the number of patients who can be treated. In Koeleman, Bhulai, and Van Meersbergen (2012) uncertainty is managed by representing the whole system as a Markov chain and developing admittance policies for patients. The nurse-to-patients assignment problem, in which both continuity of care and demand uncertainty are considered, has been rarely addressed in literature. The problem was tackled with stochastic programming on one hand (Lanzarone et al., 2012), and with analytical policies on the other (Lanzarone & Matta, 2012). However, both these approaches proved to be limited even if they improved the quality of the assignment upon those actually provided by the HC structures in practice. The stochastic programming approach is based on scenario generation and, due to the high number of patients and the associated demand variability, requires to include a very high number of scenarios. Only a limited number of them can be considered for a computationally acceptable solution and, therefore, a high expected value of perfect information (EVPI) and a low value of stochastic solution (VSS) are obtained (Lanzarone et al., 2012). Analytical policies are related to strict assumptions regarding the shape of workload probability density functions, the number of assignable patients (one patient at a time after deciding an ordering of new patients) and the number of periods in the planning horizon, which is equal to only one (Lanzarone & Matta, 2012).With the cardinality-constrained approach, we aim at exploiting the potentialities of a linear programming model rather than an analytical approach, avoiding the necessity of generating scenarios.We consider the problem of assigning a set of HC patients P to a set of nurses I over a time horizon T represented by a set of time slots.Continuity of care is taken into account; indeed, different continuity of care requirements are considered, depending on the type of patient and on his/her requests. Hence, the set of patients P is partitioned into five subsets:1.Patients who require hard continuity of care (C)Pca:set of patients who require hard continuity of care – i.e., their reference nurse cannot be changed – and are already under treatment (and therefore assigned) at the beginning of the considered time horizon. As they cannot be reassigned, they keep their assignment as it was in the past.set of patients who require hard continuity of care and start their treatment during the considered time horizon (therefore, they are not yet assigned). A subset of them begin the treatment at the first time slot. Furthermore, other patients may enter in each of the following time slots.Patients who require partial continuity of care (PC)Ppca:set of patients who require partial continuity of care – i.e. their reference nurse can be changed although it is preferable not to – and are already under treatment (and therefore assigned) at the beginning of the considered time horizon. They can be reassigned at the beginning of each time slot t, in order to balance workloads. However, each reassignment is penalized by a costγto keep the number of reassignments limited.set of patients who require partial continuity of care and start their treatment during the considered time horizon (therefore, they are not yet assigned). A subset of them begin the treatment at the first time slot, and other patients may enter in each of the following time slots. Similarly to patients inPpca, they can be reassigned at the beginning of each time slot t with a reassignment costγ.Patients who do not require continuity of care (NC)Pnc:set of patients who do not require continuity of care. They can be assigned to more than one nurse even in the same time slot t and their assignments can be changed from a time slot to another without reassignment costs.The division in districts (usually based on territory and skills) is taken into account, i.e., each district is assigned to a subset of nurses. A parametermijis given for each nursei∈Iand patientj∈P, which is equal to 1 if i operates in the district of j, and 0 otherwise.The amount of working time required by each patientj∈Pduring each time slott∈Tis an uncertain parameterrjt, with expected valuer¯jtand maximum valuer¯jt+rˆjt. Further, each nursei∈Ihas an amount of available working timeviin each time slot t. If the workload amount of a nurse exceeds the available time, overtime must be paid for.An objective usually pursued in practice is the reduction of overtime. A possible approach to pursue this goal is to minimize first the highest overtime value, then the second highest, and so on. For an analytical description, overtime cost is modeled as a stepwise function, where highest per time unit overtime costs are associated with highest overtime values. For this purpose, a set of overtime levelsLiis defined for each nursei∈Iand two parameters are given for each levell∈Li: a thresholdΔiland a cost per time unitcl, whereclis the cost for each overtime unit abovevi+∑k=1l-1Δikand belowvi+∑k=1lΔik. As example, the cost for each overtime unit aboveviand below a first thresholdvi+Δi1isc1, the cost for each overtime unit abovevi+Δi1and below a second thresholdvi+Δi1+Δi2isc2, and so on. ThresholdsΔilmay be different for different nurses, whereas costsclare usually the same andcl<cl+1to get a monotonically increasing stepwise function.A limit is also given to the total workload amount of each nursei∈I, which cannot exceeds twice the value ofvi. Hence, parametersΔilare defined in such a way that∑l∈LiΔil=vi,∀i. Although this limit is very high with respect to the contracted working timevi, indeed such limit allows to deal with the robustness by means of the cardinality-constrained approach, as described later in this section.The assignment of patients requiring continuity of care is described by binary variables. A binary variablexjiis defined for each patientj∈Pca∪Pcnwho requires hard continuity of care and each nursei∈I:xjiis equal to 1 if j is assigned to i during the whole time horizon, and 0 otherwise. A binary variableξjitis defined for each patientj∈Ppca∪Ppcnwho requires partial continuity of care, each nursei∈Iand each time slott∈T:ξjitis equal to 1 if i is in the charge of j during t, and 0 otherwise. Furthermore, a binary variableyjtis introduced for each patientj∈Ppca∪Ppcnwho requires partial continuity of care and each time slot t.yjtis equal to 1 if the assignment of j is changed fromt-1to t, and 0 otherwise.The assignments of patients∈Pca∪Ppcato reference nurses before the beginning of the considered time horizon are described by parametersx̃ji:x̃jiis equal to 1 if j is initially assigned to i, and 0 otherwise.2We could remove some variablesxjiand replace them with a fixed charge. However, variablesxjiare needed to deal with robustness.2As for patients not requiring continuity of care, the fraction of the time needed by patientj∈Pncduring time slott∈Twhich is provided by nursei∈Iis represented by a continuous variableχjit∈[0,1].The overtime amount assigned to each nursei∈Iduring each time slott∈Tis described by a continuous variablewitlfor each levell∈Li, which represents the overtime related to costcl.Sets, parameters and variables of the model are summarized in Table 1.The objective function, which aims at minimizing the overall overtime costs and the cost associated to reassignments, is written as follows:(1)min∑i∈I∑t∈T∑l∈Liclwitl+γ∑j∈Ppca∪Ppcn∑t∈Tyjt.Variables are subject to the following constraints:(2)∑i∈Imijxji=1,∀j∈Pca∪Pcn(3)∑i∈Imijξjit=1,∀j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,t∈T(4)∑i∈Imijχjit=1,∀j∈Pnc,t∈T(5)∑j∈Pca∪Pcnrjtxji+∑j∈Ppca∪Ppcnrjtξjit+∑j∈Pncrjtχjit⩽vi+∑l∈Liwitl,∀i∈I,t∈T(6)0⩽witl⩽Δil,∀i∈I,t∈T,l∈Li(7)xji⩾x̃ji,∀i∈I,j∈Pca(8)yjt⩾ξjit-ξjit-1,∀t∈T⧹{t1},j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,i∈I(9)yjt1⩾ξjit1-x̃ji,∀j∈Ppca,i∈I(10)xji∈{0,1},∀j∈Pca∪Pcn,i∈I(11)ξjit∈{0,1},∀j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,t∈T,i∈I(12)χjit∈[0,1],∀j∈Pnc,t∈T,i∈I(13)yjt∈{0,1},∀j∈Pnc,t∈TConstraints (2)–(4) guarantee that patients are assigned to suitable nurses, taking into account district compatibility and the pertinent continuity of care requirement. Constraints (5) compute nurse workload (left hand side) and overtime, which is divided into the different cost levels (right hand side). Constraints (6) set the maximum overtime workload for each level. Constraints (7) guarantee that patients belonging to subsetPcado not change their assignment at the beginning of the considered time horizon. Finally, constraints (8) and (9) compute the number of reassignments. In particular, constraints (9) compute the number of reassignments at the initial time slott1for patients in the subsetPpca.As mentioned, we consider the cardinality-constrained approach (Bertsimas & Sim, 2004) to deal with uncertainty. Based on such approach, we introduce three cardinality parametersΓci,ΓpciandΓncifor each nursei∈I. We also introduce three setsScit,SpcitandSncit, and three patientspcit,ppcitandpncitfor each nursei∈Iand each time slott∈T.Scit⊆Pca∪Pcnis the subset of patients requiring hard continuity of care and assigned to i, whose demand in time slot t is equal to the maximum treatment time (i.e.,r¯jt+rˆjt).Spcit⊆Ppca∪PpcnandSncit⊆Pncare analogously defined for patients requiring partial and no continuity of care, respectively. At most⌊Γci⌋and⌊Γpci⌋and⌊Γnci⌋patients (with hard, partial and no continuity of care) are assumed to belong to these subsets, respectively.Further, in caseΓciandΓpciandΓnciare not integer, three patients are selected for each nurse i and each time slot t, whose demand charged to i is betweenr¯jtandr¯jt+rˆjt. We denote withpcit,ppcitandpncitsuch patients:pcitis a patient belonging toPca∪Pcnbut not toScit,ppcitis a patient belonging toPpca∪Ppcnbut not toSpcit, andpncitis a patient belonging toPncbut not toSncit.The charged demand of patients not belonging toScit,SpcitandSncitand different frompcit,ppcitandpncitis the expected treatment time (i.e.,r¯jt).In this formulation, the approach proposed in Bertsimas and Sim (2004) is slightly modified. Whereas only one subset of parameters is selected for each constraint in Bertsimas and Sim (2004), in our model three subsets are selected for each constraint (i.e., for each nurse) as three disjoint set of patients may charge each nurse. It is worth noting that the computed solutions are feasible if at most(Γci+Γpci+Γnci)|I|patients require their maximum number of visits simultaneously.The robustness is taken into account considering the worst possible charge for each nurse i in each time slot t, given cardinalitiesΓci,ΓpciandΓnci. Hence, the model is modified in order to include such worst case in constraints (5):(14)∑j∈Pca∪Pcnr¯jtxji+∑j∈Ppca∪Ppcnr¯jtξjit+∑j∈Pncr¯jtχjit+maxScit∪{pcit}|Scit⊆Pca∪Pcn,|Scit|=⌊Γci⌋,pcit∈Pca∪Pcn⧹Scit∑j∈Scitrˆjtxji+Γci-⌊Γci⌋rˆpcittxpciti+maxSpcit∪{ppcit}|Spcit⊆Ppca∪Ppcn,|Spcit|=⌊Γpci⌋,ppcit∈Ppca∪Ppcn⧹Spcit∑j∈Spcitrˆjtξjit+Γpci-⌊Γpci⌋rˆppcittξppcitit+maxSncit∪{pncit}|Sncit⊆Pnc,|Sncit|=⌊Γnci⌋,pncit∈Pnc⧹Sncit∑j∈Sncitrˆjtχjit+Γnci-⌊Γnci⌋rˆpncittχpncitit⩽vi+∑l∈Liwitl,∀i∈I,t∈TPatients in subsetsScit,SpcitandSncitand patientspcit,ppcitandpncitmay change in consecutive time slots. This means that the level of charged demand for patient j in a time slot t is independent from the value in the previous time slott-1(null covariance between the events). Even if unrealistic, this assumption increases the robustness of the obtained solution as the worst scenario is found out and the solution is guaranteed to be able to deal with it.Let us denote withβcit(x∗,Γci,t),βpcit(ξ∗,Γpci,t)andβncit(χ∗,Γnci,t)the three maxima included in (14), which are associated with a given solution{x∗,ξ∗,χ∗}. They are computed independently through three linear programming models:(15)βcit(x∗,Γci,t)=maxScit∪{pcit}|Scit⊆Pca∪Pcn,|Scit|=⌊Γci⌋,pcit∈Pca∪Pcn⧹Scit∑j∈Scitrˆjtxji∗+Γci-⌊Γci⌋rˆpcittxpciti∗(16)βpcit(ξ∗,Γpci,t)=maxSpcit∪{ppcit}|Spcit⊆Ppca∪Ppcn,|Spcit|=⌊Γpci⌋,ppcit∈Ppca∪Ppcn⧹Spcit∑j∈Spcitrˆjtξji∗t+Γpci-⌊Γpci⌋rˆppcittξppciti∗t(17)βncit(χ∗,Γnci,t)=maxSncit∪{pncit}|Sncit⊆Pnc,|Sncit|=⌊Γnci⌋,pncit∈Pnc⧹Sncit∑j∈Sncitrˆjtχji∗t+Γnci-⌊Γnci⌋rˆpncittχpnciti∗tAs example,βcit(x∗,Γci,t)is computed for each nursei∈Iand each time slott∈Tby solving the following linear programming problem:(18)(Pcβit)=max∑j∈Pca∪Pcnrˆjtxji∗zjit(19)∑j∈Pca∪Pcnzjit⩽Γci(20)0⩽zjit⩽1,∀j∈Pca∪Pcnwhere i and t are fixed, andzjit∈[0,1]are continuous variables which represent the choice of elements in subsetScitand ofpcit.3Due to the structure of the model, at most one of variableszjitis fractional in any optimal solution, ifΓciis not integer, and representspcit.3Let us denote withζitcthe dual variables associated to (19) and withπjitcthe dual variables associated tozjit⩽1(20). The dual problem is formulated as follows:(21)(Dcβit)=minΓciζitc+∑j∈Pca∪Pcnπjitc(22)ζitc+πjitc⩾rˆjtxji∗,∀j∈Pca∪Pcn(23)πjitc⩾0,∀j∈Pca∪Pcn(24)ζitc⩾0Optimal values (Pcβit) and (Dcβit) coincide and, therefore, the forth addend of the left hand side of (14) can be replaced byΓciζitc+∑j∈Pca∪Pcnπjitcwith the following variables and constraints added to the model:ζitc+πjitc⩾rˆjtxji,∀i∈I,j∈Pca∪Pcn,t∈Tζitc⩾0,∀i∈I,t∈Tπjitc⩾0,∀i∈I,j∈Pca∪Pcn,t∈TThe same idea is applied toβpcit(ξ∗,Γpci,t)andβncit(χ∗,Γnci,t), deriving the primal problems (Ppcβit) and (Pncβit) and the corresponding dual problems (Dpcβit) and (Dncβit). As the three subsets of patients are disjoint, the worst case is obtained by maximizing the three primal problems independently.Hence, the fifth addend of the left hand side of (14) is replaced byΓpciζitpc+∑j∈Ppca∪Ppcnπjitpcwith the following variables and constraints added to the model:ζitpc+πjitpc⩾rˆjtξjit,∀i∈I,j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,t∈Tζitpc⩾0,∀i∈I,t∈Tπjitpc⩾0,∀i∈I,j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,t∈TThe sixth addend of the left hand side of (14) is replaced byΓnciζitnc+∑j∈Pncπjitncwith the following variable and constraints added to the model:ζitnc+πjitnc⩾rˆjtχjit,∀i∈I,j∈Pnc,t∈Tζitnc⩾0,∀i∈I,t∈Tπjitnc⩾0,∀i∈I,j∈Pnc,t∈TSummarizing, the robust cardinality-constrained model is defined by the objective function of (1) and the following set of constraints:∑i∈Imijxji=1,∀j∈Pca∪Pcn∑i∈Imijξjit=1,∀j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,t∈T∑i∈Imijχjit=1,∀j∈Pnc,t∈TΓciζitc+∑j∈Pca∪Pcnr¯jtxji+∑j∈Pca∪Pcnπjitc+Γpciζitpc+∑j∈Ppca∪Ppcnr¯jtξjit+∑j∈Ppca∪Ppcnπjitpc+Γnciζitnc+∑j∈Pncr¯jtχjit+∑j∈Pncπjitnc⩽vi+∑l∈Liwitl,∀i∈I,t∈Tζitc+πjitc⩾rˆjtxji,∀i∈I,j∈Pca∪Pcn,t∈Tζitpc+πjitpc⩾rˆjtξjit,∀i∈I,j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,t∈Tζitnc+πjitnc⩾rˆjtχjit,∀i∈I,j∈Pnc,t∈T0⩽witl⩽Δil,∀i∈I,t∈T,l∈Lixji⩾x̃ji,∀i∈I,j∈Pcayjt⩾ξjit-ξjit-1,∀t∈T⧹{t1},j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,i∈Iyjt1⩾ξjit1-x̃ji,∀j∈Ppca,i∈Ixji∈{0,1},∀j∈Pca∪Pcn,i∈Iξjit∈{0,1},∀j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,t∈T,i∈Iχjit∈[0,1],∀j∈Pnc,t∈T,i∈Iyjt∈{0,1},∀j∈Pnc,t∈Tζitc⩾0,∀i∈I,t∈Tπjitc⩾0,∀i∈I,j∈Pca∪Pcn,t∈Tζitpc⩾0,∀i∈I,t∈Tπjitpc⩾0,∀i∈I,j∈Ppca∪Ppcn,t∈Tζitnc⩾0,∀i∈I,t∈Tπjitnc⩾0,∀i∈I,j∈Pnc,t∈TThe model guarantees that the optimal solution is feasible for any three subsets of patients with cardinalityΓci,ΓpciandΓnci. As also the worst subset is considered among all of the possible subsets, the solution can face the worst scenario.Computational tests have been run in order to evaluate the applicability of the proposed approach to the management of realistic HC services. Therefore, tests are run in order to evaluate the quality of solutions obtained within acceptable computational time, and the impact of such solutions when applied to realistic scenarios. Besides, we want to evaluate the impact of different degrees of robustness and to derive suggestions on how cardinality parameters have to be tuned to meet HC needs. The aim is to evaluate the performance of the robust assignment model with regard to reduction of overtime costs while preserving continuity of care where required. First, we tested our model on real life instances, in order to evaluate the impact of different levels of robustness and of other problem features, such as the required continuity of care. Then, we applied the obtained assignment on a set of sample paths.In this section, we first describe the HC provider chosen for providing data, together with the reasons of the choice (Section 3.1), then we detail the experimental setup, describing instances and sample paths (Section 3.2). Finally, computational results are reported in Section 3.4.The considered HC provider is representative of a general class of providers in terms of organization and resource planning (Chahed, Dallery, Matta, & Sahin, 2006; Chahed, Marcon, Sahin, Feillet, & Dallery, 2009). It operates in the north of Italy, covering a region of about 800km2, with about 1000 patients assisted at the same time by about 50 nurses. It manages different professional figures; however, only the assignment of nurses is analyzed in this paper as they provide the largest number of visits, manage emergencies, meet short-term demand variations, and deal with highly uncertain workloads. Furthermore, continuity of care is usually pursued for nurses. This provider has been chosen for four reasons:•The provider is one of the largest Italian public HC providers, with a complex human resource management.A part of the national standards for HC service was developed thanks to the experience conducted with the provider.The provider tries to pursue continuity of care, at least for critical patients, by preferably assigning each patient to only one reference nurse.The provider was already adopted to validate other assignment techniques (Lanzarone et al., 2012; Lanzarone & Matta, 2012).Further, a patient stochastic model is available for this provider (Lanzarone, Matta, & Scaccabarozzi, 2010) to estimate the future patients’ demands.The provider covers three independent divisions, and the analysis is carried out for the largest one, which includes 22 nurses. The skills of nurses (nurses for palliative and for non-palliative care) and their territorial distribution are taken into account. Patients are divided into two classes (palliative care and non-palliative care patients) and three geographical areas are present in the analyzed division; hence, the division consists of six districts (one for each combination of skill and territory) and the assignments are planned considering the districts as independent. The features of the considered districts, e.g., the number of nurses and their working time, are reported in Table 2.Experiments are conducted with a rolling approach over a period of 26weeks, referred to as the rolling weeks. The model is solved at the beginning of each rolling week, and 1week time slots are considered with a planning horizon covering the considered week and the next 7 ones with a look ahead perspective (i.e., 8 time slots are in T, referred to as the horizon weeks). At each rolling week, the assignments of the first horizon week are kept, and the model is solved again for the next rolling week keeping the assignments of the previous rolling weeks. This is consistent with the policy of the analyzed HC provider, where assignments are mainly decided at the beginning of the week on a weekly basis. Finally, if a patient is discharged and readmitted during the 26 rolling weeks, he/she maintains the previously assigned reference nurse.Data refers to the period from April to September 2008, which is the same time period studied in the other papers validated with this provider (Lanzarone et al., 2012; Lanzarone & Matta, 2012). The number of patients in the charge at each rolling week and their features are taken from the historical data of the provider (considering real arrivals of new patients and real discharges). In other words, the assignments are run taking into account the real mix of patients when the assignments are decided; if a patient exits during a rolling week he/she is consequently excluded from the following ones or, alternatively, if a patient enters during a rolling week he/she is considered for the next one.In addition, stochastic demandsrjtof each considered patient j in each horizon week t (i.e.,r¯jtandrˆjt) are obtained from the stochastic model proposed in Lanzarone et al. (2010). The possible discharge of a patient during slott∗of the planning horizon is represented by assumingr¯jt=rˆjt=0∀t>t∗.Concerning costscland thresholdsΔil, the current practice of the HC provider in the considered time period was not formalized by any cost function, even if the aim of the assignments was to reduce high overtimes. Thus, in our experiments, values are decided based on the salary provided for overtimes and generalizing among nurses. Ten levels are considered (l=1,…,10), the costs are assumed ascl=l∀l, and eachΔilis taken as the tenth part of the correspondingvi(Δil=0.1vi∀i,l), as different nurses may have different values ofvi.Finally, as for reassignment penaltyγ, a violation of care continuity is accepted if keeping the continuity would be too expensive. In the analyzed HC provider, the violation is accepted if keeping continuity would cause an overtime cost equal to or greater than 3 cost units. On the contrary, if the overtime cost due to the continuity of care satisfaction is equal to or lower than 2 cost units, continuity is guaranteed. Thus, an intermediate valueγ=2.5is set.The assignments at the initial week (named rolling week 0) are computed considering all patients as newly admitted ones, i.e., without an assigned nurse. It is worth noting that instances at week 0 are more computationally expensive, as the number of admitted patients is significantly higher than in other weeks. Therefore, the initialization at rolling week 0 is obtained neglecting robustness (i.e., all patients require the expected demandr¯jt) and, consequently, constraints (5) are replaced by∑j∈Pca∪Pcnr¯jtxji+∑j∈Ppca∪Ppcnr¯jtξjit+∑j∈Pncr¯jtχjit⩽vi+∑l∈Liwitl,∀i∈I,t∈TIn this way, we simulate the case in which, starting from a plan without robustness, we include robustness and observe how the quality of the assignments improves over time.Different values ofΓci,ΓpciandΓnci, of maximum demandsr¯jt+rˆjt, and different types of continuity of care are taken into account in the experiments.As mentioned, patient demand distributions are estimated with the stochastic model proposed in Lanzarone et al. (2010). Indeed, expected demandsr¯jtand maximum demandsr¯jt+rˆjtfor each patient and time slot are taken from the empirical distribution given by such stochastic model. However, these empirical distributions may have long positive tails associated with low probability, and it is useless to consider them while setting valuesrˆjt, since they may cause an excessive and unrealistic overload in the worst case. For this reason, we assume that maximum demandsr¯jt+rˆjtare taken in correspondence of a given quantile of the demand distribution, where this quantile must be close to 1. Thus, very unlikely scenarios are discarded and excessively conservative solutions are avoided. Two values are considered in the experiments, namely 0.9 and 0.8.The continuity of care requirement is determined for each patient based on his/her characteristics. Patients belong to 14 different care profiles (CPs) for both the palliative and non-palliative cases Lanzarone et al. (2010). The type of continuity of care required is decided according to the CP at the moment in which the patient is first considered (i.e., the initial CP for patients entering from rolling week 1 to 25 and the current CP for patients at week 0), based on the idea that more complex CPs require a higher continuity of care.One configuration is adopted for non-palliative patients. As for palliative patients, we know from the provider that hard continuity should be recommended, even if a partial continuity can be accepted in some cases. In addition, from the historical data, we know that partial continuity can be acceptable for about the 20% of palliative patients, even if we cannot associate this information with patients in the dataset. Hence, two different configurations are taken into account for palliative patients: either they all require hard continuity of care (optimal case in which the HC provider guarantees a hard continuity for all palliative treatments), or they require hard or partial continuity of care according to a random choice (to simulate the presence of a 20% of patients with partial continuity of care). In the latter case, denoted with “random 80% C and 20% PC”, each palliative patient is randomly considered C (with probability 0.8) or PC (with probability 0.2) for the entire care duration. The adopted continuity of care requirements for the different CPs are reported in Table 3.4A detailed description of the CPs can be found (Lanzarone et al., 2010). The division of the considered patients among the CPs can be found in the electronic companion of Lanzarone and Matta (2012), where the same instance is analyzed with a different technique.4Concerning the robustness, two values of cardinalities are considered:Γci=Γpci=Γncieither equal to 1 or 2∀i.5Integer values are taken forΓci,ΓpciandΓnci; hence,pcit,ppcitandpncitare null.5Furthermore, in order to compare the solutions with their non-robust counterparts, the case in which the robustness is always neglected at all rolling weeks from 0 to 25 is also considered for each parameter configuration. The different experimental settings generate a set of instances (Table 4), all involving the same set of patients and nurses. Each non-robust solution corresponds to 4 robust solutions; thus, the non-robust cases are reported several times in the table.The dimension of the instances is given by the number of nurses and patients. Table 2 provides all the information about nurses: number, weekly working time, skill and territory. This configuration is constant over the 26 rolling weeks. With regard to patients, their numerousness and characteristics vary depending on the specific rolling week. Hence, to derive the dimension of the problem, the characteristics of patient mix have to be detailed for each rolling week and configuration. For this purpose, Table 5gives the detailed cardinality of each set of patients.In each configuration, assignments and workloads of the first horizon weekt1of each run are taken, and the sequence of such assignments over the 25 rolling weeks is the planned solution.The planned solutions are then applied in two different cases, as proposed in the other papers whose validation is conducted with this provider (Lanzarone et al., 2012; Lanzarone & Matta, 2012). They are either applied to a set of 10 simulated sample paths or, alternatively, to the real observed values of patients’ demands from the historical data of the HC provider. The workload of each nurse over the rolling 25weeks is determined by combining the provided assignments with patients’ demands in the scenario (or with the real demands). For patients without continuity of care (NC), the per cent division among nurses is maintained while executing in the same week.The generation of sample paths consists of a mix between a Monte Carlo simulation from a semi-Markov model and the real historical data. The semi-Markov model is used for the majority of patients by modifying the approach proposed in the Markovian patient stochastic model (Lanzarone et al., 2010). The real conditions of patients are taken at the beginning of the care pathway (or at week 0 for patients already in the charge), and their requests and discharges are generated for all future weeks starting from these real conditions. Indeed, for each patient, a sample path is generated by sampling the sojourn duration in a CP, the related demand for visits at each week and the next CP. Only demands of long stay non-palliative patients are directly taken from their real historical values; these patients show a very low variability along with time, they do not represent a relevant uncertainty source, and the variability of the entire mix of patients is not reduced by this choice.If an already assigned patient is present in a week of a sample path but not in the corresponding planning, he/she is considered in the execution by taking the last information available in the previous weeks (i.e., the last nurse assigned or, in case of NC, the last percentages).This section is devoted to the analysis of results: first, results obtained by solving the optimization model are reported; then, results obtained by executing the assignments in the generated sample paths and with the real demands are detailed.The model has been implemented with OPL 5.1 and solved with CPLEX; computational tests have been run on a PC equipped with CPU Intel Core i7 1.73gigahertz and 6gigabytes of installed RAM. A 5400seconds Time Limit (TL) has been set.First, Table 6shows the computational time in seconds and the optimality gap per each rolling week and each robust configuration. Let UB be the value of the best solution found and LB the value of the best linear relaxation, the gap is defined asUB-LBLB. Besides, their average and maximum values among the rolling weeks are given, together with the number of rolling weeks in which TL is reached. Results show that the needed computational time strongly increases while increasing the value of parametersΓci,ΓpciandΓnci, or the quantile chosen for the maximum demand. The different types of continuity of care chosen for palliative patients do not seem to influence the computational effort. TL is reached only in a few cases, in all of whichΓci=Γpci=Γnci=2. However, gaps are usually limited, always being below 5.2%. As for the non robust cases I and J, all the instances are solved to optimality in less than 3seconds.To evaluate the impact of TL value, the decrease of the optimality gap over time has been studied for instances that are not solved to optimality. The obtained evolution is reported in Fig. 1for rolling week 6 of configuration B; it can be seen that increasing the computational time from 1.5 up to 10hours only slightly improves the quality of the solution. Besides, the most relevant reduction of the gap is obtained within the first hour. Similar trends are obtained in the other cases that reached TL. Hence, for the analyzed instances and the required robustness levels, the chosen TL proves to be a good compromise between quality of solutions and practical applicability in real HC providers.Table 7shows the objective function and the number of reassignments for patients with partial continuity of care over the entire planning horizon. These values are expressed in terms of minimum, maximum and average values among the rolling weeks from 1 to 25; week 0 is excluded as it refers to the non-robust initialization.The considered instances are always feasible, i.e., current workforce is able to serve the demand with the required level of robustness. Infeasibility might occur if robustness parameters are increased, and such infeasibility has to be intended as a warning about a too high robustness requirement for the current workforce. It is a choice of the HC provider how to face such situation, whether by increasing the workforce or accepting lower levels of robustness.6It is worth noting that, should the non-robust counterpart be infeasible for a given set of patients, the only option is to increase the workforce.6The objective function increases with the values ofΓci,Γpci, andΓnciboth in terms of overtime cost and number of reassignments, as the demand of the worst scenario increases and more robust solutions are selected. Furthermore, the objective function is higher if quantile of maximum demand is equal to 0.9, as maximum demand of each patient increases as well. Also the number of reassignments increases with quantile, but the variation is limited in all configurations. Obviously, value of the objective function is significantly increased with respect to the non-robust counterpart.7It is worth noting that non-robust solutions are always optimal, whereas the optimality of robust solutions is not always guaranteed as a time TL limit is set.7The ratio between maximum and expected demands in the first week of the planning horizoni.e.,r¯jt1+rˆjt1r¯jt1is taken as index of patient demand increase. This is reported in Table 8for rolling week 10, as example, in two cases: maximum demand corresponding to quantile 0.8 or to 0.9 of the corresponding distribution (Lanzarone et al., 2010). In the following weeks of planning horizon, the ratio tends to increase, because a descending trend is observed for the expected value, which is only marginally replicated by the maximum value.The overtime cost is significantly affected by the degree of robustness of the solution, as maximum demands of patients belonging toScit,SpcitandSncithave an impact on the overall workload. However, the question arises on how a robust solution behaves if no patient requires the maximum amount of care. For evaluating the expected behavior of solutions, overtime costs of the obtained assignments are recomputed with respect to the expected demandsr¯jtfor all patients. These values are reported in terms of minimum, maximum and average values among the rolling weeks from 1 to 25 in Table 9.It can be seen that robustness determines an increase in the overtime expected costs, as expected. However, it is worth noting that, when considering expected demands, the robust assignment is not significantly penalized with respect to the optimal non-robust counterpart. Indeed, overtime expected costs are always lower than twice the non-robust case.Objective function, overtime cost, overtime expected cost and cost related to the reassignments (i.e., the number of reassignments multiplied byγ) over the rolling weeks are finally shown in Fig. 2for robust configurations A and E and non-robust configuration I. Very similar trends are also observed in all other configurations. Indeed, peaks in the objective function are in the same rolling week, independent of the specific configuration; this means that they are related to patient mix rather than determined by the solution. Furthermore, for robust configurations, higher objective functions are observed in rolling weeks 1–3, which usually decrease as weeks go by, because a non robust assignment is computed for the initial rolling week 0 and the solution gradually improves.Each obtained solution is applied to 10 generated sample paths and to the real historical patients’ demands.The quality of solutions is analyzed in each district in terms of two indicators: mean overtime cost per nurse and fairness (i.e., the range between minimum and maximum utilization). Obviously, these indicators are extracted in districts where more than one nurse is present (i.e., districts NPA, PA, NPB and NPC).The mean overtime cost per nurse is computed at each rolling week as the ratio between the total cost of the provider (computed according to the same levels,cl=landΔilapplied in the planning) and the number of nurses. The same is repeated considering each district separately. As for the fairness, utilization of a nurse in a week is computed as the ratio between the workload (i.e., the number of weekly provided visits) and the availabilityvi. Then, the fairness of a district in a rolling week is the difference between maximum and minimum utilization among nurses.These two indicators are directly taken for the execution with the historical demands, whereas for sample paths the reported and analyzed indicator is the average at each rolling week among the paths. Hence, for each configuration and district, results are the list of average costs and fairnesses over the rolling weeks in two cases: executed with the historical demands or averaged among the paths. We remark that objective functions and planned costs reported in Section 3.4.1 refer to the entire planning horizon, equal to 8weeks, whereas for the execution only the first horizon week is extracted from each rolling week.Average costs are synthetically reported in terms of minimum, maximum and average values among the rolling weeks from 1 to 25 in Table 10.Synthetic results show that robust solutions perform better than their non-robust counterparts. Average overtime costs are always lower in robust solutions for both sample paths and real data. Concerning maximum costs, they are always lower in robust solutions but in three cases, i.e., configuration H for sample paths and configurations A and E for real data. Thus, robustness improves solutions allowing cost savings. To give an idea of the obtained cost saving, we can assume that one unit of cost corresponds to about 15 euros. Considering that the four districts include 20 nurses (see Table 2), that the observed period refers to 25 rolling weeks, and that all overtimes belong to the first level, each cost reduction of one unit corresponds to a global saving of 7500 euros in the period. As example, comparing solution C and the corresponding non robust solution J, a global cost saving of 13800 euros is expected with the real execution and a global cost saving of 5400 euros is expected in the average among the paths.In the analyzed instance, the two adopted values ofΓci=Γpci=Γncishow similar quality of solutions with respect to the average overtime costs for both sample paths and real data. Concerning the maximum value, a certain benefit ofΓci=Γpci=Γnci=2is observed in case of historical data. Higher values of cardinality parameters, although requiring higher computational time, seem to guarantee better solutions, in terms of behavior in the worst case. However, as computational times significantly increase withΓci=Γpci=Γnci, we can affirm that the adopted values are reliable for the considered instance and robustness level is not to be increased. Besides, we recall that the provided solutions are feasible even if at most(Γci+Γpci+Γnci)|I|patients require their maximum demandr¯jt+rˆjt. Thus, increasing too much the cardinality parameters would produce over-conservative solutions. On the contrary, if a relevant benefit was observed passing fromΓci=Γpci=Γnci=1toΓci=Γpci=Γnci=2in an instance, higher value of robustness would be worth investigating.Results about overtime costs and fairness are also detailed for each district: minimum, maximum and average values among the rolling weeks from 1 to 25 are reported in Table 11. Their trends over the weeks are plotted in Fig. 3for the sample paths, for robust configurations A and E and non-robust configuration I; similar trends are obtained in the other configurations. Plots refer to the average among the sample paths; similar behaviors are obtained with the real demands, with slightly higher oscillations from week to week.The main benefit of robustness in terms of overtime costs is observed in districts NPA and PA both for average and maximum values. A lower benefit is observed in district NPC and hardly any benefit in district NPB. It seems that higher benefits are obtained for critical patients with higher demands (i.e., palliative patients) and for higher numbers of nurses. Indeed, district NPA includes 8 nurses, NPC 5 nurses and NPB 4 nurses.Fairness shows a similar behavior. Although fairness is not considered in the objective function and costs are null for workloads belowvi, the model balances workloads among overloaded nurses (with workload abovevi) ascl<cl+1∀l∈Li. In the robust configurations, where workloads are increased due to patients inScit,SpcitandSncit, workloads are likely to be aboveviand thus well balanced. This is the reason why, even in our instances, better fairness (i.e., lower ranges) is observed in the correspondence of lower costs.The trends among the rolling weeks (Fig. 3) show higher oscillations in fairness, as it is not considered in the objective function. Furthermore, similar values of fairness are in general observed over the weeks. Overtime costs show lower oscillations, with similar behaviors among configurations; hence, they are related to patient mix rather than to the approach. In particular, the high overtime cost at rolling week 24 for NPB is always present in all robust configurations. As expected, given the planned solutions, costs are higher in the first rolling weeks, whereas they get lower along with them. Finally, it can be seen that higher costs are usually related to lower fairness (i.e., higher ranges); as example, the peak at rolling week 24 is also present in the plots of fairness.The proposed approach produces better assignments than those applied by planners. Indeed, planners did not use any quantitative management tools. They aimed at guaranteeing that continuity of care and district division are satisfied. However, due to the poor quality of the assignments, they were forced to violate the constraints in order to avoid very high workloads. Such violations may help in reducing the burnout risks, but cause a bad quality of the service provided to patients. As the necessity of violating these constraints can be associated with low quality plans, violations would be avoided if good plans are defined from the beginning. Our results have shown that the assignments computed by the proposed robust model are compatible with both the satisfaction of the constraints and acceptable costs and workloads, differently from the historical condition of workloads. Hence, such constraints can be considered as hard ones.Finally, a direct comparison with the other approaches applied to this problem (Lanzarone et al., 2012; Lanzarone & Matta, 2012) is not directly possible. Indeed, the proposed model takes into account features and requirements which are not considered in previous approaches. As example, a simplified model is considered in Lanzarone et al. (2012); in fact, the stochastic programming approach is computationally demanding, and it is not adequate for managing a full model that includes the three types of continuity of care requirement.In this paper, we apply the robust cardinality-constrained approach proposed in Bertsimas and Sim (2004) to a health care application, namely, the nurse-to-patient assignment in HC services under continuity of care requirement. Nurse-to-patient assignment in HC is a relevant yet not very studied problem in HC management, and it significantly suffers from parameters uncertainty.According to the cardinality-constrained approach, a deterministic assignment model is modified to take into account uncertainty in patients’ demands without the necessity of assuming probability distributions or deriving scenarios.The proposed model has been tested on both historical data of patients’ demands and a set of generated sample paths, and better performances of the robust model in terms of overtime costs and fairness in nurses’ workloads with respect to the non-robust counterpart have been highlighted. Moreover, computational times needed to solve the model with a weekly frequency, although sometimes not to optimality, are reasonable.Considering the real historical patients’ demands of the analyzed period, results show that, if the assignments proposed by the robust model had been applied to the demands of that period, they would have allowed the provider to obtain acceptable workloads and costs together with the full respect of the constraints (adequate continuity of care levels and division among districts). If compared to the other methodologies applied to this problem (Lanzarone et al., 2012; Lanzarone & Matta, 2012), the cardinality-constrained approach is able to solve the problem in less computational time (whereas including stochasticity with scenario generation of the stochastic programming requires a huge computational time) and with fewer assumptions on demand variability (whereas the analytical approach based on stochastic ordering requires to introduce several assumptions on the shape of density functions).The cardinality-constrained robust approach is promising, as it suites well to many health care applications, and therefore its potentiality in health care field is worth being further investigated.However, the approach has two main limits, which must be addressed. From the computational point of view, results show that there are some instances (i.e., some rolling weeks) that cannot be solved to optimality within the chosen time limit. Besides, the robust model is too computationally expensive to be applied to the initial assignment at rolling week 0, and it is likely to be computationally expensive for instances with a number of patients or nurses higher than those considered from rolling week 1 to 25. Hence, also alternative approaches are worth being investigated to deal with larger instances. In Bienstock (2007) the implementor-adversary approach is proposed: in the implementor step, the optimization problem is solved taking into account a subset of robust constraints, whereas in the adversary step new cuts are generated, which represent the worst possible realizations with respect to the current solution. In our problem, the adversary step should generate the worst possible realization of patients’ demands for the current assignments. Further, other robustness features, besides the subsets with given cardinality, could be taken into account in generating the cuts. Concerning demand uncertainty, patients’ demands are allowed to take only two values in the proposed approach, i.e., expected and maximum values. This may cause the solutions to be excessively conservative, as unlikely values may be taken into account as maximum demands. In addition, in the real practice, patients’ demands may assume different values between the expected and the maximum ones. Further, some patients may have a demand lower than the expected value. Such limits could be overcome by introducing different levels of demand for each patient, as proposed in Mattia (2012) or Bienstock (2007), rather than only the two levels considered in this work. As future work, we will apply these approaches to the considered problem.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
