@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Capturing and prioritizing students’ requirements for course design by embedding Fuzzy-AHP and linear programming in QFD

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Addresses the issue of prioritization of students’ requirements in the context of course design.Integrates DEA based LP approach with Fuzzy AHP within the QFD framework.Sensitivity analysis is employed to examine the effects of parameter values modification on the prioritization solution.Implications for course design specifications are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in service industries,Quality management,Quality Function Deployment,Education,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Customer requirements play a vital and important role in the design of products and services. Quality Function Deployment (QFD) is a popular, widely used method that helps translate customer requirements into design specifications. Thus, the foundation for a successful QFD implementation lies in the accurate capturing and prioritization of these requirements. This paper proposes and tests the use of an alternative framework for prioritizing students’ requirements within QFD. More specifically, Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (Fuzzy-AHP) and the linear programming method (LP-GW-AHP) based on Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) are embedded into QFD (QFD-LP-GW-Fuzzy AHP) in order to account for inherent subjectivity of human judgements. The effectiveness of the proposed framework is assessed in capturing and prioritizing students’ requirements regarding courses’ learning outcomes within the process of an academic course design. Sensitivity analysis evaluates the robustness of the prioritization solution and implications for course design specifications are discussed.Quality Function Deployment (QFD) is employed towards the direction of developing and delivering flawless services based on customer requirements. QFD driven by the “voice of the customer” provides a detailed structured process, utilizing a series of planning matrices – Houses of Quality (HOQ) (Cohen, 1995) for service providers to interpret customer requirements into palpable service features and communicate quality throughout the organization assuring customer satisfaction whilst maintaining a sustainable competitive advantage (Akao, 1990; Chan & Wu, 2002a, 2002b). QFD enables companies to remain competitive by systematizing communication, decreasing costs, increasing revenues, reducing new services development time, facilitating coordination, and fostering customer-oriented decisions (Andronikidis, Georgiou, Gotzamani, & Kamvysi, 2009; Bouchereau & Rowlands, 2000; Chan & Wu, 2002a, 2002b; Gonzalez, Quesada, Picado, & Eckelman, 2004; Karsak, Sozer, & Alpteki, 2002).Implementations of QFD in higher education could be classified into five categories, namely, course design and evaluation (Franceschini & Terzago, 1998; Hwarng & Teo, 2001; Shamsuddin, 2006; Wiklund & Wiklund, 1999), educational quality improvement (Koksal & Egitman, 1998; Owlia & Aspinwall, 1998), curriculum quality enhancement (Aytac & Deniz, 2005; Ermer, 1995; Gonzalez, Quesada, Gourdin, & Hartley, 2008), teaching effectiveness evaluation (Jaraiedi & Ritz, 1994; Lam & Zhao, 1998) and research planning (Chen & Bullington, 1993). A limited number of research papers can be found regarding applications of QFD in course design. Murgatroyd (1993) conducted a preliminary study to examine the applicability of QFD in designing, developing and delivering high quality distance education courses. Higgins, Smith, and Baker (1994) suggested a QFD process to revise and monitor a course in mechanical engineering at the University of Glamorgan, getting feedback from students. Mazur (1996) used QFD to design a Total Quality Management (TQM) course in the Industrial and Operations Management Department at the University of Michigan, considering both external and internal customers’ requirements. Wiklund and Wiklund (1999) used QFD and conjoint analysis to specify students’ requirements and design a course in quality technology. Hwarng and Teo (2001) introduced a three-phased – service-based QFD methodology to deliver quality programmes and services in higher education. Duffuaa, Al-Turki, and Hawsawi (2003) implemented QFD for designing a basic statistics course in a Systems Engineering setting. Shamsuddin (2006) applied QFD to interpret the voice of the customer into instructional specifications. Chan, Chan, and Ip (2006) illustrated QFD in helping vocational education course planners to develop customer-oriented courses, and Nguyen, McIntyre, and Diab (2006) developed an assessment tool based on the QFD framework to evaluate the degree of achievement of a course’s learning objectives.Capturing, prioritizing and interpreting customer requirements are critical aspects of the QFD methodology. Within the QFD analysis, various important inputs are needed in the form of judgments and assessments, while the most important of all is the “voice of the customer” i.e. the customers’ requirements and the relative importance for customer satisfaction. A particularly difficult task is the accurate customer requirements’ prioritization that entails complex context-specific decision-making. Since the prioritized customer requirements are guiding the development process of QFD, a misinterpretation may seriously compromise the service outcome.QFD major disadvantage is that it relies upon a subjective evaluation of the factors under consideration, utilizing an ordinal scale. Practitioners seek more systematic ways to prioritize requirements and propose alternative or complementary quantitative methods to be used in conjunction with QFD (Chen & Ko, 2010; Chen & Weng, 2006; Ho, 2008; Kahraman, Ertay, & Büyüközkan, 2006; Kamvysi, Gotzamani, Georgiou, & Andronikidis, 2010; Karsak et al., 2002; Kwong & Bai, 2003; Partovi & Corredoira, 2002). Especially, regarding course design, the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) has been used in conjunction with QFD (Chan, Taylor, & Ip, 2009; Franceschini & Terzago, 1998).The purpose of this paper is to offer new insights about QFD that could potentially improve the value of information generated for prioritizing customer requirements in a service context. In particular, we present a QFD framework, in an academic course design, for capturing students’ priorities and we examine the effectiveness of this framework in prioritizing their desired learning outcomes. Learning outcomes represent knowledge, skills, attitudes and habits of mind that students acquire from the learning experience (Suskie, 2004). The contribution of this work is the development of a QFD framework that enhances the handling and integration of subjective judgments when capturing the true “Voice of the Customer”, thus, facilitating the accurate prioritization of students’ requirements, and their potential interpretation into related design specifications for an academic course. In this respect, we propose and evaluate a QFD framework that builds upon a novel combination of methodological tools, that is, the integration of Fuzzy-AHP and LP-GW-AHP into QFD.The rest of this work is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the study background and identifies key customer requirements and related course processes in order to develop a customer-centered QFD course design methodology. In particular, in Section 2.1 we provide a brief review of the relevant literature on higher education quality dimensions. In Section 2.2 we provide a short analysis on multiple stakeholders in order to identify potential key customers of an academic course and to specify the QFD course design process. Section 3 analyses potential benefits for QFD from the joint utilization with AHP; highlights a number of issues regarding AHP criticism; and proposes the integration of Fuzzy AHP and a linear programming method to generate weights in the AHP (LP-GW-AHP) into QFD in order to overcome previously reported deficiencies. In Section 4 the QFD-LP-GW-Fuzzy AHP methodology is applied in the design of an academic course. In Section 5 a sensitivity analysis is conducted to monitor and verify the performance of the proposed framework. Finally, in the last section of this work, we discuss the results and point out strengths, weaknesses and potential further research ideas.The primary role of higher education institutions is to generate, enhance, preserve and disseminate knowledge (Clarke, Hough, & Stewart, 1984). However, higher education not only facilitates the acquisition of the desired professional qualifications through a strict study process but also fosters the intellectual development of students, influencing their lives in the long run (Norris, 1978). In line with industry principles, it has been suggested that the ultimate goal of higher education should be the development of qualified graduates whose intellectual and practical skills could contribute to optimal job performance (Barnett, 1992; Worthen & Sanders, 1973). Students are no longer viewed as passive recipients of the educational process who absorb information in an uncritical and non-analytical fashion, but as active learners, engage in deep and profound learning (Mizikaci, 2006).Although, various definitions present conceptual similarities, there seems to be no agreement on the definition of service quality (Deming, 1986; Ghobadian, Speller, & Jones, 1994; Grönroos, 1984; Juran, Gryna, & Bingham, 1974; Lewis & Booms, 1983; Parasuraman, Zeithaml, & Berry, 1985; Zeithaml, Parasuraman, & Berry, 1990). Likewise, education quality is a rather indeterminate and contentious concept (Cheng & Tam, 1997; Pounder, 1999), for which it is difficult to find consensus on a single definition regardless of its growing popularity in higher education policy and practice (Owlia & Aspinwall, 1996). Given the pluralism of definitions, Green (1994) stated that since quality is a relative concept where different stakeholders assess the importance of quality dimensions according to their particular interests and motivations, the best action is to define the criteria that each stakeholder utilizes while evaluating quality and to consider the conflicting views when quality assessment is undertaken. Taking into consideration the scholars’ diverse conceptions and stakeholders’ different perceptions of education quality, it has been suggested that there are alternative strategies to achieve it (Cheng & Tam, 1997). QFD is a well-known method that is successful in designing high quality services with reported results in customer satisfaction (Mazur, 1997; Stuart & Tax, 1996) and it is also applicable in educational settings (Aytac & Deniz, 2005; Ermer, 1995; Koksal & Egitman, 1998; Lam & Zhao, 1998). It is very powerful in building a customer-focused culture that will ensure customer satisfaction and in this respect it can be used in managing and delivering high quality educational programmes and services (Aytac & Deniz, 2005; Gonzalez et al., 2008; Hwarng & Teo, 2001). One of its key advantages is the prioritization of criteria that each stakeholder utilizes when assessing education quality. In this paper, we utilize QFD in conjunction with quantitative methods to prioritize requirements in an educational setting.Considering an academic course as a type of service offered by higher education institutions (Yeo, 2008), one can easily observe that it encompasses all the salient traits of a service: intangibility, inseparability of production and consumption, heterogeneity, perishability (Owlia and Aspinwall; 1996; Shank, Walker, & Hayes, 1995). Due to these service-oriented features of educational services, quality cannot be assessed objectively (Patterson & Johnson, 1993) and consequently, the design of a course is a complex and challenging activity.When a Total Quality Management philosophy like QFD is utilized in designing and delivering quality services, the first step is usually the identification of the customer (Harvey & Langley, 1995). In an educational setting, while students are perhaps the most obvious customers, the customer base involves a broader set of interested parties i.e. faculty members, administrative staff, industry, parents, and the society. Drawing an analogy between industry and higher education, customer-orientation puts emphasis upon whether educational processes accomplish their purposes in ways that satisfy the requirements of involved stakeholders. Owlia and Aspinwall (1996) stated that stakeholders might perceive quality in a disparate way and likely, they prioritize these different notions of quality according to their particular interests and motivations. The existence of multiple and competing customers is also related to the issue that different aspects of educational processes serve different customers (Downey, Frase, & Peters, 1994; Kanji, Malek, & Tambi, 1999; Reavill, 1998). Therefore, in order to develop high quality academic courses, it is important to identify educational processes’ customers, specify their requirements, and satisfy them.Downey et al. (1994) and Owlia and Aspinwall (1997) defined the student as the primary customer of the education system. Although at the micro level of a course, there are multiple stakeholders who benefit from it, the direct beneficiaries are the students who take a course. An academic course can be identified as a system of learning objectives, covered topics, lectures, instructional methods, assignments and students’ evaluation processes, which is developed through the complementary educational processes of teaching and learning. Hewitt and Clayton (1999) stated that the key participants of the teaching and learning process are undoubtedly the faculty members and students. They also reported students’ potential employers as the other significant stakeholders. Marzo, Pedraja, and Rivera (2007) classified stakeholders as external and internal customers according to the process they are involved in. They concluded that in the learning process, students are the internal customers, while employers of university graduates and society in general, are the external ones. In the teaching process, they identified students as the external customers while faculty members, administrative and service staff as the internal ones. Hwarng and Teo (2001) used Juran’s Triple Role (Juran, 1982) concept to determine the various roles of higher education customers and specified students as the primary customers of a course. Thus, this study concentrates on students who are considered to be key players in an academic course context. Therefore, our efforts focus on defining course quality from a students’ viewpoint.The dynamic participation of customers in the design of educational processes provides guidelines for improvement initiatives (Hwarng & Teo, 2001). Taking into consideration that within each student takes place a synergism of intellect, emotions, skills, spirit, and values, it could be argued that students are essentially producers of their own education and responsible for their own development. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that students’ active participation in course design and delivery is critical for the potential success of a course. A course should be planned and performed in a way that facilitates students’ learning, encouraging them to adopt a deeper approach to learning.By adopting the classical organization operation system approach (Deming, 1993; Slack, Chambers, & Johnston, 2004; Tenner & Detoro, 1992), education can be modeled as an input-process-output system providing services that completely satisfy both internal and external stakeholders’ expectations (Cheng, 1995). In a course context, the term “input” corresponds to the entry requirements; the term “service outcome” can be translated to “learning outcomes” and the term “service process” to “learning and teaching activities”. Since, the perceived service quality is influenced both by the “service outcome” and the “service process” (Ghobadian et al., 1994), the focus is on the quality of the outcome and the critical processes of teaching and learning. Hence, learning outcomes provide an ideal starting point for designing a student-centered academic course.Mintz (1997) criticized course designs where the producers of the course are usually responsible for its planning without questioning potential students. The alternative approach is suggesting the alignment of learning outcomes with learning and teaching activities (Biggs, 2003; Suskie, 2004). Consequently, the first step in a QFD course design process is to specify and prioritize learning outcomes according to students’ preferences. The second step concerns the planning of “learning and teaching activities”, based on the prioritized learning outcomes. In the first HOQ students are asked to make pairwise comparisons between each pair of learning outcomes and to express their preference in order to produce the rating order of learning outcomes. The obtained prioritization reveals students’ desire for intellectual development, professional qualifications, employability and academic standing. Since learning and teaching activities should be aligned with learning outcomes, an academic course design that facilitates a more coherent learning experience requires the accomplishment of a second HOQ. In the second HOQ, the prioritized learning outcomes are used as input. A group of learning and teaching activities affecting learning outcomes are identified, analyzed and finally prioritized in order to design educational processes and to maximize student satisfaction. The whole QFD process is illustrated in Fig. 1. The goals are: (a) to obtain student feedback for improvement purposes and based on that (b) to provide a clearly defined methodology to design learning and teaching processes that persistently meet students’ learning requirements.Although, it is clear that the academic course design is not completed when the learning outcomes are weighted, for the purposes of the present study, we concentrate on the first HOQ since the aim is to identify the importance of various learning outcomes from a student’s viewpoint. The establishment of the “Voice of the Customer” regarding key customers is one of the most crucial issues in QFD methodology (Mazur, 1993), given that their requirements determine the success or failure of a service. Our objective is to demonstrate the implementation of QFD utilizing LP-GW-Fuzzy AHP methodology, and investigate the effectiveness of this framework in prioritizing learning outcomes.Reported limitations of QFD (Andronikidis et al., 2009; Bouchereau & Rowlands, 2000) prompted the need for improvements by incorporating other analytical tools such as the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP). Specifically, QFD is a planning and development support method, powerful in designing high-quality services (Mazur, 2008). On the other hand, AHP is a versatile and widely used decision making method (Ho, 2008; Madu & Georgantzas, 1991; Shahin & Mahbod, 2007; Zhou, Ang, & Poh, 2006) that can effectively support decision making by offering a comprehensive, systematic and rational framework for ranking a set of alternatives in the presence of multiple, usually conflicting criteria (Lam & Zhao, 1998; Saaty, 1980; Saaty, 1990). Although QFD assures that the “voice of the customer” is incorporated into all phases of service development, it is still possible to fail in capturing actual customers’ preferences and thus fail in translating them into measurable service attributes. Chan and Wu (2005) stressed that the “voice of the customer” contains ambiguity and multiplicity of meaning because not everyone has the same perception of a particular linguistic description. Moreover, QFD is mainly a qualitative tool (Bouchereau & Rowlands, 2000), which by design uses simple qualitative inputs and judgments in interpreting data. AHP’s major strength is that it models human thinking by breaking an intricate decision problem to its fundamental components, prioritizing decision alternatives through a series of pairwise comparisons (Karsak et al., 2002; Saaty, 1980, 1990, 2000; Salo & Hämäläinen, 1997). Furthermore, it can integrate decision elements that are measured on different scales or they are intangible, including numeric, descriptive, and categorical data (Saaty, 2000, 2006; Saaty & Vargas, 2001; Wedley, 1990). Finally, since it allows quantified judgments to be tested for consistency, it appears that AHP integration within QFD is justified.Several authors raised questions about the validity of AHP. In this work, a framework based on concepts from Fuzzy Theory and Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA, Boussofiane, Dyson, & Thanassoulis, 1991; Thanassoulis; 2001) is introduced to deal with reported shortcomings of AHP and especially, to manage the inherent subjectivity of human judgements and replace the eigenvalue method (EV) in the QFD framework. In particular, we propose the integration of Fuzzy-AHP and the linear programming method LP-GW-AHP into QFD (LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP). To overcome the intrinsic bias of human judgments, which sometimes conventional AHP cannot effectively take into account, triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs) are introduced in the pairwise comparison matrices, whereas the LP-GW-AHP method is used for the derivation of the priority vector.As mentioned earlier, customers’ preferences are characterized by vagueness and diversity of meaning and as a result, in many cases, precise numbers fail to express the subjectivity and elusiveness of decision-making. A Fuzzy AHP approach could accommodate the potential uncertainty in the subjective judgements of customers. Zadeh (1965) introduced fuzzy set theory in decision making, while one of the earliest studies in Fuzzy AHP is due to Van Laarhoven and Pedrycz (1983). Since then, several Fuzzy AHP applications appeared in the literature (for example, Buckley, 1985; Chen, 1996; Kahraman et al., 2006; Kwong & Bai, 2002, 2003; Promentilla, Furuichi, Ishii, & Tanikawa, 2008).Hosseinian, Navidi, and Hajfathaliha (2012) proposed a linear programming model based on DEA to generate weights of alternatives using the values from AHP judgment matrices (LP-GW-AHP method). A key feature of the LP-GW-AHP method is that it solves only one LP model for deriving local weights from one or multiple comparison matrices and it does not require normalizing the derived weight vector. To our knowledge, the idea of combining QFD with Fuzzy-AHP and LP-GW-AHP (namely, LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP) is novel, and it is proposed in this paper as an alternative framework to QFD-crisp AHP method for constructing the relationship matrices of HOQ. The implementation of QFD embedded with LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP is evaluated utilizing data from a higher education setting.In this study, we focus on expectations and preferences of a particular customer type in higher education, namely, undergraduate business students. First and fourth-year university students of business administration were asked to express their preference on the expected learning outcomes in selected courses. The objective was to identify desirable learning outcomes based on what students expect to learn, understand, and be able to do by the end of a course and to prioritize learning outcomes in accordance to their requirements.Our application utilized data collected from the following sources: (a) desktop research on relevant literature; (b) a focus group consisting of four students, three professors and three potential employers who cooperate with the university’s placement office; and (c) a questionnaire survey distributed to a class of 85 undergraduate business students, yielding 60 usable questionnaires.Initially, learning outcomes were obtained through the study of relevant literature and syllabi from nine leading UK universities taking into consideration the aim and the nature of studies in a business department (Allan, 1996; Allan et al., 1994; Bloom, Engelhart, Furst, Hill, & Krathwohl, 1956; Carter, 1985; Franceschini & Terzago, 1998; Hwarng & Teo, 2001; Shamsuddin, 2006; Wiklund & Wiklund, 1999). Data from focus group confirmed and refined the findings of the previous step. Finally, affinity diagrams were employed to group learning outcomes. As a result, three main categories were obtained: Subject-based Knowledge, Generic Academic Skills, and Key Transferable Skills. Subject-based knowledge is divided into two sub-categories: Theory-based Knowledge and Practical-based Knowledge. Analytical, Synthetic, and Critical thinking skills are under the umbrella of Generic Academic Skills. Key Transferable Skills comprise Communication Skills, IT Skills, Problem Solving and Decision Making Skills, Planning-Organizational and Time Management Skills, Teamwork-Leadership and Negotiation Skills, and Information Gathering-Research Skills. The final list comprised: Theory-based Knowledge, Practical-based Knowledge, Generic Academic Skills, and Key Transferable Skills.The survey instrument was a self-administered questionnaire utilizing short, clear and easy to understand questions. Questions required students to make pairwise comparisons among learning outcomes. Respondents were given verbal and written instructions in case they required further clarifications. Following the standard approach of students’ evaluation of teaching questionnaires (SET), the participation was voluntary and anonymous in order to enhance responsiveness. The questionnaires were distributed to first and fourth-year students in order to account for potential differences in the way students evaluate and rank learning outcomes. Students’ expectations are an indication of their motivation towards learning within higher education (Kember, Ho, & Hong, 2010). It has been suggested that freshmen may have varied expectations regarding outcomes of their education and these may influence and guide them to choose an academic discipline in an attempt to align personal abilities, interests, and personality with a specific university degree (Pike, 2006). However, the expectations of first-year students are not always in line with those of fourth-year students. The potential gap in students’ expectations on entering higher education and their experiences after four years of study may affect the way they prioritize learning outcomes. After data collection and evaluation, the next step requires structuring the HOQ. Table 1illustrates the resulting relationship matrix (HOQ) utilizing QFD-LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP framework. Students’ groups are presented in the first column and the learning outcomes are shown in columns 2–5.The relative importance ratings of the above relationship matrix are computed using LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP. In particular, LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP was employed in order to prioritize learning outcomes with respect to each group of students (first-year and fourth year students). In the following subsections (1)–(6), the analytic description of integrating LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP with QFD is demonstrated in a step by step format. In these steps, DEA replaces the eigenvalue method in Fuzzy-AHP. It is noted that steps 1, 2 and 3 are identical in both methodologies.(1)Structuring the hierarchyThe framework (QFD-LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP) decomposes the problem of prioritizing learning outcomes into a hierarchy with three layers: the “goal” layer containing the goal element, which is “delivering an academic course of high quality”; the second level layer comprises the two students’ groups based on the year of study; finally, the “criteria” layer consists of the four learning outcomes.(2)Gathering input data by making pairwise comparisonsThe input data from the field survey were used to formulate the relationship matrices. Students expressed their preferences on all pairs of learning outcomes via linguistic variables (Table 2).Then, the linguistic data were translated both in crisp number sets according to the usual nine-point AHP scale (AHP method) and in fuzzy sets (Fuzzy AHP method). In the latter case, we adopted triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs) to model the imprecise preference relations between learning outcomes. The first two columns of Table 2 represent the verbal definition and the corresponding numerical intensity of the nine-point scale (Saaty, 1980), whereas, the last two columns illustrate the “fuzzified” AHP scale and its reciprocal values (as calculated in subsection 2.1). Because of their computational simplicity the use of TFNs is often more convenient in applications (Giachetti & Young, 1997; Moon & Kang, 2001; Yang, Wang, & Wen, 2008). The incorporation of TFNs in our analysis is described in subsection 2.1.(2.1)Incorporating triangular fuzzy numbers in the analysisA triangular fuzzy number (TFN),M∼onR(Mikhailov & Tsvetinov, 2004; Zimmerman, 1991) is provided by its membership functionμM∼(x):U⊆R→[0,1]which is linear piecewise continuous as:μM∼(x)=xm-l-lm-l,x∈[l,m],xm-u-um-u,x∈[m,u],0,otherwise,where l and u represent the lower and upper values, of the support ofM∼respectively and m is the modal value ofM∼. The support ofM∼is the set of elementsx∈U/l≺x≺uIn this respect,M∼is denoted by the triplet (l, m, u).Alternatively (Chen, 2009; Kwong & Bai, 2002; Zimmerman, 1991), a TFN can be characterized using the confidence interval for a given α coefficient as:∀α∈[0,1]a=la-lm-la=u-uau-m⇔la=(m-l)a+lua=-(u-m)a+u⇒M∼a=[la,ua]=[(m-l)a+l,-(u-m)a+u]∀a∈[0,1]whereM∼αis the α-cut set of the fuzzy numberM∼(i.e. the crisp set which is made up of all the elements of the set U, whose membership grades inM∼are equal or greater than α,M∼α={x∈U/μM∼(x)⩾a}). For purposes of clarity, Fig. 2illustratesM∼.Based on the above, a parameter δ is defined to express the judgment’s degree of fuzziness or the spread of a fuzzy number, whereδ=m-l=u-m(Felix, Chan, & Qi, 2003; Promentilla et al., 2008). Using appropriate values for δ, we can decide about the suitable degree of fuzziness for our judgments. In particular, δ=1 implies moderate fuzziness, δ=2 significant fuzziness and δ=0 is not a fuzzy number. Essentially, crisp AHP is a special case of fuzzy AHP for δ=0. Zhu, Jing, and Chang (1999), suggested that only 0.5⩽δ⩽1 is a proper term. The chosen value of δ for the present implementation was equal to 1. Given a modal value m, the fuzzy number that represents the fuzzy judgment is defined by (m−δ,m,m+δ) and its reciprocal fuzzy number is denoted by (1m+δ,1m,1m-δ). By setting the degree of fuzziness δ equal to 1, the lower and upper bounds of the scale correspond to 1 and 10 respectively and considering the confidence interval at a given coefficient α, the following equations are used for the fuzzification of AHP’s nine-point scale:(1)1̃α=[1,2-α]1̃a-1=[1/(2-α),1]2̃α=[1+α,3-α]2̃a-1=[1/(3-α),1/(1+α)]3̃α=[2+α,4-α]3̃a-1=[1/(4-α),1/(2+α)]4̃α=[3+α,5-α]4̃a-1=[1/(5-α),1/(3+α)]5̃α=[4+α,6-α]5̃a-1=[1/(6-α),1/(4+α)]6̃α=[5+α,7-α]6̃a-1=[1/(7-α),1/(5+α)]7̃α=[6+α,8-α]7̃a-1=[1/(8-α),1/(6+α)]8̃α=[7+α,9-α]8̃a-1=[1/(9-α),1/(7+α)]9̃α=[8+α,10-α]9̃a-1=[1/(10-α),1/(8+α)]As can be seen, TFNs are utilized at various α levels (0⩽α⩽1). The interval of a coefficient α expresses our degree of confidence in fuzzy assessments. A larger α value indicates a more confident evaluation, suggesting that the assessments are closer to the most likely value, i.e. the modal value of the fuzzy scale. Lack of confidence over the subjective judgment is implied by α=0, considering the full range of the fuzziness. By setting α=0 and using the above equations, the resulting nine-point fuzzy scale for pairwise comparisons has been provided in the last two columns of Table 2 and their membership function is represented in Fig. 3(Kwong & Bai, 2003; Lin, 2010; Promentilla et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2008).(3)Constructing comparison matricesThe judgment matrices were formed using pairwise comparisons provided by the responding students. Since there are two groups of students – decision makers (first and fourth year of study) each group comprising 30 persons respectively, it was necessary to merge preferences for each group into one judgement matrix. Each row and column of the judgment matrices corresponded to a learning outcome. After converting all linguistic variables of pairwise judgements into fuzzy triangular numbers, the geometric mean was employed to merge individual subjective judgments and to structure the comparison matrices (Kwong & Bai, 2002). As a result, two judgment matrices were constructed, one for each group, represented in Table 3. For example, in the first year students’ matrix, the entry that lies at the intersection of Theory-based Knowledge and Key Transferable Skills indicates the fuzzy triangular number that is assigned to express the intensity of students’ preference of Key Transferable Skills over Theory-based Knowledge. That is, the value of 0.3392 stands for the lower bound of the TFN, 0.5557 represents the upper bound, and 0.3992 corresponds to the modal value.(4)Estimating the index of optimismThe subjective preferences of the fuzzy pairwise judgement matrices are converted to crisp values by estimating the degree of optimism of the students (Kwong & Bai, 2002; Promentilla et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2008). The index of optimism μ, provided by the following convex combination, is used to measure the degree of optimism (Lee, 1999):(2)αˆija=μaijua+(1-μ)aijla,∀μ∈[0,1]A higher value of μ corresponds to a higher degree of optimism. In practical applications, the values 0, 0.5 and 1 are often used to indicate pessimistic, moderate or optimistic views of the evaluator, respectively. In this sense, optimistic evaluators are apt to prefer higher values in their fuzzy assessments; moderate evaluators tend not to show particular preference, whereas, pessimistic evaluators tend to favour lower values. By setting μ=0.5 and using Eq. (2) the fuzzy comparison matrices are transformed to the following crisp (Table 4). For example, in the fourth year students’ matrix, the cell of Theory-based Knowledge and Generic Academic Skills denotes a crisp value of 0.4046 that represents the strength of the relationship between Generic Academic Skills and Theory-based Knowledge.(5)Utilizing a linear programming method based on DEA (LP-GW-AHP) to estimate the relative weights of the decision elementsIn the proposed QFD methodology, the LP-GW-AHP method of Hosseinian et al. (2012) is used to derive relative importances of learning outcomes. The linear programming model for the local weights derivation from a pairwise comparison matrix is the following:(3)MaxZSubject to(3.1)xi⩾Z,i=1,…,n(3.2)∑j=1naijyj-xi=0,i=1,…,n(3.3)∑i=1nxi=1(3.4)yi-1βxi⩾0,i=1,…,n(3.5)yi-1nxi⩽0,i=1,…,n,xi,yj⩾0;i=1,…,n,andj=1,…,nwhere xiare the local weights for learning outcomes, yjare the outputs weights which are determined by the linear programming model and aij(i, j=1,…,n) are the elements of the pairwise comparison matrix. The constraints (3.4) and (3.5) denote assurance regions, (Wang, Chin, & Poon, 2008), and β is determined by Eq. (4):(4)β=minmaxi1ri∑j=1naijrj,maxi1ci∑j=1naijcjwhere r1,…,rnand c1,…,cnare the row and column sums of the corresponding pairwise comparison matrix A=(aij)n×n.(6)Obtaining overall weightsThe local weights of each learning outcome for first and fourth-year students along with the weights for each group are used to calculate the final importance ratings of learning outcomes. The final weights were provided in the last row of the HOQ of Table 1.The QFD-LP-GW-Fuzzy AHP produced the prioritization and importance weights of the learning outcomes appearing in the first row of Table 5. Specifically, “Key transferable skills” was the learning outcome with the highest preference with a percentage priority of 31.67%. The second learning outcome in ranking is “Practical-based Knowledge”, with a percentage priority of 30.98%. “Generic Academic skills”, follows with a percentage priority of 26.02% and finally, “Theory-based Knowledge” was found to be the learning outcome with the lowest preference value, at 11.33%.A more thorough observation of the HOQ of Table 1 reveals that first-year students provided higher priority ratings to “Practical-based Knowledge” over “Key Transferable skills”, while fourth-year students showed the highest preference for “Key Transferable skills”. The results are in line with the hypothesis that possible differences exist amongst students of different year of study in prioritizing learning outcomes. It is therefore confirmed that diverse student perceptions, as a result of what they have previously experienced in their student life, led to different evaluation of learning outcomes.Initially, in order to evaluate the quality of the relative weights of the learning outcomes derived by the QFD-LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP framework we utilized the Fitting Performance index (Hosseinian et al., 2012). The Fitting Performance index is measured by the following Euclidean distance equation:FP=1n2∑i=1n∑j=1naij-wiwj2where αijare the elements of the crisp comparison matrices and wi, wjare the derived weights of comparison matrices. As illustrated in Table 6the Fitting Performance indices of the QFD-LP-GW-Fuzzy AHP relative weights are acceptable, taking into account the incorporation of fuzziness.To gain further insight on the quality of the relative weights obtained from this framework, we extended the evaluation process by employing sensitivity analysis. In this respect, we systematically changed the value of the index of optimism, set different values at confidence interval and considered different degrees of fuzziness in order to determine the effects of such changes. More specifically, we employed sensitivity analysis to study the variation in the relative and final weights of learning outcomes attributed to alterations in the value of the index of optimism μ, different α-cuts and various degrees of fuzziness δ. This analysis helped to assess the robustness of results and investigated how the selected μ values affected outcomes. Furthermore, it examined at what extent the proposed prioritizing method is independent of the α-cut concept and the effect of fuzziness of the judgments.Since μ expresses the decision maker’s attitude towards risk a larger value of μ suggests a higher degree of optimism. Sensitivity analysis was conducted by setting δ=1, α=0 and μ equal to 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9 and 1. Figs. 4 and 5illustrate the derived relative and final weights of learning outcomes at different μ values. At values 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 the corresponding linear programming models were infeasible because the maximum eigenvalue of the specific defuzzified judgment matrices was less than n (n, the dimension of the matrix) and the judgment matrices did not satisfy the cardinal consistency property αij×αjk=αik. It is worth noting that the concept of inconsistency in human judgment within the framework of Fuzzy AHP is independent from the concept of fuzziness in judgment. When a decision maker provides consistent pairwise comparisons then the resulting comparison matrix satisfies the cardinal consistency property αij×αjk=αik. Nevertheless, it is possible for a decision maker to express highly inconsistent preferences with a very low level of fuzziness. Fuzziness is associated with the concept of graded membership, which can be interpreted as the degree of truth (Bojadziev & Bojadziev, 1997).Overall, results indicated that the selected range of the degree of optimism does not alter the prioritization of learning outcomes; it influences slightly their weights, when the cardinal consistency property is satisfied. As seen in Figs. 4 and 5, the rank order of learning outcomes does not change at various μ values. In the case when the coefficient α equals to 0 and μ approaches 1, decision makers express their preference by utilizing higher values of the α-cut interval; when μ approaches 0 decision makers show their inclination by using lower values. In particular, optimistic students are apt to rate with higher values their preferred alternatives when they make pairwise comparisons, while pessimistic students tend to give lower values on the nine-point scale. However, the variation in judgment of optimistic and pessimistic students does not influence significantly the final importance ratings of learning outcomes. Hence, the derived relative and final weights of learning outcomes are highly robust, which implies that even in the case of choosing a range of different degrees of optimism the validity of the results is not threatened. Figs. 4 and 5 confirm the degree of robustness of the proposed prioritization framework.As mentioned earlier, the α-cut concept represents the evaluator’s degree of confidence in fuzzy assessments. For a given δ, any deviation of α from 1 (i.e. <1) represents a level of uncertainty or a reduced level of confidence. Notably, α-cut can be viewed as a stable or fluctuating condition. At the value of zero, it implies lack of confidence and hence utilizes the full range of uncertainty-fuzziness, while higher values of α represent a more confident evaluator. The coefficient of the confidence interval reaches 1 when the judgment approaches the modal value of the fuzzy scale. When α=1, the judgment is equal to the geometric mean of the modal value of the fuzzy scale. The coefficient α can take any number between 0 and 1, and initially, sensitivity analysis was applied by setting δ=1, μ=0.5 and α equal to 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1, respectively. As can be seen in Fig. 6, when α takes values between 0 and 0.4 first year students give slightly higher priority ratings to “Practical-based Knowledge” over “Key Transferable skills”, whereas when α takes values between 0.6 and 1 (i.e. students assessments are closer to the most likely value of m) “Key Transferable skills” becomes the learning outcome with the highest preference. Fourth year students offer the same prioritization at all confidence levels. Fig. 7shows that although the incorporation of various degrees of confidence slightly affects the final weights of learning outcomes, the rank order remains stable. This analysis assesses the extent of robustness of results with respect to different α-cuts.Finally, we turn our attention to parameter δ, which is defined as the absolute distance from the lower bound (l) to the modal value (m) or from the modal value (m) to the upper bound (u) of a fuzzy number. Larger values of δ represent higher level of fuzziness: δ=1 implies moderate fuzziness, δ=2 significant fuzziness, whereas δ=0 defines crisp numbers. According to Zhu et al. (1999) a value of δ>1 increases the degree of fuzziness and decreases the degree of confidence. As a result, it has been suggested that usual values for δ can lie between 0.5 and 1. Within the usual range of δ the results remained stable. Nevertheless, with the intention to further explore the effect of judgement fuzziness, we increased the degree of fuzziness from δ=1 to δ=2, for the same decision structure and linguistic judgments. The assignment of δ values outside the usual range, will provide evidence to support (or drop) the hypothesis that only extreme levels of fuzziness might influence the prioritization results. The new membership function of the nine-point fuzzy scale is given in Fig. 8.As it is shown in Figs. 9 and 10, there exist differences in relative and final weights of learning outcomes when the spread of a fuzzy number is increased to δ=2. More specifically, first year students give higher priority ratings to “Practical-based Knowledge” over “Key Transferable skills”, whereas fourth year students continue favour “Key Transferable skills” (Fig. 9). As Fig. 10 demonstrates, only extreme fuzziness influences the degree of dominance of learning outcomes. In particular, “Practical-based Knowledge” becomes the learning outcome with the highest preference, while “Key Transferable skills” follow. Overall, sensitivity analysis results confirm the robustness of the proposed framework within the acceptable range of fuzziness (0.5, 1).This work proposed a framework for interpreting and prioritizing customer preferences in the context of higher education. Limited cognitive processes, incomplete information and finite amount of time, prevent decision-makers from adequately scrutinize all the factors in a complex decision-making process. The interpretation and prioritization of important but ill-defined customer requirements are essential steps in order to take further actions to improve the quality of an offered service. Without a well-structured approach, practitioners are likely to fail translating the “voice of the customer” into measurable service attributes, resulting in choices founded on a subset of important criteria with limited insight on their relative importance and interactions. Since weight determination and ranking primarily depend on subjective and often vague reasoning of customers, the utilization of crisp values in pairwise comparisons often fails to capture the essence of human judgment. A QFD framework, integrated with concepts from fuzzy theory and linear programming was introduced, to deal with QFD-AHP shortcomings, in order to prioritize customer preferences and determine proper importance levels. Specifically, Fuzzy-AHP and the linear programming method – LP-GW-AHP – (LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP) were integrated into QFD, aiming to overcome the inherent subjectivity of human judgements. To our knowledge, there is no evidence of the joint use of QFD with Fuzzy-AHP and LP-GW-AHP. The proposed framework has two advantages over previous QFD frameworks: the Fuzzy AHP approach accommodates potential uncertainty of subjective judgements; the DEA based linear programming method is at least equally successful to the eigenvalue method and more easily applicable since it requires solving only one LP model to produce the importance weights. The presented QFD framework takes advantage of the QFD-LP-GW-Fuzzy-AHP incorporation, and enhances the integration of subjective judgments when capturing and prioritizing students’ requirements regarding learning outcomes. In addition, sensitivity analysis is readily applicable to inform practitioners and academics about the ranges of tolerance and provides guidance regarding the robustness of the results.Moreover, a number of interesting practical implications emerge from this study. In a student oriented academic course, learning and teaching activities should be aligned with learning outcomes. The proposed framework provides a prioritization of learning outcomes that echoes students’ need to evade the narrow boundaries of theory-based knowledge and articulate additional important skills. “Key transferable skills” in combination with “practical-based knowledge” are regarded as essential features of the educational process enhancing students’ employability. Their vital role in preparing students for the transition from higher education to labour market should be appreciated from higher education institutions. Results suggest that the development of “Key transferable skills” and “Practical-based knowledge” beyond the necessary “Theory-based knowledge” should be key learning objectives. They provide a foundation for students’ future careers and professional development. In several academic courses, the development of subject knowledge is considered as a precondition for entering professional life, while the development of other skills, such as transferable and generic academic skills is not adequately catered for. Therefore, it is crucial in course design to establish the right balance between core academic subject knowledge and employability skills. In this respect, the proposed integrated QFD framework that captures the corresponding true “voice of the customer” could help instructors in designing courses more effectively.An academic course design project requires further steps following the prioritization of learning outcomes. These outcomes could be regarded as the destination rather than the path. They facilitate a more coherent learning experience given that congruence with educational activities is secured. Thus, learning goals that adequately reflect learning outcomes could help in designing educational processes. In this respect, a future research endeavor would augment the present QFD framework to design educational activities according to the prioritized outcomes and help to select between alternative educational activities. Also, it will be of great interest to study how students of different disciplines prioritize learning outcomes and conduct a comparative analysis in order to detect potential differences. As a final point, educational organisations’ management could utilize the proposed framework to increase the degree of confidence in strategic planning decisions regarding curriculum design and structure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
