@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Empirical properties of group preference aggregation methods employed in AHP: Theory and evidence

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Aggregation methods used in the AHP are classified on the basis of algebraic properties.Matrix differential analysis shows that different methods have similar empirical properties.Cognitive distortions in group decision-making AHP are more important than random errors.Theoretical results are supported by experimental evidence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Group decisions,Matrix differentials,Separable representations,Cognitive distortions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study various methods of aggregating individual judgments and individual priorities in group decision making with the AHP. The focus is on the empirical properties of the various methods, mainly on the extent to which the various aggregation methods represent an accurate approximation of the priority vector of interest. We identify five main classes of aggregation procedures which provide identical or very similar empirical expressions for the vectors of interest. We also propose a method to decompose in the AHP response matrix distortions due to random errors and perturbations caused by cognitive biases predicted by the mathematical psychology literature. We test the decomposition with experimental data and find that perturbations in group decision making caused by cognitive distortions are more important than those caused by random errors. We propose methods to correct the systematic distortions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) of Saaty (1977, 1980, 1986) is a technique for establishing priorities in multi-criteria decision making. It can be applied to both individual and group decisions. At the individual level, the procedure starts with the decision maker measuring on a ratio scale the relative dominance between any pair of items relevant in a decision problem: namely, for any pair of items i and j from a set of size n, the decision maker elicits the ratio wi/wj, in terms of underlying priority weights w=(w1,…,wn)T, with w1>0,…,wn>0. The procedure gives rise to n(n−1)/2 subjective ratio assessments, which the AHP conveniently stores in a subjective comparison matrix A=[αij]. Various prioritization procedures can then be used to extract the priority vector from A. However, due to inconsistencies in the elicitation, the theoretical vector w cannot be known exactly, but only some perturbed vector u can be obtained. Therefore, a fundamental question in the AHP concerns the extent to which the vector u provided by different prioritization methods represents an accurate approximation of the vector w of interest.When applied to group decision making, several additional normative and behavioral issues arise, which include considerations about: the nature of the group formation and the relations between its members, the level of aggregation, the averaging methods. In general, it should be clear that aggregating decision makers’ preferences, whether in the form of judgments or priorities, is not the same as aggregating criteria. In Section 2 of the paper we will review the main important issues arising in the literature on the AHP-group aggregation and will survey several methods of aggregation.1There is indeed a large literature on AHP for group decisions, with classical and more recent writings, including Aczél and Saaty (1983), Saaty (1989), Dyer and Forman (1992), Ramanathan and Ganesh (1994), Forman and Peniwati (1998), Van Den Honert (2001), Escobar and Moreno-Jiménez (2007), Dong, Zhang, Hong, and Xu (2010). (More references in Section 2.)1One feature of the aggregating procedures which in our view still needs further scrutiny concerns the empirical performance of the various methods. In this paper we are concerned with the distance that, depending on the aggregation techniques, there is between the theoretical vector w of interest and its approximation u. Often, in the AHP, the quality of the approximation u is assessed on the basis of the consistency of the response matrix A (see, e.g., Aull-Hyde, Erdogan, & Duke, 2006; Escobar, Aguarón, & Moreno-Jiménez, 2004; Lin et al., 2008; Moreno-Jiménez, Aguarón, & Escobar, 2008; Xu, 2000). Our approach complements those analyses. While near consistency is obviously a desirable normative property holding in response matrices in which perturbations are small, the converse is not true and a pairwise comparison matrix may be perfectly consistent, but “irrelevant and far off the mark of the true priority vector” (Saaty, 2003, p. 86).In the AHP the whole decision problem is organized in a hierarchic structure of objectives, criteria, and subcriteria (see the review of applications in Vaidya & Kumar, 2006). The process of measurement occurs at each level of the hierarchy generating a specific comparison matrix relevant for that level. In this paper we concentrate the discussion on the single comparison matrix obtained by AHP group decision techniques irrespectively of the hierarchic level. Tackling the whole hierarchy is a further challenge at the individual and, especially, group level (e.g., Srdjevic & Srdjevic, 2013).In Section 3 the algebraic expressions of vectors u’s and w’s obtained for AHP-group decisions by different aggregation techniques are derived and compared theoretically and empirically. We approach the problem using the theory of matrix differentials (Magnus & Neudecker, 1999), taking the first-order expansion of vector u around w. We identify five main classes of aggregation methods which provide identical expressions for the first-order expansions of vectors u’s around w’s. The validity of the approximations is shown by applying the expressions to comparison matrices obtained in experiments with human subjects.We analyze more closely the nature of the perturbations affecting the group’s comparisons in Section 4. In classical AHP the error terms of the comparison matrix A have been typically interpreted as caused by factors like trembling, rounding, computational mistakes, lapses of concentration. As a result, perturbation terms have generally been treated as stochastically unpredictable white noise errors (see, e.g., Genest & Rivest, 1994). More recent studies in mathematical psychology have analyzed theories of subjective ratio judgments belonging to a class of so-called separable representations (see Luce, 2002, 2004; Narens, 1996, 2002). In these models people’s ratio judgments, in addition to random errors, are affected by systematic distortions. These are due to a subjective weighting function which transforms numerical mathematical ratios into subjective perceived ratios. The transformation function of separable representations can be fruitfully applied in the analysis of the AHP response matrices used for individual decision making (Bernasconi, Choirat, & Seri, 2010, 2011). Here we study the implications of separable representations for group decision making. We provide a general method to decompose, in the first-order approximation of the difference (u−w), a stochastic component due to random errors, and a deterministic component due to the subjective transformation functions. The decompositions clearly show that the deterministic components are substantially larger than the ones due to random noise. Partly this follows from the fact that while the individual random noises tend to cancel out by the group averaging procedures, the deterministic components are not exposed to the same effect. We discuss methods to correct systematic distortions.In the concluding Section 5, we summarize how our analysis can contribute to the implementation of AHP in group decision making.In this section we review some fundamental issues in AHP-group aggregation. We start to introduce some notation. For a n-vectora,a¯is the n-vector defined bya¯=[a¯i]=ai-1; unis a n-vector composed of ones; Inis the (n×n)-identity matrix; Unis a (n×n)-matrix composed of ones; eiis a vector of zeros with a one in the ith position. ATis the transpose of the matrix A. Aℓ denotes the ordinary product of the matrix A by itself, repeated ℓ times. The notationsln¯A,exp¯Aand A⊙ℓ denote the element-wise application of natural logarithm, exponential and power function (of degree ℓ) to a matrix A.∑j=1nAjand⊙j=1nAjrespectively denote the sum and the element-wise product of a series of matrices.We consider K individuals. We use an apex (k) to indicate any quantity for the kth individual. As an example,A(k)=αij(k)is the pairwise comparison matrix of the kth individual. We say that the individual comparison matrixA(k)=αij(k)respects the reciprocal symmetry property ifαij(k)=1/αji(k)for every i and j. This is an important requisite for theαij(k)’s to be measured on a ratio scale. In theory, a reciprocally symmetric matrixA(k)=αij(k)is said to satisfy the property of cardinal consistency when for any three ratio judgmentsαij(k),αil(k),αlj(k), the following holds:αij(k)=αil(k)·αlj(k). In practice, cardinal consistency is violated by individuals due to errors: these may be due to trembling, rounding and other unpredictable events. Indeed, we do not know of any cardinally consistent matrix from practice of order 5 or higher. A weaker requirement less often violated in practice is ordinal consistency, implying that whenαil(k)>1andαlj(k)>1then alsoαij(k)>1.2For example, in a test of ordinal consistency conducted with 69 subjects performing three independent ratio estimation tasks, we observed only 7 violations of ordinal consistency in the sum of the three experiments, less than 3.5% (see Bernasconi et al., 2010). Similar positive results are reported in tests of the monotonicity property, which is the equivalent of ordinal consistency in the context of ratio production tasks in psychophysics (see, e.g., Augustin & Maier, 2008).2Starting with Saaty (1977), a large literature has proposed different consistency indexes to evaluate the quality of the ratio assessments both for individuals decisions and for group decisions (important recent contributions in Aull-Hyde et al., 2006; Escobar et al., 2004; Lin et al., 2008; Moreno-Jiménez et al., 2008). As however remarked in the Introduction, consistency is a proxy for the quality of the assessments. This is because while the theoretical case of no errors always implies full consistency, the converse is not true. A simple example is a judgment matrix A(k) in which a decision maker always elicits responsesαij(k)=1in all pairwise comparisons (i, j) and in any context. The resulting judgment matrix is fully consistent, but unlikely to be without errors.We denote the priority weights in the theoretical case of no errors as w(k). Then, if A(k) is the comparison matrix of individual k, we define the matrix of errors, called dE(k), through the equalityA(k)=w(k)w(k)¯T⊙exp¯(dE(k))ordE(k)=ln¯[A(k)⊙(w(k)¯w(k),T)]=ln¯A(k)+ln¯(w(k)¯w(k),T),with dE(k)=0 corresponding to the case of no deviations. The vectors of priority weights obtained from A(k) with different prioritization methods are denoted as u(k).When applied to group decision making, techniques are used to obtain a vector of priority weights valid for the group as a whole. In this article we are interested in comparing the difference(u−w), where u is the group priority vector obtained by the application of various techniques starting from the individual comparison matrices A(k), and w is the vector that would be obtained by the application of the same techniques in the theoretical case dE(k)=0 for all k.A particularly important issue that arises in the AHP when applied to group decision making concerns how the group is formed and whether the members of the group are of equal importance. In many situations it is natural to assume that agents who agree to act as a group also agree to have equal importance. There are however also many contexts in which members may be assigned different importance. It is then possible to use weights β1,…,βKto measure the importance of every member of the group (see Forman & Peniwati, 1998; Ramanathan & Ganesh, 1994; Saaty, 1994). The weights satisfy βk⩾0 for every k and∑k=1Kβk=1. In the simplest case, it is βk=K−1 for every k. Consensus on different weights may be more difficult to achieve. In some situations, there can be an external source determining the weights or, as is sometimes referred to, a ‘supra decision maker’ (Ramanathan & Ganesh, 1994). When this does not exist, it is in principle possible to use the AHP to determine the priorities weights for the group members. The problem is then to decide who should give the judgments to obtain the member weights. If it is the group itself, the issue is to determine the member weights for this meta-problem (Forman & Peniwati, 1998). One possibility is to assume equal member weights at this upper level problem. An alternative way proposed by Ramanathan and Ganesh (1994) adopts a methodology in which each member of the group evaluate the importance of all group members, including himself or herself.3The method is based on an eigenvector approach which assumes that the members priority weights for the original decision problem and for the meta-problem should be the same (see Ramanathan & Ganesh, 1994, p. 257 for details).3A problem of this approach is that the decision maker can exaggerate her importance if she has an advantage from doing that. A limit to this tendency could come from the fact that individuals who are discovered overrating themselves, giving biased judgments, or not being really expert, will be penalized in subsequent decisions by lower weights presumably assigned by others.4Obviously, such a system of sanctions can work the better the more possibilities there are to actually monitor the biases in the decision makers’ judgments in various contexts. In a subsequent part of the paper we will further comment on the possibility to evaluate the extent to which a decision maker provides accurate judgments in the various contexts.4Other scholars have proposed approaches in which members only provide evaluations to some of the other members, which typically do not include themselves, with specific techniques proposed to recover member weights from incomplete pairwise comparisons (Van Den Honert, 2001, and references therein). Other techniques can be applied to assign weights to homogeneous subgroups (Bolloju, 2001). In any case, we remark that the analyses which will be developed in this paper apply regardless of the methods used to weight the different decision makers.Following a large literature (Aczél & Saaty, 1983; Bryson, 1996; Dong et al., 2010; Dyer & Forman, 1992; Forman & Peniwati, 1998; Ramanathan & Ganesh, 1994; Saaty, 1989; Van Den Honert, 2001; Van Den Honert & Lootsma, 1997), the aggregation can be performed at two levels: AIJ (aggregation of individual judgments) consists in the aggregation of the individual comparison matrices A(k) into one judgment matrix A valid for the group as a whole, and then in the computation of the group decision vector u from this matrix; AIP (aggregation of individual priorities) consists in the computation of the individual weights u(k) from each A(k) first, and then in obtaining the aggregated vector u from these. According to Forman and Peniwati (1998), the two methods may be seen to correspond to two different ways of considering the group: in the first, the group is taken as a sort of new individual, different from the simple collection of all its members; whereas in the second, the group is seen as a collection of independent agents maintaining their own identities. Others neglect this interpretation and compare the two methods simply on the basis of the axiomatic justifications of the procedures of aggregation.Depending on the level chosen for aggregation, different averaging procedures can be used. In the context of the AIJ, the main aggregation method is the WGM (weighted geometric mean method) that is based on the computation of the element-wise weighted geometric mean of the comparison matrices, i.e. of the aggregated matrix A=[αij] whose generic element isαij=∏k=1Kαij(k)βk, where βkis the weight for individual k. The use of this method in the context of the AIJ has sometimes been criticized because it violates the Pareto Principle with respect to individual priorities (e.g., Ramanathan & Ganesh, 1994). However, according to Forman and Peniwati (1998), the Pareto Principle with respect to priorities is inapplicable in the context of AIJ precisely because aggregation concerns judgments, not priorities. On the other hand, when aggregating judgments, it has been demonstrated that WGM is indeed the only method which preserves the reciprocally symmetric structure of the judgment matrices5An aggregation procedure preserves the reciprocally symmetric structure if the aggregated matrix A=[αij] is reciprocally symmetric when the individual matrices A(k) are.5and satisfies the Pareto Principle over judgments and the so-called homogeneity condition,6The homogeneity condition requires that if all individuals judge a ratio λ times as large as another ratio, then the aggregated judgments should be λ times as large.6whereas other procedures like the arithmetic mean do not (see Aczél & Alsina, 1986; Aczél & Saaty, 1983; Forman & Peniwati, 1998). In the AIJ in particular, assignment of different weights βk’s among agents may reflect different expertise with the purpose of assigning greater weights to judgments of more expert agents.In the context of the AIP, the vectors of prioritiesu(k)=ui(k)are first computed and then aggregated. For the AIP both the geometric and the arithmetic average satisfy the Pareto Principle and can therefore be used. In particular, for the AIP, the methods based on the weighted geometric mean considered in the literature are of two kinds: the normalized weighted geometric mean (NWGM) is based on the computation of the geometric mean of the eigenvectors and on the normalization of the vector, and yields a vector u whose ith element is given byui=∏k=1Kui(k)βk∑h=1n∏k=1Kuh(k)βk; the unnormalized weighted geometric mean method (UWGM) is based on the computation of the geometric mean of the eigenvectors without normalization (see, e.g., Forman & Peniwati, 1998), and yields a vector u whose ith element isui=∏k=1Kui(k)βk. The weighted arithmetic mean method (WAM) is based on the arithmetic mean of the vectors. It yields a vector u whose ith element isui=∑k=1Kβkui(k)and is guaranteed to be normalized.A preference for geometric mean over arithmetic mean methods is sometimes justified noting that arithmetic methods are typically relevant when measurements are on an interval scale, while in the context of AHP measurements occur on a ratio scale and have precisely the meaning of representing how many more times an alternative dominates (in terms of preference or judgment) another alternative. In this case, the geometric mean is more suitable for aggregation since it directly satisfies homogeneity (recent discussion in, e.g., Escobar & Moreno-Jiménez, 2007).Prioritization is the process of computing the priority vector from the judgment matrix. In the AIP, prioritization applies to the individual matrices A(k), whereas in the AIJ it applies to the group matrix A directly.In either case, the computation of the vectors can be performed using different methods. The classical one is the maximum eigenvalue (ME). It has been proposed by Saaty in his classical writings (1977, 1980) and confirmed since then (Saaty, 1990, 2003). In the AIP, for a generic matrixA(k)=αij(k), the maximum eigenvalue (ME) yields the vector u(k) defined as A(k)u(k)=λ(k)u(k) where λ(k) denotes the Perron root (maximum eigenvalue) of A(k) and∑i=1nui(k)=1. For the theoretical case of a judgment matrix with no errors, the ME is known to deliver directly u(k)=w(k), with the maximum eigenvalue being at its minimum λ(k)=n. The classical AHP argument is to use the ME even for the practical cases in which the matrices A(k)’s contain errors and are therefore not fully consistent, provided inconsistencies fall within given bounds. Therefore, the main normative justifications to use the ME lies in its algebraic properties (Saaty, 2003).A different prioritization method is the logarithmic least squares (LLS). It yields a vector u(k) whose ith element isui(k)=∏j=1nαij1/n∑h=1n∏j=1nαhj1/n. The main characteristic of this method is that it can be justified on the basis of statistical properties (classical references in de Jong, 1984; Genest & Rivest, 1994). A variant of LLS studied by Crawford and Williams (1985) and applied to AHP in group decision making by Escobar et al. (2004) is the row geometric mean (RGM). It yields a vector u(k) such that its ith element is given byui(k)=∏j=1nαij(k)1/n.In the AIJ the same prioritization methods can be used to obtain the group priority vector u from the aggregated matrix A.One important question regarding the above aggregation procedures which we believe the previous literature has not fully addressed concerns the difference between the various methods on empirical grounds. In particular, how much empirical difference can we expect from the various techniques when applied to actual data?To answer the above question we now analyze the algebraic characteristics of the priority weights u computed according to the different methods and compare the differences (u−w) obtained under the various methods. The results of the analysis are summarized in Table 1. We introduce the matrices W≜(diag[w]−w·wT) and W(k)≜(diag[w(k)]−w(k)·w(k),T). We recall that the matrix of errors of individual k, with respect to the case of consistency isdE(k)=ln¯A(k)+ln¯w(k)¯w(k),T. We also notice that, whatever the method of aggregation, there is no guarantee thatln¯[A⊙(w¯wT)]is a well-defined matrix of deviations from consistency (see Lin et al., 2008, p. 675, Eq. (16)).The first three columns of the table report the three dimensions of aggregations discussed above, namely the levels of the aggregation, the averaging procedures for the aggregation, the prioritization methods. The formulas for u and w obtained by the various techniques are shown in columns 3 and 5, respectively. To compare the formulas it is necessary to consider the different normalizations employed by the techniques. Most prioritization methods (ME, LLS) require that the vector is such that∑j=1nwj(k)=1; nevertheless, other methods (RGM) require a vector such that∏j=1nwj(k)=1. This introduces a small difficulty, since w(k) is normalized in different ways according to the method. The table indicates the vector with the same symbol, specifying in each case the kind of normalization. The same fact happens with w that can be given by a weighted arithmetic mean of the individual w(k)’s or by a weighted geometric mean of the same vectors; in the latter case, it can be normalized through the alternative constraints∑j=1nwj=1or∏j=1nwj=1. Also in this case, we use the same symbol, leaving the specification of the kind of vector to the context. A further problem is that, even if the individual vectors are normalized as∑j=1nwj(k)=1or∏j=1nwj(k)=1, some aggregation methods yield a resulting aggregated vector with no normalization (see below for details).The analytic derivations of all the expressions in Table 1 are obtained using the theory of matrix differentials (Magnus & Neudecker, 1999) and are given in the online Appendix. We remark that, up to the first-order, all methods have the same kind of expansion, since they are given by:(1)u≃w+1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)dE(k)un,where the matrix B(k), that is different across methods and can vary across individuals, is given in Table 1.Comparing the formulas for u’s and w’s, the table identifies 5 different classes of methods according to the first-order expansion of the vector u in terms of the matrix dE(k).Methods of class 1 (AIJ-WGM-ME/LLS, AIP-NGWM-ME/LLS/RGM) yield a vector u such thatunTu=1, andu≃w+1n∑k=1Kβk·WdE(k)un. These methods are insensitive to the normalization adopted for u(k): this is due to the fact that they are homogeneous of degree 1 in each vector, so that different eigenvectors can even be normalized in different ways. As remarked above, this is a very appealing property of WGM. Moreover, AIJ-WGM-LLS and AIP-NWGM-LLS/RGM yield exactly the same priority vector. Clearly, the remarkable result for the models of this class is that they obtain the same priority vectors regardless whether the aggregation procedures are applied at the level of judgments (AIJ) or of priorities (AIP).The two methods of class 2 (AIJ-WGM-RGM and AIP-UWGM-RGM) yield exactly the same priorities (see Escobar et al., 2004). In this case, u is normalized so that∏j=1nuj=1andu≃w+1n∑k=1Kβk·diagw·dE(k)un.Methods of class 3 (AIP-UWGM-ME/LLS) yield the formulau≃w+1n∑k=1Kβk·diagw-w·w(k),T·dE(k)un. Unfortunately, the priority vector so obtained is not normalized.Methods of class 4 (AIP-WAM-ME/LLS) yield a vector u normalized asunTu=1, with expansionu≃w+1n∑k=1Kβk·W(k)·dE(k)un.The only method of class 5 (AIP-WAM-RGM) yieldsu≃w+1n∑k=1Kβk·diag(w(k))·dE(k)un. The problem of this aggregation method is that the eigenvector is not normalized in any way.In Table 2, we compute the vectors of priority weights aggregated according to the different methods for three experiments described in Bernasconi et al. (2010). In the experiments, 69 individuals were asked to elicit individual comparison matrices in three domains respectively concerning 5 probabilities from games of chances, 5 distances of Italian cities from Milan, and the rainfalls in 5 European cities.7The instructions and the full data set of the experiments are available from the authors.7The computations in the table aggregate individual judgments or individual priorities, depending on the method, over the 69 individuals using equal weights. The results of the computations confirm the validity of the approach and of the classification discussed above. Consistently with the algebraic expressions derived in Table 1, we find that the differences between the methods belonging to each of the 5 classes are very small, namely 0 up to the third decimal in all the three experiments; while they are larger between methods of different classes. It is worthwhile to remark that the finding is independent of the size of the group, since the group size n is not an asymptotic parameter for any class.We also observe that since the methods differ only in the second and higher orders, the results indirectly support the validity of the first-order approximation.The classification in Table 1 and the empirical computations in Table 2 put also some order on the issues discussed in Section 2. First of all, although the analysis identifies five main classes of methods, two of them (classes 3 and 5) imply that the priority vectors obtained are not normalized and are therefore unsuitable for actual implementation. Methods in class 2 are characterized by the use of the RGM as prioritization procedure (when applied in combination with AIJ/WGM and AIP/UWGM). It is quite interesting that, even if this method is often considered similar to LLS, the two can produce results that are more different than those obtained under LLS and ME. On the contrary, notwithstanding the disputes between the latter two methods often encountered in the literature, it is remarkable that on the empirical ground ME and LLS generate virtually identical priorities when applied in all aggregating procedures. Overall, the analysis of this section can be viewed to speak moderately in favor of models of class 1. In addition to the interesting properties listed above, including the equivalence of the priority vectors obtained under AIP and AIJ, the use of the WGM as averaging procedure for the models of this class can be supported over (for example) models of class 4, on the basis of the normative argument outlined in Section 2, namely that the geometric mean fits better than the arithmetic mean the notion of ratio scale measures underlying both judgments and priorities.What does it cause the departure of u from its true value w? Classical AHP has not generally spent much attention to discuss the nature of the perturbations and has generally assumed that they are due to random errors (see, e.g., de Jong, 1984; Genest & Rivest, 1994). In recent years, studies in mathematical psychology have focussed on systematic distortions occurring in ratio estimations, which can be formalized in so-called separable forms (Luce, 2002, 2004; Narens, 1996, 2002).Following the literature on separable forms, from now on we assume that the elicited ratios in the AHP are generated according to the following model8For a more general discussion on the relation between the AHP and the modern theory of separable representations we refer to Bernasconi et al. (2010).8:(2)αij=W-1ψ(xi)ψ(xj)·eij,where the functions ψ and W are respectively called psychophysical and subjective weighting function, W−1(·) is the inverse of W(·), ψ(x1),…,ψ(xn) are the psychological perceptions of the stimuli intensities corresponding to the priority weightswi=ψ(xi)∑jψ(xj)(for i=1,…,n); and where the eij’s are the more classical multiplicative random error terms introduced by the AHP. The functions ψ and W indicate that two independent transformations may occur in a ratio estimation: one of the stimuli intensities (embodied in ψ), and the other of numbers (entailed in W). Support for separable forms has been found in a series of recent experiments which have been conducted to test some of their underlying properties and which have estimated different functional specifications of ψ and W (see, among others, Bernasconi, Choirat, & Seri, 2008; Ellermeier & Faulhammer, 2000; Steingrimsson & Luce, 2005a, 2005b, 2006, 2007; Zimmer, 2005). Specifically relevant are the distortions caused by W, which are interpreted as cognitive ones. In fact, findings have shown that systematic distortions of numbers (actually, ratios) due to W follow a very intuitive pattern: namely, people tend to overestimate low ratios and underestimate high ratios, with the tendency to underestimate increasing as the ratios get increasingly larger than one.Here we study the effect of deterministic distortions due to the subjective weighting function W in group aggregation methods. We set eij=exp(νij), where νij=−νjiand the νij’s are independent and identically distributed random variables withE(νij)=0andV(νij)=σ2. Then, the previous formula (2) can be rewritten as:(3)αij=wiwj·explnwjwi·W-1wiwj+νij=wiwj·edεij,where(4)dεij=lnwjwi·W-1wiwj+νij.In order to respect the property of reciprocal symmetry, we need dεij=−dεji.Taking a polynomial approximation, it is then possible to write W−1(·) as (see, e.g., Bernasconi, Choirat, & Seri, 2011, p. 156):(5)W-1(x)=x·exp∑ℓ=2Lϕℓ·[ln(x)]ℓ,so that, when ∥ϕℓ∥∞=max2⩽ℓ⩽L∣ϕℓ∣↓0, W−1(x)→x. Coefficients ϕℓ’s approximate the effect of the systematic distortion. Substituting in Eq. (4) we obtain:(6)dεij=lnwjwi·W-1wiwj+νij=∑ℓ=2Lϕℓ·[ln(wi/wj)]ℓ+νij.Thus, under the hypotheses that ∥ϕℓ∥∞=max2⩽ℓ⩽L∣ϕℓ∣↓0 and σ↓0, dεijis asymptotically negligible. This expansion holds for all the individuals in the group, so that we put an apex (k) on the quantities appearing in the above formula; for ease of notation, we suppose that L is independent of k, since this can always be achieved introducing some zero coefficientsϕℓ(k)’s.We define the vectors of weightsw(k)≜wi(k), the matrices of distortionsdE(k)≜εij(k)and of random errorsN(k)≜νij(k). In matrix notation, it is:(7)dE(k)=∑ℓ=2Lϕℓ(k)·ln¯w(k)w(k)¯T⊙ℓ+N(k)+o(‖ϕℓ‖∞)+oP(σ)=∑ℓ=2Lϕℓ(k)·ln¯w(k)·unT-un·(ln¯w(k))T⊙ℓ+N(k)+o(‖ϕℓ‖∞)+oP(σ).While the order of the approximation can obviously be extended to any desired degree, we retain the approximation in the first non-zero term9Remark that here and in the followingϕ2(k)is zero since the function ln[W(k)]−1(exp (·)) is supposed to be skew-symmetric.9:(8)dE(k)≃ϕ3(k)·(ln¯w(k))·unT-un·(ln¯w(k))T⊙3+N(k).This is indeed sufficient to characterize the regularities appearing in several empirical data of individual decision making. All of the theoretical computations can evidently be repeated within the more general model introduced above.Replacing now dE(k) in the general formula (1) for u, we obtain:(9)u≃w+1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)dE(k)un≃w+1n∑k=1Kβk·ϕ3(k)·B(k)(ln¯w(k))·unT-un·(ln¯w(k))T⊙3un+1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)N(k)un.The variance of the stochastic part is given by:(10)V1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)N(k)un=1n∑k=1Kβk2σ(k),2·B(k)·In-1nUn·B(k),T;the “bias” due to the deterministic part is given by:(11)E1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)dE(k)un=1n∑k=1Kβk·ϕ3(k)·B(k)(ln¯w(k))·unT-un·(ln¯w(k))T⊙3un.Eqs. (10) and (11) provide the basis to assess the relative contributions on the difference du≃u−w of the stochastic components due toνij(k)and of the deterministic distortions due to the subjective weighting function W(k)(·). In fact, for the case of individual decision making (K=1), it is shown in Bernasconi et al. (2011) that when ∣ϕ3∣ is equal to the standard error of the noise σ and the elements of w range on a small interval, then the effects of the deterministic distortions and of the stochastic terms are comparable; while when the stimuli in w are very different, the effects of the deterministic distortions are much larger than those due to the stochastic errors. This result is in line with the so-called homogeneity axiom of the AHP (Saaty, 1986), which requires that the stimuli used in the AHP must be in a range of comparability.The same result holds here forϕ3(k)=σ(k), provided that the w(k)’s (and the B(k)’s as a consequence) are not too dissimilar between individuals. In the latter case, moreover, the summands for the individuals in Eq. (11) are also comparable and do not tend to cancel out across individuals. On the other hand, Eq. (10) shows that when K is large enough and the βk’s are far away from the extreme case in which one β is 1 and the other ones are 0, the variance of the stochastic terms (due toβk2σ(k),2) tends to get smaller with K. Therefore, this means that, whereas the stochastic component tends to be averaged out in group decision making, the same does not necessarily happen to the deterministic part.In order to illustrate how the decomposition of Eq. (9) works in practice, the previous formulas (10) and (11) are applied to the data of the experiments described above with methods of class 1. In that case, B(k)=W=(diag[w]−w·wT), so that the variance of the stochastic part and the bias due to the deterministic part are respectively given by:V1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)N(k)un=1n·∑k=1Kβk2σ(k),2·W2,E1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)dE(k)un=1n·W·∑k=1Kβk·ϕ3(k)·ln¯w(k)·unT-un·ln¯w(k)T⊙3un.In Table 3, we provide a comparison of the different contributions to u.10With the above expressions, a limiting case that well illustrates the averaging effect is when all individuals are equally weighted (βk=K−1), have the same variances (σ(k),2=σ2), the same deterministic distortions(ϕ3(k)=ϕ3), and the w(k)’s are equal so that w(k)=w. In such a case:V1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)N(k)un=1nK·σ2·W2,E1n∑k=1Kβk·B(k)dE(k)un=1n·W·ϕ3·(ln¯w)·unT-un·(ln¯w)T⊙3un.Thus, the deterministic distortion is equal to the one of a single individual. On the other hand, the variance of the stochastic part is equal to the same quantity for a single individual divided by K.10In the computations, the parameters w(k)’s andϕ3(k)’s appearing in the above formulas are replaced by their estimates (see below on how to obtain the estimates). The “effect of W” is given by1n·W·1K∑k=1K·ϕ3(k)·(ln¯w(k))·unT-un·(ln¯w(k))T⊙3·unand the “effect of noise” is given by1nW·1K∑k=1KN(k)·un. The “remainder” is u−w−du and may be different according to the various aggregation methods of the class. It is evident that both the effect of the noise and of the remainders computed according to any method are much smaller than the effect of the deterministic distortions.The results of the previous subsection shows that it is important to correct for deterministic distortions in group aggregation. A direct way to make the corrections is provided by the computations underlying Table 3. The method is based on individual-specific estimates of parametersϕ3(k). Obviously, the closer are the individual estimates to the true parametersϕ3(1),…,ϕ3(K), the better are the corrections.A method to obtain consistent estimates, denoted withϕ¯3(1),…,ϕ¯3(K), from any judgment matrix A(k) is developed in Bernasconi et al. (2010). The method is a generalization of the LLS approach to obtain the priority vector w(k) according to the analysis of Genest and Rivest (1994). The procedure has been used in the three experiments eliciting probabilities in games of chances, distances between cities, and rainfalls in European cities. Estimates have found values ofϕ¯3(k)between −1 and 0 for the large majority of the 69 subjects participating in the study, with medians of the individual estimates very close to −0.03 in all the three experiments. The findings are consistent with the tendency of people to overestimate low ratios and underestimate high ratios, as predicted by cognitive arguments.Subject-specific estimatesϕ¯3(k)’s are useful to rank the extent of systematic biases of different individuals. Indeed, if one believes that cognitive biases in the perception of numbers are related to a more general attitude of agents to produce inconsistent reasonings,11For example, in the classical expected utility theory of choice under risk, outcome-probabilities correspond to decision weights and agents who subjectively transform probabilities are often considered exposed to a form of irrational behavior (discussion on this issue in, e.g., Neilson, 2003).11subject-specific estimatesϕ¯3(k)’s might also be useful to determine the weights of the subjects in the group. For example, greater weights β1,…,βKcould be assigned to members with smaller absolute values ofϕ¯3(k)’s because considered more generally capable to provide coherent judgments.In some cases, it may be too costly to obtain a full set of subject-specific estimatesϕ¯3(k)’s. A possibility in these cases is to use a “representative” model ofϕ¯3to correct all individual judgment matrices A(k)’s.12For example, a simple model that can be used to correct the entries of a judgment matrix can be obtained replacingαij(k)withα¯ij(k)=explnαij(k)-ϕ¯3(k)·lnαij(k)3, whereϕ¯3(k)is an estimate ofϕ3(k). Substituting the expression in Eqs. (5) and (6) (and using the fact that the errors are asymptotically negligible), one obtains:lnα¯ij(k)≃lnwi(k)/wj(k)+ϕ3(k)-ϕ¯3(k)·lnwi(k)/wj(k)3.Clearly, the expression confirms that the closer are the estimatesϕ¯3(k)’s to the trueϕ3(k)’s, the better are the corrections. Using a “representative” estimateϕ¯3for all the members of a group can in some cases be a simplifying procedure which reduces the cost of estimating subject-specific distortions.12Representative models are computationally simpler and statistically less demanding to estimate than individual-specific models. Approaches based on “representative” agents are adopted in many theories of decision making (for example, in the specification of the probability weighting of classical Prospect Theory; e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1992).A “representative” model based on the median values of the subject-specific estimates ofϕ¯3(k)is discussed in Bernasconi et al. (2010). The results of that paper shows that corrections based on individual-specific estimates are similar to those obtained by the median representative model. The analysis conducted here indicates that corrections of the median model may be even more performing in group decision making: when averaging over individuals, the use of a representative agent may be able to remove (almost) all of the effect of systematic distortions, while the law of large numbers remove the effect of the noise.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
