@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sustainable SC through the complete reprocessing of end-of-life products by manufacturers: A traditional versus social responsibility company perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Environmental sustainability through the reprocessing of end-of-life products.Traditional perspective and social responsibility perspective analysis.Critical aspects for sustainability in supply chain design are analysis.Transportation efficiency maximization through closed loop transportation system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain,Sustainability,Closed loop,Reverse flow,Reprocess,Green SC,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Every item produced, transported, used and discarded within a Supply Chain (SC) generates costs and creates an impact on the environment. The increase of forward flows as effects of market globalization and reverse flows due to legislation, warranty, recycling and disposal activities affect the ability of a modern SC to be economically and environmentally sustainable. In this context, the study considers an innovative sustainable closed loop SC problem. It first introduces a linear programming model that aims to minimize the total SC costs. Environmental sustainability is guaranteed by the complete reprocessing of an end-of-life product, the re-use of components, the disposal of unusable parts sent directly from the manufacturers, with a closed loop transportation system that maximizes transportation efficiency. Secondly, the authors consider the problem by means of a parametrical study, by analyzing the economical sustainability of the proposed CLSC model versus the classical Forward Supply Chain model (FWSC) from two perspectives: Case 1, the ‘traditional company perspective’, where the SC ends at the customers, and the disposal costs are not included in the SC, and Case 2, the ‘social responsibility company perspective’, where the disposal costs are considered within the SC. The relative impact of the different variables in the SC structure and the applicability of the proposed model, in terms of total costs, SC structure and social responsibility, are investigated thoroughly and the results are reported at the conclusion of the paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent legislation, social responsibility, corporate image and customer awareness are forcing manufacturers not only to provide more environment friendly products, but also to recover used products at their end-of-life. In the electric/electronic sector, the WEEE European Directive (Waste Electric and Electronic Equipment) of February 2003 requires the collection and recycling of such equipment (Directive 2002/96/EC), and defines the individual obligation of each manufacturer in these activities. The draft directive addresses collection and treatment requirements and sets re-use, recycling and recovery targets (50–80%, depending on the type of equipment and whether it is recovered or recycled/reused) (Rosenbach and Lindsay, 2002). According to the recovery activities of the recent recast of the WEEE directive (http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/weee/index_en.htm), the demands are more pressing. The proposal is clear:•Art 5.2: when supplying a new product, distributors shall be responsible for ensuring that such waste can be returned to the distributor.Art 7.1: producers/third parties acting on their behalf achieve a minimum collection rate of 65%.Art 8.3: producers/third parties acting on their behalf, in accordance with Community legislation, set up systems to provide for the treatment of WEEE using best available treatment, recovery and recycling techniques. The systems may be set up by producers.Art 128: each producer is responsible for financing the operations of recovering and re-using products relating to the waste from his own products.In the last decade, other countries (Japan, USA) have tried to adopts similar approaches (Rosenbach and Lindsay, 2002), and the strategies adopted by manufacturers and distributors, for the recovering of used products, are applicable in other industrial sectors, following specific directives provided by the legislation.According to Daniel et al. (2003), the recovery of used products after the end of their life cycle is a mean for environmental protection and a source of business profit through their handling. This has increased the importance of the reuse and remanufacture of used products, so reducing the utilization of materials. Consequently, manufacturers have turned to a better design of their products for maximum material reuse and recycling. This includes the concept of the ‘green supply chain’ design that, according to Tsoulfas and Pappis (2006), is influenced by different principles of environmental sustainability: product design, packaging, collection and transportation, recycling and disposal, greening the indoor and outdoor environment and other management issues. A system is sustainable if it has the ability to endure. Planning a ‘green supply chain’ requires the additional function of recycling and thus, reverse logistics is a necessary infrastructure for material flow (Wang and Hsu, 2010). In addition, if the returned products are not handled or transported efficiently, manufacturers incur larger costs that can increase the cost of the new products (Mutha and Pokharel, 2009). Tsoulfas and Pappis (2006) affirm that “by extending the useful life of equipment items, additional raw materials are not needed to produce new items. Primary raw materials should be used only in cases where there would be no stock of secondary ones.” and that “transportation and the consequent environmental effects can be significantly limited if the recovery of used products can occur at the same time or in combination with the distribution of new products”.In accordance with these concepts, this paper proposes a sustainable CLSC in which all end-of-life products return to the plants, where all the reprocessing activities take place. Some parts will be reused as raw materials and components for new products and the other parts will be transported to be disposed properly. On one hand, the reuse of end-of-life products reduces the need for raw materials, improving the economical sustainability of the process. On the other hand, it allows for a reduction of the quantity of disposable products, by improving their environmental sustainability. Economic and environmental sustainability are also guaranteed by the use of closed loop shipments, in which the collection of end-of-life products occurs at the same time as the delivery of new products. According to Yildiz et al. (2010) the unit cost (i.e. cost per pound per mile) of round-trip carriers is significantly less than the one-way unit cost: the model considers that the reverse routes are the same as the ones in forward flow, including the same transportation model. This reverse transportation model is already widespread in some SCs: for example, in the automotive industry, high value, used spare parts (such as engines and transmissions) are collected and returned to the manufacturers by the same vehicles with closed loop shipments, and are destined for regeneration purposes, allowing economies of scale benefits through the use of the same vehicle, without designing specific reverse logistics, but having, instead, a reverse SC integrated with a forward one (Kannan et al., 2010).The main objectives of this paper are to define the following issues:•What is the mathematical model that aims to design such SC?Is this design model economically sustainable?From what company perspective it could be sustainable?What are its critical aspects for its sustainability in respect to classical SC design?The study considers an innovative sustainable closed loop SC problem. It first introduces a linear programming model that aims to minimize the total SC costs. Later, authors analyze the problem in a parametrical study, benchmarking the proposed CLSC structure, where all the products at their end-of-life are returned and reprocessed as described before at the production plant, with the Forward Supply Chain (FWSC) structure seen from two different standpoints: the case of a ‘social responsibility company perspective’, whereby the disposal costs are considered inside the SC, and the case of a ‘traditional company perspective’, where the SC ends at the customers, and the disposal costs are not considered in the SC, as normally happens with companies. This second part of the study aims to:•Define the function of the two analyzed perspectives, in terms of which factors and how they combine impacts on SC costs in case of CLSC and FWSC structure.Define, using a parametrical analysis, a decision making tool that, for a given product and network with certain specific characteristics, allows a decision on whether it is possible to modify the classical forward SC structure to a ‘Green Closed Loop SC’.Study what are the elements that influence the choice of SC structure and details of in what way and how these factors influence each level of the CLSC, in terms of number and location of elements.The next section presents a brief review of the existing literature on SC, focusing of CLSC and its environmental impact from a generic and cost point of view. Section 3 introduces the proposed CLSC design model, concluding with an applicative case derived from an industrial application in Northern Italy. In Section 4, the authors analyse the problem by using a parametrical study, benchmarking the proposed CLSC structure with the FW structure, illustrating the most relevant results. Our conclusions wrap up the paper in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The study considers an innovative sustainable closed loop SC problem. It first introduces a linear programming model that aims to minimize the total SC costs, whereby the elements of sustainability are the complete reprocessing of end-of-life product and disposal of unusable parts directly from manufacturers, with a closed loop transportation system that maximizes transportation efficiency. Secondly, the authors consider the problem in a parametrical study, analyzing the economic sustainability of the proposed CLSC model versus the classical Forward Supply Chain model (FWSC) from two perspectives: Case 1, the ‘traditional company perspective’, whereby the SC ends at the customers, and the disposal costs are not included in the SC, and Case 2, the ‘social responsibility company perspective’, where the disposal costs are considered within the SC.The principal results were:1.From a ‘traditional company perspective’, where the SC ends at the customers, and the disposal costs are not considered in the SC, the proposed CLSC model is preferable compared to the classical FWSC if few conditions are met, independently from other parameters: a percentage of reused end-of-life products of at least 80%, and optimal reverse transportation costs and disposal costs. This conclusion is confirmed by recent literature (Fleischmann et al., 2001; Mutha and Pokharel, 2009) and by different industrial applications where for quantity of material recycled (i.e. automotive for engines and transmission remanufacturing) and product value recycled (i.e. electronic industry with copper recovering) where there are high levels of product reusability.From a ‘social responsibility company perspective’, where all the disposal costs are considered inside the SC also in the FWSC, the economic and environmental sustainability of the proposed CLSC model, compared to the FWSC, is already realized with 10% of reused end-of-life products. However this perspective is not typical for most companies, and for this reason, government directives (i.e. European Union WEEE Directive, 2007) or customers’ sensibility should act as a demanding factor that should lead to changes in such a direction.It is important to observe how, in a CLSC structure, the element of % of reused end-of-life products is a critical factor with respect to its influence on the total cost of the SC, and on the other environmental protection (Daniel et al., 2003). An increase of the percentage of reused end-of-life products gives a more than linear reduction on total costs. This focus on the point in the product design enforces the design for reusability concept.From a SC structure point of view, the results demonstrate that ‘sustainability factors’ such as the percentage of reused end-of-life products and disposal costs influence the CL model, more in the initial portion of the SC (plants) than in the final part (DCs and distributors). Distributors are mostly influenced by the classical parameters of distance or transportation costs. This means that, for an existing, well designed SC, with the classical approach, it is possible to pass to a CLSC structure, maintaining the distributors’ facilities. With sufficient economies of scale in the reverse transportation, DCs structure could be also maintained. For the production plants, due to the high flows through the disposal, the structure could be maintained if there is a very high reusing of end-of-life product, or if the disposal facilities are located close to the production plants.As shown in Fig. 22, looking at the average cost situation given by the parametrical analysis, if all the costs of the SC are considered, and the disposal costs in case of FWSC (social responsibility perspective) are included, it is clear that the proposed CLSC gives better results. On the other hand, from a traditional company perspective, looking at the average result, the classical FWSC produces lower costs than the proposed CLSC, and is competitive only in few cases (i.e. few industrial sectors according the parametrical analysis).The white–gray average disposal costs are mostly paid by society. The results demonstrate that, in the industrial sectors where there is low end-of-life product reusability, the European Union legislation, should introduce economic incentives, in order to encourage the manufacturers to take a direct role in the recovery of the end-of-life products. This should facilitate reaching a win–win situation with respect to the traditional end-of-life product management, with a total costs reduction for both companies and society. The main limitation of the proposed model involves considering and analyzing the case of a single company that manages the entire product life cycle. This approach is already used in some sectors and for some kinds of products (i.e. automotive). The second step of the research would be to extend the analysis to the possibility to managing end-of-life products, and reprocessing and disposal phases through companies’ consortia.