@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of the cohort-intelligence optimization method to three selected combinatorial optimization problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An emerging AI metaheuristic referred to as Cohort Intelligence is discussed.Cohort Intelligence method is applied for solving three combinatorial problems.They are assignment; cross-border shipper selection and Sea-Cargo mix problem.The CI results are compared with the CPLEX, LP relaxation.A multi-random-start-local search (MRSLS) method is developed for all the three problems.The MRSLS results are compared with the Cohort Intelligence method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cohort intelligence,Combinatorial problems,Assignment problem,Cross-border shipper selection problem,Sea-Cargo mix problem,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The real world problems in the supply-chain domain are generally constrained and combinatorial in nature. Several nature-/bio-/socio-inspired metaheuristic methods have been proposed so far solving such problems. An emerging metaheuristic methodology referred to as Cohort Intelligence (CI) in the socio-inspired optimization domain is applied in order to solve three selected combinatorial optimization problems. The problems considered include a new variant of the assignment problem which has applications in healthcare and inventory management, a sea-cargo mix problem and a cross-border shipper selection problem. In each case, we use two benchmarks for evaluating the effectiveness of the CI method in identifying optimal solutions. To assess the quality of solutions obtained by using CI, we do comparative testing of its performance against solutions generated by using CPLEX. Furthermore, we also compare the performance of the CI method to that of specialized multi-random-start local search optimization methods that can be used to find solutions to these problems. The results are robust with a reasonable computational time and accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In past few years, a number of methodologies inspired from the biological and natural systems have been proposed for solving complex optimization problems including evolutionary algorithms (EAs), swarm optimization (SO), and ant colony optimization algorithms, among others. These methods are becoming increasingly popular because of their use of simple rules in the process of searching for optimal solutions to computational problems.In the same spirit, a new optimization technique referred to as cohort intelligence (CI) has recently been developed by Kulkarni, Durugkar, and Kumar (2013). CI is based on artificial intelligence (AI) concepts. It attempts to model the behavior often observed in a self-organizing system in which candidates in a cohort interact and compete with one another in order to achieve shared goals. Each candidate tries to improve its own behavior by observing the behavior of every other candidate in that cohort. Each candidate in the cohort follows a certain behavior which may result in the improvement of its own behavior. When a candidate attempts to follow a given behavior characterized by certain qualities, it often adopts such qualities in a manner that may improve its own goal. In this way, candidates in the cohort learn from one another which, in time, helps improve the behavior of the entire group. The cohort's behavior as a whole is said to have reached saturation (convergence) if, over a considerable number of learning attempts, the individual behavior of all candidates does not improve considerably making it difficult to distinguish between them. In other words, the difference between the individual behaviors of the candidates becomes insignificant.So far, the CI methodology has been used to solve many unconstrained optimization problems (Kulkarni et al., 2013). The tests show that CI is computationally efficient and performs comparatively as well as the existing variations of SO algorithms (Liu, Zhong, & Qian, 2010; Schittkowski, 1985; Xu, Geng, Zhu, & Gu, 2013). The details of the original CI methodology are presented in Appendix A.A mutation based hybrid CI–K-means approach has also been proposed in (Krishnasamy, Kulkarni, & Paramesaran, 2014) and tested successfully by solving several clustering test problems. The performance of CI is much better than existing techniques including K-means, K-means++, genetic algorithms (GA) (Maulik & Bandyopadhyay, 2000), simulated annealing (SA) (Niknam & Amiri, 2010), Tabu search (TS) (Selim & Ismail, 1984) and SO techniques such as ant colony optimization (ACO) (Shelokar, Jayaraman, & Kulkarni, 2004), particle swarm optimization (PSO) (Kao, Zahara, & Kao, 2008), artificial bee colony (ABC) (Fathian & Amiri, 2008).The CI methodology has also been applied to find solutions to several types of combinatorial problems such as 0–1 knapsack problems (Kulkarni & Shabir, 2014). When CI is applied to solve integer programming problems, it is important to note that its performance is comparable to that of harmony search (HS) algorithms (Layeb, 2013; Zou, Gao, Li, & Wu, 2011) and Cuckoo search algorithms (Layeb, 2011) for moderate sized problems; however, the performance of CI deteriorated for sufficiently large problems. This motivated the need for finding ways to make the CI technique more efficient when solving practical-size integer programs.In this paper, we use the CI solution methodology to solve three separate integer programming problems. The first problem is a new variant of the classical assignment problem. The model has applications in healthcare systems and inventory management. The second problem is a multi-dimension multiple-knapsack problem (MDMKP) and is referred to as the sea cargo mix problem discussed in Ang, Cao, and Ye (2007). The third problem deals with the optimal selection of cross-border shippers and cargo assignments given various constraints related to due dates, processing times, fund availability, and shippers’ compliance. We formulate and solve the multi-period instance of this problem as well. The performance of the CI method is compared to that of CPLEX and to multi-random-start local search (MRSLS) methods specifically developed for each of the problems considered.This paper is organized as follows. The new variant of the assignment problem is proposed in Section 2. A detailed CI algorithm for solving this problem is presented in Section 2.2. The corresponding numerical experiments and results are discussed in Section 2.3. The sea cargo mix problem is described in Section 3. The application of the CI algorithm, which includes a constraint handling approach for solving this problem, is discussed in Section 3.1. Section 3.2 discusses the associated numerical experiments and results. The single-period and multi-period problems for the optimal selection of cross-border shippers are discussed in Section 4. The numerical experiments and results for these models are shown in Section 4.1. Concluding remarks and future research directions are discussed in Section 5 of the paper.In this section, we present a variant of the classical assignment problem. The problem stems from an application in healthcare management. Suppose we seek to schedule n surgeons/doctors over a planning horizon of n days. The recovery time for each operated patient in the recovery room varies according to the type of surgery. When building cyclic surgery schedules, one important objective is to minimize congestion in the recovery room. That is, we want to minimize the maximum number of patients in the recovery unit in any given day of the planning horizon so that the costs associated with important resources such as nurses, space, beds, and equipment are also minimized. Another application of this problem arises in supply chain management. By considering cyclic scheduling for suppliers, the maximum required storage space of a retail shop on any day over a planning horizon of n days can be minimized by developing optimal delivery schedules. The mathematical statement and formulation of the problem are discussed below in detail.NomenclatureCAn n by n row circular matrix. The ijth element of C isCi, j, wherei,j=1,…,n.The set of integers{1,2,…,n}.A permutation of set N.An n by n matrix obtained by shifting each element of row i of matrix C fori=1,…,nby(π(i)−1)positions to the right in a circular manner. In other words, The ikth element of Cπis given byCi,kπ=Ci,k−π(i)+1∀1≤i≤n,1≤k≤n.The sum of the kth column of matrix Cπ.The maximum column sum of matrix Cπ,Z=maxk=1n{Ik}.A binary variable equal to 1 ifπ(i)=j; and 0, otherwise.As in Bartholdi, Orlin, and Ratliff (1980) a row vector is said to be circular if its first and last elements are considered to be consecutive. A matrix is called row circular if its rows are circular. Given an (n × n) row circular matrixC={Ci,j}, the problem is to minimizeZ=maxk=1n∑i=1nCi,k−π(i)+1whereπ=(π(1),π(2),…,π(n))is a permutation of the setN≡{1,2,…,n}. Matrix C being row circular implies thatCi,j±n=Ci,j∀i,j. We call this problem a Cyclic Bottleneck Assignment Problem (CBAP). Cyclic refers to the row circularity of matrix C; bottleneck refers to the min max objective; and assignment refers to the problem's close affinity to the classical assignment problem that minimizes∑i=1nCi,π(i).To give the problem a different description, for a given permutation π of the set N, let us define matrix Cπby moving each element of rowi,i=1,…,n,of matrix C by(π(i)−1)positions to the right in a circular manner. More precisely, letCi,kπ=Ci,k−π(i)+1∀1≤i≤n,1≤k≤n. Since π is a permutation, every row of matrix C is rotated by a different number of columns to obtain the rotated matrix Cπ. Furthermore, let Ikdenote the sum of the kth column of the rotated matrix Cπ. In other words, letIk=∑i=1nCi,kπ=∑i=1nCi,k−π(i)+1.With these new terms, the objective in our problem can be stated asminmaxk=1n{Ik}. That is, the problem is to find a permutation that minimizes the maximum column sums of the rotated matrix. Note that, with the above notation, the standard assignment problem is equivalent tominmink=1n∑i=1nCi,kπ.To formulate the integer linear programming model for this problem, we define the following decision variables:xi,j={1ifj=π(i)0otherwiseThe model is given by(1)MinimizeZSubject to(2)∑i=1nxi,j=1,∀1≤j≤n(3)∑j=1nxi,j=1,∀1≤i≤n(4)Ik=∑i=1n∑j=1nCi,k−j+1xi,j=∑i=1n∑j=1kCi,k−j+1xi,j+∑i=1n∑j=k+1nCi,k−j+1+nxi,j,∀1≤k≤n(5)Z≥Ik,∀1≤k≤n(6)xi,j∈{0,1},∀1≤i≤n,1≤j≤nThe objective function in Eq. (1) minimizes the maximum column sum of the rotated matrix Cπ. Constraint (2) ensures that for each j there exists an i such thatj=π(i). Constraint (3) ensures that for each i there exists aj such thatj=π(i). Constraints (4) computes the sum of the kth column of the rotated matrix Cπ. Constraint (5) sets the value of the objective function equal to the maximum column sum of the rotated matrix Cπ. The CBAP is an NP-hard problem. The proof of NP-hardness is provided in Appendix B.As an illustrative example, consider the following (3 × 3) row circular matrix:C=[642888770]Applying the two permutationsπ1=(1,2,3)andπ2=(1,3,2)of the set {1, 2, 3} to matrix C yields the following rotated matrices:C(1,2,3)=[642888707],C(1,3,2)=[642888077]Since the column sums corresponding to permutations π1 and π2 are 21, 12, 17 and 14, 19, 17, respectively, the optimal solution is given by permutation π2 yielding a minimum Z value of 19. Note that due to the row circularity, we need to consider only 2 permutations in this example and(n−1)!permutations in general. While the optimal solution in this example is given by π2, the optimal solution to the standard assignment problem is given by π1 with a minimum objective value of 12. Before closing this section, we note that if the set of constraints given in (5) is replaced by the single constraint Z ≥ I1, then we get the classical assignment problem. To see this, definex^i,j={xi,jifj=1xi,2−j+nif2≤j≤nNow the problem{(1)−(4),Z≥I1,(6)}is equivalent toMin∑i=1n∑j=1nCi,jx^i,js.t.∑i=1nx^i,j=1∀j,∑j=1nx^i,j=1∀i,x^i,j∈{0,1}, which is the assignment problem.As mentioned earlier the model stated above has applications in healthcare scheduling and supply chain management. Two specific applications of this model are described below.The problem arises in surgical scheduling in a hospital setting. Surgeons operate on patients in the surgery unit. After completion of the surgery, patients are sent to the recovery unit. Assume that there are n types of surgeries that need to be performed over a planning horizon of n time periods (e.g. days). The goal is to develop a cyclic surgery schedule so as to minimize congestion in the recovery unit. Cyclic means that the schedule is repeated every n days. Also assume that the surgery unit is open every day; that exactly one type of surgery must occur in each time period; and that patients do not stay more than n days in the recovery unit. (The last assumption does not lose generality. If patients are allowed to stay more than n days in the recovery unit, an equivalent problem can be formulated in which patients stay at most n days.) For the case in which the identity permutation,π(i)=i∀i, is the current schedule (or assignment, i.e. surgery type i is scheduled on day i), Ci, jrepresents the number of patients that are operated on day i and are then sent to the recovery unit to remain there until the end of day(i+j−1). In general for a permutation π of the setN≡{1,2,…,n}, the kth column sum, Ik, of the rotated matrix Cπrepresents the number of patients remaining in the recovery unit at the end of day k. The maximum column sum of the rotated matrix Cπrepresents the maximum number of patients in the recovery unit over the planning horizon. It is desirable to keep the maximum number of patients as low as possible in order to reduce the requirement of beds, nurses and other variable costs. Then, it is reasonable to ask if there exists a different permutation that can reduce the maximum number of patients. Suppose, for example, for a given permutation π, we can find another permutation π′ such thatπ′(1)=π(2),π′(2)=π(1),andπ′(i)=π(i)∀3≤i≤nand the maximum column sum of the rotated matrixCπ′is less than that of Cπ. Then, in this case, the hospital can reduce the congestion in the recovery unit by creating a new schedule in which the positions of the surgeons that are scheduled on day 1 and day 2 are swapped and all the other surgeons keep their existing positions in the schedule. Of course, we assume that such a swap is always possible.The problem arises in minimizing the space requirements in a retail store. Suppliers deliver n different types of goods on n different days, i.e. exactly one type of product is delivered per day. In this application, Ci, jrepresents the amount of space required at the beginning of day(i+j−1)for products delivered on day i. Again, we assume that suppliers deliver according to a cyclic scheduling; that the planning horizon is n days; that the retail store is open every day; and that no product stays in the store for more than n days. The identity permutation represents the current schedule, and Ikrepresents the space requirement at the beginning of day k. Assuming that suppliers delivering on day i can be swapped with those that make deliveries on day i′ for any 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ i′ ≤ n, i ≠ i′, the importance of the objectiveminmaxk=1n∑i=1nCi,kπis to minimize the maximum space requirement.The CBAP presented in Section 2 is solved using the CI algorithm (refer to Appendix A for a description of the basic algorithm). The adaption and implementation of CI methodology for this problem is discussed below in detail.In the context of the CI algorithm the elements of the rearrangement/permutation vectorπ=(π(1),…,π(i),…,π(n))are considered the characteristics/attributes/qualities that candidates in the cohort select and are associated with. The procedure begins with the initialization of number of cohort candidates S, number of variations Y, the permutation πsof every candidates,(s=1,…,S)and the convergence parameter ɛ and maximum number of allowable learning attempts Lmax.In the cohort of S candidates, every individual candidates,(s=1,…,S)randomly generates a permutationπs=(π(1)s,…,π(i)s,…,π(n)s). Every candidate s forms matrixCπsby applying its permutation πsand rotating all the corresponding n rows of matrix C accordingly. This way, S rotated matrices(Cπ1,…,Cπs,…,CπS)are formed. Next the associated vector of maximum column sums is calculated asZS={Z(Cπ1),…,Z(Cπs),…,Z(CπS)}whereZ(Cπs)=maxk=1nIkandIk=∑i=1nCi,k−π(i)s+1s.Step 1. As a minimization problem, the probability Psof selecting a column sumZ(Cπs)of every candidate is calculated as follows:(7)Ps=1/Z(Cπs)∑s=1S1/Z(Cπs),(s=1,…,S)Step 2. Every candidates,(s=1,…,S)using a roulette wheel approach selects a candidateS︷∈(1,…,S)in the cohort to follow, i.e. it incorporates an element from withinπs︷into its existing permutation πs. Following a permutation means incorporating certain elements from withinπs︷into πs. More specifically, an elementπ(i)s︷from withinπs︷is selected randomly. Then the selected elementπ(i)s︷is identified in πsalong with its location. It then swaps its position with the element at the location in πscorresponding to its current location inπs︷. This way every candidate generates Y number of permutations represented asΠs,Y={πs,1,…,πs,y,…,πs,Y},s=1,…,Sand further computes the associated maximum column sumsZ(Cπs)Y={Z(Cπs)1,…,Z(Cπs)y,…,Z(Cπs)Y},s=1,…,S. The minimum from withinZ(Cπs)Yfor every candidates,(s=1,…,S)is found along with the associated permutation.Step 3. If either of the two criteria listed below is valid, accept any of the matrices from within the pool of current available rotated matricesCπs,(s=1,…,S)as the saturated/converged matrix C* and associated permutation π* as the final solution and stop, else continue to Step 1.(a)If the maximum number of learning attempts is exceeded.The cohort reaches a saturation state. There is no significant improvement in the elements of ZSand the difference between these elements is not very significant if further learning attempts are considered. That is, the cohort saturates to the same minimum column sum for any other number of successive learning attempts.The CI algorithm for solving CBAP is now illustrated for the example shown in Fig. 1 below. In this example, the number of candidates isS=3,the number of variations isY=2, and the number of learning attempts isL=1. The initial C matrix is shown in Fig. 1.1.The candidates randomly generate permutations represented as π1, π2, and π3 in Fig. 1(a). Then the corresponding rotated matrices(Cπ1,Cπ2,Cπ3)and associated maximum column sumsZ3={Z(Cπ1),Z(Cπ2),Z(Cπ3)}are obtained.The probabilityPs,s=1,2,3is calculated using Eq. (7). The calculated probability values are presented in Fig. 1(a).Using roulette wheel selection approach, assume that candidate 1 decides to follow candidate 3 and then generates two variations of the permutationsΠ1,2={π1,1,π1,2}and associated maximum column sumsZ(Cπ1,1)andZ(Cπ1,2)are calculated.FurtherZ(Cπ1)=min(Z(Cπ1,1),Z(Cπ1,2))and associated permutationπ1=π1,1are identified.In this way, candidates 2 and 3 also follow certain candidate in the cohort and find theZ(Cπ2)andZ(Cπ3)along with associated π2 and π3.This process continues until convergence.The CI algorithm discussed in Section 2.2 for solving the CBAP is coded in MATLAB 7.7.0 (R2008B). The simulations are run on a Windows platform using an Intel Core2 Quad CPU, 2.6 gigahertz processor speed and 4 gigabytes memory capacity. The CI parameters such as number of candidates S and number of variations T are chosen to be 25 and 5, respectively. The problem size is determined by the order n × n  of matrix C. In total, seventeen distinct cases with increasing problem size n = 5–13, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50 are solved. For every case, 10 instances are generated and every instance is solved 20 times using the CI method. The CI saturation/convergence plot for problem instancen=30is presented in Fig. 2. This plot exhibits the self-adaptive learning behavior of every candidate in the cohort. Initially, the individual behavior/solution of every candidate in the cohort can be easily distinguished. The behavior/solution here refers to the maximum column sum Z of the rotated matrix Cπ. As every candidate adopts the qualities of other candidates to improve its own solution, the entire cohort gradually reaches a saturation stage and converges to an improved solution. It is important to mention here that the saturation associated restart procedure implemented in the original CI approach (Kulkarni et al., 2013) which helped the candidates to explore further in the close neighborhood of their recently adopted qualities is not required.In Table 1 we report our computational results obtained by solving the IP model given in (1)–(6) for different values of the problem size n. For the solution quality, Table 1 shows the percentage gap between the best objective function values of solutions obtained using the LP relaxation of the model, CPLEX, the CI and MRSLS procedures. The percentage gap value between solution results of method X versus method Y is computed as|ZY−ZX|×100%/ZX.These results are also summarized graphically in Fig. 3. First, as can be seen from columns 2 and 3 of Table 1, the LP relaxation of the model yields a tight lower bound that tends to improve as n is increased. This is a useful finding as it allows us to assess the performance of the CI method for large problem sizes. Indeed, as is evident from Fig. 3(a), the times taken by CPLEX to solve the problem grow exponentially large as n increases. Unfortunately, we are able to report the CPU times for CPLEX only for n not exceeding 13. For n larger than 13, the times become prohibitively lengthy. That being said, a close examination of Table 1 reveals that the performance of CI method in solving CBAP is excellent both in terms of the percentage gap between the objective function values and the run times to solve the problem. For example, for n = 13, CPLEX takes close to 1073 seconds to reach an optimal solution whereas CI takes less than a second to produce a solution yielding an objective-value gap relative to CPLEX of less than 0.3 percent. Also, the overall CPU time (refer to Fig. 3(e)) for CI is significantly less as compared to CPLEX. Furthermore, for comparatively smaller size cases, the solution obtained using CI method confirms with the CPLEX solution. An important observation from Table 1 and Fig. 3(c) and (d) is that similar to the percentage difference between the solution obtained using LP relaxation and CPLEX, the percentage difference between solution obtained using CI procedure and LP relaxation reduces gradually as the problem size increases. This demonstrates the noteworthy ability of CI in solving larger size problems with reasonable accuracy and also underscores its competitiveness with the CPLEX. Furthermore, the CI method could achieve the optimum solution for every case of the problem in reasonable number of function evaluations (FE). In addition, it is evident from Table 1 and Fig. 3(f) and (g) that the average number of FE is found to be increasing linearly while the standard deviation (SD) remains almost stable as the problem size increases. Since the search space increases with an increase in problem size, the number of characteristics a candidate learns from the other candidate being followed in a learning attempt does not change. This results into an increase in the number of learning attempts in order to improve their individual solution and eventually reach the saturation stage. Also, the SD presented in Table 1 demonstrates that the CI approach produces sufficiently robust solution for every case of the problem.In addition, we compare the performance of the CI method for solving the CBAP to that of a local search technique that moves from one solution π1 to another neighboring solution π2 according to some prescribed rule. The following multi-random-start local search (MRSLS) is considered. In step 1, a starting solution (or permutation of the set{1,2,…,n}).π1=(i1,…,ik,i,j,…,in)is randomly generated and a value forZ(Cπ1)is obtained. In step 2, we use a pairwise interchange approach to generate a neighboring solution π2 which is given byπ2=(i1,…,ik,j,i,…,in); that is, the two elements i  and j occupying adjacent positions in the current solution are interchanged. We then calculate the correspondingZ(Cπ2)value. In step 3, the incumbent best solution is updated to π2 ifZ(Cπ2)<Z(Cπ1); otherwise π1 is kept as the best incumbent solution found so far (ties may be broken arbitrarily). The process is continued by performing and evaluating other pairwise interchange until a stopping criterion is met. Furthermore, for every individual CBAP case considered, MRSLS is run 50 times with different initialization. Also, for a meaningful comparison, every MRSLS case is initialized to start in the neighborhood of the CI's starting point and is run for exactly the same time equal to the corresponding average CPU time the CI method takes to solve that case. The results are summarized in Table 1, Fig. 3(c) and (h). The results show that, while the CI method in most cases has a slight edge over MRSLS in terms of optimality gap, the two methods perform quite well in finding good solutions to the CBAP.The Sea Cargo Mix (SCM) problem is originally proposed in Ang et al. (2007). The decision problem consists of choosing a sea cargo shipping schedule of accepted freight bookings over a multi-period planning horizon. The goal is to maximize profit subject to constraints such as the limited available volume capacity, weight capacity and the number of available containers at the port of origin. The mathematical formulation of this problem, which can be viewed as a multi-dimension multiple knapsack problem (MDMKP), is discussed below.NomenclatureT˜set of time periods{1,…,t,…,T}. Each period may represent one day, one week or one month, etc.set of ports of destinations for cargoes{1,…,j,…,J}.set of all cargoes{1,…,k,…,K}received in the planning horizon.the period that cargo k will be received at the port of origin.the shipment due date for cargo k. Each cargo has its due date requested by shipper in its booking status.the port of destination for cargo k. Cargo k will be received in period ηkand will be shipped to its destination port ξkon or before its due date τk.per volume profit of cargo k which will be shipped in period t. It can be interpreted as the per volume net profit of cargo k, i.e., per volume revenue of cargo k minus its per volume delivery cost and inventory cost.total volume of available empty containers at the port of origin in period t.total available volume capacity of shipment to port j in period t.maximum allowable weight capacity of shipment to port j  in period t.volume of cargo k.weight of cargo k.binary variable, i.e.,xkt=1, if cargo k is ready for shipment in period t;xkt=0, otherwise.Subject to(9)∑k∈Kt˜vkxkt≤Et,∀t∈T˜(10)∑k∈Ktj˜vkxkt≤Vtj,∀t∈T˜,∀j∈J˜(11)∑k∈Ktj˜wkxkt≤Wtj,∀t∈T˜,∀j∈J˜(12)∑ηk≤t≤τkxkt≤1,∀k∈K˜(13)xkt∈{0,1},∀k∈K˜,t{ηk,ηk+1,…,τk}whereKt˜={k:k∈K˜,ηk≤t≤τk},∀t∈T˜,Ktj˜={k:k∈K˜,ηk≤t≤τk,ξk=j},∀t∈T˜,j∈J˜.The objective function (8) maximizes the total profit generated by all freight bookings accepted in the multi-period planning horizon T. Constraint (9) ensures that the demand for empty containers at the port of origin is less than or equal to the number of all available empty containers at the port of origin in each period. Constraint (10) ensures that the total volume of cargoes which will be carried to port j in period t is less than or equal to the total available volume capacity of shipment to port j in period t. Constraint (11) indicates that the total weight of cargoes which will be carried to port j in period t is less than or equal to the total available weight capacity of shipment to port j in period t. Constraint (12) stipulates that each cargo may be carried in a certain period on or before its due date or refused to be carried in the time horizon T. Constraint (13) states that each cargo is either accepted in its entirety or turned down.There are J destination ports and T periods in the problem, and each cargo is either to be delivered within its due date or refused to be carried in the planning horizon. Thus, the total number of knapsacks is T × J. Moreover, for each knapsack, there are three constraint sets, i.e., the set associated with the number of available empty containers, amount of available volume capacity and amount of available weight capacity.In the context of CI algorithm presented in Appendix A, the elements of cargo assignment setC=ktξkformed by assigning every cargok,k∈{1,2,…,K}to a periodt∈{1,2,…,T}being shipped to its port of destination ξkare considered as characteristics/attributes/qualities of the cohort candidate. The port of destination ξkfor every cargok∈{1,2,…,K}is selected based on the condition below.(14)ξk=j,if[K/J]×(j−1)<k≤[K/J]×j,forj=1,2,…,J−1ξk=J,if[K/J]×(j−1)<k≤K,otherwiseThe CI algorithm begins with the initialization of number of cohort candidates S, number of variations Y, the cargo assignment set Csof every candidates,(s=1,…,S), the convergence parameter ɛ and maximum number of allowable learning attempts Lmax.In the cohort, every candidates,(s=1,…,S)randomly assigns every cargock,k∈{1,2,…,K}to a periodt∈{1,2,…,T}to be shipped to destination ξkand forms a cargo assignment set (behavior)Cs=kts,ξkand associated per volume profit are calculated asRs=∑k=1K∑t=11rk,ts.Step 1. (Constraint handling) As a maximization problem, the probability associated with per volume profit of cargo Rsis calculated as follows:(15)pRs=Rs∑s=1SRs,(s=1,…,S)There are constraints involved such as:1.demand of empty containers∑kvk,tsat the port of origin should be less than or equal to the number of all available empty containers Etat the port of origin in each periodt∈{1,2,…,T}total volume of cargoes∑kvk,jswhich will be carried to portj∈{1,2,…,J}in periodt∈{1,2,…,T}is less than or equal to the total available volume capacity Vt, j, andtotal weight of cargoes∑kwk,jswhich will be carried to portj∈{1,2,…,J}in periodt∈{1,2,…,T}is less than or equal to the corresponding total available weight capacity Wt, j.Kulkarni and Shabir (2014) propose a modified approach to the CI method for solving knapsack problems. This approach makes use of probability distributions for handling constraints. This approach is also adopted here. For every constraint type as described in 1, 2 and 3 above a probability distribution is developed (refer to Fig. 4) and the probability is calculated based on the following rules:1.If0≤∑kvk,ts≤Et,∀t, then based on the probability distribution presented in Fig. 4(a)pEts=slope1,Et×(∑kvk,ts−Et), elsepEts=slope1,Et×(0.001%Et).If0≤∑kvk,js≤Vt,j,∀t,∀j, then based on the probability distribution presented in Fig. 4(b)pVt,js=slope1,Vt,j×(∑kvk,js−Vt,j), elsepVt,js=slope1,Vtj×(0.001%Vt,j).If0≤∑kwk,js≤Wt,j,∀t,∀j, then based on the probability distribution presented in Fig. 4(c)pWt,js=slope1,Wt,j×(∑kwk,js−Wt,j), elsepWtjs=slope1,Wtj×(0.001%Wt,j).As represented in Fig. 4, the slope1, Et,slope1,Vt,jandslope1,Wt,jrepresent the slope of lines going through points((0, 1), (Et, 0)), ((0, 1), (Vtj, 0)) and ((0, 1), (Wtj, 0)), respectively. The overall (total) probability of selecting candidates to follow candidates,(s=1,…,S)is calculated as follows:(16)ps=(pRs+∑tpEts+∑t∑jpVt,js+∑t∑jpWt,js)It is clear from the above rules for probability calculation that the candidate's behavior/solution/cargo assignment with better objective and constraint values closer to the boundaries will have higher probability of being followed.Step 2.Every candidate generates Y new variations of the cargo assignment using two steps, which we refer to as ‘learning from others’ and ‘introspection’, as follows:1.Learning from others: Every candidates,(s=1,…,S)using roulette wheel approach (Liu et al., 2010; Schittkowski, 1985; Xu et al., 2013) selects a candidates︷∈(1,…,S)(not known in advance) in the cohort to follow, i.e. it incorporates an element from withincs︷into its existing cargo assignment cs. More specifically, a quality from withincs︷is selected randomly. Then the selected element is identified in csalong with its location. It then swaps its position with the element at the location in cscorresponding to its current location incs︷. This way every candidates,(s=1,…,S)generates Y/2 cargo assignments.Introspection: In addition, every candidates,(s=1,…,S)randomly selects an element from within its one of the periodst,(t=1,…,T)and relocates it to another period. This way every candidates,(s=1,…,S)generates further Y/2 cargo assignments.This way every candidate forms a total of Y new variationsCs,Y={cs,1,…,cs,y,…,cs,Y}and computes associated per volume profit and constraint functions.Step 3.As discussed in Step 1, every candidates,(s=1,…,S)calculates its corresponding probability vectorPs,Y={ps,1,…,ps,y,…,ps,Y}. Furthermore, based on the feasibility-based rules shown below, the candidate accepts or rejects the solution associated with the maximum total probability value, i.e.max{ps,1,…,ps,y,…,ps,Y}.The feasibility-based rules are as follows:Accept the current behavior/solution if1.the cargo assignment in the previous learning attempt is feasible and current behavior/cargo assignment is also feasible with improved per volume profitthe cargo assignment in the previous learning attempt is infeasible and the current behavior/cargo assignment is feasiblethe cargo assignment in the previous learning attempt is infeasible and the current behavior/cargo assignment is also infeasible with the maximum total probability value improved;Otherwise, reject the current behavior/solution and retain the previous one if1.the cargo assignment in the previous learning attempt is feasible and current cargo assignment is infeasiblethe cargo assignment in the previous learning attempt is feasible and the current cargo assignment is also feasible with worse per volume profitthe cargo assignment in the previous learning attempt as well as current learning attempt are infeasible and the total probability value is lesser than the previous learning attempt.After the completion of step 3, a cohort with S updated cargo assignments{c1,…,cs,…,cS}is now available.Step 4.If either of the two criteria listed below is valid, accept the best possible cargo assignment from within the available{c1,…,cs,…,cS}in the cohort as the final solution c* and stop, else continue to Step 1(a)If maximum number of learning attempts exceeded orThe cohort is saturated, i.e. if cohort candidates saturate to the same cargo assignment for any other number of successive learning attempts.The following notation is used to describe the results of our numerical experiments:NvNumber of decision variable in the problemNumber of constraints in the problemNumber of tested instancesUpper boundInteger programming solution (branch-and-bound method)LP relaxationHeuristic algorithm for MDMKP (HAM) (refer to Ang et al., 2007)Modified heuristic algorithm for MDMKP (MHA) (refer to Ang et al., 2007)Cohort intelligence (CI) methodMulti-Random-Start Local SearchAverage percentage gap between the best objective value of the solutions obtained using methods X and ZAverage percentage gap between the average objective value of the solutions obtained using methods X and ZWorst percentage gap between the worst objective value of the solutions obtained using methods X and ZAverage computational time (in seconds) of algorithmXStandard deviation of CPU time for CI methodStandard deviation of percentage gap between objective value of the solutions obtained using methods X and ZThe CI approach for solving the SCM Problem discussed in Section 3.1 is coded in MATLAB 7.7.0 (R2008B). The simulations are run on a Windows platform with an Intel Core2 Quad CPU, 2.6 gigahertz processor speed and 4 gigabytes memory capacity. For this model, we solve 18 distinct cases. These cases, which are originally proposed in Ang et al. (2007), are presented in Tables 2, 3 and 4. For every case, 10 instances are generated and every instance is solved 10 times using the CI method. The instances are generated as suggested in Ang et al. (2007). The per volume profit rk, tfor cargok,(k=1,…,K)shipped in periodt,(t=1,…,T)are uniformly generated in the interval [0.01, 1.01]. The volume vkand weight wkof every cargock,(k=1,…,K)are uniformly generated from the interval [100, 200]. The number of all available empty containers Etat the port of origin in each periodt∈{1,2,…,T}are uniformly generated from the interval [100 × (K/T), 200 × (K/T)], and the total volume Vt, jand weight Wt, jof cargoes which are carried to portj∈{1,2,…,J}in periodt∈{1,2,…,T}are uniformly generated from the interval [100 × (K/T), 200 × (K/T)].The CI parameters such as number of candidates S and number of variations Y are chosen to be 3 and 15, respectively. The CI saturation/convergence plot for one problem instance given by(T,J,K)=(4,13,5479)is presented in Fig. 5. The plot exhibits the self-adaptive learning behavior of every candidate in the cohort. Initially, the distinct behavior/solution of every individual candidate in the cohort can be easily distinguished. The behavior/solution here refers to the total profit generated by all freight bookings accepted in the multi-period planning horizon T. As each candidate adopts the qualities of other candidates to improve its own behavior/solution, the behavior of the entire cohort saturates/converges to an improved solution.The best and average CI solution for the objective function value for every case is compared with the associated upper bound (UB) solution achieved by solving the LP relaxation of the problem, and the integer programming (IP) solution. In addition, the solution is compared to the solution of the LP relaxation, and the problem-specific heuristic algorithm for MDMKP (HAM) and the modified heuristic algorithm for MDMKP (MHA) developed in Ang et al. (2007). The numerical results are presented in Tables 2, 3 and 4 along with the graphical illustration in Fig. 6. It is important to mention here that IP is not able to solve large-scale SCM problems.It is evident from the results in Tables 2–4 and the plots given in Figs. 6–7(a)(d) that, for small scale SCM problems, the CI method produces a solution that is fairly close to the IP and UB solution. The gap gradually increases as the problem size grows; however, observe that the worst gap between the best CI solution and corresponding IP (gICI) and UB solution (gUCI) is within 1.0459 percent of the reported IP solution and 4.0405 percent of the reported UB solution, respectively. Similarly, the worst gap between the average CI solution and corresponding IP (gICI∼) and UB solution (gUCI∼ ) is within 2.2682 percent of the reported IP solution and 5.5827 percent of the reported UB solution, respectively. Also, the percent gap between the worst CI solution and corresponding IP solution (gICI∧) is within 3.0198 percent of the reported IP solution. The corresponding UB solution (gUCI∧) is within 7.1465 percent of the reported UB solution.Furthermore, as shown in Table 2–4 and Fig. 6(i) and (j), even though the standard deviation (SD) of the percent gap between the CI solution and the corresponding IP (SICI)and UB solution (SUCI) increases with the problem size, the worst SD is 0.917. Moreover, Table 2–4 and Fig. 6(f) also show that the SD (StCI) of CPU time for solving small- and medium-scale problems is within 0.046 and 0.708, respectively. For large-scale problems it is within 4.940. This is because the search space increases with an increase in problem size.For every candidate the number of characteristics to be learnt in a learning attempt from the candidate that is being followed does not change. This results into different number of learning attempts to improve their individual behavior/solution and to eventually reach the saturation/convergence state. However, it is important to mention here that the overall SD obtained by solving the entire problem set is quite reasonable which lends support to the robustness of the algorithm.Also, the percent gap between the worst CI solution and corresponding IP solution (gICI∧) is within 3.0198 percent of the reported IP solution. The corresponding UB solution (gUCI∧) is within 7.1465 percent of the reported UB solution. This demonstrates that, even though the magnitude of SICI, SUCIandStCIincreases with increase in problem size, CI is able to produce solutions with reasonable accuracy for every case of the problem. In addition, the CI method achieves the optimum solution for medium- and large-scale problems in significantly less CPU time (refer to Fig. 6(h)). This demonstrates the ability of CI in solving large problems efficiently and highlights its competitiveness with the IP approach as well as the heuristics HAM and MHA discussed in (Ang et al., 2007).In addition to the above, CI's performance is also compared to the performance of a multi-random-start local search (MRSLS) that is used to solve the Sea Cargo Mix problem. The proposed MRSLS follows a similar pairwise interchange approach that we use for the CBAP discussed in Section 2.3.2. For each of the problem instances suggested in Ang et al. (2007), a solution is first constructed. Then a pairwise interchange approach is used in every successive learning attempt where two time periods are selected randomly. Next a set of containers associated with each period is randomly chosen and then the positions of these two sets are interchanged (swapped). The MRSLS for every individual case of the SCM problem is run 50 times with different initializations. Also, for a meaningful comparison, every MRSLS case is initialized to start in the neighborhood of the CI's starting point and is run for exactly the same time equal to the corresponding average CPU time the CI method takes to solve that case. The acceptance of the resulting solution in every learning attempt depends on following feasibility-based rules (see Deb, 2000 for a detailed discussion): 1) if the existing solution is infeasible and the resulting solution has improved constraint violation, then the solution is accepted, 2) if the existing solution is infeasible and the resulting solution is feasible, then the solution is accepted, 3) if the existing solution is feasible and the resulting solution is also feasible yielding an improved objective function value Z, then the solution is accepted. If any of these conditions are not satisfied then the existing solution is retained and the resulting solution is discarded.It is important to mention here that of the 50 MRSLS runs related to the SCM problems under study, only a few of the solutions obtained are feasible. Most of solutions are outside the feasible region. This is because for every MRSLS run a starting solution is randomly chosen and this solution can be infeasible. Furthermore, the MRSLS may not be able to discover a feasible solution during the entire run. Therefore, only the best of the feasible solutions are considered for meaningful comparison with the CI approach. From Table 5, 6and 7as well as Fig. 6(a) and (k) it is clear that the rate of increase of the percentage gap between the solution obtained using MRSLS and that obtained using CPLEX is significantly more when compared to the rate of percentage gap increase between CPLEX and CI. In addition, the percentage gap between the solution obtained using MRSLS and LP relaxation for each case is also considerably larger as compared to that of CI versus LP relaxation. In short, for the Sea Cargo Mix problem, CI achieves better performance against the MRSLS implemented for this model, especially when the problem size is large.Cross-border shippers are major players in international trade and transportation (Li, Bookbinder, & Elhedhi, 2012). With the ever-changing standards of international compliance, international shippers of imported and exported goods must comply with an increasing number of regulatory constraints. The selection of shippers with cross-border compliance/non-compliance emerged as an important problem after the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) (Wong, Lawrence, & Hui, 2009) became functional in 1994 which considerably increased cargo traffic between Canada, the United States and Mexico. Selecting compliant cross-border shippers helps avoid frustrating shipment delays at border check points and also results in transportation cost savings. In this section, we examine the problem of a company that must meet a number of goals by selecting shippers for the purpose of transporting containerized cargo across borders. The company must rely on shippers that can be either compliant or non-compliant. On the one hand, a compliant shipper is more costly to use; however, it allows shorter delivery times as it can facilitate the smooth transit of cargo through the border. On the other hand, a non-compliant shipper, while cheaper to use, may take longer delivery times of the cargo to the customer's destination as it may experience inspection slowdowns at the border. The elements involved in selection of a cross-border shipper problem include the total cargo volume to be transported to customers, the total funds available over the planning period, the ability of shippers to handle special types of goods, anticipated delivery due dates, processing times for the particular good through the shipper, the type of shipper to use, etc. The mathematical formulations of the single- and multi-period problems are discussed below.NomenclatureTNumber of periods in the planning horizonNumber of containersNumber of shippersNumber of different types of goodsContainers,i=1,2,…,IShippers,j=1,2,…,JType of goods,k=1,2,…,KSet of containers of type kA binary parameter = 1, if shipper j can handle the containers of type k; = 0, otherwiseFixed cost of choosing shipper jVariable cost of shipping container i through shipper j. If a shipper cannot handle the kind of goods in a container, then the variable cost is set to a high valueMaximum capacity of shipper jVolume of container iExpected time of processing container i through shipper jDue date of container iFund availableWeight assigned to the goal of fund constraintWeight assigned to the goal of due date for container iPenalty for exceeding the limit of non-compliant shippersReward for using fewer than allowable number of non-compliant shippersA binary parameter = 1, if shipper j complies with cross-border regulations; = 0, otherwiseMaximum allowable number of non-compliant shippersMaximum capacity of shipper j in period tFund available in period tIndex for periods,t=1,2,…,TNumber of decision variables in the problemNumber of constraints in the problemNumber of tested instancesDeviational variables associated with the fund constraint in the one-period settingDeviational variables associated with the fund constraint in period tDeviational variables associated with every container i,i=1,2,…,IDeviational variables associated with the selection of the non-compliant shippers θ0Defining the decision variables asxij={1ifcontaineriisshippedthroughshipperj0otherwiseyj={1ifshipperjischosen0otherwiseleads to the following formulation:(17)Minw1d1++∑iw2id2i++w31d3+−w32d3−(18)∑ieixij≤cj∀j(19)xij≤yj∀i,j(20)∑jajyj+∑i∑jbijxij+d1−−d1+=F(21)∑jpijxij+d2i−−d2i+=Di∀i(22)∑j(1−θj)yj+d3−−d3+=θ0(23)xij=0∀i∈Δkandαjk=0(24)∑jxij=1∀i(25)xij∈{0,1},yj∈{0,1}∀i,j,t(26)d1−,d1+≥0,d2i−,d2i+∈{0,1},d3−,d3+≥0The objective function in Eq. (17) represents the deviational variables to be optimized associated with the goal constraints given in (20)–(22). Constraints in Eq. (18) represent the ‘volume capacity’ constraints which ensure that the total volume of containers assigned to the particular shipper does not exceed its maximum capacity. Constraints in Eq. (19) forcesyj=1when a shipper is selected. Constraint (20) represents the ‘fund availability’ goal constraint which ensures that the total expenditure should not exceed the available fund. The first term in Eq. (20) represents the fixed costs associated with the selected shippers and the second term represents the variable costs for shipping the containers through a particular shipper. The ‘due date delivery’ goal constraints in Eq. (21) ensure that every container should be delivered to the customer on or before the stipulated delivery date. Constraint (22) ensures that number of shippers selected should not exceed the maximum allowable non-compliant shippers. Constraints in Eq. (23) ensure that a container is not shipped through a shipper that cannot handle the type of goods in the container. Constraints in Eq. (24) ensure that each container is shipped through exactly one shipper.We define the following (binary) decision variables:x^ijt={1ifcontaineriisshippedthroughshipperjinperiodt0otherwiseyj={1ifshipperjischosen0otherwisey^jt={1ifshipperjischoseninperiodt0otherwiseThe integer linear programming is(27)Min∑tw1d^1t++∑iw2id2i++w31d3+−w32d3−(28)∑ieix^ijt≤c^jt∀j,t(29)x^ijt≤y^jt∀i,j,t(30)y^jt≤yj∀j,t(31)∑jajy^jt+∑i∑jbijx^ijt+d^1t−−d^1t+=F^t∀t(32)∑t∑j(pij+t)x^ijt+d2i−−d2i+=Di∀i(33)∑j(1−θj)yj+d3−−d3+=θ0(34)x^ijt=0∀t,i∈Δkandαjk=0(35)∑j∑tx^ijt=1∀i(36)x^ijt∈{0,1},yj∈{0,1},y^jt∈{0,1}∀i,j,t(37)d1t−,d2i−,d2i+∈{0,1}d1t+≥0,d3−,d3+≥0,Eq. (27) represents the deviational variables to be optimized. Constraint (28) represents the volume capacity constraints. Constraint (30) forcesyj=1whenever shipper j is selected. Constraint (29) forcesy^jt=1when shipperj is selected in period t. Constraint (31) represents the ‘fund availability’ goal constraint. The ‘due date delivery’ goal constraints in Eq. (32) ensure that every container should be delivered to the customer on or before the stipulated delivery date. Constraint (33) ensures that number of shippers selected does not exceed the maximum allowable non-compliant shippers. Constraint (34) ensures that a container is not shipped through a shipper that cannot handle the type of goods in the container. Constraint (35) ensures that every container is shipped through exactly one shipper on a particular period.The CI procedure is now applied to solve the Selection of Cross-border Shippers (SCBS) problem discussed in Section 4. The procedure is coded in MATLAB 7.7.0 (R2008B). In addition, the simulations are run on a Windows platform using an Intel Core2 Quad CPU, 2.6 gigahertz processor speed and 4 gigabytes memory capacity. In total, 8 distinct cases presented in Table 8 are solved for the single-period version and 18 cases presented in Table 9 are solved for the multi-period version of the problem. For every case, 10 instances are generated and every instance is solved 10 times using the CI method. The associated CI parameters such as the number of candidates S and the number of variations Y are chosen to be 3 and 10, respectively.For all the considered problem cases, the number of different types of goods is set equal toK=5. The size of the set of containersΔkfor every type of goodk=1,2,…,Kchosen for every problem is listed in Tables 8 and 9. The value of αjkrandomly chosen to be either 0 or 1 such that each goodkk=1,2,…,Kis handled by at least one shipperj=1,2,…,J. Each shipperj,j=1,2,…,J, is randomly chosen to be either compliant (θj=1) or noncompliant (θj=0). The maximum allowable number of non-compliant shippers θ0 are considered to be equal to the number of non-compliant shippers.Furthermore, the fixed costs ajfor compliant and non-compliant shippers are uniformly generated from within the intervals [100,  150] and [150, 250], respectively. The variable costs bijof shipping container i through shipper j for compliant and non-compliant shippers are uniformly generated from within the interval [20,  50] and [50, 80], respectively. Similarly, The funds available F andF^tare uniformly generated from within the interval[max(bij)+I4,max(bij)+I2],i=1,2,…,Iandj=1,2,…,J. The maximum capacities cjandc^jtand the volumesei,i=1,2,…,I,are uniformly generated from within the interval [200,  900] and [10,  25], respectively. In addition, the expected processing times pijof container i through shipper j for both compliant and non-compliant shippers are uniformly selected from within the interval [T/2, T] and [1, T], respectively. Finally, the due dates Di,i=1,2,…,I,are randomly generated from within[min(pij),(max(pij)+1)],i=1,2,…,Iandj=1,2,…,J. Note that all the goals are considered equally important and are assigned weights equal to 1.The average CI solution for every case is compared with the associated Integer Programming (IP) solution obtained by using CPLEX. The IP could solve the single period problem up to number of shippersj=8and number of containersI=965, i.e. with 9662 variables and 8695 constraints. The performance comparison of the IP and CI solution is presented in Tables 8 and 9 along with the graphical illustration in Figs. 7 and 8.It is evident from the results in Tables 8 and 9 and plot presented in Figs. 7(a) and 8(a) that for the smaller sized problems, the CI method could produce the solution comparatively closer, i.e. within 6 percent of the reported IP solution. The difference gradually increased as the problem size grew; however, the maximum gap between the average CI solution and corresponding IP is noted to be within 12 percent of the reported IP solution. Also, it is clear from Tables 8 and 9 and Fig. 7(b), (c), 8(b) and (c) that the CPU time for CI solving the problem with the smaller cases is more than the IP; however, the rate of increase is significantly lesser than that of IP. The increase in the time for CI is because the search space increased with problem size; however for every candidate the number of characteristics to be learnt in a learning attempt from the other candidate being followed did not change, which resulted in increased number of learning attempts and time to improve their individual behavior/solution and further reach the saturation/convergence. This is evident in Fig. 7(d) and 8(d) that the standard deviation (SD) of the CPU time for solving the problem increased with the increase in problem size.In addition to the above, the performance of the CI method is also compared to a multi-random-start local search (MRSLS), which is carried out to find good solutions to both the single- and multi-period SCBS problem. The MRSLS implemented for this problem is similar in nature to the one used for finding solutions to the Sea Cargo Mix problem (see Section 4.1). Our MRSLS is again based on a pair-wise interchange argument to generate a neighboring solution from the one currently being assessed. More specifically, an initial solution is first constructed. This solution specifies an assignment of containers to shippers. To construct an alternative solution from the existing one, two shippers are randomly selected. Then, for each shipper, a subset of cargoes that are currently assigned to this shipper are randomly chosen. In the new solution, the selected cargoes are interchanged (or swapped) among the two designated shippers. This process is continued in every successive learning attempt until a stopping criteria is met.For each of the case problems considered (Tables 8 and 9), the MRSLS for the single- and multi-period SCBS problems is run 50 times with different initializations. Also, for a meaningful comparison, every MRSLS case is initialized to start in the neighborhood of the CI's starting point and is run for exactly the same time equal to the corresponding average CPU time the CI method takes to solve that case. Similar to the (SCM) problem, the acceptance of the resulting solution in every learning attempt depends on the following feasibility-based rules (Deb, 2000): 1) if the existing solution is infeasible and the resulting solution has improved constraint violation, then the solution is accepted, 2) If the existing solution is infeasible and the resulting solution is feasible, then the solution is accepted, 3) if the existing solution is feasible and the resulting solution is also feasible and the objective function has improved objective, then the solution is accepted. If any of these conditions are not satisfied then the existing solution is retained and the resulting solution is discarded.It is important to mention here again that for many of the MRSLS runs carried out to completion for the single- and multi-period case problems, only few solutions are feasible and most of them do not satisfy the feasibility conditions. This is because for every MRSLS run a solution is randomly initialized which could be infeasible and MRSLS further might not have been able to discover a feasible solution. Therefore, only the best of the feasible solutions obtained using MRSLS are considered for comparison with the CI. From Tables 8 and 9 as well as from Figs. 7(a), (e), (f) and 8(a), (e) and (f) it can be seen that the rate of increase of the percentage gap between the solution obtained using MRSLS and that obtained using CPLEX is significantly more when compared to the rate of percentage gap increase between CPLEX and CI. In addition, the percentage gap between the solution obtained using MRSLS and CPLEX per case is also considerably larger than the one achieved for CPLEX versus CI. In other words, CI has performed significantly better than MRSLS in finding good solutions to the SCBS problem.The emerging optimization technique of cohort intelligence (CI) is successfully applied to solve three selected combinatorial optimization problems; namely, a new variant of the assignment problem, which has applications in healthcare and supply chain management; a sea cargo mix problem; and a cross-border shippers’ problem. For each problem, a specific CI algorithm is developed. The results indicate that the accuracy of solutions to these problems obtained using CI is fairly robust and the computational time is quite reasonable. Furthermore, the usefulness of CI in satisfactorily solving goal programming problems is also demonstrated in this paper.The guiding principles of CI as an optimization procedure are grounded in artificial intelligence (AI) concepts. CI models the self-supervising behavior of a group of people seeking approximately the same goal. The self-supervising nature and rational behavior of the candidates among the cohort is illustrated along with the learning process that takes place among the candidates in order to further improve their individual characteristics/qualities. Furthermore, the inherent ability of the CI algorithm in handling complicated constraints lends to its applicability in solving real world complex problems. In addition, it is evident from the results that the variability as measured by standard deviation (SD) in the quality of solutions obtained using CI is commendable and remains almost stable as the problem size increases. This is because, even though the search space increases as the problem size increases, the number of characteristics in a learning attempt that needs to be learnt by a candidate who is following the behavior of another candidate does not change. This results in an increase in the number of learning attempts in order to improve candidates’ individual solutions and to finally reach the cohort's global solution.Some limitations of the CI method should also be identified. The rate of convergence and the quality of the solution is dependent on the parameters such as the number of candidates and the number of variations. These parameters are derived empirically over numerous experiments and their calibration requires some preliminary trials. It should also be observed that the number of characteristics attempted to adopt/learn is an important parameter when dealing with combinatorial optimization problems. As fewer characteristics are considered during the learning stage, this may delay the method's convergence rate significantly. The procedure may get stuck in the neighborhood of a local minimum, which may result into premature convergence. How to fine-tune the CI parameters and what to decide on the number of characteristics that needs to be learned by a candidate in every learning attempt can be done in an evolutionary and adaptive way as discussed inEiben and Smit (2011). This may also help in increasing the accuracy of the solution as well as reducing the SD and overall performance of the algorithm. In addition, it should also be observed that the initial guess of the candidate solutions can affect the computational time of the algorithm. More specifically, if the initial candidate solutions are closer to the feasible region the chances of achieving saturation/convergence and reaching the optimal solution faster are high.The paper also describes the application of a multi-random-start local search (MRSLS) that can be used to solve these three problems. The MRSLS implemented here is based on the interchange argument, a valuable technique often used in sequencing, whereby the elements of two adjacent solutions are randomly interchanged in the process of searching for better solutions. Our findings are that the performance of the CI is clearly superior to that of the MRSLS for many of the problem instances that have been solved. However, it should be noted that the two methods perform equally well in solving the CBAP, in part due the special structure of the problem.In agreement with the no-free-lunch theorem (Patankar, Kulkarni, Tai, Ghate, & Parvate, 2014), any algorithm may not be directly applicable to solve all the problem types unless it can be enhanced by incorporating some useful techniques or heuristics. The CI method may also benefit from certain performance-enhancing techniques when it is applied to different classes of problems. A mechanism to solve multi-objective problems is currently being developed, which can prove helpful in transforming the model's constraints into objectives/criteria (see Deb, 2000 and Patankar et al., 2014 for new development in this area). This can help reduce the dependency on the quality of the candidates’ initial guess.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
