@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated model for screening cargo containers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We apply knapsack analysis to the problem of screening for nuclear materials.The analysis considers various levels of intelligence based “pre-screening”.We illustrate the effectiveness of screening methods using speculative values.The analysis models a range of threats when screening for nuclear material.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cargo container security,Port security,Linear programming,Multiple-choice knapsack problems,OR in government,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper focuses on detecting nuclear weapons on cargo containers using port security screening methods, where the nuclear weapons would presumably be used to attack a target within the United States. This paper provides a linear programming model that simultaneously identifies optimal primary and secondary screening policies in a prescreening-based paradigm, where incoming cargo containers are classified according to their perceived risk. The proposed linear programming model determines how to utilize primary and secondary screening resources in a cargo container screening system given a screening budget, prescreening classifications, and different device costs. Structural properties of the model are examined to shed light on the optimal screening policies. The model is illustrated with a computational example. Sensitivity analysis is performed on the ability of the prescreening in correctly identifying prescreening classifications and secondary screening costs. Results reveal that there are fewer practical differences between the screening policies of the prescreening groups when prescreening is inaccurate. Moreover, devices that can better detect shielded nuclear material have the potential to substantially improve the system’s detection capabilities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the most catastrophic events for the United States would be a domestically-detonated nuclear weapon, which would lead to the loss of numerous lives and devastate the economy. It is known that terrorist groups are trying to obtain nuclear material to build a weapon of mass destruction (WMD), which would then presumably be smuggled and detonated within the United States. A nuclear attack would be within the realm of possibility, since there have been several cases of weapons-grade nuclear material being stolen (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2007). Reducing the risk of a nuclear attack in the United States can be achieved in part by improving security screening in the transportation sector. Cargo container screening at United States ports is a critical component in the nuclear security system, since cargo containers are viewed as a likely avenue for smuggling WMDs into the United States (Fritelli, 2005).This paper focuses on cargo container screening and port security, since the United States economy largely depends on its port capabilities for trade. McNicholas (2008) states that with regards to warfare and criminal or terrorist attacks, “no sector is more dangerously exposed than ports.” Programs and legislation such as C-TPAT, the 24-Hour Rule, the Container Security Initiative, and Secure Freight Initiative, have been created to reduce illegal material (e.g., drugs and weapons) from being smuggled into the United States. These programs allow the United States to enforce increased security measures for incoming cargo containers. These initiatives have been used to supply foreign and domestic ports with screening devices for detecting nuclear threats within cargo containers (McNicholas, 2008).Port security operations consist of a multi-layer security screening system. Before containers depart from a foreign port, the Automated Targeting System (ATS) is used to prescreen and classify the risk associated with the individual container (Strohm, 2006). When a container arrives at a domestic port, it goes through routine primary screening procedures. Port security screening devices for nuclear or radioactive material are often radioactive isotope identification devices (RIIDs), radiation portal monitors (RPMs), and X-ray imaging devices (McNicholas, 2008). Primary screening can consist of several such devices, which in combination yields a primary screening alarm, suggesting that a threat item may exist within the container, or the container is cleared, where it continues along its route. Containers that yield a primary screening alarm are sent to secondary screening, where they are further inspected for nuclear material. The secondary screening outcome are again either alarm or clear, where the containers that yield a secondary screening alarm are delayed as they are physically inspected with more intrusive screening methods, such as manual detection. These delays have severe economic costs since they disrupt the flow of international trade.This paper determines how to simultaneously define primary and secondary screening decisions using linear programming models. A prescreening-based screening paradigm is considered, where each cargo container first undergoes prescreening using ATS or a similar prescreening system. Prescreening is used to classify each cargo container into a predefined prescreening group. Every primary screening policy use a combination of screening devices, where each type of screening device has associated alarm probabilities and a cost. It is assumed that there is a budget for performing both primary and secondary screening. The screening system can be viewed as a mixture of decision trees, where the decision nodes are screening procedures (applied simultaneously or sequentially) and whose chance nodes are screening outcomes. A number of different threat scenarios are considered, which include different sources used for nuclear weapons (e.g., highly-enriched uranium or plutonium), whether the source is masked and/or shielded, and the possible target for the nuclear weapon. Different screening devices have differing capabilities in detecting WMDs constructed using different sources. The linear programming model is similar in spirit to a partially-observable Markov process, where the decision variables capture observable states (the pre-screening groups and primary screening outcomes) whereas the alarm probabilities reflect the true, hidden state (the threat scenarios). A solution to the linear programming model provides a policy for defining both a primary screening alarm and a secondary screening alarm for each prescreening group. A computational example sheds light on the value of prescreening in making security screening decisions, how to balance primary and secondary screening methods, and how the dependencies between different screening methodologies affect optimal screening decisions.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review of research that is related to this paper. Section 3 proposes a linear programming model for determining the optimal primary and secondary screening decisions. Section 4 summarizes the structural properties of the model as they relate to multiple choice knapsack problem models. In Section 5, a computational example is analyzed. Section 6 provides conclusions, recommendations and future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Interdicting nuclear weapons in cargo containers is a challenging problem. This paper focuses on interdicting nuclear weapons on cargo containers via port security screening operations, where the nuclear weapons would presumably be used to attack the port or a more devastating target. This paper examines how to design cargo container screening architectures that make integrated screening decisions across primary and secondary screening using linear programming models. The resulting screening paradigm determines how to simultaneously identify optimal primary and secondary screening policies in a prescreening-based paradigm, where incoming cargo containers are classified according to their perceived risk. Structural properties of the model are examined to shed light on the optimal screening policies.There are several directions for future research. One extension is to extend the model to make screening decisions across multiple screening stations. A second extension is to extend the decision context to consider the impact of setting the device alarm thresholds (individual screening device operating characteristics). See, for example, Wein et al. (2007) and Boros et al. (2009) who examine device alarm thresholds while assuming that an escalating security policy is in place. A third extension is to consider augmenting the prescreening system by updating perceived risk estimates using device outcomes, resulting in prescreening group assignments that are fluid rather than fixed. A final extension is to include a general cost function that would capture the economic impact of screening policies, such as the effect of inspections on delays. Work is in progress to address these avenues for future research.