@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Construction heuristics for two-dimensional irregular shape bin packing with guillotine constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a new problem to the cutting and packing literature with real application.We design an new adaptive search methodology for this problem.We design a second approach using state of the art heuristics and geometry approaches.We introduce new benchmark instance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heuristic,Cutting and packing,Forest search,Bin packing,Irregular,Phi-functions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper examines a new problem in the irregular packing literature that has many applications in industry: two-dimensional irregular (convex) bin packing with guillotine constraints. Due to the cutting process of certain materials, cuts are restricted to extend from one edge of the stock-sheet to another, called guillotine cutting. This constraint is common place in glass cutting and is an important constraint in two-dimensional cutting and packing problems. In the literature, various exact and approximate algorithms exist for finding the two dimensional cutting patterns that satisfy the guillotine cutting constraint. However, to the best of our knowledge, all of the algorithms are designed for solving rectangular cutting where cuts are orthogonal with the edges of the stock-sheet. In order to satisfy the guillotine cutting constraint using these approaches, when the pieces are non-rectangular, practitioners implement a two stage approach. First, pieces are enclosed within rectangle shapes and then the rectangles are packed. Clearly, imposing this condition is likely to lead to additional waste. This paper aims to generate guillotine-cutting layouts of irregular shapes using a number of strategies. The investigation compares three two-stage approaches: one approximates pieces by rectangles, the other two approximate pairs of pieces by rectangles using a cluster heuristic or phi-functions for optimal clustering. All three approaches use a competitive algorithm for rectangle bin packing with guillotine constraints. Further, we design and implement a one-stage approach using an adaptive forest search algorithm. Experimental results show the one-stage strategy produces good solutions in less time over the two-stage approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There exist in the literature a high volume and variety of investigations into two-dimensional (2D) cutting and packing problems, which reflects the large application scope, such as ship building, shoe manufacturing, garment manufacturing and tool manufacturing, and a range of materials, for example glass, metal, wood, and textiles. Within these publications, a popular focus of research is generating cutting patterns that satisfying guillotine cutting constraints. These constrain any cut to begin at one edge of the stock sheet and continue in a straight line to another edge of the stock sheet. To the best of our knowledge, all of the algorithms are designed for solving 2D rectangular shape cutting problems where all cuts are orthogonal to the edges of the stock-sheet. Guillotine cutting with irregular pieces has not been tackled directly. In this problem, guillotine cuts are not constrained to be orthogonal to the rectangular stock sheet edges, and pieces can be continuously rotated.An example of the irregular shape bin packing problem with guillotine constraints arises from the glass cutting industry and in particular the manufacture of conservatories (glass houses). Although many of the pieces are rectangular, there is a substantial number of irregular pieces. These are convex polygons with up to five sides in general, and occasionally more. It is common for conservatories to be a bespoke design (usually based on a standard style) to fit the specific building, hence, glass is cut to order. To satisfy the guillotine cutting constraints in practice, items of irregular shapes are individually, or in pairs, enclosed within rectangles and these rectangles are then arranged into a cutting pattern. This adds a restriction that is not present in practice, which is likely to create patterns with more waste than necessary.In this paper, we implement four pattern generation strategies with the objective of minimizing the number of bins required to pack all items. Primarily, we aim to investigate the benefit of generating cutting patterns which satisfy the guillotine cutting constraint by implementing the cuts directly on the irregular shapes instead of on rectangle enclosures. This one-stage approach is based on an efficient forest search algorithm. The forest constructs multiple layouts in parallel according to a dynamic measure of the quality of the partial layout. In order to benchmark our approach we implement a state of the art rectangle guillotine cutting algorithm of Charalambous and Fleszar [6] and generate solutions by approximating each piece by its minimum area enclosing rectangle. Further, we attempt to improve on the two stage approach used in practice by using phi-functions to cluster all pairs of pieces in their minimum rectangle enclosure and use a greedy heuristic to select a subset to pack, again using the approach of Charalambous and Fleszar [6].The contributions of this paper are many. We have brought a new problem to the literature that is found in practice. As a result, there is significant scope for further research. We have designed an efficient search heuristic using a dynamic solution evaluation function. The approach can handle continuous rotation of the pieces, multiple bins, and guillotine cuts. Irregular shape packing usually constrains the number of orientations of the pieces, approaches generally only pack a single strip and to our knowledge formulations have never included guillotine constraints. Further, the paper describes a second approach, based on industry practice, but using state of the art techniques to solve the problem by first optimizing the rectangle enclosure of pairs of pieces using phi-functions and then packing using a rectangle guillotine packing approach. This in itself is new to the literature. Finally, we have also introduced new benchmark data sets for this problem.In the next section (Section 2), we give a more detailed description of the problem. In Section 3 we review some related literature on guillotine bin packing. Section 3 explains the one-stage approach, including some notation and definitions to describe the important characteristics of the problem, and details of a core function, best match, that forms the basis of the algorithm. It also includes a description of the forest search algorithm. In Section 5, we describe the two-stage approach based on the work of Charalambous and Fleszar [6], minimum rectangle clustering based on phi-functions and our greedy selection. Section 6 contains the computational study and the discussion of the results. Finally, in Section 7 we present the conclusions.The problem objective is to cut all demand pieces from the minimum number of stock sheets possible, hence it is an input minimization problem. There are sufficient standard size rectangular stock-sheets available to meet demand, where the stock sheet has length L and width W. The demand set D contains N irregular shaped pieces, where each piece is considered to be unique and the demand of each piece is one. According to the typology proposed by Wäscher et al. [16] this is a single bin size bin packing problem (SBSBPP).Further refinements to the problem type are that all pieces are convex, and usually irregular. Pieces can be rotated continuously i.e. there are no fixed rotation angles. Further, the stock sheet can be rotated. In principle this is taken care of by rotating the pieces. However, in Charalambous and Fleszar [6] the orientation of a non-square stock sheet is important. Only guillotine cuts are allowed. A guillotine cut is a single straight line cut that begins at an edge of the stock-sheet and ends at another edge. Unlike the vast majority of the literature, the cutting line is not constrained to be parallel to an edge of the stock-sheet. Often when considering guillotine constraints, pieces must be cut free from the stock sheet with a maximum number of cuts, which is typically three. In this problem there are no limits on the number cuts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper addresses the irregular shape guillotine bin packing problem, which is found in the glass cutting industry, specifically for this paper, in the manufacture of conservatories. To the authors’ best knowledge, this problem has not been addressed in the literature before. We propose a forest tree search algorithm to solve this problem approximately, which is novel in the literature. First, we develop a procedure to find the best match of any two given convex shapes, which is evaluated using a newly derived function that includes two measures: how tight the packing is and how well it approximates to the rectangular stock sheet. The emphasis between these measures is dynamic through the search. Secondly, we construct search forest by selecting only those blocks with the utilization ratio function larger than a given value. Since this is a new problem in the literature, we cannot benchmark our results against previous work. Instead, we implement a second approach, called two-stage. This clusters all possible individuals and pairs into an enclosing rectangle, greedily selects a subset of rectangle enclosures so that all pieces are represented once, then generates the bin packing layout using a recently published guillotine cutting heuristic. The forest search and two-stage, using phi-functions for pairing, perform similarly well, but the forest search is significantly faster. A fast two-stage approach uses an alternative heuristic for pairing and produces results with between 1% and 5% reduction in stock sheet utilization. We have also introduced new benchmark data sets for this problem.There is significant scope for more research on this problem, given its relevance and lack of attention by researchers. Two suggestions for investigation that build on this research are: to improve the quality of packing at the tail end of the pattern construction for the one-stage approach, and investigating a larger clusters for the two-stage approach.