@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Risk induced resource dependency in capacity investments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a theory of resource dependency due to risk aversion.For application, we propose a novel stochastic decomposition methodology.We show that resource dependency significantly impacts optimal investment decisions.Uncertainty and risk aversion are sufficient conditions for resource dependency.Analysis of resource dependent investment is important for policy and decision-support.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support,Resource dependency,Stochastic programming,OR in energy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A capacity acquisition process is resource dependent when the existing resources impact the valuation of new resources and thereby influence the investment decision. Following a formal analysis of resource dependency, we show that uncertainty and aversion to risks are sufficient conditions for resource dependent capacity acquisition. Distinct from the technology lock-in effects of increasing returns to scale or learning, risk aversion can induce diversity. We develop a stochastic programming framework and solve the optimization problem by decomposing the problem into investment and operational horizon subproblems. Our computational results for an application to the electricity sector show, inter alia, that technology choices between low carbon and fossil fuel technologies, as well as their investment timings, are dependent upon the resource bases of the companies, with scale, debt leverage and uncertainty effects increasing resource dependency. Particularly, we show that resource dependency can significantly impact the optimal investment decisions and we argue that it should be evaluated at both company and policy levels of analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The emergence of heterogeneity in the production technology mix of capital intensive industries raises fundamental questions on the dynamics of investment decision-making in practice and the specification of models in theory. With rational expectations and efficient product markets, convergence to homogenous production processes might be expected, yet heterogeneity is common and persistent in many industrial sectors. Understanding this aspect of market evolution is clearly of importance to both investors in the industry and policy-makers who might be seeking to influence the technology mix (e.g., to a low carbon economy). Although this topic in general has motivated extensive reflections upon the distinctions between resources and capabilities (Hoopes, Madsen, & Walker, 2003), the effective bundling and co-ordination of resources (Banal-Estanol & Micola, 2009), dynamic capabilities (Dierickx & Cool, 1989), and asymmetric market structure (Reynolds & Wilson, 2000), as observed by Lockett, O’Shea, and Wright (2008), the dependencies in resource acquisitions and the investment processes leading to asset heterogeneity still retain many open research questions. In particular, although a general convergence to the lowest cost technology in a highly price-competitive product market is to be expected, many technical and operational aspects can motivate different choices with different cost characteristics amongst the producers.Thus, resource dependency in capital investment has been extensively observed and researched, e.g., in diversifying into new industrial markets (Lemelin, 1982), into previously precluded and related financial product markets (Ingham & Thompson, 1995), and from the perspective of technology lock-ins, due to increasing returns (Arthur, 1989; Cowan & Gunby, 1996) and learning (Rosenberg, 1982). But the factors inducing resource dependency are various. In this paper, we focus only upon two factors, namely uncertainty in resource valuation and its associated risk aversion, which are usually crucial elements when investment decisions are made, but which have not been analyzed for inducing resource dependency, per se, in capacity acquisition. Whilst it is self-evident that different risk attitudes can motivate different investment choices, how the risks of new assets may interact with an existing resource base is a more elusive question, and how these may become a source of resource dependency invites further explicit analysis. In addressing this topic, we formulate how the concept of risk induced resource dependency can be included in capacity investment models and we apply it to a stylized model of electricity investment under revenue and carbon policy risks.More specifically, we research the topic by (i) analyzing the theoretical conditions for risk to induce resource dependency, (ii) defining a new measure for the strength of resource dependency, and (iii) formulating an innovative capacity acquisition model that includes relevant factors for resource dependency in sufficient computational detail for a practical application. We show the importance of evaluating resource dependency and the inefficiency of investment decisions if it is ignored. Furthermore, over time, as investments accumulate, the impacts of ignoring resource dependency can get amplified. Thus, a risk averse power company facing carbon policy risk and looking only at the project may delay and await clarity on new technology costs and low carbon subsidies, whilst a company looking at synergies with its resource base, may choose to act sooner and create a policy-hedged portfolio. For firms, therefore, accounting for the resource dependency provides a better understanding of the asset synergies in risk mitigation and improves optimal capacity planning. For policy makers, a misleading view of market evolution can occur if resource dependency is not considered.Our motivation for this research follows from the various market interventions that many governments have made to incentivize sustainable and low carbon technology innovations. In formulating such incentives in deregulated markets, policy makers need to understand how the participants might respond. Likewise, market participants as investors need to understand how performance in the product markets might evolve under policy risks and business risks, as well. With these perspectives in mind, our analysis is first structured in a formal way that establishes a theoretical foundation for the concept of resource dependency in capacity acquisition. We then apply this concept in a computationally intensive formulation, and develop a capacity investment optimization model with features that account for the resource dependency in both investment and operating decisions. The model is a stochastic mixed integer optimization model with a probabilistic objective function, where the integer variables are for investment selection decisions, real valued variables for operating decisions, and a probabilistic objective function captures the risk aversion. We solve the optimization problem by decomposing it into investment and operational horizon subproblems. This is done by optimizing the operational performance for new and existing resources at different times and states of the investment horizon first and then, subject to this, optimizing the investment choice and timing. By decomposing the problem this way, it becomes computationally tractable and facilitates experimental insights into our resource dependent case study.In operations research, the capacity investment problem under uncertainty has been considered in many studies using mathematical programming models (see the review by Martinez-Costa, Mas-Machuca, Benedito, & Corominas (2014)). Thus, Dangl (1999) investigates capacity investment under demand uncertainty and the impact of flexibility to delay an investment. He shows using a dynamic programming model that demand uncertainty results in more capacity and that even small uncertainty causes the investment to be delayed. Harrison and Van Mieghem (1999) study capital investment decisions under demand uncertainty including both investment and production decisions. They derive optimal investment policies and show that the invested capacity is almost never fully utilized under the realized demand levels. Eppen, Martin, and Schrage (1989) develop a capacity planning model under demand uncertainty where the amount of capacity, location, and type of facilities are being decided. They emphasize the importance of accounting for risk aversion via using a downside risk measure. The importance of accounting for the risk, and how it can be hedged, is also articulated in the review paper of Van Mieghem (2003). More recently, Yang and Ng (2014) examine the capacity acquisition problem including production decisions under demand uncertainty and financial budget constraints, deriving optimal investment policies as a function of unit capacity costs.Our approach is distinct from all those themes of work by focusing upon the impacts of existing resources on new capacity investment decisions. Particularly, we consider the impacts of existing (i) tangible resources (the number and type of existing capital assets), (ii) intangible resources (existing capital asset financing arrangements), and (iii) operating conditions (magnitude of uncertainties and flexibility in the timing of the new investment). We undertake this whilst considering uncertainties during both the investment and operating horizons. We thereby include decisions about the technology type and timing of the investment as well as operating and financing decisions for the new and existing plants. Our case study from the electricity sector offers a rich context with substantial policy risk and with strong asset specificity effects in that different kinds of technologies (e.g., nuclear, coal, gas, wind) vary in their operational risks, capital intensity, and exposure to carbon emission policies. Also, the power plants are long-lived and thereby create a sequence of large, lumpy acquisitions.Modeling capacity investment in the power sector has been a major field of methodological innovation with large-scale decomposition techniques, stochastic methods, and real options analysis being well represented. Thus, Parpas and Webster (2014) develop a stochastic optimal control model to couple both the long-term power plant investment and short-term operations decisions. They show that the problem can be solved using a dimensionality reduction technique stemming from perturbation theory. Sen, Yu, and T-Genc (2006) formulate a stochastic programming model for the power plants’ unit commitment problem including long-term decisions about the financial power contracts. They demonstrate that the problem can be solved by decomposing the problem using nested column decomposition approach into a master problem, a coordination problem for financial contracting, and a generation problem. Epe et al. (2009) model a regional power generation system as a multistage stochastic programming problem including a long-term planning horizon with short-term operational decisions. They employ recombining scenario trees and decompose the problem using nested Benders decomposition. Our formulation extends this context of work with an emphasis upon risk, resource dependency, and computational intensity.The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we formalize the resource dependency due to risk aversion and develop the optimization model that makes the investigation of the resource dependency amenable. Section 3 describes the power sector context where the model is applied and presents analysis of the computational results. Finally, in Section 4 we conclude.We begin by presenting a general utility function for risk averse resource acquisition, Section 2.1. From this, in Section 2.2 we develop theoretical properties for resource dependency. We first consider the situation in which the investment decision has to be made without flexibility to delay, and then look at the flexibility to delay the investment decision in Section 2.3.We formalize in this section the utility function used to assess the value of each resource acquisition alternativeω=1,…,G,G∈Z+with existing resourcesΩ∈Z+. We denote the random value of a new resource alternative as ζω,ω=1,..,G,random value of existing resources as ζΩ, and the utility of a new resource with existing resources asU[ζω+ζΩ]. The utility is a function of both expected value of new and existing resources, i.e.,E[ζω+ζΩ],and their risk, i.e.,R[ζω+ζΩ]. The risk aversion factor, λ ∈ (0, 1), captures the associated risk aversion the uncertainty may induce. When λ approaches 0 and 1, we have risk neutral and risk averse decision makers, respectively.(1)U(ζω+ζΩ)=(1−λ)E[ζω+ζΩ]−λR[ζω+ζΩ]The resource acquisition selection problem is thus maxωU.Throughout this paper we consider a general class of risk measures, which fulfill following basic properties.Definition 1(I)Risk of resources with random values A and B, i.e.,R[A+B],is sub-additive (Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, & Heath, 1999)(2)R[A+B]≤R[A]+R[B].R[A+B]is an increasing function of the Pearson correlation among their values, ρA, B. When the correlation is perfect,ρA,B=1,then (2) is additive.The first property in Definition 1 represents the diversification benefit of owning two resources jointly instead of separately. This requirement is fulfilled by all coherent risk measures (Artzner et al., 1999). The second property relates to the sub-additivity of risk by implying that the sub-additivity decreases when the correlation among values of resources increases. This holds for most risk measures, such as, standard deviation where the standard deviation of random values of resources A and B, i.e.,σA+B,increases when the correlation among their values, ρA, B, increases (σA+B=σA2+σB2+2ρA,BσA,Bincreases when ρA, Bincreases). Similarly, it is straight forward to show that the property holds for downside risk measures which focus on the p-th downside percentile, such as Value-at-Risk (Föllmer & Schied, 2004), i.e.,VaRp[A+B]=E[−A−B]+FA+B−1(1−p)σA+B,whereFA+B−1is the inverse of the standardized distribution function of random resource valuesA+B.We first define the externality value that existing resources provide to a new investment without flexibility in selecting the investment timing.To investigate the impact of existing resources on a new resource acquisition decision, we quantify the additional value, externality from now on, that existing resources provide for a new resource alternative. We define this value of externality as the difference between valuing the resource together with existing resources and valuing the resource and existing resources separately.Definition 2The value of externality for a resource, ζω,ω=1,…,GisE[ζω|Ω]=U[ζω+ζΩ]−[U[ζω]+U[ζΩ]].Therefore, the value of externality can come from two sources, either the expected values of new and existing resources jointly are different than when valued in isolation, i.e.,E[ζω+ζΩ]≠E[ζω]+E[ζΩ],or the risk of new and existing resources jointly are different than when valued in isolation, i.e.,R[ζω+ζΩ]≠R[ζω]+R[ζΩ]. The former can be due to increasing or decreasing returns or learning and developing capabilities (Arthur, 1989). In practice, increasing returns can come from specialization, economies of scale in production, synergies among resources, or sharing overhead costs, for example. Learning occurs over time when an organization owns a resource and develops its capabilities. In this work, we focus on the externality value that comes from the risk hedging benefits of new and existing resources.We first establish in Propositions 3 and 4 that the value of an externality stemming from the risk hedging ability of a new resource is always positive or zero and that it increases in risk aversion and risk and decreases in correlation between the values of the new and existing resources. In practice, these conditions imply that organizations may undervalue new investments if they are treated as separate projects and, moreover, this undervaluation increases as risk aversion or risks increase or correlation between the values of new and existing resources decreases. Similarly, for policy makers aiming to influence the resource acquisition decisions of firms, the incentives may have different effects if the firms’ risk aversion and portfolio level interactions among resources are considered.Proposition 3The value of externality due to risk aversion is non-negative, i.e.,E[ζω|Ω]≥0,ω=1,…,G.Proofs for all propositions and theorems are in appendix.Proposition 4The value of externality,E[ζω|Ω],ω=1,…,G,due to risk aversion, increases in risk aversion factor, λ, and risk of new or existing assets, R[ζω] or R[ζΩ], and decreases in correlation,ρζω,ζΩ.We formalize next the resource dependency and provide conditions when resource dependency occurs. We also discuss how it can help in deterring from getting locked-in investing in one type of a resource.When existing resources provide an externality value to some of the investment alternatives, this impacts the incremental investment valuation and results in resource dependency. We define this formally as follows.Definition 5Capacity acquisition process is resource dependent ifE[ζω|Ω]≠E[ζω|∅],ω=1,…,G.In Theorem 6, we state that practically all resource acquisition processes under uncertainty are resource dependent.Theorem 6A capacity acquisition process is resource dependent due to risk aversion if there exists a resource,ω=1,…,G,that is not perfectly correlated with existing resources,ρζω,ζΩ<1.Resource dependency may lead to organization’s tendency to get locked-in to acquire the same resources persistently. Arthur (1989) shows that this can occur due to increasing returns or learning. But we show that risk aversion deter the resource lock-in, as showed in Proposition 7. This result is a qualification to Arthur (1989) by indicating that uncertainty and a degree of risk aversion can suffice to dilute resource lock-in and cause resource dependent tendencies towards a more balanced portfolio of different resources.Proposition 7An increase in risk aversion, λ, deters away from resource lock-in, i.e.,E[ζω′|ω]−E[ζω|ω],ω′ ≠ ω, increases.In Section 2.3.1, we present a more general investment optimization model where the decision maker has the flexibility to select the timing of the investment within the investment horizon. In Section 2.3.2 we propose an approach for measuring the strength of the resource dependency including the flexibility in timing. Then, to implement the concept in a realistic settting, in Section 2.3.3 we formulate an optimization model for capacity investment including resources and operational details.Capacity investment decisions frequently include not only the choice of technology but also the timing when the investment is to be made within the planning horizon, and moreover, these decisions are not necessarily made in the beginning of the planning horizon (Copeland & Antikarov, 2003). The investment decision may be re-evaluated at a later stage when more information is known about uncertainties that impact the profitability of operating different technologies. Such a sequential decision making process can be formulated using dynamic programming (Bertsekas, 1995). We formulate it here over a finite investment horizon consisting ofτ=0,…,θtime states, each time state being δ years long, when one of the technologies1,…,Ghas to be selected during the investment horizon. The market uncertainties, which influence the profitability of each technology are represented via scenarios. We denote a scenario at timeτ=0,…,θas sτand the set of all scenarios at timeτ=0,…,θas Sτ. Also, we denote the ith unique immediate predecessor of a scenario sτat timeτ−ias bi(sτ), and the probability of a scenario sτaspsτ∈ [0, 1]. The scenario dependent random profit of existing resources from timeτ=0onwards until the end of their operating lifetime are represented byζΩ,sτ. The decision variableω∈{0,…,G}tracks which of the technology is invested in (0 means no investment is made). The scenario dependent random profit of the invested technology ω from time τ onwards until the end of its operating lifetime is represented byζω,sτ. We formulate the optimal capacity investment timing and technology selection problem I as follows, which can be solved recursively using dynamic programming.(3)I:Wsτ=maxω{U(ζω,sτ+ζΩ,sτ|ω=1,…,G),max[Wsτ+1|ω=0,b(sτ+1)=sτ]}0≤τ<θWsθ=maxω{U(ζω,sθ+ζΩ,sθ)}.The optimal investment policy obtained from (3) can be used to calculate investment probability profiles across investment times and across technologies invested in. We define the probabilities of investing in a particular technologyω=1,…,G,in timeτ=0,…,θ,with existing resources and without existing resources as ξω, τand ϕω, τ, respectively. With the help of these investment probability profiles, we can now investigate the impacts that the resource dependency via the externality values have on the actual investment decisions in both time and technology selection dimensions.We define a measure for the strength of resource dependency in terms of the sum of absolute deviations in investment probability profiles across investment times and across technologies invested in with and without the existing resources. Measuring the strength of resource dependency in this way is more practical and informative than focusing on changes in the value of externalities, because the actual investment decision may not have been changed even if the externality value is high for some investment alternatives.Definition 8The strength of resource dependency isP=∑τ=0θ|∑ω=1G(ξω,τ−ϕω,τ)|+∑ω=1G|∑τ=1θ(ξω,τ−ϕω,τ)|4.The strength of resource dependency,P,is normalized by dividing the sum of investment probability deviations across investment time, i.e.,∑τ=0θ|∑ω=1G(ξω,τ−ϕω,τ)|,and across technologies invested, i.e.,∑ω=1θ|∑τ=0θ(ξω,τ−ϕω,τ)|,by their maximum possible deviation 4. As a constructP:[0,1]Gθ→[0,1],so that whenP=0there is no resource dependency and as the value ofPincreases, the resource dependency gets stronger. Other possible two dimensional dissimilarity or distance measures, e.g., Euclidean, could have been used (Basseville, 1989).We apply this measure in the subsequent case study to evaluate what circumstances will strengthen or weaken resource dependency in the choice of investments.In practice, underlying the high level formulation of (3), operational conditions need to be specified in considerable detail. In this section, therefore, we develop a detailed formulation for the operating profits of the new and existing capital assets and explain how the overall problem can be solved by decomposing the problem into investment and operating horizon subproblems.With respect to the risk measure itself, we consider that risk is manifest as a potential abnormal reduction of the net asset value over the operating life time of the capital asset. The risk of this can be measured using a risk measure focusing on downside risk as suggested in several other capacity investment studies (e.g., Eppen et al., 1989; Nawrocki, 1999; Van Mieghem, 2003; Fortin et al., 2008). Particularly, we apply the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) risk measure, which measures the mean of the worst pth-percentile of net asset position. CVaR is a subadditive risk measure (Artzner et al., 1999) and increases in correlation. Thus, it is consistent with the conditions for a risk measure we describe in Definition 1. Also, CVaR risk measure is well amenable for optimization because it can be formulated as a linear programming problem when uncertainties are represented using scenarios (Uryasev, 2000). The optimization model for the operations of the new,ω=1,…,G,and existing capital assets, Ω, over finite time statest=0,…,Ttakes a form of a multi-stage stochastic programming problem with a probabilistic objective function. We present here its deterministic equivalent using scenarios. First, we define the following parametersα,γst∈Rauxiliary variables in computation of CVaR, st∈ St,the probability of a non-tail event in CVaR computation,the accrued cash at scenario st∈ St,the opportunity rate of return,firm’s tax rate,number of plants, 0 is the new plant,1,…,Ωare existing plants,one year operating profits of a plantj=0,…,Ω,st∈ St,one year interest payments for debts taken at0,…,t−n,st∈ St,the lump sum investment cost of a plantj=0,…,Ω,the lifetime of a plantj=0,…,Ωin years,the decision to take a debt at timet=0,…,T,maturing at timek=t+1,…,Γ,Γ∈Z+,st∈ St(ys−1kdenotes existing debts),the interest rate for debt taken at timet=0,…,T,maturing at timek=t+1,…,Γ,st∈ St(rs−1kdenotes the interest rate for existing debts),the initial amount of available cash,time in years between operating horizon time statest=0,…,T−1,(the last time period’s length can vary as will be explained)the remaining operating lifetime of a plantj=1,…,Ωatτ=0,for a new plantη0=l0+τatt=τ,the risk free interest rate at timet=0,…,T,st∈ St, andthe credit spread for the debt maturing atk=t+1,…,Γ.The amount of accrued cash,zst,at a scenario st∈ Stdepends on (i) existing cash that accrues a return at the tax adjusted opportunity rate of return, (ii) debt taken out and debt payments maturing, and (iii) net income from operations. To develop a mathematical representation for this, we consider, firstly, each of these four items separately and then combine them into constraints for accrued cash. To ensure that existing cash accrues at the tax adjusted opportunity rate of return, we define a function C(c, t0, t1), in which c is the cash amount that accrues return from time t0 to t1, with the opportunity rate of return, r, that is adjusted by the tax rate, w,(7)C(c,t0,t1)=c(1+r(1−w))t1−t0.The new debt that is taken out,Dst,and maturing debt that needs to be paid off,Mst,∀st∈ St, are(8)Dst=∑k=tΓystk,Mst=∑i=0t+1ybi(st)t.The net income from operations,Ist(n,t2),∀st∈ St, is computed over t2 years. Whenn=0,this corresponds to including all plants; whenn=1,the new plant is not included (this is required att=0in (12) to represent that net income is not received from the new plant from time 0 to τδ). The net income from operations consists of yearly operating profits,vstj,yearly interest payments,qst(n),and yearly depreciation tax shield benefits,ujljw. In the formulation below, we account for the taxes and the additional return which is earned on the cash that is accrued over t2 years.(9)Ist(n,t2)=∑i=0t2−1C((∑j=nΩvstj−qst(n))(1−w)+∑j=nΩujljw,0,i)Note that the yearly operating profits,vstj,can depend upon the specific operating decisions (this will be evident when we apply the model in the power sector context in next section). The yearly, interest payments,qst(n),depend on the level of debt,ybi(st)kand the debt interest rate,rbi(st)k(10)qst(n)=∑i=nt+1∑k=tΓybi(st)krbi(st)k.The debt interest rate depends further on the risk free ratefstand the maturity of the debt ϱk(11)rstk=fst+ϱk.Constraints for the accrued cash that include all of the above components are, ∀st∈ St,(12)zst={C(C(ι,0,τδ)−u0+Dst,τδ,Δ)−Mst+C(Ist(1,τδ),τδ,Δ)+Ist(0,Δ−τδ)t=0C(zb(st)+Dst,0,Δ)−Mst+Ist(0,Δ)t>0.If the operations of the new and existing plants are valued when the new investment is delayed, i.e., τ > 0, then att=T,the last time period’s length is τδ instead of Δ.The deterministic equivalent of the multi-stage linear stochastic programming model for operations of new and existing assetsO,whose overview is shown in Fig. 1, is thereforeO:(4)subjectto(5)−(12).To solve the overall capacity investment problem (3) and (4)–(12), we need to solve model I subject to the optimal solutions of model O. This problem is possible to solve by first solving the operating horizon problem O for all technology alternativesω=1,…,Gand for all investment horizon scenarios sτ,τ=0,…,θand subsequently the investment horizon problem I subject to the optimal outcomes from model O. Thus, the problem can be solved by decomposing it into operating and investment horizon problems. In general terms, this approach facilitates a solution to a capacity investment problem that takes a form of a multi-stage stochastic mixed integer programming problem with a probabilistic objective function. As we will demonstrate in Section 3, where we apply the model in power sector context, the proposed approach is capable of solving problems including tens of millions of decision variables within an hour.We begin by motivating and describing the use of a power sector case study to examine the effects of risk-induced, resource dependency, Section 3.1. Then in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, we provide benchmark results and identify the conditions that may strengthen or weaken resource dependency, with respect to our proposed definition.The rational for investigating resource dependency in the power sector context is provided in Section 3.1.1. Sections 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 elaborate power sector specific modeling details, such as the generation of scenarios for the uncertainties and the formulas for the annual operating profits of different power plants. Section 3.1.4 presents the computational setting within which the numerical experiments are conducted.The power sector is well suited for analyzing resource dependency in capacity investments because investments in generation assets are lumpy, irreversible, capital intensive, long-lasting, and risk averse (Bunn, 2004). Also, this is a sector of considerable social and economic importance, in which it is widely claimed there is a need to make technology and investment timing decisions for about $1.5 trillion of new generation assets globally by the year 2035, under significant market and policy risks (IEA, 2012). Policy uncertainty regarding decarbonisation, in particular, which impacts technology choice risk, is explicitly modeled in our formulation through the inclusion of a carbon price on fossil fuel generation. Because of our focus upon risk in terms of debt coverage, interest rate uncertainty is also included explicitly, consistent with other studies that point to the importance of debt financing in power investment (Gross, Heptonstall, & Blyth, 2007). Both carbon and interest rate uncertainties have an influence on firms’ future cash flows, thus impacting net asset positions and financial strength. Focusing on these uncertainties is also motivated because they cannot be easily hedged away unlike fuel price uncertainty by owning a fuel source or entering into long-term contracts. Using a risk measure focusing on downside risks, such as CVaR is commonly considered as an appropriate risk metric for capacity investment problems (e.g., Eppen et al., 1989; Nawrocki, 1999; LaGattuta, Stein, Tennican, Usher, & Youngen, 2001; Van Mieghem, 2003; Fortin et al., 2008).We assume that the investment horizon is ten years long. The firm may not necessarily have an exclusive right to invest during this horizon, i.e., the opportunity to invest might close earlier. Therefore, we consider three types of investment opportunities. First, a firm can have an exclusive right to invest during the entire investment horizon, for example through the ownership of rights. Second, a firm can have an investment opportunity but without an exclusive right so that the opportunity may come to an end at any time during the investment horizon, by which point the investment decision will need to be made. This could be the case under regulatory risk, for example. Third, a firm can have an opportunity to make its investment decision only at a pre-specified time due perhaps to resource or permit constraints.Our experiments are formulated through investments in five technology alternatives, namely fossil 1 and 2, with and without carbon capture and storage (CCS) facilities (which reduces CO2 emissions), and nonfossil generation technologies. Fossil 1, 2, and nonfossil technologies are characterized by supercritical pulverized coal plant, combined cycle gas turbine plant, and wind farms, respectively. More generally, fossil 1 can be considered as a more capital intensive and more CO2 emitting but lower marginal cost fossil technology than fossil 2, whilst the nonfossil technology can be any capital intensive, none CO2 emitting, low marginal cost generation technology (generally renewable but also including nuclear). We have therefore chosen a representative range of technologies, exposed differently to the risks posed by carbon policy and financing. Data used in the experiments is shown in Table 1. Whilst the case study is not done for a specific firm, we have used realistic data. The specific generation data is obtained from AESO (2012); CCPC (2008); NETL (2011), the carbon price process is estimated from DOE (2010), the interest rate parameters are derived from BoC (2012); Moody’s (2012) and, overall, the model calibration has been further informed through discussions with industry experts.The uncertainty in the risk free interest rate is modeled as a mean reverting Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process. The carbon price uncertainty is modeled similarly but it also includes jumps and mean-reversion to a trend. The trend, to which the carbon price mean is reverting, is adjusted when a jump occurs by increasing the trending mean by the size of the jump. These processes are as follows:dXt=κX(X¯−Xt)dt+σXdzXdYt=κY(Yt¯−Yt)dt+σYdzY+Ytdq,where κXand κYare mean reversion coefficients,X¯andYt¯are means where to revert, σXand σYare standard deviations, dzXand dzYare Wiener processes, and dq is a Poisson jump process with mean arrival rate λ. If a jump occurs, Ytincreases by a fixed amount ϕ andYt¯,Yt+1¯,...increases by the same amount.Fig. 2presents all scenarios that have probabilities between (0, 1] when an investment is analyzed atτ=0. We can observe the mean reversion towards a stationary long-run mean in the risk free interest rate process and towards a trend in the carbon price process. The total number of scenarios in the investment horizon for the dynamic programming is 30 and the number of different states is 19. In the operating horizon for the stochastic programming, the number of scenarios is the product of scenarios in the interest rate and carbon price trees, which at the final time state amounts to288×400=115,200. Further explanations on how the scenarios are created are included in Appendix.To formulate the operating profits, i.e., earnings before interest and tax, from operating the power plants we definegj∈R+the yearly fixed operating cost of a plantj=0,…,Ω,the yearly energy production capacity of a plantj=0,…,Ω,in MWh,the yearly average electricity price/MWh, st∈ St,the yearly average price of a contract to emit one ton of CO2, st∈ St,tons of CO2 emission/MWh of a plant j,the efficiency multiplier of a plantj=0,…,Ω,(compared to the variable costs of dominant plant of the same technology in the market), andthe variable operating cost/MWh of a plantj=0,…,Ω.If a fossil fuel power plant is built with CCS, this provides further flexibility in operations as the plant can then be run either with or without the CCS. This changes the variable costs. Such flexibility in operating CCS is accounted for in the operating profits in (13) by changing the max function to include:κj[est−cstmfo−ϵjofo]−gj,where mfoand ofoare emissions and variable costs of the fossil fired power plant without operating CCS.As (13) shows, the operating profits depend on electricity prices modeled in (14). We assume that the electricity price is set by the marginal generation technologies, plus a profit spread on top of the marginal costs, see Fig. 3. A similar kind of electricity price formation process is also being employed by Kettunen, Bunn, and Blyth (2011). Marginal costs consist of fuel costs and CO2 emission allowance costs.To derive electricity prices, we introduce the following notationd∈R+the profit spread of electricity price over the fuel cost/MWh, andthe set of price setting plants (f1 = fossil 1 and f2 = fossil 2).Computationally, the overall investment problem has about 33 million decision variables (33 million real valued decision variables in the stochastic programming problems and 19 integer decision variables in the dynamic programming problem), see Table 2. We developed a procedure using Java that first solved the19×5=95operating problems of model O (for all five technology alternatives and for all 19 investment horizon states) using the FICO® Xpress optimization software. Subsequently, the procedure solved the overall 19 state dynamic programming problem I using that information. This problem can be solved in about one hour using a computer with a 64-bit operating system, Intel® CoreTMi7-930 processor, clock rate 2.80GHz, and 12GB RAM.We establish in this section benchmark results for risk neutral,λ→0+,and risk averse,λ→1−,investors to confirm the validity of the models. Also, we demonstrate the importance of accounting for resource dependency in capacity acquisition decisions.Our results in Table 3(which are run without existing assets, i.e.,Ω=0) confirm that the expected profit (resp. CVAR), is higher (resp. lower) for risk neutral investor (resp. risk averse investor).11Note that as CVaR measures risk, lower values corresponds to less risk and negative CVaR values refer to profits.Also, the results show that a risk neutral investor and a risk averse investor both prefer an investment opportunity with more flexibility. This is as expected (Amram & Kulatilaka, 1999), i.e., the value of the objective function given optimal decisions is best with an exclusive right to invest. Furthermore, Table 3 shows that a risk averse investor can reduce CVaR at 5 percent level, i.e.β=0.95,by 10 percent with only a 1 percent reduction in expected terminal cash position, if the firm has an exclusive right to invest.To investigate the significance of resource dependency, we establish some comparative results concerning risk averse investment behavior. Fig. 4shows that it is optimal for a firm without existing assets (or, if resource dependency is ignored) but having an exclusive right to invest, to postpone investment until carbon policy is in place. At that time, it is optimal for the firm to invest in clean, capital-intensive nonfossil technology with about 5 percent probability if interest rates are very low. Otherwise, if interest rates are not low, it will invest in less capital intensive fossil 2 technology, which emits some CO2 but less than fossil 1 technology. If the firm does not have an exclusive right to invest and the opportunity window closes within the first two years, then it is optimal for the firm to invest in fossil 1 as the carbon policy has not come in effect. But, if the opportunity window stays open longer, then the optimal investment decision is shifted to fossil 2, which remains the dominant alternative until the end of the investment horizon. Similar investment patterns hold when the firm is obliged to invest at a specific time.In contrast, with a diversified existing asset portfolio, the firm’s investment behavior differs significantly, as Fig. 4 shows. This is the manifestation of the resource dependency, resource dependency measurePbeing between 0.06 and 1.00. In particular, it is optimal for a firm, with or without the exclusive investment right, to invest immediately in a more capital intensive and more CO2 emitting fossil 1 technology. This is because initially, atτ=0,it is beneficial to hedge its risk exposure to low carbon prices in the near term, as it already owns some fossil 2 and nonfossil technologies. Therefore, paradoxically, low carbon resources can, from this perspective, be an obstacle to further decarbonized generation investments if a profitable horizon of low carbon prices are envisaged. Whilst this may seem unrealistic, it should be observed that following the collapse of carbon prices in the EU after 2010, more output from coal was recorded and more new gas-fired generation was being planned even though the tighter, longer term policy targets for carbon emissions were still in place. If, however, the investment decision needs to be postponed towards the end of the investment horizon, then hedging the risk exposure of existing fossil 1 plant to the expected higher carbon prices becomes more important and investment in either fossil 2 or nonfossil technologies is optimal. This is clearly a property of the carbon price formation, as specified in this model, being mean-reverting to a long-term trend. Although the investment probabilities for fossil technologies with CCS facility remained zero, given a sufficient subsidy these investments could occur.We ran an extensive set of computational experiments to analyze how differences in some features of tangible resources, intangible resources and business circumstances impact the strength of resource dependency. In particular we looked at the following indicative and common sources of company specificities: (i) the number of existing capital assets, (ii) differences in the existing capital asset financing arrangements, (iii) operating uncertainties and (iv) flexibility in investment timing.Following the formal propositions that risk aversion leads to resource dependency (Theorem 6) and that the value of an externality which causes resource dependency increases in risk aversion (Proposition 4), we focus on the extreme condition of risk aversion,λ→1−. Thus, the expected value term,(1−λ)∑sT∈STpsTzsTdrops out of (4). By taking this extreme, our results manifest fully any of the effects of the various risk factors. This assumption is made without loss of generality because the focus is here on whether the resource dependency,P,becomes stronger or weaker, not in its absolute values.Table 4summarizes concisely the resulting observations using our probabilistic resource dependency measure,P.Pvalues are averages when the opportunity window closes at 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10; whenτ=0,2,4,6,8,10in cases of the non-exclusive right to invest; and when the investment has to be made at time τ, respectively.Our first observation relates to the scale of the exiting assets, ”O1: Scale”, and indicates that resource dependency in resource acquisition is strengthened by an increase in the scale of existing assets. For example, if the firm has an exclusive right to invest then the resource dependency increases from 0 to 1.00 as the number of existing fossil 2 plants is increased from one to three. The resource dependency in this case incentivizes investing in a fossil 1 plant that hedges the low carbon price risk of existing fossil 2 plants. This means that even if scaling up operations and locking-in on a particular technology can be beneficial due to increasing returns (Arthur, 1989) and learning curve (Rosenberg, 1982) effects, risk considerations may in contrast encourage diversifying investments demonstrating Proposition 7. Whilst the results are shown only for fossil 2 technology, we confirmed that it holds for all three technologies.By comparing Observation ”O2: Scope” results to the base case in Table 4, we can observe mixed impacts on the resource dependency when an investment can be made only at a specific time. These results show that resource dependency increases when the existing assets consist of only fossil 1 and decreases if the existing assets consist of purely fossil 2 or renewable plants. This occurs because fossil 2 or renewable technology portfolios do not need to be hedged against the risk of high carbon prices unlike the base case portfolio including fossil 1 technology or a portfolio consisting only of fossil 1 technology. Also, we find that it is not optimal to diversify an existing portfolio consisting only of fossil 1 technology initially, atτ=0,as the risk of low carbon prices is dominant, and can be best managed by investing immediately in another fossil 1 plant to generate more profits before carbon prices increase detrimentally. In contrast, it is optimal to diversify the portfolio at the end of the investment horizon,τ=10,as the high carbon price risk then becomes dominant. The managerial insight from this is that steps towards asset diversification are non-monotonic and resource dependent as a function of time because uncertainties and risks evolve over time.By comparing Observation ”O3: Debt amount” results to the base case, we can observe that existing debt increases resource dependency. Similarly, our results ”O4: Debt maturity” weakly indicate that an earlier maturity of debt increases resource dependency (debt maturity was altered from the base case value of 20 years to 10 years). The managerial insights from these are that whilst leveraging the asset base and making shorter debt contracts provide more flexibility temporarily in investment decision making, they also decrease future flexibility due to increased resource dependency.The Observation ”O:5 Uncertainty” results show that an increase in operating uncertainty increases resource dependency. The uncertainty is increased during an asset’s operating life time in the experimental setting by doubling the jump size in the carbon price process whilst halving the jump probability, which is a similar mean-preserving increase in uncertainty as used by Bernanke (1983), for example. The intuition in this observation is that a new investment is more likely in fossil 2 technology when it needs to perform best on average in both high and low carbon price outcomes. Therefore, the managerial insight is that an increased operational uncertainty, i.e., reduced knowledge about future prospects, strengthens resource dependency and encourages risk averse investments in technologies that can hedge the risk.The Observation ”O:6 Flexibility in investment opportunity” results in Table 4 show that resource dependency increases when a firm has more flexibility in deciding upon the investment timing. Therefore, resource dependency increases when a firm has a non-exclusive right compared to an opportunity to invest at specific time and even more when the firm has an exclusive right to select the investment timing during the entire investment horizon. Under such circumstances, the existing resources have a stronger impact on the resource acquisition decisions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have defined a capacity acquisition process to be resource dependent when the existing resources impact new resource valuation and therefore the acquisition decision. Whilst resource dependency has been analyzed by researchers from other perspectives, we are not aware of previous work that models and investigates resource dependency due to risk aversion. By addressing this topic, we have made both practical and theoretical contributions to the literature on capacity investment.We have developed a modeling framework that can be used for investigating an organization’s evolution in acquiring resources. The framework was developed to incorporate the following properties: (i) existing assets, (ii) dynamic operating decisions, (iii) differences in new acquisition opportunities. Our modelling framework includes both acquisition (timing and alternative selection) and operating decisions for existing and new assets, financing, and re-financing. One of the most innovative aspects of the model is the solution technique in which we decompose the problem into nested optimization problems, where dynamic programming is applied for the investment timing and technology selection decisions and stochastic programming for the operations management decisions.The decomposition approach proceeds firstly by solving the optimal operations for all technology alternatives and for all investment horizon scenarios. Using that information, the overall dynamic programming problem is subsequently solved for the investment timing and technology selection problems. This decomposition is beneficial not only because it decomposes the problem into smaller faster solvable problems but because it allows the use of optimization techniques that are well suited for the different types of optimization problems. For example, mathematical programming approaches, such as stochastic programming (Birge & Louveaux, 1997), are well suited for dealing with the real valued operating decisions and CVaR risk constraints, whilst the optimal technology selection and investment timing problems, consisting of integer decisions, can be solved efficiently using dynamic programming (Bertsekas, 1995). This method provides a solution to a computationally intensive problem including tens of millions of decision variables. In general, we suggest that this decomposition approach could be beneficial in a wide range of problems where (i) uncertainties are exogenous to the decision maker and (ii) the first decision is a selection from discrete choices and (iii) this is contingent on second stage optimization of real valued operating decisions. For example, this could hold in new product development, where the first integer decision relates to the selection of a product configuration and the embedded operating decisions relate to R&D budget choices. The exogenous uncertainties however preclude situations where actions influence the state of nature, e.g., companies that can move the market prices by their actions.More generally, our results provide policy level insights regarding technology subsidies and incentives. Incentives are usually provided in a nondiscriminatory way to all firms, but, evidently from our analysis, whilst appearing fair, this is likely to be inefficient insofar as it ignores the firm-specific, resource dependent investment synergies. Thus, providing an equal technology subsidy for all firms (i) can provide supernormal profits for firms that would anyways choose to invest in that technology due to their favorable resource dependency, (ii) may not reach the policy goals as investments in the technology may still not occur or are delayed due to the unfavorable resource dependency, and (iii) is suboptimal compared to resource specific subsidies that can account for firms’ existing resources. Whilst it is hard to envisage market based instruments acting in a discriminatory way on different firms, fiscal measures are often resource, and hence firm, specific. Taxes often discriminate according to the circumstances of firms and in this respect, resource dependency may be a further argument in favor of, for example, carbon taxes over carbon market pricing, and tax credits for carbon-free investments rather than green energy certificates. Finally, and regardless of the policy implications, we observe that without taking proper account of resource-dependency drivers, a misleading view of the evolution of market heterogeneity will be manifest, generally suggesting greater production homogeneity than is likely to occur. This is a direct consequence of assuming that firms have similar resources to start with.