@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pricing and supply priority in a dual-channel supply chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study channel priority strategy of a dual-channel supply chain facing potential supply shortage.We examine the effects of coordination/decision sequence of channel priority on priority strategy.Channel coordination can alleviate the retailer's complaint of insufficient supply.A higher total surplus in retail channel dampens the motivation to leverage retail channel priority.Pricing and channel priority strategies are robust to the time sequence of channel priority decision.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Supply shortage,Random yield,Game theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies a manufacturer marketing a product through a dual-channel supply chain, comprised of an online channel and a brick-and-mortar retail channel. In particular, we consider the pricing and channel priority strategies of dual-channel supply chain in the presence of supply shortage caused by random yields. To this end, we develop game theoretic models to investigate the price decisions and the channel priority strategy, as well as examine the impacts of channel coordination and the time sequence of decisions, i.e., ex-ante and ex-post production yield, on the channel priority strategy. While encountered with a potential supply shortage, the manufacturer has two channel-allocation priority strategies: direct channel priority and retail channel priority. Our study shows that: (i) coordination of the dual-channel supply chain can alleviate the retailer's complaint of insufficient supply; (ii) counter-intuitively, the retail channel priority is adopted only when the total surplus in the retail channel is low in the decentralized setting; and (iii) the effect of the unit cost of sales of the direct channel on the motivation to use retail channel priority depends on the effect of channel priority on the demand. In addition, we find that the main results of pricing and channel priority strategies remain robust to the time sequence of channel priority decision (yield ex-ante or ex-post).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
E-commerce, such as an online channel (referred to as a direct channel), provides a plausible platform to attract potential consumers and thus opens another door to increase manufacturer's revenue. Therefore, more and more manufacturers such as Apple, Hewlett-Packard, Nike, and Sony are marketing their products not only through a brick-and-mortar retailer (referred to as a retail channel), but also through a direct channel, i.e., leveraging dual channels composed of a direct online channel and an indirect retail channel (Cai, 2010; Pinkerton, 2006; Teimoury, Mirzahosseinian, & Kaboli, 2008). When a manufacturer produces its products, its yield may be random due to such controllable or uncontrollable reasons as defective units, machine breakdowns, damage or shrinkage occurred during transshipment, and random components allocation from suppliers (Tang & Yin, 2007; Yano & Lee, 1995). In the presence of yield uncertainty, the manufacturer may be inevitably exposed to the risk of supply shortage. Unfortunately, many companies do not have an established, formal and cross-functional process to manage the allocation of insufficient inventory to mitigate the impact on customers and shareholders, cf. Uskert, Davis, and Lord (2011). How to manage this uncertainty is an imperative and timely issue for the manufacturer to maintain its competitive advantage and secure its profit.With a potential supply shortage, a manufacturer with dual channels is typically faced with assigning priority issue given two channel strategies: satisfy the direct channel first, or satisfy the retail channel first. Throughout the paper, we adopt the term direct channel priority (denoted as DCP) to signify that the manufacturer's chosen priority is to satisfy the direct channel demand first, while the term retail channel priority (denoted as RCP) refers to the opposite. Both cases have been widely observed in practice. For example, the brick-and-mortar retailers of Apple, Sony, and Panasonic often complain that the manufacturers reserve their hot-selling products for the direct channel, while the retailers must wait for product allocations under supply shortage (Pinkerton, 2006). Right after Apple introduced the iPhone 5s in late 2013, because of limited supply, consumers could only buy online because there was no guarantee any retail store would have the device available in stock (Lee, 2013). For an example of RCP, when the Air Jordan 2011 shoe was first introduced, it was only available at third-party retail stores for several months before Nike officially put the quality-performance footwear on its own website (Business Wire, 2011). As another example of RCP application, the demand for the highly popular Sony PS4 (debuted in November 2013) had far exceeded its supply. In late March 2014, consumers could only buy the game console at some Best Buy stores, while Sony's online store showed no units available (Johnson, 2014).Given the observations that both DCP and RCP are commonly applied in a variety of marketplaces, one natural question for the manufacturer is which strategy is preferable over the other. Intuitively, under the RCP policy, retail channel snatches consumers away from the direct channel, which consequently decreases the manufacturer's profit from the direct channel. However, the leverage of the DCP policy leads the retail channel to lose consumers. In each case, the channel priority intensifies the conflict between the manufacturer and the retailer. Moreover, channel priority influences the manufacturer's profit from the retail channel because it affects the retail price as well as the unit wholesale price. Thus, the manufacturer needs to make a trade-off between the two channel priority strategies.The decentralization of channel structure is commonly understood as a reason to decrease supply chain efficiency due to its inherent double marginalization effect (Spengler, 1950). To mitigate the negative effect of decentralization, some effective contracts have been designed and implemented to coordinate the pricing behavior of retailers (Chen, Zhang, & Sun, 2012; Jeuland & Shugan, 1983). The coordination of the retail channel alleviates the conflict between the dual-channel manufacturer and the retailer, and affects both the demand and the manufacturer's profit in both channels (especially under supply shortage), which in turn influences the manufacturer's channel priority strategy. However, the extant literature does not investigate how to coordinate supply chain to deal with potential supply shortage. It is one of our goals to explore how decentralization (coordination) of the retail channel affects the manufacturer's channel priority strategy.To address these aforementioned questions, we develop game theoretic models of a one-manufacturer and one-retailer supply chain in the presence of random yields, through which we investigate the optimal price decisions and channel priority strategy, and explore the effects of decentralization of the supply chain on the channel priority strategy. In terms of the decision timeline of the channel priority strategy, we consider two types of models: the yield ex-ante model in which the channel priority decision is decided before the yield uncertainty is resolved; and the yield ex-post model in which it is determined after the yield is realized. In each model, we systematically study the system under two different settings: the centralized (coordinated) setting and the decentralized setting. For each setting, we investigate the channel priority strategy by comparing the performances of RCP and DCP in terms of their expected profits. We find that channel coordination can alleviate the retailers’ complaints about supply shortage, and also that the manufacturer has an incentive to select RCP rather than DCP in the centralized setting. However, in contrast to the centralized setting, the decentralized manufacturer uses RCP only when the total surplus for the retail channel is not too high. In addition, under DCP, the manufacturer may offer a direct channel price higher than the consumer's reservation price such that only the retail channel is active; however, such phenomenon does not happen under RCP.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Experiencing the growing innovation and development of e-commerce, more and more manufacturers start to market their products through dual channels: a retail channel and a direct channel. The channel priority strategy under supply uncertainty influences the pricing and sales quantity, and thus consequently affects the respective profitability of the two channels. Taking these factors into consideration, this paper has studied channel priority strategies in the presence of random yield, in both the centralized setting and the decentralized setting. We have also examined the effects of coordination of the supply chain on the channel priority strategy. In addition, we have investigated how the time sequence of the channel priority decision affects equilibrium outcome.In the yield ex-ante model, we have assumed that the channel priority decision is decided before the yield uncertainty is resolved. We first considered the channel priority strategy in the centralized setting and then in the decentralized setting. It is of practical interest that, in the centralized setting, the manufacturer has an incentive to leverage RCP. In the decentralized setting, we identify the condition under which a higher unit cost of sales of the direct channel strengthens the motivation to use RCP. We have shown that the manufacturer may leverage RCP under a low total surplus of the retail channel, while apply DCP under a high total surplus in the decentralized setting. This contrasts to the centralized setting wherein the motivation of using RCP comes from a higher total surplus for the retail channel. In this sense, decentralization of the dual-channel supply chain may inverse the effect of the total surplus of the retail channel on channel priority strategy. In other words, decentralization of the supply chain plays an important role in determining the channel priority strategy. In the yield ex-post model, after observing the supply yield, the manufacturer determines the channel priority strategy. By comparing the two models, we found that the decision timeline of channel priority (yield ex-ante or yield ex-post) does not change the main results about channel priority strategies or pricing decisions.There are several directions spawning future investigations. First, this paper only considers two channel priority cases when the manufacturer faces supply shortage. It is of interest to consider the case with a general allocation rule and study the optimal or suboptimal allocation rule of the manufacturer after observing the supply shortage (if the optimal rule is intractable to find). One can refer to Cachon and Lariviere (1999) and Hall and Liu (2010) for allocation rules of capacity. Second, instead of uniform distribution for the yield, one can consider the random yield following a general distribution and examine the effect of distribution variation on equilibrium outcomes. We mention that such a model is analytically cumbersome or intractable and one might have to illustrate those economic phenomena in a numerical way. We consider the case where the two channels offer different selling prices. To avoid price discrimination charged by different channels, it is also of interest to assume that channels charge the same selling price. This case can be analyzed by simplifying our model with restricting the retail price to be the same as the direct channel's selling price. In this line, one relevant research question encountered by the retailer will be an inventory ordering decision, i.e., how many to order from the manufacturer while considering the channel priority strategies. Finally, we have assumed that the market demand is deterministic. One can extend the analysis to the case with random yield and demand. However, it is outrageously complex and challenging such that numerical examples are largely used to the analysis.