@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A queueing model for managing small projects under uncertainties

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Home improvement contractors tend to accept multiple projects to keep his crew members busy.Accepting multiple projects can cause unsatisfied customers to abandon and/or file complaints.We develop a queueing model to determine optimal admission policy by capturing the tradeoff.We present analytical results and examine issues including productivity and pricing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Project management,Multi-projects,Queueing models,Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a situation in which a home improvement project contractor has a team of regular crew members who receive compensation even when they are idle. Because both projects arrivals and the completion time of each project are uncertain, the contractor needs to manage the utilization of his crews carefully. One common approach adopted by many home improvement contractors is to accept multiple projects to keep his crew members busy working on projects to generate positive cash flows. However, this approach has a major drawback because it causes “intentional” (or foreseeable) project delays. Intentional project delays can inflict explicit and implicit costs on the contractor when frustrating customers abandon their projects and/or file complaints or lawsuits. In this paper, we present a queueing model to capture uncertain customer (or project) arrivals and departures, along with the possibility of customer abandonment. Also, associated with each admission policy (i.e., the maximum number of projects that the contractor will accept), we model the underlying tradeoff between accepting too many projects (that can increase customer dissatisfaction) and accepting too few projects (that can reduce crew utilization). We examine this tradeoff analytically so as to determine the optimal admission policy and the optimal number of crew members. We further apply our model to analyze other issues including worker productivity and project pricing. Finally, our model can be extended to allow for multiple classes of projects with different types of crew members.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Project delays are common. Boeing experienced a series of delays (4 years) and a $6 billion cost overrun when managing the 787 development project (Gates, 2008; Greising & Johnsson, 2007). The delays associated with this complex development project were expected due to many uncertain elements such as unproven technologies (due to the use of composite materials), unprecedented outsourcing of design (in addition to the traditional outsourcing of manufacturing), untested multi-tier supply chain (as opposed to the traditional one-tier supply chain), and unprecedented risk-sharing contract (as opposed to the traditional contract under which each supplier will receive his payment once he completes his own development task).11Under the risk-sharing contract, each supplier will receive his payment only after all suppliers have completed their development tasks.The reader is referred to Tang and Zimmerman (2009) and Kwon, Lippman, McCardle, and Tang (2010a) for a detailed description of the Boeing 787 development project and the analysis that examines the impact of risk-sharing contracts on the project completion time.Not only large and complex projects face major delays, well-defined projects such as construction projects can experience long delays. For example, Al-Momani (2000) examined 130 public construction projects (such as residential or office buildings, school buildings, medical centers, etc.) in Jordan. Out of these 130 projects, 106 projects were completed late due to various reasons ranging from poor design, poor planning, change orders (by customers), etc. Similar reasons were identified in various surveys of contractors who worked on large public and private construction projects; see Odeh and Battaineh (2002).Many small and well-defined home improvement projects (e.g., flooring installation, counter/cabinet installation, basic home remodeling, etc.) also tend to complete later than the completion time quoted by the contractor. Unlike large projects, there is no academic research study that examines the underlying causes. However, there are many online forums and blogs commenting that project delay are usually caused by (a) contractor’s poor planning; (b) unforeseen conditions; and (c) change orders (by customers).Contractor’s poor planning can be unintentional or intentional. Unintentional poor planning is usually due to contractor’s inexperience or poor execution. For examples, the contractor fails to check with vendors about the availability of required materials for the project or to schedule the project tasks properly. Through our discussions with a number of home improvement contractors, we learned of the notion of intentional “poor planning” under which the contractor takes on multiple projects to keep his crews busy in generating revenue. This intentional act, however, causes project delays and frustrates customers.It is common practice among small project contractors to accept multiple projects intentionally, but this practice has not been examined in the research literature. Contractors adopt this practice because, in many instances, they have to pay their crew members when they are between projects.22For certain types of projects, it is difficult to adjust part-time crew members dynamically, especially for those who are trained to perform certain tasks. Without a stable team of crew members, many contractors and regular crew members find it difficult to communicate and coordinate with part-time crew members.As both arrival times between projects and project completion times are uncertain, a small contractor has strong incentives to take on multiple projects in order to keep his crew busy to generates revenue. The contractor then “rotate or spread” his crew members among these different projects so as to string along multiple customers.This intentional act, however, can cause damages to the contractor. When a contractor accepts too many projects, project delays ensue, causing frustrated customers to forfeit their deposits and abandon their projects. In some cases, instead of filing a claim against the contractor, unhappy customers can damage the contractor’s reputation by filing complaints with the Best Business Bureau (www.bbb.org), State government (www.dca.ca.gov), Small Business Association (www.sba.gov), or giving bad ratings at various online forums such as Yelp (www.yelp.com) or Angie’s list (www.angieslist.com).33While customers may add liquidated damages (due to delay) in a project contract agreed by the contractor, some legal experts commented that liquidated damages clauses are generally considered unenforceable in certain jurisdictions. For small home improvement projects, it is uncommon for customers to hire lawyers to draw up such a legal contract. Even if the customers want to take legal actions against the contractor, the claim may not be high enough to justify the time and effort to do so.The above considerations create the following dilemma for the contractor. If the contractor accepts too few projects, he faces a higher risk of idling his crew members and incurring unnecessary labor cost. If the contractor accepts too many projects, he faces a higher risk of customers abandoning projects and damaging his reputation. These two competing forces motivate us to develop a stylized model to examine the underlying tradeoff.To capture the uncertain customer arrivals and the inherent uncertain processing times (due to unforeseen conditions), we present a simple queueing model to examine the tradeoff encountered by a contractor with K identical regular crew members. We capture the contractor’s dilemma through his project admission policy N, where N is a decision variable that represents the maximum number of projects (or customers) he will accept at any point in time. In our model, these K crew members are the servers who process the accepted projects by the contractor as a team simultaneously at any point in time. For instance, if there are i (i ≤ N) customers in the system, the contractor will rotate (or spread) these K servers among all i projects in order to string along the customers.44As we shall explain later, this assumption can be relaxed and the analysis remains the same as long as all K crew members are kept busy when i > 0.Therefore, servers are idle only wheni=0. (This setting differs from the traditional queueing models in whichK−iservers will become idle when i ≤ K.)Under an admission policy N, the contractor will reject any potential customer who arrives at the time when there are already N customers in the system. In this case, he forgoes the revenue associated with this potential customer. At the same time, each customer already in the system may abandon her project due to waiting. In this case, he cannot collect the remaining revenue (except the upfront project deposit) associated with this project. Also, he may incur reputation damages when an abandoned customer launches a complaint in a public forum.By applying the standard queuing theory approach, we use the steady state analysis to examine the following research questions:1.Suppose the contractor has K crew members and accepts up to N projects at any point in time. What is the expected project completion time? How often will he turn customers away? How often will a customer abandon her project?Taking into account the revenue loss and reputation damage due to project abandonment, what is the optimal N* (i.e., the maximum number of projects that the contractor should accept)? What is the optimal K* (i.e., the optimal crew size)?Should the contractor offer a higher payment to his crew members to entice them to work faster?Should the contractor charge a higher project price and/or require a higher deposit?Our steady state analysis enables us to obtain closed form expressions for various performance measures including the expected project completion time (i.e., expected waiting time in system), the rejection rate (i.e., the percentage of customers being turned away), and the abandonment rate (i.e., the percentage of customers in the system who abandon their projects). We use these steady state performance measures to examine the impact of the admission policy, arrival rate, process rate, and crew size on these performance measures analytically. We also determine the optimal admission policy N* and the optimal number of crew members K*.Using an extensive numerical analysis, we illustrate how the contractor should manage his crew size in addition to selecting the optimal admission policy. For example, our numerical results show that the contractor should adjust his optimal admission policy N* to cope with small increases in the arrival rate. However, to cope with major increases in the arrival rate, the contractor should adjust the optimal number of crew members K* instead. Therefore, our analysis enables us to gain a deeper understanding about the underlying tradeoff faced by the contractor. We further demonstrate how our model can be used to examine other issues of managerial importance including worker productivity and project pricing. Our overall analysis indicates that, to strike a balance optimally, the contractor needs to select his admission policy and manage his crew size carefully.Finally, we show how our model can be extended to allow for two classes of projects with two types of crew members. Due to numerical complexity, we develop a simple approximation for solving this extended model and provide numerical results to show that our approximation scheme can be used for obtaining near-optimal crew size and admission policy efficiently.This paper is organized as follows. We review relevant literature in Section 2. We describe the contractor’s problem in Section 3. Section 4 presents our queueing model that captures the underlying uncertainties and customer’s abandonment dynamics. We use the steady state analysis to determine various performance measures that would enable us to evaluate the tradeoff faced by the contractor. In Section 5 we provide an extensive set of numerical to illustrate our model results and generate useful managerial insights for managing crew size, admission policy, worker productivity and project pricing. Section 6 presents an extension to the base model to allow for two classes of projects with two types of crew members. We conclude the paper in Section 7. All proofs are provided in the Appendix.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
