@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Estimating the technical efficiency of health care systems: A cross-country comparison using the directional distance function

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We measure the efficiency of health systems of 171 countries.We incorporate both desirable and undesirable outputs into the efficiency assessment.We introduce a modified definition of the efficiency score.The obtained efficiency scores are independent of the length of the direction vector.The inefficiency scores always lie within the interval null and unity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Data envelopment analysis,Directional distance function,Undesirable outputs,Health systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Economic activity produces not only desirable outputs but also undesirable outputs. Undesirable outputs are usually omitted from efficiency assessments (i.e., applications of Data Envelopment Analysis) which fail to express the true production process. The directional distance function model has been used for handling asymmetrically both desirable and undesirable outputs in the assessment process. In the present paper, we apply a generalized directional distance function to measure the efficiency of the health systems of 171 countries. We incorporate both desirable and undesirable outputs into the efficiency assessment without transforming the latter type of outputs into inputs or into their inverse form, as is done in most of the extant studies that deal with the measurement of health efficiency. The methodology that we apply introduces a modified definition of the efficiency score which yields results consistent with those obtained from radial DEA models. In addition, our results are independent of the length of the direction vector.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) is a nonparametric methodology for evaluating the production process of operational units, or, as they are usually called in DEA literature, decision making units (DMUs). Drawing on the seminal paper of Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), the scope of DEA is the comparative efficiency assessment of DMUs defining the minimum inputs engaged or the maximum outputs produced. At that study, outputs were regarded as a non-homogeneous entity with a unitary (positive) impact for every DMU.Nowadays, becoming more sensitive to the negative impact of human activity (e.g., pollution, health system inequalities, medical complications, negative effects of policy making), a distinction between good and bad outputs should not be neglected, if such is present. Characteristically, in recent years, because of the growing interest in incorporating both desirable and undesirable outputs in performance measurements, an increased number of scholars in the DEA literature are engaged with the development of methods for handling asymmetrically the two types of outputs (Chung, Färe, & Grosskopf, 1997; Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, & Pasurka, 1989; Scheel, 2001; Seiford & Zhu, 2002; Tone, 2004). In the presence of undesirable outputs, their omission from the evaluation process is regarded as a misspecification error which yields misleading results (Färe et al., 1989; Lozano & Gutierrez, 2011; Yang & Pollitt, 2009; Yu, Hsu, Chang, & Lee, 2008).The methods that deal with good and bad outputs in the DEA literature can be classified into three groups according to their methodological framework. Each group introduces the following: (a) transformations of conventional DEA models (i.e., hyperbolic efficiency measure (Färe et al., 1989), separating measures for good and bad outputs (Scheel, 2001), linear monotone decreasing transformation of the bad outputs (Seiford & Zhu, 2002), and handling of the bad outputs as inputs (Yang & Pollitt, 2009); (b) modifications on the slacks-based measure (SBM) (Lozano & Gutierrez, 2011; Tone, 2004); and (c) modifications on the directional distance function (Chung et al., 1997). In practice, the directional distance function (DDF) is applied mostly for handling desirable and undesirable outputs (Lozano & Gutierrez, 2011; Podinovski & Kuosmanen, 2011).In most of the studies that deal with the measurement of efficiency in health, undesirable outputs are either treated as inputs (Prior, 2006; Retzlaff-Roberts, Chang, & Rubin, 2004) or transformed into desirable outputs (e.g., survival rate (desirable)=1−mortality rate (undesirable)) (Afonso & St Aubyn, 2005; Alexander, Busch, & Stringer, 2003). Grosskopf, Self, and Zaim (2006) use the inverse of a bad output (i.e., infant mortality) in the assessment of healthcare efficiency. Furthermore, Hollingsworth and Wildman (2003) select an undesirable output (i.e., morbidity) together with desirable outputs to compose an aggregate health index that stands for a proxy of life expectancy. This index is treated as a desirable output in the assessment of health efficiency.After a review of the extant literature, we identified only a few studies that evaluate health efficiency by applying DDF, such as Arocena and Garcia-Prado (2007), Bisel and Davutyan (2011), Ferrier, Leleu, and Valdmanis (2009), and Dervaux, Ferrier, Leleu, and Valdmanis (2004). The first two works also incorporate undesirable outputs into their analysis. Arocena and Garcia-Prado (2007) apply a generalized DDF that was originally put forth by Chavas and Cox (1999) (Appendix A). The limitation of the applied model is that the obtained efficiency scores depend upon an arbitrarily user-defined variable (i.e., α). The model that Bisel and Davutyan (2011) use is a traditional expression of the directional distance function.In addition, we should note that the majority of the published works neglect to introduce bad outputs, either with their original negative impact or with a transformed positive magnitude, to the measurement of health efficiency (Blank & Valdmanis, 2005; Butler & Li, 2005; Chang, Cheng, & Das, 2004; Grosskopf, Margaritis, & Valdmanis, 2004; Kirigia, Emrouznejad, & Sambo, 2002; Martinussen & Midttun, 2004).Our study incorporates both desirable and undesirable outputs in the measurement of health efficiency acknowledging the significance of the latter variables in the assessment of health production processes. We utilize a generalized directional distance function (GDDF) that introduces a modified definition of the efficiency score. This generalized expression yields results that are consistent with those obtained from radial DEA models. In addition, the applied GDDF produces efficiency scores that are independent of the length of the direction vector. Moreover, the defined inefficiency scores always lie within the interval null and unity without violating the restrictions applied to traditional directional distance function-based measures.Given that the purpose of this study is the measurement of efficiency and ranking of health systems, we apply our GDDF in conjunction with super-efficiency DEA. Similarly, Ray (2008) applied a super-efficiency DDF to airlines data.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the foundations of the directional distance function, and discusses a limitation of this methodology. Section 3 analyzes a generalized efficiency measure in the directional distance function. In Section 4, the new efficiency measure is applied to real-world data from the national health system of 171 countries. The scope of this section is the measurement of efficiency in the presence of both desirable and undesirable outputs, the ranking of the evaluated DMUs, the determination of optimal input and output levels, and the comparative analysis between the GDDF and the radial DEA, DDF and SBM models. Section 5 concludes.The DDF can be seen as a generalized form of the radial model(1)maxβs.t.Xλ+βgx⩽x0Yλ-βgy⩾y0λ⩾0gx⩾0,gy⩾0which is formulated appropriately when undesirable outputs exist(2)maxβs.t.Xλ+βgx⩽x0Yλ-βgy⩾y0Bλ-βgb=b0λ⩾0gx⩾0,gy⩾0,gb⩽0In model (1), gxand gydenote the direction vectors associated with inputs (x) and outputs (y), respectively, and β is the measure of inefficiency. Model (2) differs from model (1) in that it introduces a distinction between good outputs, denoted by y, and bad outputs, expressed by b. Accordingly, an additional direction vector (gb) is incorporated that refers to bad outputs (b).Note that the direction vector that refers to bad outputs, namely, gbin expression (2), should be non-positive, which indicates that the undesirable outputs are reduced in order to reach the frontier. In addition, the equality that is used instead of inequality in the third constraint of model (2) indicates the weak disposability of the undesirable outputs.One drawback of the DDF is that although β stands for a measure of inefficiency, it is not compatible with the inefficiency measures yielded by the radial and SBM models because β can be greater than unity. This incompatibility is eliminated only when gx=x0, gy=y0 and gb=b0. In practice, when the direction vectors are considered equal to the observed inputs and outputs, the DDF is equivalent to a radial model. Assuming that bad outputs are not present, the DDF is equivalent to the input-oriented radial model if gx=x0 and gy=0; if gx=0 and gy=y0, the DDF is equivalent to the output-oriented radial model (Chambers, Chung, & Färe, 1998).In this section, we develop a generalized definition of the efficiency score for the DDF even if no simplification in the direction vectors is applied.By assuming that no undesirable outputs are present, the GDDF can be defined as:(3)min1-1m∑i=1mβgi/xi01+1s∑r=1sβgr/yr0s.t.Xλ+βgx⩽x0Yλ-βgy⩾y0λ⩾0,xi0≠0,yr0≠0gx⩾0,gy⩾0and when undesirable outputs are produced by the production process, model (3) is rewritten as:(4)min1-1m∑i=1mβgi/xi01+1s+p∑r=1sβgr/yr0+∑t=1pβgt/bt0s.t.Xλ+βgx⩽x0Yλ-βgy⩾y0Bλ-βgb=b0λ⩾0gx⩾0,gy⩾0,gb⩽0where s denotes the number of good outputs and p the number of bad outputs. The ratio βgi/xi0 indicates the proportion of the inputs’ decrease. Accordingly, the ratios βgr/yr0 and βgt/bt0 express the proportion of the good outputs’ increase and the proportion of the bad outputs’ decrease, respectively.The proposed model (4) can be combined with the super-efficiency DEA model in order to increase its discriminatory power on efficient DMUs and to obtain ranking properties. For an efficient DMUk, the super-efficiency model becomes(5)min1-1m∑i=1mβgi/xik1+1s+p(∑r=1sβgr/yrk+∑t=1pβgt/btk)s.t.∑j=1j≠knλjxij+βgi⩽xik,i=1,2,…,m∑j=1j≠knλjyrj-βgr⩾yrk,r=1,2,…,s∑j=1j≠knλjbtj-βgt=btk,t=1,2,…,pλj⩾0,j=1,2,…,n(j≠k)gi⩾0,gr⩾0,gt⩽0The generalization of the proposed method lies in the fact that both radial and slack-based measures can be seen as special cases of the introduced GDDF.In particular, let’s assume that undesirable outputs are not present in order to deal with a simplified expression of the new model. In the case that(i)gx=x0, and gy=y0, model (4) is reduced to the non-oriented radial measure proposed by Chen, Deng, and Gingras (2011), as follows(ii)gx=x0, and gy=0, model (4) is reduced to the classic input-oriented radial measure (Charnes et al., 1978)(iii)gx=0, and gy=y0, model (4) is reduced to the classic output-oriented radial measure (Charnes et al., 1978)1.The efficiency scores computed with this method are independent of the length of the direction vector, although the values of β are dependent on the length of the direction vector. For example, the computed efficiency scores are the same irrespective of whether the direction vector (1, 1, 1, 1) or the direction vector (2, 2, 2, 2) is used.It produces results that are consistent with the measures used in the radial model. For example, if the direction vector is defined as the input (or output) values of the evaluated DMU, the GDDF model will be equivalent to the radial model, and the efficiency scores of the two models will be the same.The inputs and outputs can be attached with user-defined weights (w) to indicate their relative importance.It should be noted that the applied GDDF determines an appropriate measure of inefficiency, that is limited within the interval null and unity, irrespective of the value of the direction vectors.In this section, we illustrate an application of the GDDF model to a cross-country dataset on health systems. The data are from the World Bank and the United Nations Development Programme, and they consist of three inputs and three outputs. The inputs are measured by health expenditure per capita (in US dollars) (x1), total health expenditure as percentage of GDP (x2), and adult literacy rate (x3). The latter has been proven to be an input towards better health, especially at the country level (Evans, Tandon, Murray, & Lauer, 2001). The utilized outputs are life expectancy (y1), under-five mortality rate (b1), i.e., the mortality rate of children less than 5 years of age, and maternal mortality rate (b2). Life expectancy has been used as an output in many empirical analyses of the efficiency of health systems using DEA (Afonso & St Aubyn, 2005; Grosskopf et al., 2006; Retzlaff-Roberts et al., 2004; Zaim, Färe, & Grosskopf, 2001), and it is also a general indicator for the measurement of population health but also a vital component in the evaluation of socioeconomic conditions (Lantz & Ubel, 2005; Weinstein & Appadoo, 2001; Wilson, Graham, & MacDonagh, 2004). The mortality rate of children less than 5 years of age and the maternal mortality rate, which are used extensively in the extant literature in evaluating a health system and human development, are regarded as undesirable outputs (Bhatia, 1993; Hegyvary, Devon, & Murua, 2008; Kao, Chen, Shi, Weinrich, & Miller, 1997; Loudon, 1992; Mauldin, 1994; Rajaratnam, Tran, Lopez, & Murray, 2010; Rutherford, Mulholland, & Hill, 2010; Shiffman, 2000). Descriptive statistics of the input and output data are illustrated in Table B1 at Appendix B.The primary focus of this analysis is on the technical efficiency of the health systems of 171 countries. This analysis is useful because it will increase our understanding of how each national health system performs relative to others. The Millennium Development Goals emphasize that, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 years of age mortality rate should be reduced by two thirds (67%) and that the maternal mortality ratio should be reduced by three quarters (75%). In some areas, including Sub-Saharan Africa, South-East and Southern Asia, and Oceania, insufficient progress has been made towards the attainment of these goals (United Nations, 2011). In particular, the highest level of child and maternal mortality rates always occurs in Sub-Saharan Africa. It has been reported that one in nine children in this region die before the age of five. This is more than twice the average rate of the rest of the world, and it is far greater (18.5 times) than the average rate in high income regions. Sub-Saharan Africa has the worst performance in reducing both child and maternal mortality even though it does not have the lowest health expenditure per capita, health expenditure as percentage of GDP and adult literacy rate. As a comparison, South Asia has the lowest health expenditure per capita, health expenditure as percentage of GDP and adult literacy rate, but neither its child mortality rate nor its maternal mortality ratio is the highest in the world. The data indicate that, in addition to insufficient investment in healthcare, technical inefficiency may be another major cause of poor performance in Sub-Saharan Africa.Table 1summarizes the latest available data (2010) provided by the official websites of the World Bank and the United Nations Development Programme. These data, which were obtained from 171 different countries, were used in this analysis.The developed GDDF is compared against the radial DEA, DDF and SBM models. We applied the GDDF using two sets of direction vectors: (1) gx=(x10, x20, x30), gy=(y10), gb=(−b10, −b20) and (2) gx=(1, 1, 1), gy=(1), gb=(−1, −1). By using the first set of direction vectors, we present that the GDDF is reduced to the radial model. By using the second set of direction vectors, the betas obtained from the GDDF and the DDF are the same. It should be pointed out that the DDF measures betas and not efficiency scores. In other words, the major difference between the GDDF and the DDF is focused on the definition of efficiency (DDF models: (1) and (2) vs. GDDF models: (3) and (4)) that enables the former method to measure proper efficiency scores.In Table 2, super-efficiency expressions of the radial, SBM, DDF and GDDF models are applied under variable returns to scale (VRS). These expressions enable the ranking of the health systems under evaluation.In the case that the direction vectors of the GDDF are set equal to the observed inputs and outputs, in other words, the GDDF is reduced to a non-oriented radial DEA model, the Belarusian health system is assigned the highest efficiency score (i.e. 5.2441) among the 171 health systems of the sample (Tables 2 and B2 in Appendix B for detailed presentation of the health systems’ efficiency scores). In the case that all the direction vectors of the GDDF are set equal to unity, the health system of Sri Lanka is regarded as the relatively most efficient, being assigned a score equal to 6.1248 (Table B2 in Appendix B). The analysis and implications of these findings follow within the same section.All the results obtained by the SBM differ from the corresponding results measured by the remaining models. In particular, the SBM yields efficiency scores that are always lower than the scores measured by the GDDF and radial models.The GDDF, as a generalized approach of the radial DEA model, defines the same target inputs and outputs with the radial model when the direction vectors of the GDDF are equal to the observed inputs and outputs. In the case that the direction vectors of both the GDDF and the DDF are set equal to unity, the target inputs and outputs of the two models are the same. All of the three approaches take into account the negative impact of undesirable outputs on efficiency. They also manage to define maximal desirable outputs while minimizing undesirable outputs seeking to lead all of the inefficient units (e.g. national health systems) to an optimal status (i.e. efficiency score⩾1.0).In Table 3, the efficiency scores of selected national health systems are displayed in column 2, and columns 3–8 present the difference between target and original inputs and outputs. The target inputs and outputs express the optimal level of inputs and outputs, which ensure efficiency for every national health system under evaluation. The non-oriented GDDF successfully minimizes input while maximizing the desirable output and simultaneously minimizing the undesirable outputs (Table 3). The negative values for inputs and undesirable outputs denote that the target inputs and target undesirable outputs are lower than their original levels. In addition, the positive value for the desirable output (i.e. life expectancy at birth) presents that the target level is higher than the original level. The GDDF never violates the need for increasing desirable outputs while decreasing undesirable outputs towards efficiency attainment.Unlike the GDDF, the non-oriented SBM does not always succeed in defining higher desirable output levels and lower undesirable output levels for inefficient units. As shown in Table 3, in the cases of the Argentine, Australian, Bahamian and Bahraini health systems, the non-oriented SBM seeks to optimize efficiency by solely minimizing inputs and undesirable outputs. In all of these cases, the desirable output is unchanged. In this context, the SBM fails to handle asymmetrically desirable and undesirable outputs, which is the objective of efficiency measurement when the production activity has not only desirable but also undesirable outputs.In Table 4, we display the dataset grouped into quartiles. For instance, column 3 presents the minimum and maximum values of each quartile for the input variables: health expenditure per capita. In column 3, input values that are grouped in quartile 1 lie within the interval [11.9, 65.1], and input values that are classified in quartile 2 lie within the interval (65.1, 246.8]. Similar classification applies to the quartiles of the remaining input and output variables.The classification of the original inputs and outputs in quartiles facilitates the reasoning and interpretation of the efficiency scores that are assigned by the GDDF to the national health systems.In order to prevent the simplification of the developed GDDF to a radial DEA model, we set all direction vectors equal to unity to measure the efficiency scores. This decision is in line with Lozano and Gutierrez (2011) and Podinovski and Kuosmanen (2011), who stated that the DDF is the most applied method for handling asymmetrically desirable and undesirable outputs.Drawing on our selection for the direction vectors of the GDDF, we define that the four top-performing health systems are the Sri Lankan, the Belarusian, the Ethiopian and the Singaporean (Table 5). The surprising top-ranked positions, especially for the first three health systems, are solely based on the inputs and outputs that were incorporated in the analysis. Similar to the radial model, the GDDF identifies as top performers the units that engage the least resources to produce the most outputs compared to counterpart units under evaluation. Taking into account the same efficiency concept, which derives from the work of Farrell (1957), the health systems of developed countries (e.g. Australia, Denmark, Germany, the United Kingdom, the United States) that use a significantly greater amount of resources to produce greater or marginally greater output than their counterpart health systems (e.g. Singaporean) cannot be regarded as efficient.In Table 5, all of the top-performing health systems engage significantly lower inputs than the health systems of the developed countries to produce outputs that, in some cases, are not significantly different. For instance, Belarus spends less than 10% per capita for health compared to the United Kingdom, which is equivalent to a 41.7% lower health expenditure, as the percentage of the Belarusian GDP compared to the corresponding expenditure that the United Kingdom reports. However, Belarus manages to control the undesirable maternal mortality ratio at one third of the corresponding level of the United Kingdom, while the undesirable mortality rate and the desirable life expectancy that are associated with the health system of the former country are 13.1% and 12.5% lower than those of the United Kingdom.The Ethiopian health system is another unexpected top-performing case. Its inputs are among the lowest of the inputs that the sample national health systems use (i.e. they are classified in the first quartile), and its outputs are also among the lowest and most undesirable of our sample. However, the level of the desirable output is closer to the upper bound of the first quartile, and also the two undesirable outputs are closer to the lower bounds of the fourth quartiles. It should also be noted that the applied GDDF identifies the Ethiopian health system as a benchmark for health systems that apply a similar production process (i.e. Afghanistan (0.583),1The values in the parentheses express the lambdas of the linear programs which are the coefficients of the linear combination of the benchmarks (e.g. the Ethiopian health system). From a managerial perspective, the values in the parentheses denote the magnitude of the Ethiopian health system’s production model in the referred national health systems’ production model.1Bangladesh (0.195), Benin (0.412), Bhutan (0.375), Burkina Faso (0.821), Burundi (0.208), Central African Republic (0.268), Congo Dem. Rep. (0.082), Eritrea (0.036), Gambia (0.299), Guinea (0.398), Haiti (0.064), Liberia (0.275), Mali (1.000), Morocco (0.114), Mozambique (0.285), Niger (0.846), Papua New Guinea (0.047), Senegal (0.356), Sierra Leone (0.362), Timor–Leste (0.447), Togo (0.390), and Yemen Rep. (0.095)) and not for health systems of developed countries.One of the benchmarks for all of the inefficient health systems of developed countries (e.g. Australia (0.293), Denmark (1.000), Germany (1.000), the United Kingdom (0.390), the United States (0.723)) is the Singaporean health system. According to the GDDF, the other major benchmark of the inefficient health systems of developed countries is the Japanese health system (e.g. United Kingdom (0.610), United States (0.277)).It should also be noted that the efficiency scores and the ranking of the national health systems will be modified if additional or different inputs and outputs are incorporated in the measurement. However, the GDDF will yield the same efficiency scores and ranking regardless of the values of the direction vectors unless the GDDF is reduced to a radial model.In Tables 6 and 7, we present the national health systems that should refer significantly to the Sri Lankan and Belarusian health systems, respectively, in order to become efficient. In both Tables, it becomes explicit that the two top-performing health systems (i.e. Sri Lankan and Belarusian) are identified as benchmarks for health systems that utilize similar production processes.In column 2, the country that is highlighted in grey denotes the top performer, and the other listed countries can further improve the efficiency of their health systems by partially following the production model of the top-performing country. To be more precise, in Table 6, the health system of Tonga can increase its efficiency by 90.6% through adoption of the health production model of Sri Lanka, and also by 7.1% and 2.3% among the health production models of Qatar and Myanmar, respectively. Table 7 shows that the efficiency of the Estonian health system can be improved by using best practices from the Belarusian (62.1%) and Singaporean (37.9%) health systems.Focusing on the health systems of the Baltic countries (i.e. Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania), the GDDF regards as benchmarks for the Lithuanian health systems the Estonian (0.584), Belarusian (0.166), Malaysian (0.150) and Singaporean (0.100) health systems. In the case of the Latvian health system, none of the neighboring health systems is identified as a benchmark. This is because the two undesirable outputs of the Latvian health system are significantly higher (i.e. mortality rate under 5: 8.9 (quartile 2), maternal mortality ratio: 34 (quartile 2)) than that of the Belarusian and the Estonian health systems. As a result, the efficiency frontier for the Latvian health system consists of health production models of Malaysia (0.612), Brunei Darussalam (0.215) and Singapore (0.173).A comparison of the efficiency frontiers defined for the Lithuanian and the Latvian health system by the GDDF and the radial model, which is equivalent to GDDF with gx=x0, gy=y0, and gb=−b0, reveals that the GDDF efficiency frontiers are not as complex as the radial efficiency frontiers. In particular, the radial efficiency frontier of the Lithuanian health system consists of Estonia (0.595), Bosnia and Herzegovina (0.218), Saudi Arabia (0.118), Belize (0.032), Singapore (0.030) and Malaysia (0.008). In this case, the Belarusian health system is not a benchmark as it was according to the GDDF (i.e. gx=1, gy=1, gb=−1) efficiency frontier, and also the GDDF efficiency frontier consisted of four health systems while the radial efficiency frontier consisted of six health systems. Similarly, according to the radial model, the health systems that are located in the Latvian efficiency frontier are six (i.e. Sri Lanka (0.288), Singapore (0.247), Cuba (0.206), Bosnia and Herzegovina (0.163), Belize (0.091) and Malaysia (0.005)), while the GDDF efficiency frontier consists of three national health systems. The increased complexity of the radial efficiency frontiers compared to the GDDF (with direction vectors different from the observed inputs and outputs) efficiency frontiers applies to all of the inefficient units.In Table 8, we present the efficiency frontier shift in the case that the two undesirable outputs (i.e. mortality rate under 5, and maternal mortality ratio) are included in the efficiency measurement in addition to the three inputs and the desirable output. The incorporation of the two undesirable outputs leads to an upward movement of both the efficient and the inefficient national health systems. To be more precise, there is a significant increase of the efficiency scores according to the Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Table 9). After the inclusion of the two undesirable outputs in the efficiency measurement, the number of the top-performing health systems (i.e. efficiency score⩾1.00) increases to 36 while, before the inclusion of the undesirable outputs, it was 18. For instance, the addition of the two undesirable outputs moved the Belarusian and the Estonian health systems to the efficiency frontier.The upward movement of the efficiency scores and also the movement of several national health systems from the feasible area to the frontier are not surprising. This shift is on the one hand due to the dimensionality issue that plagues both deterministic (e.g. radial DEA, DDF, SBM) and non-deterministic methods, and on the other hand due to the additional information about the production process which enables the program (i.e. GDDF) to apply further distinction of the national health systems’ efficiency status.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
