@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Financial distress drivers in Brazilian banks: A dynamic slacks approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study applies the Dynamic Slacks Based Model in major Brazilian banks.These slacks can be used a proxies for an eventual financial distress situation.Results indicate higher inefficiency levels and slacks in small public and national banks.Policy implications are also addressed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Efficiency,Banks,Brazil,Dynamic DEA,Financial distress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study applies the Dynamic Slacks Based Model (DSBM) developed by Tone and Tsutsui (2010) in order to assess the evolution of input saving/output increasing potentials in major Brazilian Banks from 1996 to 2011. We propose that these potentials or slacks can be used as proxies for an eventual financial distress situation in the future. The main research objective is to determine whether or not different characteristics of bank type – related to ownership, size, and merger and acquisition processes – are significantly related to inefficiency levels and, by extension, to an eventual financial distress situation, since higher inefficiency levels also imply lower input saving/output decreasing potentials. Based on a balanced panel model, secondary data from Economatica were collected and analyzed. Results indicate higher inefficiency levels and slacks in small public and national banks. Policy implications are also addressed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper explores the use of the Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), applying the Dynamic Slacks Based Model [DSBM] developed by Tone and Tsutsui (2010) to a data panel of major Brazilian banks, from 1996–2011, in order to assess the evolution of the input saving and output increasing potentials over the course of time. Differently from previous DEA models, the DSBM uses a non-radial slack-based measure, which allows a non-proportional changes of inputs and outputs. Moreover, the DBSM defines inter-temporal activities as carry-overs and allows their categorization into four types: desirable, undesirable, discretionary, and non-discretionary. These features can be particularly useful when analyzing credit risk and financial distress within the ambit of banking efficiency, as the limits of capital and equity of each institution typically vary over the course of time in different proportions, not observing a fixed one imposed by radial measures (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984; Varian, 1987).Efficiency has been the focus of much recent research (Boussemart, Briec, Peypoch, & Tavéra, 2009; Briec & Lemaire, 1999; Briec & Liang, 2011; Camanho & Dyson, 2005) especially on banking (Arif & Can, 2009; Berger & Humphrey, 1992; Berger & Humphrey, 1997; De Borger, Ferrier, & Kerstens, 1998; DeYoung, 1998; Drake, Hall, & Simper, 2009; Epure, Kerstens, & Prior, 2011; Fukuyama & Weber 2009a, 2009b; Fukuyama & Weber 2010; Ray & Das, 2010; Sahoo & Tone, 2009). Deregulation and liberalization have placed Brazilian banks in a much more competitive environment and increased competition amongst them (Beccalli & Franz, 2009; Correa, 2009). As a result, Brazilian banks are now under pressure to upgrade their efficiency relative to their competitors. Benchmarking analysis is one of the ways to drive banks towards the frontier of best practices (Berger, Hasan, & Zhou, 2009).The current research on banks’ efficiency using non-parametric models such as DEA motivates and guides our research study. Recent empirical studies that focus on Brazilian banks includes Silva (2001), Ceretta and Niederauer (2001), Macedo, Santos, and Silva (2005), Ghilardi (2006) and Jorge and Wichmann (2006). All these papers have adopted traditional DEA models. The advantage of DEA is that it facilitates the computation of multiple input and output production correspondences.This paper extends the current research on bank efficiency by assessing the role of productive slacks over the course of time as proxies of an eventual financial distress situation in the future. It also innovates in this context, by relating their respective inefficiency levels with several contextual variables associated to bank type: size, mergers and acquisition processes, and ownership. The major underlying hypothesis is that lower efficiency levels, which are linked to bank type, also imply higher slacks and, therefore, a greater chance for an eventual financial distress situation in the future.The motivation of this paper are as follows: First, it aims to analyze efficiency in a representative emerging economy, Brazil. Although there is some research on Brazilian banks using DEA, the analysis of inter-temporal changes in productive slacks have not been taken so far into consideration. Therefore, this paper aims to contribute to the current theoretical research on bank efficiency using the innovative DBSM proposed by Tone and Tsutsui (2010). Second, the paper expands the existing literature especially due to its practical application that emulates the CAMELS rating systems and interprets its results linked to corporate governance characteristics (Männasoo & Mayes, 2009). Third, we analyze the aggregate carry-over slacks over the course of time, regressing them against different contextual variables. This is a significant contribution to the current research on efficiency in the bank sector in general. Fourth, our analysis covers the period from 1996 to 2011, which allows us to observe changes in banks’ efficiency. Finally, our analysis is based on a representative sample of Brazilian banks.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the literature review. The theoretical model of banking profit model appears in Section 3. Section 4 presents the data and the model. The empirical results are presented and discussed in terms of policy implications in Section 5. Conclusions follow in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper provides four major contributions to the analysis on bank efficiency. First it focuses on Brazilian banks, which have attracted scarce research so far (Ceretta & Niederauer, 2001; Ghilardi, 2006; Jorge & Wichmann, 2006; Silva, 2001) despite its importance in international economy. Second, it sheds some light upon the discriminatory power of DBSM and its carry-overs in terms of assessing potential financial distress situations. Third, it emulates CAMELS risk assessment framework within the ambit of DEA models, and fourth, it offers additional insights to the body of literature with respect to the contextual variables analyzed. More precisely, as regards collateral contributions of the paper to the body of banking literature, it presents evidence that size is of paramount importance in the Brazil economy. Besides, public banks and foreign banks do not increase Brazilian bank efficiency. Public banks are usually inefficient (Dinc, 2005; Galindo & Micco, 2004). A reason for foreign banks not contributing to efficiency may stem from the fact that Brazilian financial markets have been particularly closed, and foreign banks competition is a new phenomenon in which foreign banks are not yet fully capable to navigate its institutional obstacles, regulation and bureaucracy. Merger and acquisition contributes to Brazil banking efficiency, thereby validating previous research on this issue (Garette & Dussauge, 2000).The results presented here can be used as a preliminary off-site screening tool by Brazilian regulators, managers, and investors to ascertain the standing of a given financial institution among the banking industry. More specifically, attention by regulators can be further directed at potentially distressed banks as some of them would be candidates for closer monitoring or even intervention by central bank authorities.More specifically, based in this result lies the policy implication that Brazilian banks should take into account benchmarking exercises that permit the bank to compare with alternative competitors, aiming to control inputs and outputs in the production process. Furthermore, more openness of the banking market will contribute to additional growth, as more funds enable more projects. Merger, may have a positive impact long term since larger banks have economies of scale that decrease costs and therefore should be promoted.Future research is necessary to assess the role of carry-over slacks in discriminating and predicting financial distress. One possible endeavor is the combination of data mining techniques and a greater number of contextual variables in order to identify the most relevant ones. Future research is also necessary to cope with and test for possible reverse causality within the range of a larger set of contextual variables and efficiency or slacks, trying to identify whether or not this is also present in other contextual variables besides M&A.