@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Entrepreneurial finance with equity-for-guarantee swap and idiosyncratic risk

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper builds dynamic incomplete models investigating the effects of an equity-for-guarantee swap on consumption, portfolio, financing and exit choices.The new swap can overcome financing constraints and improve welfare level.The growth of welfare level increases dramatically with risk-aversion index and the volatility of idiosyncratic risk.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finance,Borrowing constraints,Equity-for-guarantee swap,Capital structure,Cash-out option,,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a risk-averse entrepreneur who invests in a project with idiosyncratic risk. In contrast to the literature, we assume the entrepreneur is unable to get a loan from a bank directly because of the low creditability of the entrepreneur and so an innovative financial contract, named equity-for-guarantee swap, is signed among a bank, an insurer, and the entrepreneur. It is shown that the new swap leads to higher leverage, which brings more diversification and tax benefits. The new swap not only solves the problems of financing constraints, but also significantly improves the welfare level of the entrepreneur. The growth of welfare level increases dramatically with risk aversion index and the volatility of idiosyncratic risk.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of fundamental characteristics of entrepreneurship is lack of diversification. Specifically, the revenue of an entrepreneurial firm (private firm) suffers systematic and idiosyncratic risks. Entrepreneurs can trade risk-free bonds and the diversified market portfolio to diversify the systematic business risk but not the idiosyncratic risk. Therefore, the diversification benefit of risky debt is important to entrepreneurs in addition to the standard trade-off between tax benefits and costs of financial distress, see Chen et al. (2010) among others.In addition, there are many small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and fresh graduates every year who are hungry for money to start a new business. Such investment is generally extremely high-risk, and to compensate for such risk, the entrepreneur comes with the potential for high returns. However, due to low credibility and lack of guarantee, many entrepreneurs, let alone fresh graduates, are unable to get a bank loan or get other debt financing cheaply. Under such situation, traditional financial theory on optimal capital structure is not reasonable since the entrepreneur has no other choice beyond starting her business with her own money only or simply giving up the business.To overcome borrowing constraints, some insurers and entrepreneurs in China have developed an innovative financial product, called equity-for-guarantee swap (EGS). This is an agreement between a lender (bank), an insurer, and a borrower (entrepreneur), where the bank lends at a given interest rate to the entrepreneur and if the entrepreneur defaults on the debt, the insurer will make a compensatory payment to the creditor so that the creditor will always be paid up-to a certain guarantee level. In return for the guarantee, the firm needs to allocate a percentage of the firm’s equity to the insurer. This contract was first signed in 2002 in China and it has become increasingly popular in the country.11The guarantee in our model shares a few similarities with that in Ju and Sohn (2014), where the contract is based on a technology credit scoring model.In this article, we extend the model established by Chen et al. (2010) to take into account both idiosyncratic risk and the EGS. This paper relates to Yang and Zhang (2013), who provide the first formal study on the swap. However, Yang and Zhang (2013) merely discuss traditional capital structure issues in the classic framework of Leland (1994). Our model examines this contract in a more general context with idiosyncratic risk and cash-out option.The main results in Chen et al. (2010) are based on the assumption that the entrepreneur has “deep pockets”, i.e. she can issue debt with the coupon rate being higher than the project’s revenue since she can inject cash into the firm to pay coupons. However, this assumption is not feasible for many entrepreneurs, not to mention fresh graduates. Actually, Chen et al. (2010) point out that entrepreneurs may be liquidity-constrained, i.e. no external funds are available to cover the firm’s debt service, and hence an earlier liquidation will be forced by the creditor. We argue that the assumption becomes practical thanks to the EGS. In fact, under the swap, the entrepreneur is equivalent to the one who has deep pockets and the default threshold can be lower than the coupon level because the claim owned by the creditor is guaranteed by the insurer. In exchange for the guarantee, the entrepreneur needs to pay the insurer a proportion of equity of the firm. In addition, since the insurer guarantees the debt, the creditor under the swap does not demand a protective covenant.We consider a risk-averse entrepreneur having access to standard financial investment opportunities with a chance to invest in a project. The objective of the entrepreneur is to maximize her expected lifetime utility over intertemporal consumption. We choose the exponential utility primarily for analytical tractability. While constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility does not capture wealth effects, it reduces the dimension, especially for the double-barrier boundary problem, see Henderson (2002),Miao and Wang (2007),Ewald and Yang (2008), and Yang and Yang (2012) among others.22As argued by Miao and Wang (2007) and Chen et al. (2010), it is believed that our model and insights apply to regular utility functions, since the precautionary savings effect, which is captured by utility functions with convex marginal utility like CARA, is the driving force. For this reason and mathematical convenience, we only consider CARA utility in the paper.The main results of the paper are as follows. First, our setting improves a generalized model of capital structure trade-off among borrowing constraints, tax, diversification benefits, and costs of financial distress. Second, the EGS fundamentally raises the entrepreneur’s borrowing capacity and therefore the entrepreneur optimally issues more debt and takes higher leverage than that without the swap. Higher leverage leads to larger tax shields and diversification benefits because the entrepreneur faces less equity exposure to the project and thus her portfolio is less risky. Third, the entrepreneur with the swap receives more welfare increments and has more investment opportunities because of being more willing to invest. Higher risk-averse entrepreneurs under higher nondiversifiable idiosyncratic risk gain more benefits resulting from the swap.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 solves the model. Section 4 discusses the numerical results. Section 5 concludes. Appendices provide equilibrium valuation of corporate securities.We consider an infinitely-lived risk-averse entrepreneur who has an option to invest in a take-it-or-leave-it project at present time 0, which requires a one-time investment cost I. All sources of uncertainty arise from two independent standard Brownian motions B and Z defined on a filtered probability space(Ω,F,{Ft:t≥0},P).In addition to the project opportunity, the entrepreneur has access to standard financial investment opportunities, see Merton (1971). Let W denote the entrepreneur’s liquid wealth process. The entrepreneur invests an amount of πtin a diversified market portfolio and the remaining amount Wt− πtin the risk-free asset with a constant interest rate r. The return of the diversified market portfolio is denoted by R which satisfies(1)dRt=μMdt+σMdBt,where μMand σM> 0 are constants, and η ≡ (μM− r)/σMis the Sharpe ratio of the market portfolio.We assume the project generates a stochastic revenue process {yt: t ≥ 0} that follows a geometric Brownian motion (GBM):(2)dyt=μyytdt+ρσytdBt+ϵytdZt,y0given,where μyis the expected growth rate, σ is the total volatility and ρ ∈ [ − 1, 1] is the correlation coefficient between the project payoff and the return on the market portfolio given by (1). A higher absolute value |ρ| of the correlation coefficient implies that the systematic volatility has a larger weight, ceteris paribus. The parameters ω ≡ ρσ andϵ≡1−ρ2σare respectively the systematic and idiosyncratic volatility of the revenue growth.We assume that the entrepreneur runs the project by setting up a limited liability entity, such as a limited liability company (LLC) or an S corporation, which allows her to face single-layer taxation for her business income and makes the debt nonrecourse. We follow the simple tax system in Chen et al. (2010). Entrepreneurial business profits incur taxes at a rate τe. A public firm is subject to a double taxation which is captured by an effective marginal tax rate τm. The capital gains upon cash-out are taxed at a rate τg.The entrepreneur finances the initial one-time lump-sum cost I via her own funds and external financing. We assume that the main source of external financing is debt, e.g. bank loans. Due to the high default probability and relative lack of collateral, it is much more difficult for the entrepreneurial firm to take debt financing than for a large company. Unlike Chen et al. (2010) who do not consider borrowing constraints, we study the entrepreneur who is constrained in borrowing due to protected covenants demanded by the lenders. This financing constraint is alleviated by introducing the EGS supported by a commercial guarantee company or insurer. Unlike the traditional credit hypothecation, though, the entrepreneurial firm in the new credit guarantee scheme must pay to the guarantee company a portion (φ) of equity as guarantee costs instead of regular guarantee fees.Under the guarantee, the entrepreneur chooses to issue an interest-only consol with coupon b and par value F0 = F(y0) at time 0 and remains unchanged until the entrepreneur exits from the project, see (A.9) and (A.11). After the debt is in place, at any time t ≥ 0, the entrepreneur has three choices: (1) She runs the firm and receives a fraction (1 − φ) of cash payments from the firm; (2) She defaults once the default threshold ydof the revenue process is reached and then the insurer must make a compensatory payment to the creditor so that the creditor is paid up-to a certain guarantee level; (3) She cashes out by selling the firm to a diversified buyer at the cash-out threshold yu, which incurs a fixed transaction cost K.Once the entrepreneur defaults, the debt holders (lenders) take control and liquidate/sell the firm. Bankruptcy ex post is costly and the bankruptcy loss can be interpreted in different ways, such as loss from selling real assets, asset fire-sale losses, legal fees, etc. We assume that κ ≡ 1 − α is the bankruptcy loss rate, i.e. α is the recovery rate. Then the remaining liquidation/sale value of the firm is equal to αA(yd), where A(yd) is the equilibrium value of an unlevered (all-equity without debt) public firm given by (A.1). Moreover, the debt holders will gain the compensatory payment from the guarantee company so that under the arrangement of equity-for-guarantee contract the debt holders gain ϕb/r once the entrepreneur defaults instead of the remaining value αA(yd) only, where ϕ is the guarantee level. Therefore, the value, denoted by Pguar, of the compensatory payment is given by(3)Pguar=(ϕbr−αA(yd))q̲(y),whereq(y) is the value of a security that claims one unit of account at the default time. It is (A.2) for the default option only and (A.7) for the case with the cash-out option as well.While selling the firm to cash out, the entrepreneur needs to retire the firm’s debt obligation at par F0 given by (A.11). Similar to Chen et al. (2010), we assume that the buyer is well diversified who will optimally relever the firm, see Leland (1994). The value of the firm after sale is the value of an optimally levered firm in the complete market, i.e. V*(yu) given by (A.6).LetTbe the set of{Ft:t≥0}-stopping times. An investor is characterized by her initial wealth W0, a time-discount rate β and her preference U( · ). She seeks to choose the default timingTd∈Tand cash-out timingTu∈T,a bond coupon b and a consumption process c so as to maximize her expected lifetime time-additive utility of consumption:(4)E[∫0∞exp(−βs)U(cs)ds].In the following text, thanks to the justification argued in the last section, we assume the utility function in (4) is a CARA utility, i.e.U(c)=−exp(−γc)/γ,c∈ℜ,where γ > 0 is the absolute risk aversion parameter.In this section, we analyze the entrepreneur’s optimal decisions under borrowing constraints and the EGS. We note that the entrepreneur’s problem is significantly different from that considered by Chen et al. (2010). In fact, the problem here is much more challenging than Chen et al. (2010) since the guarantee cost depends on both the default threshold and the cash-out threshold, which conversely depend on the guarantee cost at the same time.Firstly, we solve the standard Merton consumption and portfolio choice problem faced by the entrepreneur, see Merton (1971), after she exits from her business via either cashing out or defaulting. Secondly, we solve a mixture of optimal control and optimal stopping problem. We derive the guarantee cost, which is a function of the default threshold ydand the cash-out threshold yu. Then, for any given ydand yu, we find the maximum for(5)E[∫0τDexp(−βs)U(cs)ds+exp(−τD)Je(WτD)],yd≤y0≤yu,whereD={(w,y)∈ℜ2|yd≤y≤yu},τD≡inf{t≥0|(Wt,yt)∉D}=min{Td,Tu},and the function Je( · ) is derived by solving the Merton problem given by (7) below. The maximum of (5) is also a function of the default threshold ydand the cash-out threshold yu. Therefore, we need to solve a constrained nonlinear programming problem to obtain the optimal default thresholdyd*and the cash-out thresholdyu*. Finally, we determine the entrepreneur’s initial investment and optimal capital structure.Unlike the traditional credit hypothecation, though, the entrepreneurial firm in the new credit guarantee scheme must pay to the guarantee company a portion (φ) of equity instead of regular guarantee fees. Thus, we call φ the guarantee cost of the EGS.Generally, a guarantee company is usually a diversified investor who signs such contracts with a large number of firms and therefore the idiosyncratic risk of a entrepreneurship firm is well-diversified. This means that, in addition to (3), the value Pguar of compensatory payment must be equal to the market value of the equity allocated to the insurer. That is(6)Pguar=φE0(y;yd,yu),where E0(y; yd, yu) is the market value of the outside equity held by the insurer and it is given by (A.4) if the cash-out option is prohibited and given by (A.10) if the cash-out option is admissible.Therefore, combining (3) and (6) gives the guarantee cost φ as followsφ≡φ(y;yd,yu)=(ϕbr−αA(yd))q̲(y)/E0(y;yd,yu)=(ϕbr−α(1−τm)ydr−μ)q̲(y)(1−τe)(yr−μ−br)−(1−τe)(ydr−μ−br)q̲(y)+[V*(yu)−(1−τe)(ydr−μ−br)]q¯(y),where V*(y),q(y) andq¯(y)are defined in (A.6), (A.7) and (A.8).Remark 1The guarantee cost here is fundamentally different from that given by Yang and Zhang (2013), which does not take into account that the entrepreneur is a risk-averse individual and has the option to cash out. For this reason, thanks to game theory, the equilibrium value of equity must be related to the entrepreneur’s decisions on the cash-out option and a default threshold, which is clearly different from that in Yang and Zhang (2013) based on a risk-neutral world.After exiting from her business, the entrepreneur lives on her own financial wealth and faces the standard consumption and portfolio choice problem in Merton (1971). The maximum of the expected lifetime time-additive utility of consumption is given by(7)Je(w)=−1γrexp[−γr(w+η22γr2+β−rγr2)].Before exit, the entrepreneur’s financial wealth evolves as follows,(8)dWt=(rWt+πt(μM−r)+(1−τe)(1−φ)(y−b)−ct)dt+πtσMdBt,0<t<τD.Compared to the exogenously given fraction of equity retained by the entrepreneur in Chen et al. (2010), the fraction 1 − φ here is endogenously determined by the EGS, which depends on the entrepreneur’s decisions on default and cash-out. For this reason, we first solve the optimization problem (5) for any given exit threshold pair (yd, yu). Under this case, the entrepreneur’s value function Js(w, y) satisfies the following Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation according to Bellman’s principle of optimality:(9)supc≥0,π{U(c)+(rw+π(μM−r)+(1−τe)(1−φ)(y−b)−c)Jws(w,y)+(πσM)22Jwws(w,y)+πσMσρyJwys(w,y)+μyyJys(w,y)+σ2y22Jyys(w,y)−βJs(w,y)}=0,with the value-matching conditions(10)Js(w,yd)=Je(w),(11)Js(w,yu)=Je(w+(1−φ)V*(yu)−F0−K−τg((1−φ)V*(yu)−K−I)).According to utility indifference pricing principle, for the current revenue yd< y < yu, the utility indifference price (also called subjective value)33Thanks to the exponential utility assumption, the utility indifference price is independent of the wealth level of the entrepreneur.of equity owned by the entrepreneur, denoted by G(y), satisfies(12)Js(w,y)=Je(w+G(y))=−1γrexp[−γr(w+G(y)+η22γr2+β−rγr2)].Substituting (7) and (12) into (9)–(11), according to the first-order conditions for the optimal consumption and portfolio choice, we obtain the following theorem immediately:Theorem 3.1The entrepreneur exits from her business when the revenue process {yt: t ≥ 0} reaches either the default threshold yd or the cash-out threshold yu, whichever comes first. For any given exit threshold pair (yd, yu), liquid wealth level w and revenue yd< y < yu, the optimal consumption and portfolio rule is given by(13)c*(w,y)=r[w+G(y)+η22γr2+β−rγr2],(14)π*(w,y)=ηγrσM−ρσσMyG′(y),where G(y) is the utility indifference price of equity owned by the entrepreneur and is a solution of the following ordinary differential equation:(15)rG(y)=(1−τe)(1−φ)(y−b)+(μy−ρση)yG′(y)+σ2y22G′′(y)−γr(1−ρ2)σ2y22G′(y)2,subject to the boundary conditions:(16)G(yd)=0,(17)G(yu)=(1−φ)V*(yu)−F0−K−τg((1−φ)V*(yu)−K−I).In order to complete the computation of the entrepreneur’s optimization problem, we now need to derive the optimal default thresholdyd*and optimal cash-out thresholdyu*,such that the value function Js(w, y) is maximized. Equivalently, we need only to find the maximum point (yd*,yu*) of the function G(y; yd, yu) for any given revenue level.44Obviously, the maximum point will not depend on the current revenue level in our model. Thus we find the maximum point at y0 = 1, and we set the constraint(0,y0)′≤(yd,yu)′≤(y0,y¯)′,wherey¯is a sufficiently large boundary to includeyu*.The constrained nonlinear programming problem is solved by numerical methods.Remark 2At first sight, this theorem is similar to Chen et al. (2010), but the fraction 1 − φ of equity owned by the entrepreneur here is endogenously determined under the newly invented EGS. As a result, one of the distinctions from Chen et al. (2010) is that the state transition equation (8) itself depends on the optimal stopping times. Therefore, to derive the optimal default threshold and cash-out threshold more effectively, we solve a nonlinear programming problem instead of utilizing the smooth-pasting conditions as done by Chen et al. (2010).Similar to Chen et al. (2010),Equation (15) implies thatthe systematic and idiosyncratic risk premium denoted by ξs(y) and ξi(y) respectively, are(18)ξs(y)=ρσηyG′(y)G(y),(19)ξi(y)=γr2(1−ρ2σyG′(y))2G(y).Now we turn to the entrepreneur’s initial decision on the optimal debt borrowed from the lender for investing in the project in order to maximize the entrepreneur’s net profit under the EGS.The entrepreneur’s initial optimal capital structure to start the project is to find optimal coupon level b*, which maximizes the entrepreneur’s net profit (target function)(20)P(y0;b,I)≡G(y0)+[F(y0)−I].We identify a break-even investment cost I* by solving a root-finding problem P*(y0; b*, I*) = 0.Denote byP*^(y0)the maximum net profit obtained by an entrepreneur without signing an EGS contract, and by Ws(y0) the welfare loss of this entrepreneur because the swap is not signed, and then we haveWs(y0)≡P*(y0)−P*^(y0).After the entrepreneur invests in the project, a natural measure of leverage for the entrepreneur is the private leverage ratio L(y0) ≡ F(y0)/S(y0), where S(y0) is the total subjective value of the entrepreneurial firm. In contrast to Chen et al. (2010), the total subjective value in our model is given by S(y0) = G(y0) + F(y0), which excludes the value φE0 of the outside equity held by the insurer because the value of the outside debt held by the lender is already taken into account.To make an effective comparison, similar to Chen et al. (2010), our baseline parameter values are carefully selected. For example, we select the parameter values that ensure yd< y0 < yu. That is, we excludes two uninteresting cases: One corresponds to a sufficiently large asset recovery rate α, together with a sufficiently high guarantee level ϕ and a large risk aversion γ, which might lead to an immediate default; the other corresponds to a sufficiently small cash-out cost K, which might make the entrepreneur sell the firm immediately.Our numerical simulations are based on the following annualized baseline parameter values: interest rate r = 3 percent, expected growth rate μy= 4 percent, the Sharpe ratio of market η = 0.4, asset recovery rate α = 0.6. The entrepreneur’s rate of time preference is β = 3 percent and the initial level of the project revenue is y0 = 1. The initial investment cost for the project is I = 10 and the cash-out cost is K = 27. The effective marginal tax rate τmis 11.29 percent. The tax rate τeof entrepreneurial firm is set to equal τmfor emphasizing the entrepreneur’s nondiversifiable idiosyncratic risk. The effective capital gains tax rate is τg= 10 percent. In addition, we set the guarantee level ϕ = 50 percent, the systematic volatility of growth rate ω = 10 percent, and idiosyncratic volatility ε = 10 percent. Hence, the total volatility of the project σ = 0.020.5, correlation coefficient ρ = 0.50.5. In fact, except for ϕ, these baseline values are also assumed in Chen et al. (2010), who justify why the values are so selected.At the very beginning, a sensitivity analysis of G(y) and G′(y) is provided in Table 1.We apply Fig. 1to illustrate the properties of the utility indifference price G of equity, i.e. the value of the cash flow (1 − τe)(1 − φ)(y − b), received by the entrepreneur with the EGS. Fig. 1 shows the results under the case of default option only and under the case with both default option and cash-out option respectively. After that, we present the risk premiums demanded by the entrepreneur in Fig. 2. Here we let τe= 0 to exclude the effects of tax.The results in Fig. 1 under the EGS are similar to Chen et al. (2010) if we think the amount of equity allocated to the insurer in our model as the outside equity in Chen et al. (2010), who do not take into account the swap. The subjective values G(y) of equity are convex functions of revenue y when it is sufficiently low, i.e. the default option is deep in the money, or it is sufficiently high, i.e. the cash-out option is deep in the money. Under other situations, the subjective values are concave because the precautionary saving demand dominates the impact of the two options.The properties of risk premium demanded by the entrepreneur shown in Fig. 2 are similar to Chen et al. (2010) as well. On the one hand, when the revenue y approaches default threshold yd, the systematic risk premium ξs(y) diverges to infinity as seen in (18) because of the significant leverage effect. It rises when the revenue y approaches the cash-out threshold yubecause the cash-out option makes the value G more sensitive to cash flow shocks. On the other hand, the idiosyncratic risk premium ξi(y) is small when y is close to yd. When revenue y is large, its growth leads to a fast growth of ξi(y) because the conditional idiosyncratic variance(1−ρ2σyG′(y))2rises faster than G(y), as seen in (19).We compare three capital structures under different financing arrangements in Table 2without taxes τe= 0 and in Table 3with taxes τe= τm= 11.29 percent respectively. In Tables 2 and 3, Panel A represents the unlevered entrepreneurial firm; Panel B is the entrepreneur who is able to choose optimal risky debt but is unable to determine optimal default due to the protective covenant yd= b; Panel C exhibits the entrepreneurial firm with optimal leverage and optimal default supported by the EGS. Table 2 shows the special case where entrepreneurs acquire only diversification benefits without tax benefits from risky debt.Similar conclusions to Chen et al. (2010) are found from the two tables. First, the model is equivalent to the complete-market benchmark when the risk aversion γ → 0 and τe= 0, and hence the firm is valued at the market value 33.33. Second, the subjective value for a risk-averse entrepreneur decreases because they discount the nontradable equity due to nondiversifiable idiosyncratic business risks. Third, more risk-averse entrepreneurs issue more debt in order to achieve greater diversification benefits, and as a result, it leads to a less subjective value of equity held by the entrepreneur.More importantly, our results reveal large increased benefits for the entrepreneur through introducing the EGS. Under this swap, the entrepreneur is not forced to default by the protective covenant even when the revenue y is lower than the coupon b. Accordingly, the entrepreneur is able to choose the endogenous optimal default threshold ydthat is generally lower than b. In other words, thanks to the swap, the entrepreneur has deep pockets now without liquidity constraints, which is an assumption widely applied by Chen et al. (2010). For this reason, we argue that the EGS in our model makes the important assumption in Chen et al. (2010) feasible.Admittedly, the entrepreneur with the swap faces higher credit spreads and default probabilities due to higher optimal leverage if the debt is guaranteed by only ϕ = 50 percent level, i.e. the insurer only ensures that the debt holder receives 50 percent of the value b/r. Certainly, credit spreads and default probabilities can be reduced by raising the guarantee level ϕ if it is agreed by the three parties. However, a higher guarantee level ϕ demands that the entrepreneur should pay a higher portion of equity to the insurer in exchange for the guarantee. If the portion is greater than or equal to one, then it means that no insurer wants to sign the swap contract with the entrepreneur.From Tables 2 and 3, thanks to the EGS, the entrepreneur with the guarantee achieves a considerable welfare increment, i.e. the welfare losses Wsof the entrepreneurs without the guarantee are significant. The welfare increment is enlarged by a higher tax rate and a higher risk-aversion index of the entrepreneur. In particular, the welfare increment gets even more relative to the case of no leverage, which is particularly common in China among others, since a large number of entrepreneurs of SMEs are fundamentally unable to issue debt directly.To demonstrate the increased benefits resulting from the EGS for the entrepreneur further, we present comparative statics on welfare loss Wsfor different parameter values in Figs. 3and 4. We only show the results of welfare loss Wsincurred by the entrepreneur without leverage due to the pervasive low borrowing capacity of an SME. The findings on Wsof the entrepreneur with the protective covenant are similar.Figs. 3 and 4 highlight large benefits resulting from the EGS. Compared with the unlevered firm, the swap raises net profit, and the welfare increment ascends for more risk-averse entrepreneurs who optimally take higher leverage. First, for a risk-averse entrepreneur, the welfare loss Wsincreases substantially with the idiosyncratic volatility ε and the guarantee level ϕ. Second, if the cash-out cost K is small, the welfare loss Wsincreases quickly with K for a sufficiently risk-averse entrepreneur, and then keep unchanged if K is sufficiently large. It also shows that the welfare increment increases quickly with the risk-aversion index and does not depend on the cash-out cost if the cost is sufficiently large. Finally, the welfare loss Wsdecreases with the correlation coefficient ρ since a large absolute value of ρ means a less idiosyncratic risk, keeping parameter σ unchanged.The previous subsections explore the benefits of the EGS in financing decisions. Now we focus on the effects of the swap on an entrepreneur’s investment decisions. Chen et al. (2010) examine the effects of idiosyncratic volatility ε ∈ {0.15, 0.20, 0.25} on the break-even investment cost I*. Here we provide more detailed analysis on the cut-off rule I* and emphasize the benefits of the swap.We compare the break-even cost I* under three different capital structures, i.e. no leverage without the swap, optimal leverage with bankruptcy protection but without the EGS, and the optimal capital structure with the swap. As reported in Table 4, generally the break-even investment cost I* decreases for a more risk-averse entrepreneur and/or a higher idiosyncratic volatility of the revenue. That is, a high risk aversion reduces the likelihood to invest, which is consistent with the observations of Chonopoulos et al. (2011). For instance, if ε = 0.90, the entrepreneur with γ = 0 under the swap (Panel C) will invest in the project even the investment cost is as much as 27.26. By contrast, if the entrepreneur is risk-averse enough, say γ = 2, she will give up the project once the investment cost is greater than 21.55.However, the trend of I* does not hold true all the time. In fact, we notice that in Panels B and C of Table 4, as idiosyncratic volatility ε grows further, break-even investment costs fluctuate slightly. This is because the subjective values of equity held by the entrepreneur include the values of the default option and the cash-out option, both of which increase with a growth of the volatility of idiosyncratic risk although for a risk-averse investor, the subjective value of larger risk asset will be less in general.In addition, we find that in Panel B under risk aversion γ = 2, the break-even investment cost is higher than that under γ = 1 if the volatility of idiosyncratic risk is large enough, say ε ≥ 0.4. This is because a more risk-averse entrepreneur would borrow more money from the bank and get more diversified benefits and tax shields under bankruptcy protection yd= b.Actually, under the EGS, the break-even investment cost of a more risk-averse entrepreneur decreases gradually and it is considerably greater than the corresponding break-even investment cost if the swap contract is not signed. These results imply that an entrepreneur armed with the swap is more willing to invest, since the swap provides the entrepreneur with the eligibility to issue debt and to freely choose the time to default.More importantly, a high break-even investment cost means a large net profit obtained by the entrepreneur after investing in the project. By comparing the three financing schemes in Table 4, we find that a risk-averse entrepreneur obtains considerable welfare increments resulting from the EGS, although the welfare increments are very limited if the entrepreneur’s risk aversion γ = 0.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
