@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis on China's eco-innovations: Regulation context, intertemporal change and regional differences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study eco-innovation effects of China's multiple environmental instruments.An extended productivity index is used to measure eco-innovation.An integrated analysis framework is constructed to evaluate eco-innovation.China accelerated its eco-innovations in response to environmental regulations.Realizing paths of cross-region eco-innovation gains are noticeably discrepant.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Eco-innovations,Energy saving and emissions reduction,Path differences,China,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Eco-innovation is recognized as a determinant of success or failure of environmental protection efforts in the long run. This paper attempts to examine China's eco-innovation gains in response to the energy saving and emissions reduction (ESER) policy enforced during 2006–2010. We first construct an integrated analysis framework to evaluate the changes of energy and environmental performance used as the proxy of eco-innovation, and then the intertemporal change of China's eco-innovation gains as well as the regional differences is investigated. The results indicate that China had accelerated its process of eco-innovations during 2006–2010 when a series of ESER policies were enforced. The developments and wide adoptions of advanced energy saving and environmentally friendly technologies serve as the primary driving forces, while upgrading management skills and organizational designs contribute relatively little. Furthermore, the realizing paths of cross-region eco-innovations in China are obviously discrepant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To relieve the constraints of energy shortage and environmental deterioration to China's sustainable economic growth, great efforts have been taken by the central government to enforce energy saving and emissions reduction (ESER) during the 11th five-year plan (FYP). By the end of 2010, China had decreased its energy intensity by nearly 20 percentage points compared with 2005 levels, and the total amount of sulphur dioxide (SO2) and chemical oxygen demand (COD) emissions in this developing country have respectively been reduced by 14.29 percent and 12.45 percent during the same period. However, as the low hanging fruits have been picked over, the marginal costs for further energy saving and emissions reduction efforts are increasing rapidly. The prospect of China's energy and environmental situations in the following several decades are still unknown and an effective long-term mechanism for promoting ESER practices is urgently required.Eco-innovation, which plays a crucial role in decoupling China's rapid economic growth from its resource consumptions and environmental pollutions, is considered as one of the most important determinants of success or failure of energy saving and environmental protection practices in the long run (Jaffe, Newell, & Stavins, 2002). In general, eco-innovation is defined as the process of developing or implementing new products, processes or organizational arrangements which significantly decrease environmental impact but provide increased competitiveness of the users (Fussler & James, 1996; Kemp & Pearson, 2008; OECD, 2009). Yet due to the existence of dual externalities including environmental externalities and knowledge spillovers, firms lack the incentives to invest voluntarily in eco-innovation activities (Jaffe, Newell, & Stavins, 2003). In this context, some normative analysis suggest that public policies on energy saving and environmental protection, when appropriately designed, can stimulate the innovation and adoption of environmental-friendly technologies (López-Gamero, Claver-Cortés, & Molina-Azorín, 2009; Perino & Requate, 2012).Up to now, numerous studies focus on the actual effects of environmental policies on eco-innovation (see Kemp & Pontoglio, 2011 and Popp, 2010a for a review). The dominant view insists that policy instruments designed to improve environmental quality can encourage environmentally-friendly technological change. On the one hand, policy instruments internalizing environmental externalities change the direction of technological change towards environmental innovations. Based on induced innovation hypothesis proposed by Hicks (1932), early studies found that some emissions reduction policies such as carbon/energy tax drive up the prices of fossil fuels relative to other inputs, and then induce the development of energy-efficient technologies. For example, Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins (1999) demonstrate that there exist a positive relationship between energy price and the improvement of energy efficiency in home appliances such as air conditioners and gas water heaters. Popp (2002) finds a long-term positive elasticity of energy patenting regarding energy price, i.e., patents on energy-efficiency technologies increase when the price of energy goes up. Kumar and Managi (2009) also verified that substantial oil price-induced technological progress at the world level has emerged when long-term oil prices are rising. More recently, Lukas and Welling (2014) point out that the European Union emissions trading scheme creates financial incentives for companies to invest in climate-friendly innovations in order to reconcile economic efficiency with ecological efficiency.On the other hand, wide adoption of existing leading environmentally friendly technologies is another important pathway for firms’ eco-innovation gains, and well-designed environmental policies that are linked to market conditions and to firms’ technological capabilities can effectively accelerate this process. Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2005) indicate that energy conservation tax credits or technology subsidies speed the adoption of new environmental technologies by decreasing uncertain returns on investment for firms. Taylor, Rubin, and Hounshell (2005) find that stricter SO2 emissions standards force the wide utilization of desulfurization facilities. Recently, Popp (2010b) points out that firms tend to adopt newer post-combustion control techniques to save costs in response to increasing regulatory stringency.As we summarize from the existing literature that a majority of previous empirical studies focus on the effects of a single environmental policy instrument on a specific type of eco-innovations in a given technological field. But in practice, a portfolio of policy instruments including command-and-control measures (such as technology-based standards) and market-based policy instruments (such as environmental tax and energy-saving subsidies) is employed synchronously to address all kinds of environmental problems in different circumstances (Bennear & Stavins, 2007). These environmental instruments create incentives or constraints for the development and adoption of different eco-innovation types through different channels (Kesidou & Demirel, 2012; Triguero, Moreno-Mondéjar, & Davia, 2013). In many cases, there often exists very complicated interaction effects among these policy instruments (Zhang, Zhang, Liu, & Bi, 2013), thus it is generally difficult to distinguish the eco-innovation effect of one environmental policy instrument from another. In this context, a more comprehensive analysis framework is indispensable to investigate the actual eco-innovation effects of the combination of various environmental instruments from a macro perspective.In this paper, we attempt to examine the integrated eco-innovation effects of China's energy saving and emissions reduction policy enforced during the 11th FYP. Unlike previous studies that used environmental R&D investment or environmental patents as the proxy of eco-innovation, this paper constructs a productivity index specified at energy saving and emissions reduction for eco-innovation measurement as suggested by Arundel and Kemp (2009). The advantages of employing this index include two aspects. On the one hand, it can capture the comprehensive effects of all kinds of eco-innovation practices including technological and non-technological types. On the other hand, the productivity index is easy to be further decomposed into several components so that we can identify the channels through which production units conduct their eco-innovations. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the definition of eco-innovations and selects a proper indicator for its measurement, Section 3 elaborates the methodology used in this study, Section 4 reports the actual eco-innovation effects of China's ESER policy along with the pathway diversities among 30 administrative provinces, Section 5 concludes the paper and puts forward some useful policy implications.In recent years, eco-innovation firstly proposed by Fussler and James (1996) has acquired increasing attention from policy makers and scholars worldwide. Due to the involvement of interdisciplinarity in sociology, economics and ecology, different definitions for eco-innovation have emerged without a standardized statement (Kemp & Pearson, 2008; OECD, 2009; Rennings, 2000; EIO, 2013). This paper applies the conception illustrated by OECD (2009) as follows:“The creation or implementation of new or significantly improved products (goods and services), process, marketing methods, organizational structure and institutional arrangements which – with or without intent – lead to environmental improvements compared to relevant alternatives”.Three distinguishing characteristics can be drawn from the above definition of eco-innovation: (1) Universality: there are many types of eco-innovation practices ranging from technological dimensions to social and institutional ones, such as eco-products, eco-processes or eco-organizations (Triguero et al., 2013). Moreover, it is not just limited to the traditional innovation introduced by Schumpeter (1934), but encompasses the diffusion of already available environmentally-friendly products, processes, or organizations. (2) Effectiveness: it underlines the real environmental effects of all types of innovation activities, regardless of whether they were intended to be “ecological” or not. Eco-innovation gains can thus result from firms’ other economic activities such as increasing market share or reducing production costs, although these practices are not predominantly motivated by environmental concerns (Horbach, Rammer, & Rennings, 2012). (3) Relativity: compared to the previous technology (or organization), the new one improves the environmental performance of adopters.Eco-innovation is difficult to be fully and directly assessed due to its intrinsic “eco” element. Hence several alternative indicators are usually employed by existing empirical studies. Arundel and Kemp (2009) offer a review on available measurement indicators for eco-innovation and group them into three categories as shown in Fig. 1.As the main sources of technological eco-innovations, input measures such as environmental R&D expenditures or personnel have been given a priority to the measurement of eco-innovation (Demirel & Kesidou, 2011; Popp & Newell, 2012). However, this type of indicators may be biased when there are inefficient R&D investments (Kumar & Managi, 2009). As an alternative, some output indicators such as the number of successful environmental-related patent applications or scientific publications, have been applied widely in previous empirical literatures (Johnstone, Hascic, & Popp, 2010; Marin, 2014; Noailly, 2012; Popp, 2006). Yet the limitations of these indicators for the measurement of technological eco-innovations have also been pointed out in the existing literatures (Arundel & Kemp, 2009; Marin, 2014). For instance, patent applications usually overestimate technological innovation when patents have not been commercialized successfully. Furthermore, neither input nor output indicators cover organizational and service eco-innovations since these innovations are often not listed in government R&D expenditure budget, and also not patented.To gain a more comprehensive picture of eco-innovation, some scholars suggest that the change in eco-efficiency or environmental productivity is a feasible alternative since the final effects of eco-innovation practices are embodied in the improvements of eco-efficiency performance or environmental productivity (Arundel & Kemp, 2009; Kumar & Managi, 2009). In contrast to the input and output indicators, these indirect measurements can capture the actual and aggregated effects of all eco-innovation practices including technological and non-technological ones. In this regards, the measurement of eco-productivity has attracted more and more attention. Mahlberg and Sahoo (2011) assess eco-productivity performance of 22 OECD countries using the directional Russell measure of inefficiency. Picazo-Tadeo, Gómez-Limón, and Beltrán-Esteve (2014) measure environmental productivity of EU-28 member states and decompose it as the result of eco-efficiency change and environmental technical change (or eco-innovation).Unlike Picazo-Tadeo et al. (2014) that treat eco-innovation as a component of environmental productivity, in this paper we consider the intertemporal change of entities’ energy and environmental performance as the proxy of technological and non-technological eco-innovation. To construct this productivity index, we define a three-dimensional directional distance function which incorporates the targets of economic growth, energy conservation and emissions reduction in a common analysis framework.Another important merit of employing productivity index is that we can further identify the pathway through which one entity obtains its eco-innovation by decomposing its productivity change. The developed indicator in this paper can mainly be decomposed into two components: the purely technological eco-innovation represented by the shift of energy saving and environmental friendly technologies (EET) frontier, and the technical efficiency change measured by the movement towards the frontier of EET. The former mainly results from the following activities: (1) the development and successful commercialization of advanced energy and environmental technologies, such as technology breakthroughs in energy conservation and pollution control, new green products, cleaner process technologies and handling techniques (Kemp & Pontoglio, 2011); (2) the wide diffusions of best-practice eco-technologies; and (3) the commercial process of a previously existing technical idea that was never used (Newell, Jaffe, & Stavins, 2006). In contrast, the technical efficiency change captures the catch-up effect of the entity under the frontier of EET towards the corresponding best practice, which can mainly be attributed to: (1) organizational and institutional innovations that facilitate successfully economic production compatible with energy saving and emissions reduction, such as the establishment and improvement of environmental management system; and (2) the diffusions of management skills or technical experiences related to the leading energy saving and environmental friendly technologies (Briec, Peypoch, & Ratsimbanierana, 2011).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
