@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Asymmetries in stock markets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The protocol of return reversals and asymmetry in return reversals has been questioned.Return persistency and asymmetry in return persistency have been proposed.Return reversal asymmetry is confined to developed markets during stock market downtowns only.Return reversal asymmetry is mostly ambiguous and illusionary.Return persistency asymmetry, though also weak, is relatively more prevalent.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Asymmetry,Volatility,Return reversals,Return persistency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper analyzes three major asymmetries in stock markets, namely, asymmetry in return reversals, asymmetry in return persistency and asymmetry in return volatilities. It argues for a case of return persistency as stock returns do not always reverse, in theory and in practice. Patterns in return-volatility asymmetries are conjectured and investigated jointly, under different stock market conditions. Results from modeling the world's major stock return indexes render support to the propositions of the paper. Return reversal asymmetry is illusionary arising from ambiguous parameter estimations and deluding interpretations of parameter signs. Asymmetry in return persistency, still weak though, is more prevalent.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While asymmetric time-varying volatility on the stock market has been widely documented in the empirical literature, the other major asymmetric phenomenon, asymmetry in returns, has yet to be scrutinized. Although the former has been publicized with the news argument, the leverage notion and even an econometric model of EGARCH (Exponential General Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity, cf. Nelson 1991), the latter is more direct in shaping returns to investors. Further, interactions between return and volatility asymmetries need to be probed into, to identify the right source of asymmetry and to avoid the delusion of one kind of asymmetry in the name of the other. Critically, most empirical studies have overlooked the difference between a shock to stock returns and the return itself, thereby the terminology of asymmetry in return reversals has emerged, which is at most half of the veracities. During stock market upturns, both slope and intercept parameters in the mean (return) equation are likely to be positive, so positive returns persist and negative returns may tend to reverse, regardless of a positive or negative past return shock. The present study proposes hypothetically and tests empirically this new strand of asymmetry, i.e., return persistency asymmetry, alongside return reversal asymmetry and their interactions.The rest of the paper progresses as follows. The next section provides a brief review and discussion of recent research on asymmetries in stock return reversals and volatilities. Section 3 specifies the models and develops the corresponding hypotheses. It elaborates on the behavioral patterns in return reversal/persistency asymmetry and volatility asymmetry, vis-à-vis the restrictions imposed on the return reversal/persistency asymmetry parameters and the volatility asymmetry parameters. Section 4 presents the empirical results and findings of this study, with further deliberation on the implications of the present study. Finally, Section 5 summarizes this study.It has beenwidely documented that a negative shock to stock returns, or an unexpected fall in the stock price, tends to increase volatility of the stock to a greater extent than a positive shock to stock returns, or an unexpected rise in the stock price of the same magnitude. This kind of volatility asymmetry exhibits asymmetric responses to good news vis-à-vis bad news, and is reasonably attributed to, and explained by, the leverage effect in the literature. It is not the intention of the present paper to review this kind of asymmetry in volatilities, which is abundant in the literature ready to be referred to. Studies on return reversals, or stock market overreactions and asymmetries in stock market returns, include De Bondt and Thaler (1985) in early days, which continues to progress and one of the recent examples is Kedar-Levy, Yu, Kamesaka, and Ben-Zion (2010). De Bondt and Thaler (1985) have found that investors overreact on the stock market, using monthly returns on the stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange for the period between January 1926 and December 1982. Their results and findings are confirmed or supported by later studies by Zarowin (1989,1990), Dissanaike (1996), Kim and Nelson (1998), Malliaropulos and Priestley (1999), Atkins and Dyl (1990) and Bremer and Sweeney (1991), Iihara, Kato, and Tokunaga (2004), and Nam, Pyun, and Avard (2001). Recently, Hwang and Rubesam (2013) provide an explanation to overreactions and asymmetries in stock returns based on behavioral biases. Two conditions that increase return reversals are proposed. Return reversals increase when investors respond to public signals asymmetrically or when public signals become noisy.Most empirical studies, however, have overlooked the difference between a positive (negative) shock to stock returns and a positive (negative) return itself. Their results and findings may look sound with return data in stock market downturns or stagnation, but are questionable otherwise. Failing to differentiate shocks to returns and returns themselves would mingle persistence with reversion. These can be demonstrated with a basic model for capturing reversion, Rt= μ0 + μ1Rt − 1 + ɛt. During booming times or stock market upturns, both slope and intercept parameters in the mean (return) equation are likely to be positive, so a positive past return tends to persist, regardless of a positive or negative past return shock. Whereas negative past return could either persist or reverse, depending on the relative size of the intercept and slope parameters. Table 1 summarizes the return persistency/reversal patterns of positive and negative past returns, given assorted combinations of the intercept and slope parameters. The table is arranged with return persistency decreasing/return reversals increasing from left to right, starting with the highest return persistency tendency case and ending with the highest return reversal tendency case. It can be observed that no clear patterns of persistency/reversals exist in many cases, even less unlikely for asymmetry in return persistency/reversals. Return reversals may apply to stock market downturns, during which the slope parameter is likely to be negative. When stock prices stagnate, the slope parameter can be negative with a positive intercept, or be positive with a negative intercept, and the former case could exhibit mean reversion tendencies. As returns do not always reverse, we study whether stock returns would persist with a higher compounding rate following a positive return shock as against a negative return shock.There are a few real and behavioral factors that may possibly induce asymmetry in return persistency and reversals. In booming times, the stock price is on average rising around an up sloping trend. A positive past return shock coupled with a positive past return means that, while the expectation was on the rise, it was not higher enough in the previous round. Whereas a negative past return shock coupled with a positive past return indicates that investors were over optimistic. Positive stock returns are therefore more likely to persist and to persist to a higher degree in the former than in the latter. The catchphrase “a good round deserves another” probably best explains this asymmetry pattern. Then it comes to the case of a negative past return. Stock returns would reverse to a larger degree with a positive past return shock, vis-à-vis a negative past return shock, under our framework. i.e., stock returns would become positive or lesser negative following a positive return shock, but remain negative or deeper negative following a negative return shock. The conventional propositions and analysis in return reversals in the existing literature would work appropriately in stock market downturns, nevertheless. With a negative slope parameter under the circumstances, stock returns almost always reverse. With the expectations that stock performance improves more or deteriorates less following a positive return shock than a negative return shock, there would be the following patterns in return reversal asymmetry. Experiencing a positive past return shock, stock returns would reverse to a lesser extent when the past return was positive, and would reverse to a larger extent when the past return was negative, both being an indication of improving performance or recovery. Whereas given a negative past return shock, stock returns reverse to a larger extent with a positive past stock return and to a lesser extent with a negative past stock return, both being the indication of deteriorating performance or relapse.Few studies have included both asymmetric return reversals and asymmetric time-varying volatilities in empirical investigations, nonetheless. Adopting an ANST-GARCH modeling approach, Nam, Pyun, and Avard (2002) study asymmetric mean reversion and contrarian profits, so both asymmetries in mean reversion and time-varying volatilities can be examined. Koutmos (1998) tests the hypothesis for nine national stock markets that both the conditional mean and the conditional variance of stock index returns are asymmetric functions of past information. The empirical evidence suggests that both the conditional mean and the conditional variance respond asymmetrically to past information. He alleges that asymmetry in the conditional mean is linked to asymmetry in the conditional variance, because the faster adjustment of prices to bad news causes higher volatilities during down markets, which suggest that volatility asymmetry increases with mean reversion asymmetry. Park (2011) suggests that asymmetric herding is a source of asymmetric return volatility. His work is based on exchange rate data though and involves no asymmetries in return reversals. Charles (2010) has found that asymmetry influences the day-of-the-week effect on volatility. Hua and Zhang (2008) deal with asymmetry in conditional distribution and volatility asymmetry. It is claimed that empirical results of one-step-ahead density forecasts on the weekly S&#38;P500 returns suggest that forecast quality can be significantly improved by modeling these asymmetric features.Recently, Wang and Wang (2011) have scrutinized the interactions between return reversal asymmetry and volatility asymmetry. They suggest that mean reversion asymmetry and volatility asymmetry may originate from similar sources and causes but the two asymmetries do not reinforce each other. Volatility asymmetry can be a measure of ambiguity in mean reversion asymmetry. There would be no or weak volatility asymmetry, instead of strong, definite volatility asymmetry, when there is a strong, clear pattern of mean reversion asymmetry. They argue that asymmetric return reversals can be better explained by risk aversion functions where relative risk aversion is a decreasing function of wealth levels, or conditional on the direction of changes in wealth levels. This asymmetry in risk premium requirements could be the source of asymmetry in return reversals that would otherwise have been symmetric. They propose that asymmetry in variances is the residual effect of mean reversion asymmetry in the interaction between the mean and the variance, in terms of the trade-off between asymmetry in return reversals and asymmetry in time-varying volatilities. Their empirical results contradict those in Koutmos (1998).Different from all the previous research, the present study scrutinizes return persistency asymmetry in exploiting the mystery in return behavior and patterns. It is in contrast to Wang and Wang (2011) and Koutmos (1998) who have associated the two asymmetries in return reversals and in volatilities to a certain extent. The present study makes inquiries into whether and how asymmetry in return reversals and persistency surfaces. The study examines return reversal/persistency asymmetry and volatility asymmetry jointly and in a balanced way, imposing no prior conditions on the likely patterns in return reversal/persistency asymmetry and volatility asymmetry and restrict to no specific geographical regions. It distinguishes the two asymmetries on the ground of their underpinning makings with corresponding model specifications and hypothesis tests.We model the proposed return persistency asymmetry, along with asymmetries in stock return reversals and stock return volatilities in this section. Both return reversal/persistency asymmetry and volatility asymmetry are modeled with a threshold function and a smooth transition function, accommodating diverse views on the properties of the two processes. Restrictions are further imposed on the pertinent parameters of the model in relation to the test of the proposition. Return reversal/persistency asymmetry features the qualitative reaction to the sign of the shock; whereas volatility itself responds to the magnitude of previous shocks that are quantitative measures, so does volatility asymmetry. Volatility is proportional to the size of either a positive shock or a negative shock, but the ratio of proportionality is hypothesized to be higher for a negative shock than for a positive shock with equal size. Eq. (1) below is the general model for the mean process:(1)Rt=μ0+M(ɛt−1)Rt−1+ɛtwhere Rtis return on the stock, ɛtis the residual, and μ0, μ1, ρ are coefficients. M(ɛt − 1) captures asymmetry in mean reversion or persistency. Two types of design for M(ɛt − 1) are adopted. One is the dummy variable approach and the other assumes a kind of transition function. For the former, an endogenous dummy variable takes the value of unity if the residual or shock in the previous period is negative and zero otherwise, capturing asymmetry in mean reversion:(2)M(ɛt−1)=μ1+ρD(ɛt−1)={μ1+ρ,ɛt−1<0,μ1,ɛt−1≥0Returns reverse when μ1 is negative. The sign of ρ is negative in the presence of asymmetry of mean reversion, i.e., returns reverse to a greater extent following a negative return shock. If μ1 is positive, then returns do not reverse but persist following a positive past return shock. Given a ρ in the range of − μ1 < ρ < 0, or μ1 + ρ > 0, returns still persist following a negative past return shock, but with a lower compounding rate. Only when ρ < −μ1, or μ1 + ρ < 0, would returns reverse following a negative past return shock. Overall, a negative ρ indicates return reversal asymmetry that returns reverse to a greater extent following a negative past return shock. Likewise, it indicates return persistency asymmetry that returns tend to persist with a higher compounding rate following a positive past return shock.A logistic type specification is assumed for the design of transition functions:(3)M(ɛt−1)=μ1+ρ[1+exp(−λɛt−1)]−1With λ < 0, M(ɛt − 1) → μ1 when ɛt − 1 → ∞, M(ɛt − 1) → μ1 + ρ when ɛt − 1 → −∞ and M(ɛt − 1) → μ1 + 0.5ρ when ɛt − 1 → 0. When λ > 0, the function value mirrors that for the M(ɛt − 1) → μ1 case. λ measures the degree of smoothness of the transition function. A larger λ in absolute value corresponds to a sharper asymmetry in return reversals/persistency. In its extremity, an infinite λ in absolute value reduces the logistic function to a threshold function. It is required that ρ and λ have the same sign for the null of our hypothesis regarding return reversal/persistency asymmetry, i.e., ρ < 0 and λ < 0 or ρ > 0 and λ > 0. Whereas both sets of requirements are equivalent mathematically, the latter set of requirements is inclined to be associated with return persistency asymmetry.Asymmetry in time-varying volatilities is also specified by a threshold function and a smooth transition function that will be tested for superiority empirically. Adopting a most parsimonious as well as effective GARCH(1,1) for the symmetric part of time-varying volatilities, the general model for the variance process is as follows:(4)ht=(α0+α1ɛt−12+β1ht−1)V(ɛt−1)With a threshold specification,  V(ɛt − 1) takes the form of:(5)V(ɛt−1)=1+θD(ɛt−1)={1+θ,ɛt−1<01,ɛt−1≥0θ > 0 is required for the kind of volatility asymmetry where volatility is greater following a negative return shock than a positive return shock. The logistic specification is as follows:(6)V(ɛt−1)=1+θ[1+exp(−γɛt−1)]−1Similar to the cases for asymmetry in mean revision/persistence and with γ < 0, V(ɛt − 1) → 1 when ɛt − 1 → ∞, V(ɛt − 1) → 1 + θ when ɛt − 1 → −∞ and V(ɛt − 1) → 1 + 0.5θ when ɛt − 1 → 0 for both specifications. If γ > 0, the function value mirrors that for the γ < 0 case. θ and γ are required to possess opposite signs for exhibiting a volatility asymmetry pattern consistent to our hypothesis. γ measures the degree of volatility asymmetry, a larger γ in absolute value corresponds to a higher degree of volatility asymmetry. In extreme cases, an infinite γ in absolute value reduces the logistic function to a threshold function.Let us consider briefly the stationarity conditions for the above specified variance. Notice that E{V(ɛt − 1)} = 1 + 0.5θ for all the two variance specifications of Eqs. (5) and (6). Therefore, taking expectations operation for Eq. (4) gives rise to:(7)σAPTARAVAREPSILONε2=(α0+α1σAPTARAVAREPSILONε2+β1σAPTARAVAREPSILONε2)(1+0.5θ)whereσAPTARAVAREPSILONε2is the unconditional variance of the residual. It follows that the stationarity conditions are:(8)α1+β1<11+0.5θThe joint mean and variance function are expressed as follows:(9)Rt=μ0+M(ɛt−1)Rt−1+ɛtht=(α0+α1ɛt−12+β1ht−1)V(ɛt−1)Eq. (9) is the general model and the base upon which various restrictions will be imposed to test our hypotheses empirically. Notice that the mean reversion/persistence asymmetry specification of Eq. (3) encompasses that of Eq. (2). It can be observed that M(ɛt − 1) → μ1 + ρD(ɛt − 1) when λ → −∞ for ɛt − 1 ≠ 0. Next, there is no mean reversion/persistence asymmetry if ρ = 0 is confirmed for the specification in Eq. (2) or Eq. (3). Correspondingly, there are following hypotheses to be tested empirically, with regard to imposing restrictions on the return reversal/persistency asymmetry parameters:H1Return reversal/persistency asymmetry is a quantitative response to the previous return shock. The null of the hypothesis is − ∞ < λ < 0 and ρ < 0 or 0 < λ < ∞ and ρ > 0 with the smooth transition process ofEq. (3).Return reversal/persistency asymmetry is a qualitative response to the sign of the previous return shock. The null of the hypothesis for the specification ofEq. (3)is λ → −∞ and ρ < 0 or λ → ∞ and ρ > 0, and the null is ρ < 0 with the threshold process ofEq. (2).Similar restrictions are imposed on the variance asymmetry parameters, with the following corresponding hypotheses:H3There exists asymmetry in time-varying volatilities that is a qualitative response to the previous return shock. The null of the hypothesis is γ → −∞ and θ > 0 or γ → ∞ and θ < 0 with the specification ofEq. (6). The null of the hypothesis is θ > 0 with the specification ofEq. (5).There exists asymmetry in time-varying volatilities that is a quantitative function of the previous return shock, i.e., it responds to both the size and the sign of the previous return shock. The null of the hypothesis is − ∞ < γ < 0 and θ > 0 or 0 < γ < ∞ and θ < 0 with the specification ofEq. (6).The above hypotheses deal with asymmetries in return persistency/reversals and volatilities individually. As stressed earlier, one of the issues is the interactions between the two asymmetries. Conceptualizing the discussions in the previous section, we put forward two additional hypotheses, the ambiguity hypothesis and illusion hypothesis, as follows:H5Return reversal/persistency asymmetry is ambiguous. The null of the hypothesis is ρ = 0 with the specification ofEq. (2) or Eq. (3); or the B,T specification is not statistically superior to the N,T specification in the tables.Return reversal/persistency asymmetry is illusionary.There are two parts for this hypothesis as follows:H6aIt is illusionary that suppressing the volatility asymmetry parameter deteriorates the performance of the model while inducing asymmetry in return revision/persistence in the mean equation. The null of the hypothesis is a significant log likelihood ratio test statistic, LR, for the specification ofEq. (13)versus the specification ofEq. (9); meanwhile, asymmetry in return revision/persistence is induced, i.e., ρ = 0 withEq. (9)becomes ρ ≠ 0 after suppressing the volatility asymmetry parameter incorrectly withEq. (13).It is illusionary that adopting over sophisticated specifications does not improve on model performance while conceiving asymmetry in return revision/persistence in the mean equation. The null of the hypothesis is an insignificant log likelihood ratio test statistic, LR, for the full specification versus the specification ofEq. (10)andEq. (11); or the T,T specification is not statistically superior to the B,T and N,T specifications in the tables. Meanwhile, asymmetry in return revision/persistence is conceived, i.e., ρ = 0 with the B,T specification becomesρ≠0,λ≠0with the T,T specification.The data sets used in this study are FTSE All World return index and its eight constituency indexes, comprising the geographical spreads of Asia Pacific, North America, Latin America, Middle East and Africa, Europe, and the development stage groupings of all emerging markets, advanced emerging markets, and developed markets. All the indexes are measured in the US dollars. In addition, the return index for the euro area is included, denominated in both the US dollars and the euros. So, there are 11 return series in total covered in this study. The data sets span 15 years, starting on Wednesday January 1, 1997 and ending on Friday December 2011, yielding 3913 observations in total for each of the return series. The period encompasses two major financial crises, the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and the latest global financial crisis triggered by a complex interplay of valuation and liquidity problems in banking and financial systems in 2008. Fig. 1illustrates stock market movements in this period, choosing three markets out of 11 with representative patterns. They are developed markets, all emerging markets, and Asia Pacific. The developed market is hit little by the 1997 Asian financial crisis but has experienced a major downturn from the turn of the millennium to the spring in 2003. In contrast, the emerging market is hit hard by the Asian financial crisis and has experienced a significant downturn between June 1997 and October 1998, and stagnated until the spring of 2003. Then the stock market around the globe has enjoyed an over four years’ booming era until the end of October 2007. It is then followed by the most severe stock market plummet in 80 years triggered by the US subprime mortgage crisis. The market has recovered from March 2009 but is hit again in May 2011 by the Greek debt crisis. The markets in North America, Europe and the euro area measured in both the US dollars and the euros share the same pattern as that in the developed market. So does the all world index as developed markets still play a dominant role on the stage of global stock markets. The markets of Middle East and Africa, Latin America and advanced emerging economies bear the hallmark of that of all emerging markets. Whereas the markets in Asia Pacific share the similar pattern with emerging markets during the 1997 Asian financial crisis period and with developed markets in the stock market downturn between January 2000 and March 2003, due to the fact that Asia Pacific encompasses both merging markets and developed markets such as Japan. Given these patterns in stock market movements, the period between March 12, 2003 and October 31, 2007 is set to be the major booming period for empirical analysis in this study, for all return indexes. The sharp downturn period from October 31, 2007 to March 9, 2009 is also experienced by all return indexes, so is an auxiliary upturn period from March 9, 2009 to May 2, 2011. For the markets in the developed world, North America, Europe, the euro area and the all world, there is an additional auxiliary upturn period from January 1, 1997 to December 31, 1999; and the period between January 1, 2000 and March 12, 2003 is the major downturn period. For advanced emerging markets, all emerging markets and Asia Pacific, the period between June 26, 1997 and October 5, 1998 is an auxiliary downturn period. For Middle East and Africa and Latin America, the period between January 1, 1997 and March 12, 2003 is reserved for stack market stagnation. This paper only reports the results for (a) the major booming period between March 12, 2003 and October 31, 2007 for all return indexes, (b) The sharp downturn, or the financial crisis, period from October 31, 2007 to March 9, 2009 also experienced by all return indexes, (c) the major downturn period between January 1, 2000 and March 12, 2003 for the developed world, North America, Europe, the euro area and the all world, and (d) the stagnation period between January 1, 1997 and March 12, 2003 for Middle East and Africa and Latin America.Fig. 2demonstrates the estimation strategy of this study. Starting with smooth transition specifications for both mean reversion/persistence asymmetry and variance asymmetry on the top, pertinent restrictions are imposed to inspect whether the specification at a higher level is superiorto the specification at the lower level. If the upper level specification is not superior to the specification one level down, the estimation process moves down to the next level, otherwise it stops at the upper level. There are five levels altogether. The specification on the top with both mean reversion/persistence asymmetry and variance asymmetry performs no better than the MM1 specification in most of the cases. Either the likelihood ratio statistic for adopting the encompassing model is not significant, or the estimation fails to converge using a variety of algorithms and numbers of iterations. On the other hand, the MV1 specification is inferior to the specification with both mean reversion/persistence asymmetry and variance asymmetry, either with a significant likelihood ratio statistic or failing to converge in a similar way as the latter. So, the route of estimation is via the MM1 branch, followed by the imposing pertinent restrictions as elaborated above. This strategy leads to reporting results with four specifications in the following tables, namely, T,T, B,T, N,T, and B,N.11The B,B specification results are not reported, as the B,B specification performs significantly worse that the B,T specification. H3is rejected and results are available upon request. The B,N specification results are presented instead, since we would like to assess the effect of suppressing volatility asymmetry parameters altogether.All estimation is made with the BHHH log likelihood maximization procedures in RATS (Regressional Analysis of Time Series). Table 2 reports the estimation results for the major booming period, whereas Table 3 reports the results for the major downturn period, Table 4 for the financial crisis period and Table 5 for the market stagnation period.22Only the results from specifying the smooth transition process with a logistic function are reported due to space limit.In each table, 1 is for all world; then the markets are numbered alphabetically: 2 for advanced emerging, 3 for all emerging, 4 for Asia Pacific, 5 for developed economies, 6 for Europe, 7 for euro area (dollar returns), 8 for euro area (euro returns), 9 for Latin America, 10 for Middle East and Africa, and 11 for North America. When a market is not included, the next market does not move up, it keeps its own number in all four tables. For example, the downturn period does not apply to advanced emerging economies and all emerging economies. While the two groups do not show in Table 3, the next group, Asia Pacific keeps its number 3.4 and does not move up to 3.2.In booming times, only the markets in North America appear to exhibit return reversal asymmetry that returns reverse following a negative return shock with a significant ρ, whereas returns do not reverse following a positive return shock. Nonetheless, suppressing ρ does not have significant effect and the null hypothesis of no return reversal asymmetry can be accepted with a log likelihood ratio statistic of just 0.4432, as reported in Table 2. The other market that possesses a significant ρ is Asia Pacific. However, μ1 + ρ is positive with ρ being −0.1603 and μ1 being 0.1721, so returns do not reverse at all regardless of a positive or negative return shock. Returns are more persistent following a positive return shock and are less persistent following a negative return shock in this case, and the return persistency hypothesis tends to be accepted as the log likelihood ratio statistic for suppressing ρ, being 3.0008 in Table 2, is significant at the 10 percent level. Latin America is similar, its μ1 + ρ is always positive, so it is a matter of high or low persistency in returns. With a positive λ and a positive ρ, returns are more persistent following a positive return shock and less persistent following a negative return shock. The return persistency hypothesis also tends to be accepted for Latin America with a log likelihood ratio statistic of 2.7280, being significant at the 10 percent level. In the case of euro area (euro returns), although ρ (0.3033e−2) is significant, it is less than 1/30th of μ1 (0.1013), so it does not have a non-negligible effect on return persistency.Inspecting the results, it can be observed that return reversal asymmetry is confined to the developed world in economic downturns. In this category are Europe, the euro area and North America. Developed markets as a whole exhibit a pattern of return reversal asymmetry, albeit by a very small scale, so does Asia Pacific, dominated by the Japanese market. With a ρ of −0.7898e−2 that is less than 1/10th of −0.1452 for μ1 in absolute value in the case of Asia Pacific as reported in Table 3, this return reversal asymmetry is practically immaterial, taking any minimal transaction costs into account. For developed markets, return reversal asymmetry is as trivial as in Asia Pacific, with its ρ being less than 1/7th of μ1 in absolute value. The full specification of a smooth transition function for both mean reversion/persistence asymmetry and variance asymmetry works for only two of the return series, developed markets and Asia Pacific, and it does not perform better than the B,T specification statistically, with which return reversal asymmetry does not show up. For Europe, the euro area and North America, the best specification is B,T, and suppressing the mean reversion parameter ρ for the N,T specification reduces log likelihood function values. The log likelihood ratio statistic is significant at the 10 percent level for euro area (dollar returns) and at the 5 percent level for Europe and euro area (euro returns). Above all, North America demonstrates the strongest return reversal asymmetry – the log likelihood ratio statistic for the N,T specification vis-à-vis the B,T specification, at 29.1654, is highly significant at the 1 percent level.In severe economic downturns, returns simply remain negative and there is no tendency to reverse, leave it alone asymmetry in return reversals. This is evident by a significant intercept and insignificant slope parameter in most of the cases with the preferred model specifications, reported for the financial crisis period in Table 4. An exception is advanced emerging markets where returns do reverse to a significant degree not only statistically but also practically meaningfully. Its return reversal asymmetry parameter ρ, at −0.1481e−1, is greater than the intercept μ0 of 0.5197e−2 in absolute value. Additionally the T,T specification, with which return reversal asymmetry shows up, cannot be rejected for the alternative of a B,T specification. The result suggests that investors in advanced emerging markets are relatively optimistic, expecting a negative return to reverse to become positive following a negative return shock, which is inconceivable in the developed economy in that period. Indeed, the developing world has suffered much less than the developed American and European economies in the last financial crisis. In the case of euro area (dollar returns and euro returns), although the T,T specification works for them with a statistically significant ρ and a statistically significant λ, the absolute value of ρ is 1/20th of the absolute value of the slope parameter μ1 in both cases. Such return reversal asymmetry is practically immaterial, misleading and illusionary. Indeed, imposing restrictions on the return reversal asymmetry parameters can be accepted, with a very insignificant log likelihood ratio statistic of 0.8790 for euro area (dollar returns) and 0.4946 for euro area (euro returns). Consequently, the T,T specification is not superior to the B,T specification, with which an opposite return reversal asymmetry is produced for the former that returns reverse faster following a positive return shock and no asymmetry in return reversals for the latter. An additional remark on this period is that econometric estimation is also in crisis, sometimes with peculiar t-statistics though the algorithm has been managed to converge, albeit involving a kind of fine-tuning. α1 or α0 is negative in some cases but the stationarity condition of Eq. (10) is still met nonetheless.No return reversal asymmetry is found in stock market stagnation either. Viewing Table 5, returns are more persistent following a negative return shock for Latin America. Suppressing ρ makes the model performance worse with a log likelihood ratio statistics of 3.8436 that is significant at the 5 percent level. Therefore, such return persistency asymmetry does exist. Moreover, the size of ρ is in the same range of μ1, which has practical implications. For Middle East and Africa, the T,T specification seems to work with a statistically significant ρ and a statistically significant λ. However, μ1 + ρ is always positive with ρ being −0.1858e−2 and μ1 being 0.8877e−1, so returns do not reverse at all in any circumstance. The absolute value of ρ is about 1/50th of the absolute value of the slope parameter μ1. Such statistically significant figures are not only irrelevant but also misleading practically. With imposed restrictions being accepted, no return reversal asymmetry exists actually.The T,T specification that adopts a smooth transition function for both return reversal/persistency asymmetry and volatility asymmetry is overwhelmingly disallowed, either due to non-convergence of the algorithm or unfittingly lower log likelihood function values. When it has worked for a limited number of cases, the log likelihood statistic for imposing restrictions is mostly insignificant, indicating it is not superior to the B,T specification where return reversal/persistency asymmetry is modeled with a binary process. Therefore, H1that hypothesizes return reversal/persistency asymmetry is a quantitative response to previous return shocks, is rejected in favor of a qualitative response.Return reversal asymmetry is ambiguous. In most instances, ρ is negative but insignificant. In limited cases where ρ is statistically significant, it is much smaller than the slope parameter μ1 in absolute value and is practically immaterial. Further and in booming times, suppressing the return reversal asymmetry parameter does not reduce the function value statistically but suppressing the return persistency asymmetry parameter does reduce the function value in three out of 11 return indexes. That return reversal asymmetry is ambiguous is upheld overwhelmingly, but that return persistency asymmetry is upheld to a lesser extent in stock market booms. i.e., H5is accepted overwhelmingly when stock returns experience reversals but is accepted to a lesser extent when stock returns persist. The situation is the same in stock market stagnation that return reversal asymmetry is ambiguous but return persistency asymmetry does seem to exist. In severe stock market downturns or the financial crisis, stock returns simply remain negative with no signs of reversals at all, except one out of 11 cases; only returns on advance emerging market still reverse under such economic circumstance. Return reversal asymmetry is found to be primarily a developed market phenomenon only during market downturns.Return reversal/persistency asymmetry is illusionary. Suppressing the volatility asymmetry parameter incorrectly deteriorates model performance in all 31 cases, with a highly significant LR statistic for the B,N specification reported in these 31 tables. More seriously, suppressing the volatility asymmetry parameter induces asymmetric return revision/persistence in the mean equation. It has created a significant ρ in six cases and produced a ρ showing some asymmetry symptom (negative with t > 1) in additional eight cases, from the N,T specification to the B,N specification. H6ais therefore accepted decisively. Adopting an over sophisticated T,T specification does not improve on model performance. This specification has only worked for nine out of 31 cases. In seven of them, both ρ and λ are significantly different from zero. In one case, ρ is significantly negative but λ is insignificant, which effectively becomes a binary threshold specification for return reversal/persistency asymmetry. Seven out of nine cases, this sophisticated specification is not superior to a binary threshold specification for return reversal/persistency asymmetry; it is also not superior to the specification without return reversal/persistency asymmetry. Among the only three cases where the sophisticated T,T specification achieves a statistically higher log likelihood function value than other specifications, one is at a lower significance level of 10 percent modest for a booming Latin America and the other at a modest significance level of 5 percent for advance emerging market in the financial crisis. With an absolute value of ρ being less than 1/30th of the absolute value of the slope parameter μ1 for a booming Latin America, this kind of asymmetry is immaterial. In only one case this sophisticated specification is highly significantly superior for the euro area (euro returns) in booming. Again, the absolute value of ρ is less than 1/30th of the absolute value of the slope parameter μ1. Therefore, even if this sophisticated T,T specification is superior statistically in this case, its return reversal/persistency asymmetry is practically immaterial and illusionary financially. As such, H6bis upheld overwhelmingly.The above analysis that examines the interactions between asymmetries in mean reversion/persistence and in time-varying volatilities reveals that return reversal/persistency asymmetry is illusionary created by suppressing the volatility asymmetry parameter incorrectly and by adopting over sophisticated model specifications. On the other hand, return reversal asymmetry is found to be ambiguous. The implications are that attempts to predict returns based on return reversal/persistency asymmetry parameter values would end up achieving no overall improvements when return reversal/persistency asymmetry is ambiguous. Under this circumstance, uncertainties in asymmetry in mean reversion/persistence are best left for the variance asymmetry parameter to pick up. The attempts will not help at all when return reversal/persistency asymmetry is illusionary.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
