@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supply chain performance and consumer surplus under alternative structures of channel dominance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze power-asymmetry between the manufacturer (M) and the retailer (R).The dominant agent makes the pricing and inventory risk allocation decisions.M-dominated channel results in the lowest price and the highest quantity.Total consumer surplus and channel profits are the highest in R-dominated channel.We study extensions on demand model, risk sharing, and different cost schemes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Price-setting newsvendor,Channel dominance,Inventory risk allocation,Consumer surplus,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Supply chain partnerships exhibit varying degrees of power distribution among the agents. This has implications for pricing and operational decisions in the channel and eventually influences the end customers. To understand how different power schemes affect the supply chain partners’ performance and consumer surplus, we study channel structures with a dominant manufacturer, a dominant retailer, and no single-agent dominance. Under random and price sensitive demand, channel dominance is interpreted in our setting as exerting power to determine the retail and wholesale prices as well as to transfer the inventory risk to the weaker party. We analyze all problems in a game-theory based framework and characterize the equilibrium retail price, wholesale price, and order/production quantity. We show that the manufacturer-dominated channel structure leads to the highest production quantity, the lowest retail price, and the largest expected surplus for an individual buyer; on the other hand, the entire channel profit and the total consumer surplus are highest when the retailer holds the channel dominance. While both the manufacturer and the retailer are better off when they become a power agent individually, channel dominance does not always guarantee higher share of channel profits, as we show under the manufacturer-dominated structure. Further insights are derived analytically and numerically from comparisons of the manufacturer/retailer dominance schemes with the no single-agent dominance structure and integrated channel. We also study extensions to investigate the effect of demand model and risk sharing, and we address industry settings with alternative schemes of holding cost, shortage penalty and salvage value.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supply chains have different structures based on the relative power distribution among the members. In some cases, agents have comparable power, hence no definite channel dominance is present; in other cases, there is power imbalance which may give rise to a dominant agent in the channel. For example, companies such as Wal-Mart, Best Buy, Home Depot, Amazon.com, and Tesco, which are referred to as “power retailers,” are mentioned to pursue a dominance strategy in some of their channel partnerships. In a similar way, the term “power manufacturer” may be used for companies such as Apple, Caterpillar, and designer goods manufacturers. Although in most cases channel dominance is achieved together with market dominance, it is also possible that market-dominating companies not simultaneously adopt a channel dominance strategy (Jerath, Hoch, & Zhang, 2007), as for example in the partnership between Wal-Mart and Proctor & Gamble, which can motivate a balanced or distributed power structure. The purpose of this work is to investigate the effects of such dominance structures on supply chain performance and consumer surplus. Focusing on a single product, we measure the supply chain performance by the sales quantity, retail price, and the profits of the agents and the entire channel; while the consumer surplus is measured as the sum of differences between individual buyers’ willingness to pay for the product and its retail price.It is natural to expect that the particular power distribution will influence the channel dynamics. Practice offers insights on how retailers and manufacturers execute their channel power. For example, industry reports mention that power retailers use their dominant position to extract concessions from manufacturers in the form of trade deals and slotting allowances (Bloom & Perry, 2001). Bowman (1997) reports that many suppliers feel their profits are squeezed due to demands of power retailers for lowered prices, accelerated delivery times, or extra inventory storage. One example is Wal-Mart’s strict response to RubberMaid’s price increase of its products which eventually drove the company to a merger with Newell in 1999. Other sources report similar examples of Wal-Mart’s influence on its suppliers’ pricing decisions, for example, USA Today cites that “Big food companies including Kraft, which gets 10% of its revenue from Wal-Mart, have not been able to raise prices as quickly as they once did because of Wal-Mart’s demands.” Krishnan and Soni (1997) mention examples from Europe where retailers with significant market power are reportedly “demanding guarantees of margins from the manufacturers.” Power retailers’ influence may even extend to decisions on inventory ownership or product quality (Dukes, Geylani, & Liu, 2014). In consignment-sales contracts, such as those offered by Amazon.com, the retailer does not typically take ownership of the goods and “charges the manufacturers a predetermined percentage of the selling price on each unit of their products actually sold” (Wang, 2006). Amazon.com can also collect advance demand information through customers’ preorders based on which the firm places own orders to suppliers; hence practices “order postponement” (Granot & Yin, 2005).Power manufacturers engage in some practices that may impose similar restrictions on the channel partners. For example, in the electronics industry, Apple preannounces the retail price of its products long time before demand realization and is reported to offer retailers a discount that is only a small percentage lower than the announced price (Hiner, 2011). This leaves little flexibility for the retailers to make discounts or set their own prices. Munson, Rosenblatt, and Rosenblatt (1999) explain that power manufacturers try to “influence the final price to better manage consumer demand, respond to competition, and send the appropriate quality signal.” Some industry practices such as “minimum (advertised) pricing” and “resale price maintenance” in which the manufacturer restricts retailers from offering discounts and/or enforces that all retailers sell the product at a certain price allow power manufacturers to control or determine the selling price of their products. These applications contrast with the practices in retailer-dominated channels where the retailer holds considerable pricing power in determining the final selling price. Consequently, different power structures introduce alternative retail pricing schemes which have direct impact on customers.All of these examples illustrate that a power agent might exert its influence in the supply chain to shape or dictate other partners’ decisions, such as in pricing and stocking. This raises some questions from the perspective of the entire channel, its independent members, and the customers. For example, would we expect lower or higher retail prices in the presence of a dominant retailer or a dominant manufacturer? Would the consumers be better off, based on measures such as service level and expected surplus, in a manufacturer or retailer-dominated channel? These questions relate to the impact of different power structures on channel performance and consumer surplus, which is the main motivation for our research. While the supply chain management literature has extensively studied the agents’ independent decision-making and the development of incentives to improve channel performance, there has not been much focus on comparing the different types of power structures and addressing their impact on retail pricing and stocking decisions. In the economics and marketing areas, some papers study power issues in distribution channels and the effects of manufacturer’s price setting on retail competition and consumer surplus; however, they do not address operational decisions such as inventory ordering under different risk allocation mechanisms or inventory fill rate. In our paper, we propose models that explicitly incorporate the power structure into retail pricing and timing of inventory order commitment, and we aim to contribute to the literature by offering insights on the impact of channel power structure from the operations perspective with consideration of pricing decisions.More specifically, we consider channel structures with a single dominant agent; manufacturer or retailer, and one without sole-agent dominance in which power is distributed to the manufacturer and the retailer. Our analysis is built on the framework of a price-setting newsvendor who faces random and price-dependent demand for a single product which is procured from the manufacturer after a relatively long production lead time and sold during a single selling season. To operationalize the notion of power, we adopt a viewpoint by El-Ansary and Stern (1972) and Wilkinson (1974), which defines it as the ability to control the decisions of another member in the channel. In our setting, the dominant manufacturer determines the retailer’s gross profit margin rate, while the dominant retailer effectively sets the wholesale price of the manufacturer by remitting a certain percentage of the retail price. As a result of this transfer-pricing scheme, the dominant agent becomes responsible for determining the selling price to the customers. Furthermore, the dominant agent is able to eliminate the risk of having any excessive inventory at the end of season by shifting it to the weaker party in the channel. When there is no single-agent dominance, the wholesale price and gross profit margin rate are determined individually by the manufacturer and the retailer, and inventory risk is shared.We model the interactions between the channel partners in a game-theory based framework and analyze the equilibrium prices, order quantities and profits under different dominance structures. In the base model, demand is iso-elastic with multiplicative randomness factor and no holding/shortage costs or salvage value are applicable. We find that the equilibrium retail price is the lowest and the total production quantity is the largest in the manufacturer-dominated channel, which implies that for an individual customer the greatest expected surplus is possible when the manufacturer holds the channel dominance. On the other hand, this channel structure leads to the lowest inventory fill rate as measured by the fraction of expected demand satisfied by the available stock in the long run, which implies that customers face a higher probability of encountering a stock-out. Consequently, when we consider total consumer surplus from the entire market perspective, we find that the channel under retailer dominance has the best performance. Comparing the equilibrium profits of the channel agents, we derive the following results. Both the manufacturer and the retailer achieve profit advantages when they gain channel dominance. However, it is also possible that the weaker agent command a larger share of the total profits. We find this observation in the manufacturer-dominated setting and derive the conditions based on the demand parameters. Overall, the retailer-dominated channel leads to a higher system profit than the channels under manufacturer dominance or where the agents have distributed pricing power. When the agents additionally implement inventory risk sharing, profit comparison results for the retailer-dominated and no single-agent-dominated channels are mixed, but both outperform the manufacturer-dominated structure. We also find that the total system profit and consumer surplus are affected by the demand variance and customers’ price sensitivity.Our findings in the base model extend to the case in which holding/shortage costs and salvage value are relevant. Further, we observe that increasing shortage cost intensifies the power agent’s profit gains in the channel while the effects of holding cost and salvage value are mixed with respect to whether the retailer or the manufacturer is the dominant agent. Another extension in which the demand is linear with multiplicative randomness factor reveals that some results regarding the comparison of supply chain performance and consumer surplus may be reversed. These findings help us understand the impact of demand curve mode.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the literature review. In Section 3, we describe the main model setting and the different dominance structures; we also discuss model assumptions and present some preliminary results. Our analysis is presented in Section 4, where we establish the equilibrium results for the manufacturer-dominated channel (Section 4.1), retailer-dominated channel (Section 4.2), channel with no single-agent dominance (Section 4.3) and integrated channel (Section 4.4). Section 5 contains results from the comparison of the different models and Section 6 presents the analysis of the extended models including the scenarios with holding/shortage cost and salvage value (Section 6.1), linear multiplicative demand (Section 6.2), and inventory risk sharing (Section 6.3). We summarize our findings and discuss future research ideas in Section 7. All of the proofs and findings omitted from the main body are available in the online appendix.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Supply chain management has emerged as an important business trend in recent years and is now recognized to be an essential strategy for companies to better serve their customers and achieve success. Potential conflict between the channel’s independent and self-interested parties is often identified as one challenge in attaining effective management of supply chains. In addition to such misalignment of objectives, it is also possible that asymmetrical power relationships exist among the agents, imposing certain implications for channel parties’ decision-making, for example, in determining the prices and timing of the production/inventory order commitments. It is therefore important to have an in-depth look at the different power structures in supply chains and their effects on the chain members and customers.We study three different types of power schemes in a single retailer, single manufacturer supply chain where the retailer sells a product with random and price-sensitive demand. In the first two models, we assume that a single agent, either manufacturer or retailer, has higher power than the other agent; but in the third model, no sole-agent dominance is present. Motivated by some observations in practice, we assume that holding the dominant position in the channel gives the associated party the right to determine the weaker agent’s pricing decision as well as the timing of production/order quantity commitment. Specifically, the dominant manufacturer determines the retail price and enforces the retailer to commit to an order quantity in advance of selling season, whereas the dominant retailer sets the manufacturer’s wholesale price through the transfer price mechanism and is able to implement order postponement. As such, the presence or absence of order postponement is an inventory risk-shifting mechanism utilized by the powerful party in the channel. The third model is concerned with the case when neither party has channel dominance. In addition, we study the integrated channel to obtain the overall benchmark performance.Our analysis is based on game theory models and reveals several interesting results. In the base model with iso-elastic multiplicative demand form, we find that the equilibrium retail price is the lowest and the production quantity is the largest in the manufacturer-dominated channel; therefore, an individual buyer can obtain the highest expected surplus when the manufacturer is dominant. But it does not mean that the channel performance under this power structure is the best; in fact, it is the retailer-dominated structure which yields the highest channel profit. Although the system capacity is largest under the manufacturer’s dominance, the stock-out risk is also high because low retail price stimulates high customer demand, which leads to lower inventory fill rate. The retailer-dominated channel balances this tradeoff best and thus it is also the most preferable structure from the perspective of total consumer surplus. These observations imply that the retailer would benefit more by gaining channel dominance. This is also evident in our result which shows that under certain conditions of the demand distribution parameters, the retailer is able to capture a greater share of the total channel profit even under manufacturer dominance. In an extended analysis, we consider linear multiplicative demand and inventory risk sharing, and we find that some of these comparison results are sensitive to the chosen demand function. On the other hand, results are robust when holding/shortage costs and salvage value are incorporated into the main problem setting.There are some limitations of our work which lead to several directions for future research. First, we assume a one-manufacturer/one-retailer supply chain setting. This assumption filters out market competition and helps us focus on the effect of power differential within a channel. It also facilitates derivation of analytical results. Nevertheless, introducing competition via consideration of multiple agents and/or additional echelons is a meaningful research extension. Such an extended study would however need major modeling changes, for example, in the form of demand function and game designs, which would require significant further analysis and is therefore worthy of pursuing as a separate research project. Second, we assume common knowledge of all problem parameters but in practice there may be information asymmetry between the channel partners. Although the structures with a sole-agent dominance may mitigate the information asymmetry by exercising various tools such as demand forecast sharing, this case can still provide interesting insights as to whether the consumers benefit from such schemes. Other simplifying assumptions in our analysis include risk-neutral decision makers and linear production costs. In the presence of power asymmetry, alternative risk attitudes may be of interest. For example, the dominant agent may demonstrate risk-seeking behavior while the agent in a weaker position may demonstrate risk-averse behavior. Overall, this would exacerbate the misalignment of objectives in the channel and thus would decrease the efficiency of the supply chain. On the other hand, since the effect is expected to be seen in all models, we speculate that the qualitative results obtained by the comparison of the different power structures will still hold under the mentioned alternative risk behaviors of the agents. The linear cost structure can be generalized into quadratic or piecewise linear forms to address a wider variety of industry settings. While such generalizations will surely change the structural results, main qualitative insights can be expected to extend to those settings.