@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Implementation strategies of a contract-based MRI examination reservation process for stroke patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Contract-based reservation of MRI examination for stroke patients is considered.Control strategies include RTS (regular time slots) assignment and RTS reservation.RTS reservation improves the unused time slots and waiting times of RTS assignment.RTS reservation avoids unlucky patients waiting for lengthy regular reservation.Sensitivity wrt RTS delay, unused time slot cost and arrival rate is investigated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Healthcare,Hospital,Capacity allocation,Capacity reservation,Implementation strategies,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Timely imaging examinations are critical for stroke patients due to the potential life threat. We have proposed a contract-based Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) reservation process [1] in order to reduce their waiting time for MRI examinations. Contracted time slots (CTS) are especially reserved for Neural Vascular Department (NVD) treating stroke patients. Patients either wait in a CTS queue for such time slots or are directed to Regular Time Slot (RTS) reservation. This strategy creates “unlucky” patients having to wait for lengthy RTS reservation. This paper proposes and analyzes other contract implementation strategies called RTS reservation strategies. These strategies reserve RTS for NVD but do not direct patients to regular reservations. Patients all wait in the same queue and are served by either CTS or RTS on a FIFO (First In First Out) basis. We prove that RTS reservation strategies are able to reduce the unused time slots and patient waiting time. Extensive numerical results are presented to show the benefits of RTS reservation and to compare various RTS reservation strategies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper is motivated by our collaboration with a large French university teaching hospital in order to reduce the waiting time of stroke patients treated in Neural Vascular Department (NVD). A stroke is the sudden loss of brain function, which is usually caused by interruption of the blood supply (ischemic stroke) and rupture of a blood vessel (hemorrhagic stroke). The brain is deprived of oxygen and nerve cell death will occur in the area of the brain with no blood flow. The patients will suffer from severe physical and cognitive deficits. It is crucial for stroke patients to have timely imaging examinations in order to have appropriate diagnosis and treatment.However, significant delays are observed because many key examinations rely on expensive and heavily used imaging facilities such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). In France, the average waiting time for MRI examinations is about 30–40days. Stroke patients, just like the other routine patients, have to reserve the time slots via fax or via telephone for the emergency patients. Long waiting time has a negative impact on quality of care and patient service [2].In order to reduce the waiting time of stroke patients, we proposed in [1] a contract-based MRI examination reservation process. The imaging department managing the MRI facilities reserve each week some Contracted Time Slots (CTS) for NVD treating stroke patients. Stroke patients can be served by either CTS or regular time slots (RTS) in case of arrival surges of stroke patients. CTS decisions and RTS assignment policy determine the efficiency of the reservation process. The former is the number of CTS and its distribution over the time, whereas the latter refers to the policy for assigning incoming patients to RTS. We proposed a method combining stochastic programming model and Markov Decision Process (MDP) to simultaneously determine the two decisions. Structural properties of the optimal RTS assignment policy were established by an average cost MDP model. It is proved that there exists a threshold Lifor each day i and the optimal RTS assignment control consists in sending patients to RTS by keeping CTS queue length below Li. Then Monte Carlo approximation and local improvement were used to determine CTS decisions and RTS assignment policy. Computational results showed that the reservation process can greatly reduce the average waiting time of stroke patients. However, there exist some “unlucky” patients who are directed to RTS and have to wait much longer time than those who wait for CTS.In order to solve this problem, this paper proposes three new MRI reservation processes. In these processes, RTS is reserved for NVD and added to the list of CTS. CTS and RTS time slots are grouped according to their day of availability and filled by patients. No patient is directed to wait for lengthy RTS. All patients wait in the same queue for MRI time slots and are scheduled to either CTS or RTS in a FIFO (First In First Out) order and according to the release dates of CTS and RTS.Three RTS reservation policies are proposed in this paper based on patient queue length information and some service ratio criterion. We first prove that RTS reservation policies outperform RTS assignment policy with shorter patient waiting time and less unused MRI time slots. We then perform extensive numerical experiments to compare the performances of different contract implementation strategies.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Literature review is described in Section 2. Section 3 defines and compares different MRI-contract implementation strategies. Formal proofs that RTS reservation strategies improve RTS assignment strategy are given in Appendix A. Section 4 presents computational results to show the efficiency of RTS reservation strategies and the impact of different problem parameters. Conclusions and perspectives are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
