@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Second order conic approximation for disassembly line design with joint probabilistic constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The disassembly line design and balancing problem is studied under uncertainty.Task times are assumed to be random variables with known normal distributions.The goal is to design a line with maximal profit in presence of hazardous material.Chance constrained programs and efficient exact solution approach are developed.Results have shown their potential applicability in industry for real life cases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Assembly and disassembly,Line design and balancing,Stochastic programming,Joint probabilistic constraints,Piecewise linear approximation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A problem of profit oriented disassembly line design and balancing with possible partial disassembly and presence of hazardous parts is studied. The objective is to design a production line providing a maximal revenue with balanced workload. Task times are assumed to be random variables with known normal probability distributions. The cycle time constraints are to be jointly satisfied with at least a predetermined probability level. An AND/OR graph is used to model the precedence relationships among tasks. Several lower and upper–bounding schemes are developed using second order cone programming and convex piecewise linear approximation. To show the relevance and applicability of the proposed approach, a set of instances from the literature are solved to optimality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Disassembly process plays a crucial role in material and product recovery. It is a required condition for an efficient treatment of end-of-life (EOL) products (Ilgin & Gupta, 2010, 2012). The objective of disassembly is to separate EOL products subassemblies and components for recycling, remanufacturing and reuse. To carry out disassembly operations with higher productivity rate, disassembly lines are used (Güngör & Gupta, 2002).From practical point of view, disassembly process is more complex than assembly. In fact, in a disassembly environment, a product is broken down into several components and subassemblies whose quality, quantity and reliability cannot be controlled as in an assembly environment. The structure and quality of EOL products are strongly uncertain and even the number of components in such products can not be predicted. Moreover, an EOL product may contain certain hazardous material which necessitates special handling at a workstation of a disassembly line. Due to technical or economic restrictions such as irreversible connections of components of a product and low revenue obtained from retrieved parts, disassembly is usually a partial process (Lambert, 2002).Because of the peculiarities given above, the design and balancing of disassembly lines (known as DLBP: disassembly line balancing problem), is a hard optimization problem and needs adapted solution methods. A disassembly line consists of an ordered sequence of workstations connected by a material handling system which is used to transport work–pieces from one workstation to another. As aforementioned, certain parts or subassemblies may be hazardous and require a particular treatment incurring a supplementary cost.The studied optimization problem consists in assigning a given set of disassembly tasks (of an EOL product) to an ordered sequence of workstations, while respecting precedence and cycle time constraints. Cycle time constraints are to be jointly satisfied with at least a certain probability level (1−α) fixed by the decision maker. Task times are assumed to be independent random variables with known normal probability distributions. The main objective is to maximize the profit produced by the line by optimizing the number of needed workstations of the line and the depth of the disassembly process. Subsequently, the idle times at workstations should be as smooth as possible.Although the main purpose of this paper is to study stochastic DLBP, it is also shown that the obtained results remain valid for stochastic assembly line design and balancing problem (ALBP).The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the relevant literature on disassembly and assembly line design and balancing under uncertainty. A formal description of the studied problem is given in Section 3. Section 4 presents the developed solution approach. Numerical experiments and optimization results are presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper with future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
