@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
High-speed railway scheduling based on user preferences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The high-speed railway model represents the behaviour of the passengers.The supply is represented as a discrete event simulation model.The demand is defined as a nested logit model which considers user preferences.A hybridization of PSO and NM methods is applied for solving the model.A numerical experiment has been conducted on a real high-speed railway network.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Timetabling,High-speed railway,Constrained nested logit model,Utility theory,Metaheuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an optimization model for high-speed railway scheduling. The model is composed of two sub-models. The first is a discrete event simulation model which represents the supply of the railway services whereas the second is a constrained logit-type choice model which takes into account the behaviour of users. This discrete choice model evaluates the attributes of railway services such as the timetable, fare, travel time and seat availability (capacity constraints) and computes the High-Speed railway demand for each planned train service.A hybridisation of a Standard Particle Swarm Optimisation and Nealder–Mead methods has been applied for solving the proposed model and a real case study of the High-Speed corridor Madrid–Seville in Spain has been analysed. Furthermore, parallel computation strategies are used to speed up the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
European Union competition policy is promoting an ongoing liberalisation process in the rail market and the setting up of an EU air market. In this single transport market, the low-cost air carriers and the high-speed railway (HSR) operators are competitors on routes that are interchangeable within a certain distance range, especially in point-to-point routes. Currently HSR systems are expanding their rail networks in the EU and incrementing their demand share. However, in order to meet the new scenario of competition between transport operators, the rail industry should focus the railway service on addressing passenger needs.The Train Timetabling Problem (TTP) consists of the establishment of a set of conflict-free train routes with respect to given train requirements. TTP has received a great deal of attention in the scientific literature in recent years. The literature focuses on minimizing parameters related to train company operations (operations-centric models) but so-called passenger-centric models have also been developed but they are much sparser. These analytical models are crucial in improving the competitiveness of the rail industry.HSR systems are an emergent technology whose singular features have not yet been widely discussed in the current literature on TTP modelling. The departure time choice, travel time, the pricing regime and the competition of these systems with the traditional or low-cost air, rail and private vehicles should be taken into account in the TTP models. Motivated by this need, this paper proposes a high-speed passenger-centric TTP model that uses a high-speed demand forecasting model to learn the behaviour of passengers with respect to the attributes (departure time, travel time, ticket cost and travel comfort) of the proposed timetable.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews related research papers. Section 3 describes the proposed HSR–TTP model in detail. Section 4 explains the algorithms used for solving this model, in Section 5 several computational experiments are reported, and finally Section 6 concludes with a discussion of our findings and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
