@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hedonic modeling to explore the relationship of cell phone plan price and quality in Croatia

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The study explores the use of hedonic indices for cell phone plans.Cell phone plan price and quality are studied in Croatia during 2009–2013.Hedonic price and quality indices are calculated for the first time in Croatia.Indices show slow fall in cell phone plan prices and rise in technological quality.Results are consistent with trends in European telecommunications market.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cell phone plans,Hedonic study,Price,Quality,Mobile market,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since 2009, the Croatian mobile market has been subject to various negative influences, including the economic crisis and a 6% telecommunication tax on mobile operator gross revenues. This paper took advantage of this tumultuous period to explore the effects of quality change on monthly price of cell phone plans in Croatia during 2009–2013. We used hedonic modeling to calculate hedonic price and quality indices over the period. The results indicate that cell phone plan prices slowly fell rather than rose, and that plan quality increased. The results are consistent with trends in other European countries with similar market conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Telecommunications services have been a major driver of the global economy in recent years (Roeller and Waverman, 2001; Koutroumpis et al., 2011; Gruber and Koutroumpis, 2011), and they are no less important to Croatia, where the combined revenues of the three major operators reached $279 million in the fourth quarter of 2012 alone (Economic Institute Zagreb, 2013). Despite the rapid development of the telecommunications industry in Croatia, few statistical indicators have been devised to track the evolution of prices and services on the market.Since 2009, the Croatian mobile market has been subject to various negative economic conditions, which have led to more cautious spending by Croatian mobile operators, a significant decrease in revenues, and most importantly, the first drop in call and SMS volume in the industry’s history as well as a significant drop in overall number of mobile users (Sutedja and Unger, 2009). While the global economic crisis has played a key role in these effects, a tax introduced by the Croatian government in August 2009 on gross revenues on calls and messaging has likely also contributed. The government initially presented the tax as a measure to stabilize public spending and avoid a reduction in public sector salaries and retirement pay-outs. These negative market conditions likely led operators to rethink their cell phone plan price and quality in order to retain market share and compensate for loss of revenue. The tax in Croatia was discriminatory against mobile telephony and jeopardized competition because it was not applied to fixed-line communications, which compete directly with mobile telephony in some market segments. Though the tax proved short-lived, ultimately being repealed in 2012, it created significant economic uncertainty for mobile operators because the government initially announced that it would remain in force until the end of the country’s economic recession.Other countries have also levied controversial telecommunications taxes on operators. Similar to Croatia, Hungary imposed in October 2010 a special tax on telecommunications services to increase public revenues due to extensive outlays for health care, public education and pensions (Deak, 2010). Tax rates corresponded to 0–6.5% depending on operators’ gross revenues. In 2009, Spain and France imposed a tax of 0.9% gross revenues in order to finance public television, which would then be forbidden from showing advertising, but the European Commission (EC) ruled the tax illegal. Concurrently, Greece levied a telecommunication tax of 12–20% on mobile postpaid subscriptions depending on the amount of the monthly bill, as well as a 12% tax on prepaid cards (Koutroumpis et al., 2011). Albania and Ukraine levied similar taxes.This tumultuous period in the mobile telephony industry has had intriguing effects, which are not entirely understood. An analysis by Deloitte (2011) predicted that these disturbances of market conditions would cause an increase in quality, and slow decrease in cell phone plan prices, rather than the increase that might be expected from simple classical theory. A slow decrease in prices is, in fact, suggested by the telecommunication consumer price index (TCPI) published by the Croatian Bureau of Statistics, but this does not tell the whole story, since TCPI aggregates telecommunications equipment1According to the Croatian Bureau of Statistics, telecommunications equipment includes telephone and telefax equipment.1and services.It is not yet known how changes in monthly price during the study period interacted with changes in quality of cell phone plans. This question is important to investigate because mobile operators are increasingly exploiting both price and cell phone plan differentiation to maintain market share in the rapidly evolving telecommunications sector (Smith, 2012; Gautam and Kumar, 2011; Paulrajan and Rajkumar, 2011; Corrocher and Zirulia, 2010).Therefore the focus of the present work is twofold. First is to explore the rarely use of hedonic methods for cell phone plans. Second is to explore the relationship between monthly price and quality of cell phone plans for the period 2009–2013. These details may serve as a way to derive preliminary conclusions about cell phone plan differences among the major mobile network operators in Croatia in response to the challenging market environment. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first such detailed assessment of this relationship in Croatia and Eastern and Central Europe.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
