@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A framework for optimising product performance through feedback and reuse of in-service experience

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of a framework for knowledge management and in-service data feedback to product development.Demonstrating how field data is captured, fed back and reused for product development.The shift of OEM product development paradigms from traditional linear steps to more integrated product and service business models was discussed.The key in-service information OEMs require from in-service for new product development were identified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
In-service data,Product life cycle,Product service systems,Knowledge and information management,Feedback to design and manufacturing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Optimising performance of complex engineering artefacts, which are typically designed to have a useful life of several decades, becomes very difficult during in-service if lessons learnt are not used properly. The authors argue that performance of long-lived complex artefacts can be improved if adequate product in-service data is fed back to the early stages of the product life cycle. This paper discusses an inclusive life cycle approach to optimising product performance by using knowledge and experience gained during in-service. The problem is presented alongside a review of literature of relevant subject areas. A framework for in-service knowledge management is then presented and operationalised through an industrial case study. The framework is developed from the point of view of an integrated product and service provider. The findings from the case study demonstrate how in-service knowledge can be captured, fed back and reused for the design and manufacture stages of the product lifecycle. This enables designers to learn from in-service product performance by informing subsequent designs with in-service knowledge, and consequently improving the through-life product performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Engineering product development, in the late 20th century, has evolved from taking linear and sequential steps to a more integrated life cycle approach [1]. This was perhaps driven by the evolution in information technology (IT) which led to the emergence of concepts like computer-aided design and manufacture. These have been commonly used in product development and as a result, making the product development process more automated by requiring less human effort. This consequently reduces the development time and errors. Furthermore engineering artefacts are becoming even more complex, consisting of several major systems and/or sub-systems. These systems could be any combination of structural, mechanical, electrical, software or electromechanical components. Also, it is very likely that in practice, one or several sub-systems of such complex artefacts are designed and/or manufactured by different original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) [2]. When such an artefact is put into service, it is expected to perform according to its design requirements. However, if such requirements are not met either as a result of failure or non-performance, it can be brought back to a running state through maintenance and repair or in some cases, through upgrades.Ideally, the lessons learnt during the useful life of a product, in the form of in-service knowledge and experience, are expected to be used to improve subsequent designs of parts-of or the entire system. However, in practice, OEMs find it difficult to collect, feedback and reuse in-service knowledge for design improvements [3,4]. Also OEMs, who need to maintain regular contacts with customers so as to gain field and operational product knowledge, sometimes have misapprehensions about working environments, load and operating parameters which their product is subjected to [5].This paper discusses how OEMs can continually optimise product performance by using knowledge and experience gained while their products are in-service. The paper also explores how experience gained in-service can be used to improve the design and manufacture of new products. This paper is an extended version of the conference paper titled: “A framework for optimising product performance through using field experience of in-service products to improve the design and manufacture stages of the product lifecycle”, which was written previously by the authors and is now being re-written for the purpose of journal publication. This paper also draws upon previous literature in the life cycle knowledge management, through-life engineering, and product-service systems fields, through a taxonomic and captious review. The literature review is intended to provide theoretical underpinnings for this research focusing on the shift in product development paradigms and the challenges companies face with respect to in-service knowledge capture, feedback and reuse. A framework for in-service knowledge management, which was previously proposed in the conference paper [6], is developed further and then operationalised through an industrial case study. The primary aims of this paper include:•Developing the in-service knowledge management framework.Operationalising the framework by demonstrating how it enables the capture, feedback and reuse of in-service data for through-life product optimisation.Apart from the primary aims, the paper also focuses on the following:Exploring the shift from traditional product development to a more integrated approach, which requires not just integrating product and services but also adopting a through-life or whole life cycle approach to knowledge and information management in each stage of the product life cycle.Identify the challenges that manufacturing companies face in managing and learning from life cycle knowledge, especially during the in-service stage.Explore the opportunities for manufacturing companies when they adopt new life cycle paradigms and what factors to consider, with respect to life cycle knowledge management, if such paradigms are adopted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
