@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Developing a benefits counseling website for Veterans using Motivational Interviewing techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Implementing web-based Motivational Interviewing can be challenging.Veterans expressed dissatisfaction with the Compensation process.Veterans desire additional assistance throughout the Compensation application process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web-based,Veterans,Motivational Interviewing,Think-aloud,Website development,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Understanding Veterans’ narrated experience as they navigate a web-based intervention is important because it can inform the content, layout and format of these therapies. Using the “Think Aloud” method, twenty-five Veterans of military service expressed thoughts and reactions while navigating through a web-based Motivational Interviewing intervention. The intervention encouraged Veterans applying for Compensation for military-related psychiatric conditions to engage in work related activities. They then completed quantitative ratings of the site. Overall, the site was rated highly, and ratings were in the neutral range as to whether internet delivery of the material was preferable to in-person counseling. Comments revealed the complexity of adapting Motivational Interviewing for a web-based intervention. The intervention provided reflections and non-judgmental statements to Veterans accustomed to more directive statements, and receiving reflections from a computer-therapist evoked mixed responses. Veterans answered questions with intuitive formats quickly, and usually did not read directions concerning how to answer questions. Veterans felt frustrated by the lack of support throughout the Compensation process. They advocated for further development of this web-based intervention as a support for people awaiting their claim determination.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Automated counseling delivered remotely via the internet, a computer or mobile phone, can be available to people who have difficulties coming to an in-person appointment and allows for private, customized delivery of evidence-based treatments (Carroll & Rounsaville, 2010; Griffiths, Lindenmeyer, Powell, Lowe, & Thorogood, 2006). There have been web-based behavioral interventions designed specifically for Veterans targeting a variety of conditions (Brief, Rubin, Enggasser, Roy, & Keane, 2011; Kinsinger et al., 2009; Lapham et al., 2012; Newton, Han, Stewart, Ryan, & Williamson, 2011; Possemato, Ouimette, & Knowlton, 2011). Some researchers have described the iterative process by which they developed online counseling interventions (Houston & Ford, 2008; Zulman et al., 2012), but few have detailed the development of automated counseling specifically for Veterans (Anderson, Willson, Peterson, Murphy, & Kent, 2010).Counseling employing a Motivational Interviewing (MI) approach has been automated in several published studies. MI involves a particular empathic, non-judgmental stance, with an emphasis on dealing with ambivalence. The counselor understands that ambivalence and resistance are a natural part of the change process and use evocative questions to elicit “change talk.” In order to facilitate change, the counselor uses reflective listening and, when clients are ready to change, helps the individual plan concrete steps to change the behavior (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). Web-based programs which include MI may focus on assessing readiness to change, determining stage of change and then providing feedback on the stage (DiIorio et al., 2008; Lapham et al., 2012; Ondersma, Chase, Svikis, & Schuster, 2005). Other programs measure confidence in ability to change, either in place or in addition to the readiness assessment (Cucciare, Darrow, & Weingardt, 2011; Osilla, D’Amico, Díaz-Fuentes, & Watkins, 2012). There is little literature, however, describing how MI techniques that depend on tone, empathy, tailoring and encouraging people to disclose their resistance to change are experienced when delivered by a computer.Think Aloud (Willis, 2005) procedures are often part of usability testing of new web-based programs to illuminate how users receive them (Anderson et al., 2010; Lapham et al., 2012). In this commonly-employed procedure, participants speak out loud what they are thinking as they navigate a website. One study utilizing the Think Aloud method for a Veteran-focused website assessed problem drinking (Lapham et al., 2012). Veterans felt it was helpful to have their drinking behaviors presented back to them and appreciated the anonymity the program provided. However, some Veterans believed the program overestimated the risks of their drinking and felt judged by being placed in riskier categories than they felt they belonged in Lapham et al. (2012).In this paper, we describe the results of a Think Aloud evaluation of a website designed to deliver a web-based version of a MI counseling intervention. We then make general suggestions for web-based counseling programs that incorporate MI or are targeted to Veterans.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The interpretation of the Think-Aloud results was not straightforward because experiences differed across individuals. It was challenging to determine what site changes to recommend, if any, when the site users did not agree Veterans who volunteered less information during the Think Aloud or were less articulate may have had unaddressed issues. The limitations of Think Aloud highlight the value of having quantitative ratings from all the participants to help in drawing conclusions.Our subjective impression was that the main factor driving the website’s overall positive reception was related to its content. Put simply, the site addresses a problem Veterans want help with—navigating the Compensation application process and deciding what to do next. Veterans in this pilot expressed dissatisfaction with the VA claims process and were eager to describe their experiences, to be heard, and to be acknowledged. They reported feeling lost and felt this program could be an important medium to provide more specific instruction. They believed there was information regarding the Compensation claim process that could be clarified by this website.