@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predictors of mobilizing online coping versus offline coping resources after negative life events

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study mobilization of online and offline coping resources using a large dataset.We find support for social compensation with regard to coping resources.The lonely, isolated, and those with low self-esteem are less disadvantaged online.Women mobilize more support offline but less online after negative life events.The compensation is strongest for socioemotional coping and weak for disengagement.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet,Social support,Online support groups,Social network sites,Health-related information,Social compensation hypothesis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This exploratory study drew upon the social compensation/social enhancement hypotheses and weak tie network theory to predict what kind of people supplement offline coping resources with online coping resources more than others. Using a large, representative survey the authors found that low self-esteem, lonely, and socially isolated individuals add more online resources to their mix of preferred coping strategies than their counterparts. These groups benefit from the fact that online coping resources are not as strongly entangled with online social ties as are offline coping resources with offline ties, and from the fact that online coping resources can sometimes be mobilized without any social interactions. In contrast to offline coping, the researchers also found that men mobilize more online coping resources than women. The authors discuss the implications of these findings in terms of the social compensation hypothesis and online weak tie networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The advent of the Internet and social media provides individuals with numerous online resources (via online communities, social media, websites, etc.) which may serve an important function in terms of helping them gain access to additional sources of information and support as well as the ability to develop relationships with others in ways that may be different from or supplement offline support when coping with stressful life events (Damian & Van Ingen, 2014; Mikal, Rice, Abeyta, & DeVilbiss, 2013; Rains & Keating, 2011; Rossetto, Lannutti, & Strauman, 2015; Van Ingen, Utz, & Toepoel, 2015; Wendorf & Yang, 2015; Wright & Rains, 2013a).Online coping can be defined as thoughts and behaviors facilitated by the Internet that help to manage stressful situations (cf. Folkman & Moskowitz, 2004). There are several indications that the Internet is of rising importance when it comes to dealing with stressful situations (See Wright & Bell, 2003). Furthermore, scholars have suggested that some of the mechanisms of coping are different online, which implies that more research and theory development in this area is needed. Additionally, it appears that many individuals cope with stressful life events using both offline and online social networks (Vergeer & Pelzer, 2009). In the current exploratory study, we attempted to gain a better understanding of factors that predict online versus offline coping.In addition, previous research that has focused on differences between online and offline coping has tended to examine coping behaviors within specific contexts, such as online support groups or specific Facebook and Twitter groups (See Barak, Boniel-Nissim, & Suler, 2008; Wright & Rains, 2013b). Moreover, these studies have explored a somewhat limited range of coping strategies within these contexts, such as informational or emotional support-seeking. In the current study, the researchers took an exploratory approach to examining how people cope with stressful life events by investigating several dimensions of coping within both online and offline domains. This simultaneous assessment of both online and offline mobilization of resources supporting different coping strategies enabled us to analyze the relative importance of online (versus offline) coping, something that few previous studies have explored. Furthermore, previous studies have tended to focus on specialized populations, such as online communities targeting specific health concernsor student populations. In the current study, the researchers were interested in exploring how individuals engage in online and offline coping strategies following stressful life events among members of a more general population.Although other theoretical frameworks may also explain this phenomenon, the current study drew upon the social compensation/social enhancement hypotheses (Peter, Valkenburg, & Schouten, 2005; 2006; Valkenburg & Peter, 2007b; Zywica & Danowski, 2008) and weak tie network theory (Granovetter, 1973; 1983) as a starting point to explore online coping. Toward that end, it examines predictors of how individuals from a general population (a randomly selected sample of individuals from the Netherlands) mobilize a broad range of online versus offline coping resources following stressful life events. These include mental disengagement, active coping, seeking social support, and other psychological responses people use to cope with stressful situations. Specifically, the study examines the influence of extraversion, self-esteem, loneliness, social isolation and gender on online and offline coping resource mobilization choices. Although it is unlikely that individuals who are socially disadvantaged will establish the largest online networks and spend most time socializing online, it is likely that they will draw a relatively large share of their coping resources from the Internet. In the next section, we argue that the main reason for this is that online coping resources are less entangled with online social interactions than are offline coping resources with offline social interactions.The Internet provides a wealth of information about almost every imaginable topic, increased opportunities for connection with others, and access to information related to specific problems or issues (Wright & Bell, 2003). One advantage of using online networks over offline social networks for coping with a stressful life event is that online networks provide access to a larger number of weak ties, many of whom may offer the specific type of support individuals are seeking to help them cope with their situation effectively. This support from weak ties can help make up for deficiencies in terms of support in face-to-face social networks. Moreover, individuals who tend to cope with problems in a certain way, such as seeking additional information or practicing new skills, are more likely to gain access online to individuals who will provide them with the type of support that facilitates their preferred coping style (Wright & Rains, 2013b). Therefore, we contend that online versus offline coping choices are to a large extent trait-like in nature (cf. Seckin, 2013).The ability to successfully mobilize coping resources, such as information and social support, following a stressful life event has been linked to reductions in mental and physical health symptoms, reduced depression and stress, and increased well-being (Lett et al., 2007). Although only a few studies have applied the social compensation hypothesis (Peter et al., 2005; 2006; Valkenburg & Peter, 2007b) to how people mobilize online resources, there are several findings that suggest that this framework may be helpful for understanding how individuals with high levels of social anxiety may mobilize more coping resources if they use computers to replace or supplement their social networks to a greater extent than their peers who do not use computers to replace/supplement their social networks. Studies have found that socially anxious individuals report they compensate for their social anxiety by engaging in online communication (Baker & Oswald, 2010; Peter, Valkenburg, & Schouten, 2006; Valkenburg & Peter, 2007b). Social interactions that occur online primarily consist of on-screen text (except when individuals use webcams, Skype, and similar applications), and therefore a large amount of visual information typical of traditional face-to-face interactions is concealed during online communication. This has been found to increase relational development in cases where the lack of visual information (especially disconfirming nonverbal cues) leads individuals to develop idealized perceptions of online relational partners (Tidwell & Walther, 2002). Moreover, this can lead to a more comfortable social situation for socially anxious individuals who are coping with a stressful life event in comparison to traditional face-to-face interactions, supporting the case for social compensation.In contrast to the social compensation hypothesis, the social enhancement, or the rich-get-richer, hypothesis posits that individuals who already are comfortable in social situations may use the computer, either in person or online, to seek out additional opportunities to socialize with others (Peter et al., 2005; Zywica & Danowski, 2008). In other words, online communication with others tends to increase the overall number of social interactions a person has rather than replacing more traditional means of interactions.Online social networks tend to consist of weaker, more heterogeneous network members than are typical of offline, close-tie social networks, and this provides individuals who are coping with stressful events greater opportunities for social comparison, increased sources of social support, and a greater diversity in terms of life experiences and knowledge than what is typically available in offline, face-to-face social networks (Wright & Miller, 2010). These characteristics of online social networks may influence both the social compensation hypothesis and the social enhancement hypothesis depending on individual needs.In some cases online networks provide opportunities to communicate with others more easily/comfortably. For example, individuals may be reluctant to disclose certain problems or issues with members of their traditional face-to-face social networks in cases where they feel they will be judged by others due to the nature of the problem (e.g. substance abuse, having an affair, divorce, etc.), or if they are coping with a problem that is difficult or embarrassing to talk about (Green-Hamann & Sherblom, 2014; Wright & Miller, 2010).In an attempt to explain this phenomenon, Granovetter (1973; 1983) proposed that when individuals feel that their close interpersonal ties are unable to provide adequate or satisfying social support, they will be more likely to turn to weak ties for social support. Weak ties are often able to provide greater heterogeneity of information regarding a stressful situation, are less likely to judge an individual due to his or her problems, and make it less risky for people to disclose sensitive information (Wright & Miller, 2010).In the age of the Internet, the multitude of potential weak–tie relationships online via social media has grown exponentially. Several researchers have found research on weak ties to be applicable to explaining why some individuals prefer to obtain social support online instead of (or in addition to) using traditional offline networks (Green-Hamann & Sherblom, 2014; Wright & Rains, 2013b; Wright & Miller, 2010). When members of traditional offline social networks have limited knowledge about a stressful situation, there is evidence that individuals often turn to online sources of information and social support (Wright & Miller, 2010), despite the fact that they may feel less close relationally to the people with whom they interact online. Coping resources accessed via online networks may be particularly valuable when offline sources of support are unable or unwilling to help a person with his or her problem. Rains and Keating (2011), for example, found that the health bloggers in their sample who received the least social support from their friends and family most benefited from the support provided by blog readers online.Social network websites, such as Facebook and Twitter, also appear to replace or extend traditional offline support networks in terms of providing greater access to the increased social capital available in a larger, easier to maintain, network of individuals who are often geographically separated (Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007; Van Ingen et al., 2015). These online communities can help individuals in times of stress and transition access new, often more appropriate, networks of support, such as others facing the same or similar transitions and stressors. Of course, online communities and social network sites can also consist of stronger ties (either from a person's offline social network or an initial online relationship that has developed into a strong tie), and people may feel uncomfortable interacting with these strong ties depending on the nature of the problem. However, the majority of the people within such communities tend to be weaker ties rather than strong ties, and these weak ties are more easily accessible via the Internet than would be possible in the face-to-face world.In some situations, it is even possible to mobilize online coping resources without online interactions or communication. Mo and Coulson (2010) found that – although they were less effective than users who interacted – those who only read messages in online support groups (known as “lurkers”) still found support and information that empowered them in the coping process. In most online support groups once messages are posted – which will often be meant as bilateral support to a person requesting help through the forum – they become a collective good among forum users: everyone can read them and use the information to their advantage. For the socially anxious in need of coping resources this provides opportunities that are virtually absent in the offline world.In short, some individuals prefer drawing upon online resources and relationships when coping with problems if the characteristics of online support are seen as advantageous compared to what is available in offline social networks or if including online resources/relationships is perceived as better than solely relying on offline resources/relationships. To socially disadvantaged individuals the characteristics of online support look more advantageous, because of the fact that there is – when compared to offline social interactions – less need for strong tie relationships in order to mobilize coping resources. Although previous research has not directly this idea, there is indirect empirical evidence that seems to support it. First, online relationships are often reported to be weaker than offline relationships. For instance, Chan and Cheng (2004) found that offline ties were characterized by more interdependence, depth, and commitment than their online counterparts. Second, several studies have shown that online support often comes from weak ties (Walther & Boyd, 2002; Wright & Rains, 2013a,b). And third, studies have shown that in some cases it is possible to mobilize online coping resources without online communication or interaction (Mo & Coulson, 2010).In the current study, the researchers attempted to explore these aspects of the social compensation/social enhancement hypotheses as well as weak tie network theory to the mobilization of online resources and by examining the links between multiple participant characteristics and coping resources mobilized from both online and offline social networks.Previous research suggests that extraversion is related to several aspects of social relationships. Asendorpf and Wilpers (1998) found that extraversion was positively associated with the number of peers in students' social network as well as the number of daily social interactions. In addition, individuals with high levels of extraversion have been found to report higher control and higher levels of intimacy in their interactions (Barrett & Pietromonaco, 1997). Extraversion also plays a positive role in coping processes. In a review of the literature on this topic, Carver and Connor-Smith (2010) conclude that “Extraversion predicted more problem solving, use of social support, and cognitive restructuring (one kind of accommodation)” (p.690).There are good reasons to expect that extraversion is less of an advantage online. Not when it comes the number of online friends (Peter et al., 2005), nor the extent of Facebook interaction (Gosling, Augustine, Vazire, Holtzman, & Gaddis, 2011), but when it comes to the quality of online relationships as well as the extent to which the Internet is used to mobilize support (Baker & Oswald, 2010; Valkenburg & Peter, 2007b; Van Zalk, Branje, Denissen, Van Aken, & Meeus, 2011). In addition, researchers found that introverts scored higher on social compensation motives of Internet usage (Peter et al., 2005). Supportive of the social compensation argument, Van Zalk et al. (2011) found that individuals with low extraversion were the only group that showed longitudinal effects of chatting with “online-exclusive peers” on (lower) depression and (higher) self-esteem. Finally, in a study of shyness (sometimes considered a sub dimension of extraversion, see Asendorpf & Wilpers, 1998) it was found that – contrary to those with low levels of shyness – highly shy individuals showed a positive association between time spent on Facebook and importance of online peers, closeness to online peers, and perceived social support (Baker & Oswald, 2010). Hence we expect that:H1The effect of extraversion on mobilization of online coping resources is smaller than on mobilization of offline coping resources.Previous research suggests that self-esteem affects social relations and coping processes. Low self-esteem can be a constraint in building a high-quality network of relationships (De Jong-Gierveld, 1998), and it was found to be associated with anti-social behavior, like aggression and hostility (Donnellan, Trzesniewski, Robins, Moffitt, & Caspi, 2005). Phrased more positively, those with high levels of self-esteem are less reluctant to engage in social interactions, and are generally better at maintaining positive, lasting relationships. Those with high self-esteem also cope with their stress more actively and show greater positive reinterpretation and growth, whereas those with low self-esteem are more likely to become preoccupied with distress emotions (Carver, 1997). Aspinwall and Taylor (1992) found that self-esteem caused less avoidance coping and greater seeking of social support (and subsequently, those with high self-esteem also received more social support).Studies have found that online interaction can lead to increased coping resources among individuals who experience low self-esteem in offline contexts (Shaw & Gant, 2002; Steinfield, Ellison, & Lampe, 2008). These studies suggest that individuals with low self-esteem are drawn to online communication and relationships more than they are to offline communication and relationships. Hence, we formulate the following hypothesis:H2The effect of self-esteem on mobilization of online coping resources is smaller than on mobilization of offline coping resources.Loneliness is a ubiquitous psychosocial problem that is often related to inadequate social support (Hudson, Elek, & Campbell-Grossman, 2000). Most individuals have an innate desire for connection with others, but when they feel disconnected from their social networks, this often results in loneliness. Loneliness is distinct from social isolation (De Jong-Gierveld, 1998); the former is an experienced deficiency in the quality of one's network, the latter is actual disconnectedness. Both the size and quality of one's social network are important determinants of the amount of resources individuals can access (De Jong-Gierveld, 1998).Studies suggest that people who are lonely or disconnected may use media, including the Internet, for distraction, entertainment, or to escape daily life (Vorderer, Klimmt, & Ritterfeld, 2004). Some lonely individuals are more proactive in their Internet use and try to battle loneliness by searching for new people or socializing with others online (Saunders & Chester, 2008).Many individuals experience loneliness due to stigmatized health conditions or other problems (especially highly visible issues, such as physical or mental disabilities) that are viewed negatively by society. In such cases, people may perceive that other people in their offline social networks will evaluate them negatively (Barak et al., 2008; Wright & Rains, 2013b). As a result, they may voluntarily withdraw from interacting with members of offline networks, which often leads to an increased sense of loneliness. In attempt to compensate for these issues, many individuals turn to social media to reduce feelings of loneliness and social isolation. However, other lonely individuals may cope with social isolation in other ways, by seeking sources of distraction both online and offline, such as reading books, watching television, or passing time by searching the Internet for websites that appeal to their specific interests (Vergeer & Pelzer, 2009).Since the mechanisms connecting social isolation and loneliness to online versus offline coping choices are different (actual lack of certain resources in the offline network versus experienced problems when connecting to the offline network), we formulate two hypotheses:H3The effect of loneliness on mobilization of online coping resources is less negative than on mobilization of offline coping resources.The effect of being socially isolated on mobilization of online coping resources is less negative than on mobilization of offline coping resources.Previous research has found that men and women have different offline social networks. Women generally have more strong ties in their network (Moore, 1990), they spent more time socializing informally (maintaining their strong ties), and mobilize more emotional support from their network (Van Emmerik, 2006). Men have been found to be more reluctant to seek lay support for mental health issues such as feelings of distress and depression (Oliver, Pearson, Coe, & Gunnell, 2005). Women typically have more strong ties they can turn to for social support when faced with problems, while men tend to rely exclusively on their partner as their sole source of emotional support (Harrison, Maguire, & Pitceathly, 2005). Vergeer and Pelzer (2009) found that women in their study possessed a larger offline social network than men and used it more intensively than men.There is some evidence that suggests that women also mobilize more online support. In several online support group studies, women significantly outnumber men in terms of participating in online support groups (Mo, Malik, & Coulson, 2009; Wright & Bell, 2003). In terms of coping differences, several researchers have found that women who use online support groups prefer receiving emotional support while men are more likely to prefer informational support (Mo et al., 2009). Nonetheless, if our assertion about the loose connection between online social interactions and online coping resources is correct, it follows that:H5The difference between men and women in mobilization of online coping resources is smaller than the difference in mobilization of offline coping resources.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
