@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A case study of Augmented Reality simulation system application in a chemistry course

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of inquiry-based Augmented Reality learning tools.Students interacting with a 3D model of micro-particles.AR tool with significant supplemental learning effect.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Augmented Reality,Chemistry learning,Inquiry-based learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The comprehension of micro-worlds has always been the focus and the challenge of chemistry learning. Junior high school students’ imaginative abilities are not yet mature. As a result, they are not able to visualize microstructures correctly during the beginning stage of chemistry learning. This study targeted “the composition of substances” segment of junior high school chemistry classes and, furthermore, involved the design and development of a set of inquiry-based Augmented Reality learning tools. Students could control, combine and interact with a 3D model of micro-particles using markers and conduct a series of inquiry-based experiments. The AR tool was tested in practice at a junior high school in Shenzhen, China. Through data analysis and discussion, we conclude that (a) the AR tool has a significant supplemental learning effect as a computer-assisted learning tool; (b) the AR tool is more effective for low-achieving students than high-achieving ones; (c) students generally have positive attitudes toward this software; and (d) students’ learning attitudes are positively correlated with their evaluation of the software.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For many learners across the world, chemistry is introduced for the first time in junior high school. Abstract concepts such as molecules, atoms, and amount-of-substance are formidable to junior high school students; these students are often required to envision across micro- and macro-worlds, which can be extremely challenging. “The composition of substances” is a critical concept in chemistry learning, as it is the foundation of further learning about chemicals and organic chemistry. However, young students’ imaginative abilities are limited, and it is difficult for them to imagine how particles such as atoms compose substances. This problem necessitates improvement in the learning methods and tools used in chemistry teaching.Augmented Reality (AR) is an extension of Virtual Reality (VR). By contrast to traditional VR, AR provides a seamless interface for users that combines both the real world and the virtual world. Users can interact with virtual objects that are interposed on real scenes around them and obtain the most natural and genuine human–computer interaction experience. Only a computer and a camera are needed to construct a local AR environment. The camera detects markers within its vision and then presents the scene it captures and the corresponding virtual objects represented by the markers simultaneously on the computer screen. Users can move the markers to interact with the interposed virtual objects. In the three Horizon Reports released during 2010–2012, the New Media Consortium predicted that Augmented Reality will be applied on a large scale in the near future (Johnson, Adams, & Cummins, 2012; Johnson, Levine, Smith, & Stone, 2010; Johnson, Smith, Willis, Levine, & Haywood, 2011).With the rapid development of Augmented Reality, the integration of AR into disciplinary teaching has emerged to a significant extent. AR is most applicable in the following two cases: (1) When the phenomenon cannot be simulated in reality, such as the solar system in “the book of the futures” (Cai, Wang, Gao, & Yu, 2012). (2) When real experiments have conspicuous shortcomings, such as the convex imaging experiment (Cai, Chiang, & Wang, 2013), as it is dangerous to keep a lighted candle in a classroom. Another example is a serious game for the treatment for a 25-year-old woman with cockroach phobia through a mobile phone (Botella et al., 2011). The use of the game reduced her level of fear and avoidance before a “one-session” AR exposure treatment was applied.After a review of the related computer-assisted tools in chemistry education, we consider AR the most suitable and appropriate solution for the present problems we are faced with in instruction on chemistry micro-worlds, as micro-particles cannot be observed in reality.This research aims to develop an inquiry-based AR learning tool for junior high school chemistry courses, examine its effect on students’ cognitive performance, compare its effects on high-achieving and low-achieving students and investigate students’ attitudes toward the software.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The experiment result shows that the AR tool is beneficial in improving middle school students’ cognitive test performance on corresponding content, and has relatively larger influence on low-achieving students. Additionally, students generally hold a positive attitude toward the AR tool and enjoyed the exploration experience.Based on the findings, we wish to further employ this AR tool as a remedial learning tool and extend the method to other chapters and contents in middle school chemistry course that require students to memorize abstract chemical structures and concepts. With the application and instruction form, teachers can apply this AR tool in inquiry-based learning in their own classes.Through this empirical study, we have witnessed the great potential and acceptance of the inquiry-based AR tool. The research shows that in an inquiry-based chemistry microstructure learning scenario, students’ academic performance will be enhanced by the AR learning tool. We also proposed several aspects where the research can be further improved and continued. We wish to observe how this AR tool compares with other learning software and whether the AR learning tool will result in longer-lasting memory. The following are our plans for our future work.In terms of software design,•Promote the cognitive accessibility of the software by making it more stable and easier to use.Present vocal operation procedures as part of the software rather than text on an activity form.Survey target students to determine their preferences. Add elements that might attract them to the software, such as cartoons and animation.In terms of experiment design.Add a control group, which will learn the same content using textbooks, and analyze the difference between this group and the experiment group using the AR tool.During the inquiry-based learning activity, incorporate teacher guidance and enable students to explore and learn using the teacher’s instruction and feedback.Increase the difficulty level of the pre-test and post-test. Change the structure of the test, avoid having all blanks assess cognitive knowledge points, and add problem-solving topic questions.Conduct two post-tests. Launch the first post-test immediately after use of the AR tool and the other a week after use. Attempt to measure the long-time learning effect of the AR tool.