@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Web Third-person effect in structural aspects of the information on media websites

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Sample from media websites, 9150 respondents, Greece.Factors that predict the Web Third-person effect (WTPE) were found.Age has statistically significant effects on WTPE.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Third-Person,User online,Article views,Social media metrics,Media website,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, the characteristics of what users observe when visiting a media website as wells as the prediction of the impact on oneself, friends and others are researched. The influence that this information has over their opinion verifies the existence of Web Third-person effect (WTPE). With the use of an online survey (N=9150) in all media websites it was proved that the variables that have a greater impact either on others or our friends than ourselves are: The number of users being concurrently online on the same media website, the exact number of users having read each article on a media website as well as the number of users having shared a news article on facebook, twitter, or other social networks. Moreover, age is a significant factor that explains the findings and is important to the effect. Additionally, factors that affect the influence of the user generated messages on others than on oneself were found. Furthermore, the more credible the news is perceived to be and when there is not a particular mediated message the WTPE is absent confirming the existing theory.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Digital applications are designed to be human oriented, since they address to end users’ or customers’ needs (Kirschner, Carr, van Merriënboer, & Sloep, 2002) while instructional psychology requires them to integrate some specific psychological and technological characteristics and aspects (Tennyson, 2010). Customers prefer to interact with devices and applications, whose characteristics are designed with the scope to provide familiarity, convenience and effective functionality to them (Kim & Sundar, 2012). Designers create new applications, taking into consideration the rapid and constantly evolving technology and information techniques (Liu, Gibby, Quiros, & Demps, 2002). At the same time several attempts are made, aiming at the fulfillment of re-scenarios and user’s satisfaction by the aforementioned applications (Crespo et al., 2011; Yoo & Kim, 2014). It has to be mentioned that an evaluation process is required for every system during its life cycle. The evaluation process includes the implementation of various techniques, which are applicable to any website (Goh & Chua, 2010).Media websites contain user generated multimodal content (text, images, videos and sound) which adds cumulative value since it is capable of influencing the public opinion (Antonopoulos & Veglis, 2013; Lee, 2012; Spyridou, Matsiola, Veglis, Kalliris, & Dimoulas, 2013). Furthermore, it serves users’ satisfaction (Bargas-Avila, Lötscher, Orsini, & Opwis, 2009) by incorporating an efficient and functional navigation design (Cyr & Head, 2013) and may also support users to form opinions about the website in a very limited time period (Lindgaard, Fernandes, Dudek, & Brown, 2006). Web media in order to be attractive to end users, integrate social media aspects to built brand trust (Habibi, Laroche, & Richard, 2014) and take into consideration its users’ recommendations (Knobloch-Westerwick, Sharma, Hansen, & Alter, 2005). In this context, one crucial factor that can influence users’ media consumption (Klapper, 1960) and is related to the selective exposure of online news, concerns the investigation of Third-person effect (TPE), which was initially introduced by Davison in 1983.The existence of TPE has been extensively researched in traditional (typical) media, such as newspapers, television stations and radio stations (Eveland, Nathanson, Detenber, & McLeod, 1999; Tal-Or, Tsfati, & Gunther, 2009). In web media have not been conducted similar studies to such an extent and this may be justified by the fact that this is a relatively new research field (Li, 2008). While in traditional media the viewer cannot affect media content, this is not the case for online media. For the purposes of the present study and because of the focus on web media the term Web Third-person effect (WTPE) will be used instead of Third-person effect or Third-person perception (Tal-Or, Tsfati, & Gunther, 2009). WTPE has been studied across blogs, online newspapers (Banning & Sweetser, 2007), online news in social media contexts (Schweisberger, Billinson, & Chock, 2014) and by social media metrics (i.e. number of shares and comments) in the process of opinion formulation about health information (Stavrositu & Kim, 2014) (see Table 1). It is worth noting that the above studies are not experimented in prediction modeling.This paper attempts to present a generalized research on the investigation of the WTPE in all media websites (except blogs), by combining newly defined and multivariate factors regarding the structural aspects of information on media websites. Moreover, the motivation for the current work derives from the attempt to conclude in significant results regarding the properties that affect users’ attitudes, while interacting with media websites and social networks. On this ground, the innovation of the presented research relies on the utilization of an extended and diversified sample set, subjected to a thematically and contextually non-oriented responding process, in order to achieve maximum generalization of the formulated behavioral analysis. Furthermore, a breakthrough in this scientific area can be considered the conduction of prediction modeling, while implicating the defined input variables or metrics in evaluation processes and machine learning experiments.The scope of the current study is to analyze WTPE in the web media context of the messages or factors that the users may receive or observe concerning the number of users that are concurrently online on the same media website, the exact number of users having read each article, the author’s name or the article sources and the number of shares and likes that an article receives on social networks. The investigation of the aforementioned factors has been conducted with the structured formulation and distribution of a web questionnaire to all web media types, including social media. These questionnaire-related properties have been statistically processed, aiming at the detection of their respective correlation or relevance to the WTPE effect. Furthermore, several experiments have been conducted for the potential formulation of a generic predictive model, with the utilization of specialized classification algorithms in pattern recognition modules (Roiger & Geatz, 2002; Zhao, Zheng, & Wang, 2008).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
