@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Birds of a feather locate together? Foursquare checkins and personality homophily

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assess spatial homophily between users of the Foursquare social network.Users show stronger homophilic tendency when they are more open and conscientious.Disagreeable users were homophilous at a higher number of common venues visited.Contrary to expectations, extroverts had no such tendency.Neurotic users' tendency to co-locate was even less than expected by chance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Spatial homophily,Personality,Location-based social network,Foursquare,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we consider whether people with similar personality traits have a preference for common locations. Due to the difficulty in tracking and categorising the places that individuals choose to visit, this is largely unexplored. However, the recent popularity of location-based social networks (LBSNs) provides a means to gain new insight into this question through checkins - records that are made by LBSN users of their presence at specific street level locations. A web-based participatory survey was used to collect the personality traits and checkin behaviour of 174 anonymous users, who, through their common check-ins, formed a network with 5373 edges and an approximate edge density of 35%. We assess the degree of overlap in personality traits for users visiting common locations, as detected by user checkins. We find that people with similar high levels of conscientiousness, openness or agreeableness tended to have checked-in locations in common. The findings for extraverts were unexpected in that they did not provide evidence of individuals assorting at the same locations, contrary to predictions. Individuals high in neuroticism were in line with expectations, they did not tend to have locations in common. Unanticipated results concerning disagreeableness are of particular interest and suggest that different venue types and distinctive characteristics may act as attractors for people with particularly selective tendencies. These findings have important implications for decision-making and location.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is well-recognised that homophily, the attraction of individuals with similar traits to one another, is a widely occurring human disposition (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Cook, 2001). With the advent of the Internet and the popularity of social networking, it has become possible to understand this concept through the electronic ties that individuals choose to make with each other, leading to a wide range of insights from large electronic data sources. Despite these recent advances, relatively little is known about the manifestation of homophily in a physical context, thus the extent to which similar people have a preference for visiting the same places is an important question to ask. Unfortunately, a significant barrier to answering this question has been convenient data collection on a large scale, which until recently has been challenging to accomplish without access to dedicated location tracking equipment. However, the recent advent of smartphones and location-based social networks (LBSNs) allows new progress to be made. Location-based social networks run on a smartphone as a location-aware application, enabling a user to log their presence at a physical location (referred to as a checkin), which is shared across an online social network in real time. The analysis of checkins thus provides insight into the places that individuals publicly associate with.Many socio-demographic, behavioural and intra-personal factors (McPherson et al., 2001) can potentially characterise aspects of similarity between individuals. For decisions related to human spatial activity, the most fundamental characteristics are arguably the personality traits, given that these are relatively persistent dispositions, thereby broadly framing an individual's outlook and potential approach to activity, interaction and behaviour. Trait-theorists argue that this is supported by evidence of personality trait correlation with wide-ranging human activities, ranging from consumer marketing (e.g., Kassarjian (1971)) through to organisational behaviour (e.g., Hough and Oswald (2008)) and individual tastes (e.g., Rawlings and Ciancarelli (1997)). The boundaries of scenarios where personal activities are congruent to personality traits have been explored in Sherman, Nave, and Funder (2012), with findings that effectively characterise individual freedom consistent with choice in social, consumer-related and location-based decisions. Consequently, we focus on individual preferences regarding assortment.To explore user similarity in location-based activity, we use data collected by a recently introduced experimental platform (Chorley, Whitaker, & Allen, 2015), which has been designed to allow users of the Foursquare11Foursquare have recently reorganised their business model and checkins are now made through a dedicated application called Swarm: http://www.swarmapp.com.location-based social network to participate in anonymous collection of their checkins and personality profile in return for visualisation of their own personality relative to others at locations where common checkins are made. This novel approach naturally incentivises participation and has allowed viral participant recruitment “in-the-wild” to be accomplished, resulting in data from 174 anonymous participants who have collectively checked in 487,398 times at 119,746 venues. Taking the volume, diversity and broad categorisation of venues visited as variables, the first examination of human mobility behaviour at street level, in relation to human personality (Chorley et al., 2015) identified a number of interesting correlations. In particular, conscientiousness positively correlated with the number of venues visited, openness positively correlated with checkins at both sociable and popular venues, and neuroticism negatively correlated with the number of sociable venues visited.In this paper we focus on the extent of overlap in personality for common place-based visits, using checkins as the observed signal. As far as we are aware this is the first investigation of personality homophily based on spatial activity.LBSNs are an interesting hybrid technology that extends online social networking into the physical “real” world. Facebook, Foursquare, and Google + are, to date, the most commonly used LBSNs, with Foursquare recently reorganising its business to provide the checkin facility through a complementary application called Swarm. Users of LBSNs require location-aware smartphones and internet connectivity in order to record their presence at a location, referred to as a checkin. This activity triggers a notification to friends within the associated online social network. Rather than a checkin being recorded solely as a geographical reference (e.g., longitude and latitude or street address), it is usually delivered with a meaningful semantic representation, such as a named place at street level (e.g., the name of a coffee shop and its approximate location). Places that are explicitly registered through the LBSN in this way are called venues. Many LBSNs operate extensible taxonomies of venues that are populated by users, and these have become widespread for cities and popular areas on a global basis.Checkins give particular insight into the venues that an individual chooses to record as important, interesting or relevant. However in some LBSNs such as Facebook and Google+, the checkin functionality has been introduced as a secondary function, built on top of other online social networking functionality. The Foursquare LBSN is different in this regard, originating with checkins as its primary function, and with limited secondary content provision. These factors, combined with a rich API22API stands for Application Program Interface.on which third party applications can be developed, have led to Foursquare being a popular basis for academic insight to a range of human behaviours. Primarily these have concerned physical activity, such as relating to patterns made by users (e.g., Noulas, Scellato, Mascolo, and Pontil (2011)) and with a high degree of location data aggregation. This has led to insights into the effect of social relationships and routine on spatial behaviour for example (Cho, Myers, & Leskovec, 2011).A LBSN users' checkin behaviour may be motivated by several factors, such as establishing a social connection with friends, discovering new places to visit, keeping track of already visited places, fighting boredom and gamification (Lindqvist, Cranshaw, Wiese, Hong, & Zimmerman, 2011). LBSNs allow users to select certain locations as a means of self-presentation, referred to as the spatial self (Schwartz & Halegoua, 2014). This is frequently consistent with other forms of online self-presentation and can involve venue avoidance to counter associations with perceived negative places (Lindqvist et al., 2011). Users have been found to control the volume of checkins in different ways, avoiding spamming their social networks with too many checkins and giving thought to self-presentation (Schwartz & Halegoua, 2014). Different levels of consistency (i.e., venue selection) have been reported. Some users consistently check in to any place they visit, while others select their checked in locations more carefully, based on how interesting or deserving they deem the place to be (Lindqvist et al., 2011). Audience management is a further aspect of user behaviour in LBSNs, with users sharing different checkins with different groups of friends and acquaintances. In some cases, interesting checkins, meaning checkins at unusual or new venues, were reserved for Twitter and Facebook, while more general checkins were shared with friends (Cramer, Rost, & Holmquist, 2011).These factors mean that the checkin is a potentially noisy signal with varying purposes between individuals. To some degree, checkins represent a unique footprint which is characteristic of the individual user, and are worthy of investigation as a means to understand human behaviour. However, limited existing studies have addressed the role of checkins in relation to individual differences such as personality. Wang, Pedreschi, Song, Giannotti, and Barabasi (2011) have considered the personality characteristics that correlate with individuals sharing checkins in Facebook, and in Chorley et al. (2015), the personality traits of individual users have been correlated with observed checkins.In psychology, trait theory (Allport, 1966) suggests that humans have underlying stable characteristics of biological origin, framing how situations are individually considered and approached. These traits, broadly referred to as personality facets, can influence subconscious human behaviour. As such, there has been considerable research exploring the relationships between diverse human activity and personality. Situations where personality facets are particularly influential to human behaviour have been considered by Sherman et al. (2012). These behaviours have been broadly categorised as freedom of self-expression, social interaction, lack of a-priori structure and an opportunity to engage in competencies. Aspects of both online and offline human activity fall into these categories, including checkins and spatial behaviour.From lexical origins, dimensions capturing personality have progressively emerged since the 1930's, with the NEO Personality Inventory being developed by Costa and McCrae (1985) and validated by McCrae and Costa (1987) in the 1980's. The concept of the Big Five and the NEO Personality Inventory has been updated and revised throughout the years (Digman, 1990), with the revised NEO-PI-3 published by McCrae, Costa, and Martin (2005). Although not without considerable debate (e.g., Block (2001)), the five factor model has become a widespread model of personality (Costa & McCrae, 1985; Goldberg, 1990), with its dimensions capturing Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness and Neuroticism. An alternative model to the Big 5 is the HEXACO model (Lee & Ashton, 2004); which of these models captures personality dimensions more accurately and more universally is still an ongoing debate (Ashton & Lee, 2008; Lee, Ogunfowora, & Ashton, 2005). In terms of correlation with online activity, research in this area has addressed relationships between personality, Internet and social network usage, primarily concerning Facebook (e.g., Amichai-Hamburger and Vinitzky (2010); Ross et al. (2009)), Twitter (e.g., Quercia, Kosinski, Stillwell, and Crowcroft (2011)), and to a lesser extent concerning LBSNs, such as Foursquare (e.g., Chorley et al., 2015).Homophily, the attraction of similar nodes in a network, is a fundamental organizing principle in social networks. Homophily can predict interests and characteristics of users in a network, based on the characteristics and interests of their neighbours (Kossinets & Watts, 2009). This is of value to many Internet services: for example websites such as Amazon and Netflix apply similarity of buying and watching patterns to predict and recommend future consumption (Ziegler & Golbeck, 2007).Homophily has important structural implications for social networks. Strongly connected users tend to be more similar than weaker connected users (McPherson et al., 2001), while nodes in small communities may be more prone to assort than larger ones (Launay & Dunbar, 2015), in line with the small world effect Milgram (1967) and the prevalence of hubs (high degree nodes) and a low mean shortest path (Newman, 2000). In the online domain, homophily has also been observed in directed networks such as Twitter (Bollen, Gonçalves, Ruan, & Mao, 2011), where psychological dispositions have been investigated as the basis for homophily. Loneliness has for example been shown to be assortative (McPherson et al., 2001). Furthermore, positive Twitter users were most likely to follow and be followed by other positive users. Negative users assorted in the Twitter network, and also tended to follow and be followed by fellow negative users (Bollen et al., 2011).Considerably less attention has yet been paid to personality and homophily and as compared to other measures of similarity (e.g., political affiliation or friendship), assessing personality requires a greater levels of participant interaction. However personality-based homophily has been found to be a predictor for connections in a social network formed among first-year university students (Selfhout et al., 2010). Students tended to befriend others with similar levels of extraversion, agreeableness and openness to experience.Given that personality is a potential predictor for behaviour and attitudes in a range of situations (Goldberg, 1990), it is possible that personality-based homophily may support the attraction of like individuals for a wide range of scenarios (Sherman et al., 2012). One conceivable scenario where personality may have a homophilic effect relates to the type of location that individuals choose to visit. So-called spatial homophily has only recently been considered (Pelechrinis & Krishnamurthy, 2015; Zhang & Pelechrinis, 2014), and captures the attraction of individuals, who are in some sense similar, to common locations (Colombo et al., 2012; Williams et al., 2012).Recent work (Schwartz & Halegoua, 2014) has proposed that people may use the places that they visit to build an online representation of themselves. Hence, potentially the characteristics of people can be derived from the locations that they choose to affiliate with through checkins. Graham and Gosling (2011) demonstrated that impressions of a place and its visitors could systematically be derived from the Foursquare user profiles of its visitors. Participants were able to accurately predict the personality of a typical visitor of a specific location, based on the Foursquare profiles of actual visitors (ICC=.69). Ambiance (ICC=.32) and typical activities of visitors (ICC=.33) of a specific place had far lower agreement. On a larger scale, Cranshaw, Schwartz, Hong, and Sadeh (2012) demonstrated that a city's character could be derived from the mobility patterns of its residents. Similar people tended to visit a network of venues within a neighbourhood or region of a city that form a comprehensive whole, rather than individual locations (Cranshaw et al., 2012).Personality has also been related to spatial location and to spatial homophily. For example different neighbourhoods in London have different personality profiles (Jokela, Bleidorn, Lamb, Gosling, & Rentfrow, 2015). Here it was identified that the centre of London has a higher prevalence of high openness to experience and low agreeableness, while neighbourhoods further away from the city centre are low in neuroticism and high in conscientiousness. Jokela et al. (2015) also showed that personality mitigated the effect of neighbourhood on life satisfaction. More specifically, open individuals were the happiest in neighbourhoods with a high number of fellow open people. This suggests that personality-homophily can have important implications for life satisfaction in specific London neighbourhoods (Jokela et al., 2015). Personality not only characterizes specific neighbourhoods, but evidence has been presented that it may characterize entire countries. For example, Rentfrow, Jokela, and Lamb (2015) indicated that within the United Kingdom, Scotland was agreeable and emotionally stable while Wales was, on average, introverted and neurotic.The places considered through spatial homophily need not be restricted by one's residential neighbourhood or region, however. For example, Joseph, Tan, and Carley (2012) identified clusters of individuals, such as gym enthusiasts or art enthusiasts, who had similar interests in venues consistent with their Foursquare checkins. Interestingly, the venues visited by individuals within the same cluster were spread throughout the city, rather than being confined to a particular neighbourhood. Specific types of locations, rather than general geographic areas, can therefore be places where people with similar personality traits assort. This contributes to the motivation for our investigation.Our focus concerns observing signals of homophily through common LBSN checkins and similarity of personality. The extent of the effect of individual differences in personality on the similarity of locations visited remains unknown. Developing further understanding of this issue is our objective, while acknowledging that checkin activity represents only a subset of human physical behaviour and a conscious but noisy signal, with different motivations for its use (see Section 1.2).Based on previous findings (e.g., Zhang and Pelechrinis (2014)) it is possible some venues may play a greater role in facilitating spatial homophily than others, such as leisure venues (e.g. sports centre) and sociable avenues, (e.g. nightlife spots), as compared to venues people only pass through as a necessity and with little option for choice or self-expression (e.g., transport hubs). Furthermore, each checkin may serve as a signal to social network followers concerning personal affiliations with places that they feel are important.Given this context, we consider the implications of personality facets on spatial homophily in the following sections. As the literature on spatial homophily and location-based social networks is limited, we additionally consider the usage of online social networks and user personality.Individuals that score highly with reference to Openness to experience tend to be curious, creative and open to new experiences. People who score low on this facet tend to be conservative and unimaginative in their proposed solutions (Goldberg, 1990). Recent research from spatial homophily (Jokela et al., 2015) suggests that openness to experience might be the strongest predictor of homophilous connections in an LSBN such as Foursquare. Openness to experience was also positively correlated with visiting sociable and popular venues (Chorley et al., 2015). In terms of online social networks, open people tend to enjoy a diverse network of friends (Wehrli, 2009) and are frequent users (Ross et al., 2009; Schrammel, Köffel, & Tscheligi, 2009; Wehrli, 2009). The motivation for use of online social networks by highly open users is most likely tied to their novelty (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010). Therefore, one could infer that in a LBSN setting, open users might seek popular venues, because such locations appeal to them through their novelty and originality. Sociable venues might be attractive because open people tend to enjoy socializing with and meeting new people. Additionally, by virtue of their curiosity, open people might have a tendency to assort at common venues that are new and interesting to them. However, this could lead to widespread dispersion of checkins, reducing scope for spatial overlap and common checkins, thus resulting in lower spatial homophily. In terms of low openness scoring, such individuals may have a tendency to congregate at a more limited range of familiar places, affecting likelihood of common checkins being detected.Highly extraverted individuals are generally social, talkative and energetic. They tend to engage in many social activities and have a large number of friends. In contrast, introverts tend to be less inclined to engage in social activities, preferring a smaller number of friends and also enjoying doing activities in isolation (Goldberg, 1990). In terms of LBSNs, extraversion has not been found to correlate with any particular checkin behaviours (Chorley et al., 2015), but their high sociability characteristics might make them likely to assort at sociable venues nonetheless (Shen, Brdiczka, & Liu, 2015). When using Facebook, extraverts post and share updates about their social life through photos and events more often than introverts; and have, unsurprisingly, a bigger network of friends in online communities (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010; Quercia et al., 2011; Schrammel et al., 2009). Therefore LBSNs might be especially suited to extraverts who like to readily share the events and offline activities they take part in through online means (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010). However we could equally find that extraverts are attracted by a diverse range of venues, and therefore do not display the predicted homophilous behaviour. Furthermore, in terms of online behaviour, extraverts have been found to refrain from using the Internet as a substitute for social interactions (Amiel & Sargent, 2004). This means that extraverts could use LBSNs consistent with meeting friends or partaking in social activities. For online social networks it has also been argued that extraverts, although enjoying a vast number of friends and being less prone to loneliness, tend to have less well connected neighbours, while introverts are embedded in strongly connected networks, albeit with fewer neighbours (Hamburger & Ben-Artzi, 2000; Shen et al., 2015). Introverts post and share less on social media, however, when they do, they gain more likes and comments than their extraverted counterparts (Amichai-Hamburger, Wainapel, & Fox, 2002), providing support for the idea that introverts are embedded in small, but tight-knit social networks. Homophily has been shown to be stronger in smaller communities (Launay & Dunbar, 2015), we could therefore find introverts to be more homophilous than extroverts, including in a location-based social network such as Foursquare.Conscientious individuals tend to be well organized and disciplined, while unconscientious people tend to be disorganized and inconsistent (Goldberg, 1990). For online activity, Conscientiousness was found to be negatively correlated with leisure-related Internet use and positively with academic Internet use among adolescents (Landers & Lounsbury, 2006). It has been argued that conscientious users tend to stay focused on their tasks, which makes them less likely to engage in distracting behaviours, such as going on Facebook (Ross et al., 2009). Conscientious users have more friends on Facebook than unconscientious users, but also use some Facebook features less (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010). Conscientiousness has been linked to the use of LBSN through Foursquare (Chorley et al., 2015), being positively correlated with the number of venues visited. The nature of the Foursquare application might be especially suitable for conscientious users: they consistently remember to checkin at the venues they visit, unlike their more disorganized counterparts. There is no indication that being a consistent LBSN user increases their likelihood to checkin to the same venues, however. Previous social network and communication studies have not identified conscientiousness as playing a role in homophilous processes of other social networks (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010; Balmaceda, Schiaffino, & Godoy, 2013; Ross et al., 2009). Therefore, in terms of spatial homophily the basis for specific expectations for the conscientiousness facet to be assortative are limited. However, a conscientious user's consistent checkin behaviour might increase the likelihood of detecting homophilic effects.Highly agreeable people are friendly and likeable. Highly disagreeable people, however, are unpleasant to be around and tend to come across as unfriendly to others (Goldberg, 1990). Highly agreeable people are popular communication partners for extraverted and emotionally stable users (Balmaceda et al., 2013). They also tend to preferentially communicate between themselves, while disagreeable users were not as likely to communicate amongst themselves (Balmaceda et al., 2013). Agreeableness has not been found to be related to number of friends on Facebook or other online communities (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010; Schrammel et al., 2009; Wehrli, 2009) nor to time spent on Facebook or online in general (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010; Schrammel et al., 2009). Overall, agreeableness appears assortative in a communication setting, but does not seem to be specifically correlated to online behaviour or social networking site use (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010; Ross et al., 2009; Schrammel et al., 2009). It was also uncorrelated with venue checkins in Foursquare (Chorley et al., 2015). Other than a friendly atmosphere, it is difficult to speculate on what aspects of a venue attract agreeable individuals. Agreeableness is a personality facet that is most related to social interactions between acquainted individuals, which might be difficult to capture from LBSN data when the relations between users are not known. Communication between users, the only aspect that agreeable individuals have proven homophilous on (Balmaceda et al., 2013), cannot be assessed. We therefore expect that agreeable LBSN users would not necessarily increase likelihood of attraction to similar venues.Highly neurotic people are sensitive and nervous, and generally susceptible to negative emotions while emotionally stable people tend to be in control of their emotions (Goldberg, 1990). Neuroticism, which has been associated with a lack of perceived social support, also has a negative relationship with Internet use (Swickert, Hittner, Harris, & Herring, 2002), in particular with leisure usage such as instant messaging and social gaming (Amiel & Sargent, 2004). Neurotic people have been found to avoid discussion boards, showing little interest in participating in them online (Amiel & Sargent, 2004). Unsurprisingly, neurotics are avoided as online interaction partners on discussion boards, even by other neurotics (Balmaceda et al., 2013). Whether these avoidance patterns are reflected in their spatial behaviour is unclear. Emotionally stable users preferred to communicate with agreeable users, but not with each other (Balmaceda et al., 2013). It seems that neurotic people tend to have difficulties forming and maintaining social relationships online and offline (Wehrli, 2009). However, neurotic individuals are speculated to be more comfortable in some online settings, as they are more likely to construe their online persona as their ‘real-me’ (Amichai-Hamburger et al., 2002), which they create in LBSN by regulating their checkins (Schwartz & Halegoua, 2014). This ‘altered’ version of their profile might therefore be an inaccurate reflection of their ‘true’, offline personality. Despite this, neuroticism was found to be negatively correlated with number of checkins to sociable venues (Chorley et al., 2015). However, no relation to spatial homophily was identified in Jokela et al. (2015) and therefore we expect to detect no spatial homophily effect for neuroticism, but one might expect highly neurotic users to be disassortative.Analysing each of the five personality traits separately gives us valuable insight into homophily processes. However, given the spatial context in which homophily is being investigated, we further consider the overall personality profile. Concerning LBSNs, Graham and Gosling (2011) found that participants were able to accurately predict the personality of typical visitors of a venue, solely based on images from Foursquare. Additionally, previous studies on ties in social networks found that similarity in three of the five facets (extraversion, agreeableness, openness to experience) promotes tie formation (Selfhout et al., 2010). It remains unclear from this study whether tie formation is especially strong among people who score similarly on all three facets at once. According to McPherson et al. (2001), the stronger the connection between two people, the higher their similarity. In line with this assertion, the homophily effect appears to be especially strong among spouses and close friends (McPherson et al., 2001).However, in the present study, connection between people represents the extent of commonality (i.e., number of checkins) at a location in a LBSN, rather than a direct human relationship. To the extent of our knowledge, this is the first time connection strength has been assessed in this way. But based on previous work on close ties and personality (McPherson et al., 2001; Selfhout et al., 2010) and predictions based on Foursquare activity Graham and Gosling (2011), there is some basis to hypothesise that increased commonality at which checkins are made positively influences overall personality similarity.Based on Sections 2.1–2.6 we summarise the hypotheses as follows:H1Open users have a greater tendency to checkin at common venues;Spatial homophily and conscientiousness are not correlated;Extraverted users have a greater tendency to checkin at common venues;Spatial homophily and agreeableness are not correlated;Neurotic users have a lesser tendency to checkin at common venues;Greater similarity in overall personality profile implies a greater tendency to checkin at common venues.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
