@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Individual and social benefits of online discussion forums

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Online discussion forums have benefits at individual and society level.They are positively linked to well-being for stigmatised group members.Online discussion forum use is linked to offline civic engagement in related areas.Identification with other forum users mediates the above relationships.Online discussion forums are of greater applied importance than has been realized.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online discussion forum,Well-being,Civic engagement,Activism,Social identity,Stigmatised group membership,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There has been much debate surrounding the potential benefits and costs of online interaction. The present research argues that engagement with online discussion forums can have underappreciated benefits for users’ well-being and engagement in offline civic action, and that identification with other online forum users plays a key role in this regard. Users of a variety of online discussion forums participated in this study. We hypothesized and found that participants who felt their expectations had been exceeded by the forum reported higher levels of forum identification. Identification, in turn, predicted their satisfaction with life and involvement in offline civic activities. Formal analyses confirmed that identification served as a mediator for both of these outcomes. Importantly, whether the forum concerned a stigmatized topic moderated certain of these relationships. Findings are discussed in the context of theoretical and applied implications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Can human interaction over the internet be personally and socially transformative? The introduction of new, disruptive technology is always accompanied by a deep suspicion – for example, the telephone was greeted by claims that it would break up home life and stop people from visiting friends (Fischer, 1992; Pool, 1983) – and the internet has been no exception to this rule (see, e.g., Putnam, 2000). As we detail below, debates about the supposed pros and cons of internet-based interaction have focused primarily on individual well-being, largely ignoring the potential benefits at more inclusive levels of analysis (community and society). We propose that one of the key benefits of online interaction has been overlooked by researchers: its potential to contribute to increased engagement with civic activities. Our contribution in this paper is to demonstrate that online interaction can foster offline engagement at the same time, counter-intuitively, as it fosters individual well-being. Drawing below on social identity theory (Tajfel & Turner, 1979), we demonstrate that identification with other forum users plays an influential role in both these processes.In the present research we focus on one particular mode of online interaction – participation in online discussion forums – to consider when, why, and how they may transform their users. Online forums have been in existence for many years, and indeed predate the internet (Li & Bernoff, 2011). Although seemingly eclipsed in the past decade by social networking sites such as Facebook, forums are still regularly used by around 20% of online users in the US, and about 10% of online users in the UK (Li & Bernoff, 2011), attesting to the value that users continue to derive from them. This value may stem, at least in part, from the fact that forums represent one of the few remaining spaces online that afford the user the potential for anonymous interaction.We contend that this value accrues at both the individual level (well-being) and the society level (civic engagement). To put our argument and data in context, below we first review past work on the connection between online interaction and individual-level outcomes, and then the small amount of available work relating online interaction to society-level outcomes. We then consider mediating and moderating variables and end the introduction by deriving concrete hypotheses.How does online interaction impact an individual’s well-being? Intuitively, one might expect that any form of interaction, regardless of setting, is probably an aid to well-being. In offline settings, researchers have demonstrated that those who communicate more and have close supportive relationships are less stressed, happier and psychologically healthier (e.g., Baumeister & Leary, 1995; House, Umberson, & Landis, 1988) whereas those who have fewer close relationships, social resources and support tend to feel more lonely, be more depressed and psychologically less well (Barnett & Gotlib, 1988; Bruce & Hoff, 1994).But some have argued for an “internet paradox”: the idea that more interaction online translates into reduced well-being because it disrupts interaction offline. If time spent interacting online comes at the expense of vital everyday face-to-face interaction with family and friends, there could be negative implications for users’ psychological wellbeing downstream (e.g., Mesch, 2001; Nie, Hillygus, & Erbring, 2002). There is certainly evidence that “too much” online activity can result in a range of negative effects on users. Heavy internet users report feeling more isolated from society and report fewer interactions with family and friends (Nie & Hillygus, 2002; Nie et al., 2002). Time spent online has been shown to be associated with increased depression and other emotional problems (Carden & Rettew, 2006; Morgan & Cotton, 2003) and impaired academic performance (Junco, 2012). Using the internet to meet people is also associated with depression (Boneva, Quinn, Kraut, Kiesler, & Shklovski, 2006).An influential set of studies provides perhaps the most definitive tests of these ideas (Kraut et al., 1998). Kraut and colleagues recruited families who did not have Internet access in homes at the beginning; gave each a personal computer, internet, and e-mail; and tracked them over two years to assess the impact of internet use on their social involvement, social support, and psychological well-being. Far from improving users’ well-being, the evidence gathered in this study suggested that stress, depression, and loneliness seemed to be worsened by internet use. This paper calling the benefits of online interaction into question generated significant media and scholarly attention. But these provocative findings have not held up over time. First, others’ data have not been fully supportive (see LaRose, Eastin, & Gregg, 2001; Morgan & Cotton, 2003). Second, Kraut and colleagues’ own later data have also run against their earlier findings. In a follow-up study of over 200 of the respondents from their original 1998 paper, Kraut and colleagues reported that most of the negative effects had dissipated, with the exception of increased stress. They also collected fresh data several years after the earlier study and found that participants in this later sample experienced mostly positive effects of using the Internet (Kraut et al., 2002). Overall, these findings paint a far more optimistic picture.Taking the later data into account, many researchers have arrived at a more positive view of the consequences of internet use, arguing that online interaction can supplement rather than supplant face-to-face interaction (DiMaggio, Hargittai, Neuman, & Robinson, 2001; Wellman, Haase, Witte, & Hampton, 2001). Several reasons underlie this argument. First, the internet helps to maintain geographically dispersed networks: it can prevent communities, families, and friends from becoming too fragmented by providing sources of social support regardless of users’ physical location (Howard, Rainie, & Jones, 2001; Subrahmanyam, Reich, Waechter, & Espinoza, 2008). Second, getting involved in online groups can be of huge benefit to those with somewhat depleted offline social resources (McKenna & Bargh, 1998); developing relationships with individuals and groups online may help compensate for the social resources that are lacking offline. Last, internet interaction has been positively linked to the development of social capital (Best & Krueger, 2006; Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007, 2011; Gross, Juvonen, & Gable, 2002; Hampton & Wellman, 2003; Kavanaugh, Carroll, Rosson, Reese, & Zin, 2005; Kraut et al., 2002; Quan-Haase, Wellman, Witte, & Hampton, 2002; Robinson, Kestnbaum, Neustadtl, & Alvarez, 2000). Offline (face-to face) social capital has been shown to decrease dropout rates, and increase students’ sense of belonging and well-being in academic settings (Garcia-Reid, 2007) and similar benefits have been shown among members of virtual communities (Tomai et al., 2010).In sum, research shows that online interaction impacts both positively and negatively upon users’ well-being. It is not so much a question of whether online interaction impacts well-being, but when, why and how it does. Before explaining the identity-related process by which we believe this occurs, we first consider the second of our two major outcomes of interest in this paper.Alongside effects on individual well-being, we seek to better understand when and how users of online discussion forums become motivated to work on behalf of the issues discussed in those forums. Such civic activities in related offline settings might include willingness to sign petitions, willingness to donate money, and other forms of civic-minded collective action.As noted, there is less evidence addressing these society-level effects than evidence addressing personal-level effects. But there is suggestive evidence that online engagement can translate into offline collective action, such as civic and political participation (e.g., Valenzuela, Park, & Kee, 2009). In addition to these suggestive correlational studies, some “natural experiments” have provided opportunities to test a causal relationship between internet use and civic engagement more carefully. In one illustrative intervention study (Hampton & Wellman, 2003), a suburb of Toronto had been turned into a “wired suburb” when residents were offered a package of online services, including high-speed internet access, videophone, online health advice, and local online discussion forums. After this intervention, follow-up data suggested that the internet actually stimulates more offline contact (resonating with the debate reviewed above) and promotes collective action to solve community problems offline (see also Blanchard & Horan, 1998).There are, however, exceptions to this pattern (e.g., Byrne, 2007). A recent meta-analysis of the link between internet use and political/civic engagement suggests it is far from inevitable (Boulianne, 2009). Clearly, more work is needed on the timely and important question of whether (and what type of) online interaction can translate into offline civic engagement, and more importantly, to better understand the processes that may underlie this link. A major goal of our study was to address these gaps in the literature.We follow others in conceptualizing ingroup identification as a feeling of similarity and engagement with an ingroup and its other members. Identification reflects, and is expressed by, the inclusion of the ingroup in the self-concept (Tropp & Wright, 2001). Thus, forum identification refers to the extent to which users include the forum in the self-concept. Joining the forum is not synonymous with becoming a high identifier; active members of the forum may vary in their identification. Because a given user may be strongly identified with one forum but only weakly identified with another, identification is not a stable personality trait. To measure individual differences, we need to specify the target (in this case, the specific forum).Why is identification important? Social identity theory (Tajfel & Turner, 1979) posits that our group memberships are just as important as individual identity in defining the self (see Ellemers, Spears, & Doosje, 2002) and thus are equally important determinants of our downstream outcomes mediated by the self-concept (such as well-being and behavior). We suggest that online forums are precisely this type of group; they function as a powerful site of community for their users. Furthermore, it is the development of the sense that this community is meaningfully connected to the self (i.e., forum identification) that creates the dual benefits of individual well-being and offline civic engagement. In other words, identification plays a mediating role that drives the other two outcomes of interest. In this section we highlight two of the many benefits of identification already established in the offline literature that we feel merit closer attention because they map onto our outcomes of interest.First, at the individual level, group identification has been robustly linked to health and well-being, both in terms of effective coping with situational stressors (Haslam & Reicher, 2006) and in the longer term. For example, a significant body of work is accumulating that suggests social group memberships, and more specifically, engagement in activities associated with such groups, can play a significant protective role in both the onset of and recovery from depression (see Cruwys, Haslam, Dingle, Haslam, & Jetten, 2014, for an overview of this extensive program of research). Our prediction that identification mediates the positive impact of online discussion forums on individual well-being derives from this well established and robust connection.Second, at the societal level, group identification is also quite often linked to heightened civic engagement, in the sense that it is almost an accepted ‘given’ that they somehow go together (Youniss, 2011). Those with a strong political identity are more inclined to engage in civic activities such as political activism (Stewart & McDermott, 2004) and protest participation (Klandermans, 2002). Qualitative accounts of adolescents’ commitment to and engagement with prosocial and political organizations suggest that sustained social action may be at least partly a direct consequence of identification with the goals of the organizations they belong to (Martínez, Peñaloza, & Valenzuela, 2012). Within environmental psychology, too, there is suggestive evidence that identification promotes environmental activism (Dono, Webb, & Richardson, 2010; Fielding, McDonald, & Louis, 2008). And sufficiently many findings in the social psychological literature affirm the role of identification in collective action that an influential paper putting forward a social identity model of collective action was needed to integrate them (van Zomeren, Postmes, & Spears, 2008). These myriad and varied sources all suggest a mediational role for identification in fostering collective action. To our knowledge, though, no researchers have asked whether these same dynamics might link online identification with offline collective action, or any other form of civic engagement. Our study provides the first test of that intriguing idea.If identification has so many benefits, it becomes increasingly crucial to ask where it comes from. In other words, instead of taking identification levels as a “given,” we need to conceptualize them also as a dynamic outcome. Social identity theory has taken up the question of the antecedents of forum identification and provided some answers. Patterns of identification with different ingroups suggest that identification occurs when it is functional (useful). People may strategically express identities when they think they will not be punished, and/or connect them to an audience that is valued (Spears, Lea, Corneliussen, Postmes, & Ter Haar, 2002). Moreover, low identifiers will begin to identify with a group when they anticipate that the group is about to benefit from positive social change, but will dis-identify when change is unlikely (Doosje, Spears, & Ellemers, 2002).This suggests that we may be able to uncover antecedents of forum identification that similarly reflect users’ sense that the forum has been useful for them. Initial levels of forum identification are low as a rule; users do not tend to join a forum with a sense of already being connected to other users (who are strangers) by more than shared interests. Forum identification develops over time – but how and why? A key goal of our study was to investigate the antecedents of forum identification.One of the advantages of online communication is that it may allow people to fulfill needs that are not being met offline. Our rationale in considering the antecedents of forum identification was influenced by the ‘uses and gratifications’ approach (Herzog, 1944; Katz, Blumler, & Gurevitch, 1974), a second theoretical perspective that complements the social identity approach. This holds that people may trade off ‘richness’ of the medium against its ability to satisfy their felt needs. For example, people with an obscure interest may join an online discussion forum to obtain information or social support that is not available in their own community. Because online communication provides disparate gratification opportunities compared with traditional media, individuals may find it superior to face-to-face communication, if that richer medium is not considered fit for purpose (Dimmick, Kline, & Stafford, 2000). This approach inspires us to draw a distinction between instrumental reasons for joining forums (e.g., to seek information) and social reasons – the two main reasons that have emerged in our preliminary research into this question (Pendry, Mewse, & Burgoyne, 2012).Given that identification has a strong emotional component (e.g., Cameron, 2004) we put forward the novel hypothesis that social factors are more influential than instrumental factors in fostering forum identification. What we mean by this is that users have high initial expectations about the instrumental benefits (which are typically fulfilled), but not about the social benefits. Because they do not readily intuit that the experience of interacting with other forum users will result in the formation of new social ties, their expectations are frequently exceeded. Putting this all together motivates our hypothesis that the antecedents of identification are primarily social. Thus, the strongest predictor of identification should be the extent to which social (not instrumental) expectations are met or even exceeded.A key aspect of our argument is that some of the benefits of online interaction may accrue particularly to people with stigmatizing conditions, whose need for a sense of community may be harder to meet in the course of normal, day-to-day offline interactions (Goffman, 1963). A stigmatizing condition is one that subjects its carrier to social devaluation (Crocker, Major, & Steele, 1998), and stigma is a psychological stressor for precisely this reason (Allison, 1998; Heckman et al., 2002; Varni, Miller, McCuin, & Solomon, 2012). Although social stigmas may be differentiated along a variety of dimensions (e.g., visibility), our goal in this work is not to draw fine distinctions between different types of stigmas. Instead, we cast a wide net by considering the core defining element of devaluation that links the experience of people who have a variety of different types of stigmatizing conditions.Nowadays people can both avoid and proactively cope with this devaluation by turning to online forums populated by others who share the same devalued group membership. However, little to no work to date has addressed whether this is an effective strategy in the sense of improving users’ well-being or offline civic engagement. To address this question, our research directly compared users’ experiences with two types of forums: forums that address stigmatizing topics (post-natal depression, mental health issues, and non-disposable diaper usage) and forums that are more focused on recreational activities (golf, bodybuilding, and a range of self-identified forums).We hypothesized that users of the stigma-related forums should reap unique benefits for well-being, relative to users of the recreational forums. We reasoned that members of these forums would feel they had few people to talk to in their day-to-day lives who could truly understand what it means to deal with the stigmatizing characteristic and the accompanying devaluing social reactions. Forums can all offer some initial anonymity, a community, and information that geographically proximate others may not have. What stigma-related forums uniquely offer is that the anonymity protects those who are not ready to be publicly associated with sensitive topics; the community helps to neutralize the “spoilage” of identity that accompanies stigma (Goffman, 1963). In forums focused on less stigmatizing topics, only the specialized knowledge and expertise (not the anonymity and sense of community) are relevant, and they are a luxury rather than a necessity. We based our hypothesis on research showing that only people who initially lack offline support reap mental health benefits from online interaction (Bessière, Kiesler, Kraut, & Boneva, 2008) and that symptoms of depression are best ameliorated when sufferers not only ‘show up’ to but actively engage with offline groups (e.g., community recreation groups; Cruwys et al., 2014). Thus, getting involved with social groups, whether offline or online, is known to especially benefit those with stigmatising conditions.Putting this past work together, we expected only users of the stigma-relevant forums to show individual well-being benefits to the extent that they come to identify with the forum, because their initial need is not being met. In contrast, we had no theoretical reason to suspect that civic engagement would be affected by the stigma relevance of the forum; past work shows that identification predicts collective action across a wide range of naturally occurring groups. Thus, we expected users of all types of forums to experience improved civic engagement to the extent that they come to identify with the forum.First, regarding motivations for joining the forum, we predicted that participants would report having initially joined primarily to seek information (Hypothesis 1). Second, regarding fulfilment of these goals, we predicted that participants would report that their information needs had been very well met (Hypothesis 2), since serving as a clearinghouse for user-generated information is one of the most straightforward and easily fulfilled functions that forums provide. Importantly, though, we further predicted that these explicitly acknowledged information-seeking experiences on the part of users would be less important predictors of forum identification than alternative (social) needs would be (Hypothesis 3).Next, we investigated how users’ forum identification impacts upon two key outcome variables: their own well-being, and downstream, potential offline impact in terms of civic engagement in related activities such as volunteering or campaigning. Consistent with past work, we predicted that participants’ levels of forum identification would be correlated with both of these outcome variables (Hypothesis 4). We predicted that identification with other forum users would mediate the relationship between, on the one hand, users having their social expectations met or exceeded on the forum, and on the other hand, the positive outcomes they enjoy in terms of improved satisfaction with life and offline engagement (Hypothesis 5). Importantly, this mediated relationship would hold for all forums in the case of offline engagement, but would only hold for stigma-related forums in the case of satisfaction with life (Hypothesis 6).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Dwarfed in recent years by more prominent social media giants such as Facebook and Twitter, forums appear anecdotally to have assumed an unfashionable status in many organizations’ eyes, being viewed as a primitive form of communication whose time has passed. This observation is partly based on feedback we have received when presenting these findings at end-user conferences. Such a view is also echoed by forum moderators themselves seeking to sell the benefits. A recent comment on one large forum perfectly captures this mood:“I’ve contacted a number of larger organizations with members anywhere from 100k to 500k and asked them if they would be interested in creating a discussion forum for their members. I told them of the benefits of bringing…members closer together by finding common interests and having a dedicated online “space” for them to congregate and talk about things relevant to their organization… All of the responses I’ve received… they have decided the direction they want to go with social media and it is [Facebook] and Twitter, but I tell them that this is something completely different than those two forms of [social media].”http://www.technibble.com/forums/showthread.php?p=336934We agree with this poster. Forums offer something different and their potential to provide social capital and effect related offline civic activity remains a largely untapped force, and one that is in danger of being eclipsed by their larger, and more seductive contemporary social networking cousins. If this should happen, we would consider it a shame. The need for forums has certainly not decreased, and forum providers should be actively promoting the benefits of forum use more widely and energetically. The uninitiated may yet need convincing, but converted, committed and active users already know that forums can transform lives. In the words of Radin (2006, p. 599–600), the forum formula “…succeeds in transforming many casual visitors into people who wholeheartedly contribute to the community…by their very existence, [online forums] are planting the seeds of revolution.”