@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Adolescent girls can develop attachment with others through, and with, technology.Adolescent girls use technology to meet others and mediate relationships.Facets of relationships can be understood as functions of secure relationships.Functions include proximity-seeking, trust, exploration and return to secure base.Technology use can amplify girls’ secure relationships with peers and parents.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Attachment theory,Adolescence,Technology,Sociology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Technology plays an almost ubiquitous role in contemporary British society. Despite this, we do not have a well-theorised understanding of the ways adolescent girls use digital devices in the context of their developing secure relationships with their families and friends. This study aims to address this gap in understanding. Fifteen young women based in the Midlands and from across the socio-economic spectrum participated between 2012 and 2013. Participants completed three research tools exploring technology-mediated attachment and relationships, and participated in a face-to-face interview. The findings suggest that it is possible for girls to develop attachments with others through, and with, technology; technology use brings people together and mediates relationships in a range of ways encapsulated by attachment functions. The study highlights the ongoing importance of parental and peer relationships by suggesting that technology can act as a means by which the positive and negative attributes of existing relationships can be amplified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Technology is deeply embedded in the lives of most adolescent girls in contemporary British society (EU Kids Online, 2014). Whether as a result of increased internet access, user-generated content and the popularity of social networking sites (SNS), or ease of access to information and entertainment, the trend has been examined in a number of ways. Adams and colleagues have focused on the technology-mediated educational needs of adolescents (2013). Goswami (2008) has focused on the relationship between child development and technological experience. Amichai-Hamburger (2002) has focused on social networking and personality, and his work has been extended by Zoppos (2010), Oldmeadow, Quinn & Kowert (2013) into exploring loneliness, introversion/extroversion and adult attachment online. These latter groups have shone a light on the characteristics of technology-enabled communication and human interactions.These studies all improve our understanding of our relationships with technology and with one another. These are not trivial; the apparent ubiquity of technology and resultant implications have been the source of moral panic within the media, in homes, schools and public policy. The study reported here aims to bring a framework to that debate in the context of technology use and relationships made, lost, re-made and evolved by adolescent young women.Building on a pilot study (Levine & Edwards, 2014), it reflects on these relationships through the lens of attachment theory. Attachment theory offers a meaningful way to reflect on these relationships because we see that our technology-mediated lives are not ‘worlds apart’ from adult-oriented lives. Rather, while technology does offer distinctive constraints and promoters, our technology-mediated relationships draw on well-understood, familiar themes of relationship models that can be applied across online and offline worlds. These provide research, practice, families and young women with both language and space to reflect on these relationships in rational ways.The study reported in this paper therefore aims to respond to the question ‘What can we understand about technology-mediated relationships in light of attachment theory?’ Within this sub-questions focus on technology-mediation of family relationships and friendships, and two potentially key mediating factors of age and socio-economic circumstance. Carried out as one strand of an ESRC-funded PhD project, the study is novel in two ways:-the frameworks of attachment theory, the sociology of adolescence and the study of digital media have not previously been brought togethernew tools have been developed for exploring a range of socio-cognitive characteristics in the context of adolescent technology use, and established tools have been adapted for use in this setting.The study focuses on adolescent girls (rather than adolescents of both sexes) for two reasons. Firstly, the endocrinological (Sisk & Zehr, 2005) and neuroscientific (Blakemore, 2012) evidence is clear that boys and girls experience puberty in distinctive and different ways. These differences manifest in psychological and behavioural contexts (e.g. Froh, Yurkewicz, & Kashdan, 2009; Keijsers, Branje, Frijns, Finkenauer, & Meeus, 2010). Secondly, methodological challenges make robust comparison of technology use across genders in adolescence difficult, for example in the gaming literature (Hayes, 2013).Attachment theory can provide a framework in which to analyse young people’s online and offline interactions and relationships with the parents and friends close to them (Levine & Edwards, 2014).John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth pioneered attachment research during the last century, providing the conceptual and methodological foundation upon which contemporary theorists link relationships and emotional development (Bowlby, 1973; Goldberg, 2000). Ainsworth’s research into attachment theory focused on young children, and led to the identification of the systematic patterns of behaviour (Ainsworth, 1969) of ‘secure’, ‘avoidant’ and ‘resistant/ambivalent’, and subsequently, ‘disorganized’. In research with older children and young people, these patterns are also called ‘balanced’, ‘limiting’, ‘preoccupied’ and ‘disorganized’ respectively (Goldberg, 2000).Bowlby argued that healthy relationships with a small number of trusted individuals are key to an individual’s mental health (Bowlby, 1973). While initial research focused on mother-child relationships as the ‘secure base’, attachment researchers have since broadened into investigating other relationships, particularly in exploring attachment with older children. Some relationships can be described as ‘attachment bonds’ (Cassidy & Shaver, 2008). Attachment bonds occur when an individual has a relationship with another who is seen to be a source of security. These are not always the same as ‘affectional bonds’ although there may be overlaps between them within the attachment context. An attachment bond includes all of the facets of an affectional bond, but also exists in relationships where an individual looks for safety and calm. Attachment behaviours do not always imply an attachment bond; causal relationships are difficult to demonstrate (Sroufe & Waters, 1977). Attachment behaviours are ‘situational’, and attachment bonds are ‘consistent over time’ (Cassidy & Shaver, 2008, p.13.), regardless of the situation or circumstance.Attachment theory also provides a framework in which to identify and analyse the ways in which relationships are represented in other life contexts (Bretherton & Munholland, 2008). Bowlby called this representation our ‘inner working models’ (IWMs) of relationships (1973). IWMs can be thought of as the representational frameworks in which we can conceptualize our interactions with others, based on our previous interactions. Their key function is to ‘anticipate’, ‘interpret’ and ‘guide’ interactions with others (Bretherton & Munholland, 2008, p.103), whether parental or otherwise.In adolescence, the attachment focus shifts away from categorizing or dichotomizing attachment organization types and relationships, and towards the functions of attachment (Allen, 2008) such as trust/respect, unhappiness on separation, proximity-seeking and exploration from the secure base (Ainsworth, 1989).Allen characterizes a number of adolescent attachment ‘developmental transformations’. The changing relationship with the parent features heavily in these, as the young person transitions from a concern with the proximity of the attachment figure, to availability (Booth-Laforce et al., 2006), to growing independence and developing attachments outside the parent/carer relationship. Although we see an increase in peer attachment throughout the adolescent years, parental relationships continue to be important.The importance of peer relationships for adolescents cannot be underestimated (although 2014 work by Herres and Kobak amongst others has found that attachments with parents continue to be important throughout adolescence) and are associated with a number of positive and negative societal outcomes (Boykin McElhaney, Immele, Smith, & Allen, 2006). Boykin McElhaney et al. suggest that teenagers’ attachment types - in particular, types of insecurity - are linked to the ability to externalize, and whether or not the young person is engaged in delinquent activity. There is a small amount of research exploring technology and attachment (for example Amichai-Hamburger, 2002 on intergroup interactions online; Lee, 2013 on attachment style on social networking sites; Otway et al., 2014 on texting and security) this rarely focuses on adolescence. This study posits that technology could have a role to play in facilitating the kind of relationship identification and development that characterizes Allen’s functions described above.This freedom to explore outside parental relationships in more than logistical ways resonates particularly for young adolescents beginning to increase their levels of risk-taking in their online interactions (Livingstone, 2008), and is also correlated with attachment (Morsünbül, 2009; Richards, McGee, Williams, Welch, & Hancox, 2010). Peer attachment, while also correlated with good psychological health, is associated with more active participation in high risk behaviours (Carter et al., 2007).The study is rooted in an interpretive paradigm that draws on qualitative social psychology and the sociologies of adolescence and technology. A purposive sampling technique was used, specifying the following criteria:-femalewilling to speak freely with the researcherMidlands-basedaged between 8 and 18, but predominantly clustering around the 9–11 and 16–18 age rangesfrom a range of socio-economic backgrounds, ideally Groups B, G, H, L, M, P and Q (Acorn classification, CACI, 2014)high volume users of technology, meaning they used digital technological for more than one hour a day at the youngest age range, and more than three at the oldest age range.Two sibling groups were included in the sample to enable comparison between and within families. Twenty families were approached to participate via social and professional networks. Ten families were from urban environments, and ten from rural or semi-urban environments. Of these, fifteen families agreed to participate, with one family lost to attrition early in the process. Table 1provides more detail concerning the sample.A distinctive, but unanticipated characteristic of the sample is that most participants were living in a home with both parents. This may have significant implications for the nature of parental relationships, particularly in light of the methodological and interpretive limitations afforded by a small sample of this nature.Following ethical approval, a face-to-face conversation was held with the prospective participants and their primary parent or carer. The goals and processes of the project were described, and the disclosure protocol clearly outlined. Following the finding from our pilot study (Levine & Edwards, 2014), we were not concerned about introducing the key terms of the project to participants, as we found that the language of attachment can be an empowering and supportive tool for adolescent girls. By revisiting the data in several ways, the analytical approach was designed to ensure that instances where the project processes influenced the participants, this would be made explicit and acknowledged in the analysis.The overarching study comprised six exploratory tools delivered online to each participant, with each tool followed by an email exchange. These tools were called ‘interactions’ in order to emphasize the two-way nature of the process. Eight participants also agreed to an interview lasting between 30 and 60 min, depending on the participant age. In total, six methods were deployed during the study, of which four are relevant to the theme of attachment. For the purposes of this paper, the key tools providing data on technology-mediated attachment and relationships were:This method was based on the Twenty Statements Test (Kuhn & McPartland, 1954). It has been used in a large number of studies to investigate self-concept in relation to diverse topics such as gender (e.g. Grace and Kramer, 2002) and power (Kraus, Chen & Keltner, 2011). It was chosen because of its simplicity, and because it opened the data gathering with a focus firmly on the individual participant.Participants in this study were asked to complete the adapted version of the Twenty Statements Test (TST).11Available on Figshare at: http://figshare.com/articles/Adapted_Twenty_Statements_Test/1515892.As with most tools, there are limitations to the TST, primarily lack of stability across multiple completions, it is challenging to code across a large data set, and challenges in making comparisons between participants’ responses. This was not a large sample and making comparisons between participants at this stage was not necessary. The matter of lack of stability was addressed by including tools later in the data gathering that repeated similar or identical questions.This Interaction asked participants to complete an online questionnaire. The questionnaire was based on the Adolescent Attachment Questionnaire (AAQ) (West et al., 1998) and adapted during the pilot study (Levine & Edwards, 2014)22Available on Figshare at: http://figshare.com/articles/Adapted_AAQ/1515894.. This tool was chosen because it has been tested in the field (although not without challenge, particularly in a large sample setting) and is relatively easy to complete.The AAQ gathers data against three attachment-related parameters: ‘Angry Distress’, ‘Availability’ and ‘Goal-Corrected Partnership’. The Angry Distress scale measures levels of anger towards the parent. The Availability scale measures the extent to which the respondent believes that the attachment figure is available to them, and vice versa. The Goal-Corrected Partnership scale measures the extent to which the respondent reflects on others’ perspectives, differentiates those perspectives from their own, and works with others to construct the relationship. Each dimension contains three paired sets of questions.For the purposes of this project, the tool was adapted to include parameters for online and offline friendships, thereby providing a technological and non-technological comparator for each participant, as well as an insight into their relationships with each parent. For example, the opening Angry Distress question became four sub-questions:My mother only seems to notice me when I am angry.My father only seems to notice me when I am angry.My closest offline friend only seems to notice me when I am angry.My closest online friend only seems to notice me when I am angry.Each sub-question was rated on a five-point Likert-type scale. Goal-Corrected Partnership and Availability were reverse scored. Scores were combined to provide a sub-score for each dimension. The higher the score, the more likely it is that there is a non-secure attachment for the dimension (West et al., 1998; Levine & Edwards, 2014).The adapted AAQ was used in a more interpretive way than its original design might afford. It was not used to gather data across a large sample, or indeed used as a clinical or diagnostic tool, but rather as the beginning of an exchange about relationships with each participant, a source of discussion during the interview, and a way of looking at relationships in the analysis stage.Mental state stories were included in the study as part of an exploration of theory of mind/mentalizing within the over-arching social cognitive focus. It is perhaps indicative of the importance of human relationships in adolescent lives that findings relevant to the attachment theme emerged from this data gathering exercise. Happé’s original set of 24 Strange Stories (1994) was designed to test people with brain lesions and those with advanced ToM ability was adapted by White et al. (2009) to explore mismatches between findings relating to mental and physical states. This was not of relevance to the study reported here, but the format of the mental state stories (White et al., 2006, pp.1109–1111) provided a template for some new ‘Stories’ that were relevant to this study.The adapted version comprised three one-paragraph ‘Stories’, each of which included a technological feature. Each Story comprised a realistic, simple account of an event that explores the non-literal technology-mediated choices and behaviours we experience in everyday life. The Stories created for this study also explored issues such as lying, seeking sympathy and sensitive friendships, but each had a technology-mediated angle. Participant views on the technology angle as part of the original instrument was not explicitly included in order to see whether they would raise this as an issue spontaneously. The Stories created for this study were not intended to serve the diagnostic or neuroscientific purpose of the original set or more recent adaptations, but could usefully be tested in these contexts in the future.33Available on Figshare at http://figshare.com/articles/Mental_state_stories/1515895.There were significant limitations to using mental state stories in this study, not least the fact that using them in these qualitative ways is a new, untried approach. For this reason findings emerging from this tool should be viewed with a critical eye, and as suggestions for hypothesis and tool development rather than definitive statements of truth.The data gathering was completed with interviews with 8 participants in order to facilitate direct data gathering (Cohen, Manion and Morrison, 2007). A semi-structured approach was chosen in order to allow flexibility and enable the exploration of sensitive topics within the scope of the project. The schedule addressed participants’ sense of self and role attributes, personal priorities, affective responses and an exploration of conflict.44Available on Figshare at: http://figshare.com/articles/Interview_schedule/1515891.Participants were asked to use post-it notes to document any thoughts or feelings they had about technology use and their parents, friends, school, wider family, future and present self. They then prioritized the notes in three encased circles in decreasing importance.A three stage data analysis process was used for the findings reported here, comprising:1.Thematic analysis. This comprised axial coding of all data using the main conceptual themes of the study using NVIVO. ‘Theory led’ TA (Coolican, 2009) was largely employed, as the project drew on existing theories on attachment and adolescence. A more ‘inductive’ TA approach was used with reference to the technological element of the study. We intended that this balance would ensure that themes external to the main concepts would not be excluded in the analysis.Deeper exploration. During this stage two main activities took place. Firstly, line-by-line coding of all data, allowing codes and sub-codes to arise from the axial codes in Step 1 in order to provide a deeper insight to the participants contribution. Secondly, the survey data were analysed, and the coding arising from the qualitative data used to illuminate these findings. This stage was important for two primary reasons. Firstly, to ensure that the full range of data was captured and explored, and secondly to ensure that instanced where the data gathering process influenced participants’ beliefs or actions were captured.Increasing trustworthiness. Finally, in order to establish whether similar codes and themes emerged using alternative analysis techniques, we revisited all data using mindmapping and diagrammatic methods. We used these methods as they offered a fresh way into data we had pursued in the previous stages.In this section, we will share the key findings that emerged from the data.A considerable amount of data indicated that, for the majority of the participants, relationships with their families were very important. Fig. 1demonstrates that mothers were particularly important for the factors explored in the adapted AAQ.Participants’ use of technology plays a role in parental relationships. For some it is a manifestation of the support and safety they experience in their technology-mediated daily lives:IL12: [Mum] only goes on every so often just to check what I’m doing. I’m OK with that.CE10: Because it’ll help. Because, like, if she saw what I was doing, so if someone gave me a bit of trouble she could say things … so she would see what you were posting and that would be helpful.JL4: Yeah, it would sort of be like she’s keeping me safe. And if Dad was on there I’d probably have him too.IL12: I think we all trust Mum and Dad. And I think it is a bit of a deterrent - puts people off if they see your parents on there. (Sister triad interview, IL12, CE10 and JL4)For others it can be a source of mutual pleasure and connection.I like watching my mum over her shoulder when she plays her game [Candy Crush] … Sometimes I do say stuff while she’s playing, but lots of the time stuff is asking like ’What’s that thing?’ (HA7, interview)For some, it is a way of reaching out to more distant family. For example HA7 uses Skype to speak with her grandparents abroad every week, and for TR9, it was a way of ‘evoking memories’ of special family occasions.For others it is a source of minor confrontation.SS2: If we’re on the computer for ages, and Mum wants us to do something productive, because the kinds of things we go on aren’t very beneficial on the whole.FA1: I always use the argument that they do strengthen our relationships with friends, but it doesn’t seem to wash with Mum. Yes, it is more of a source of conflict.(Sister dyad interview, SS2, FA1)None of the participants reported the serious conflicts arising from technology use. Those participants who consider themselves gamers (e.g. TL5, HN11 or CE10) demonstrated an acceptance that their parents would intervene for positive reasons, rather than restrictive ones.There were some examples of securely attached participants drawing on parental support to resolve emotional conflicts and challenges. MR8 described a stage in which she was struggling to maintain distinctions between the online role play/fanfiction she was creating and her day-to-day experiences. She turned to her mother:And that’s when I talked to Mum. I can’t remember what she did. She kind of talked to me and helped me decipher what was real, what wasn’t real. I think it was mainly the talking that did help. (MR8, interview)Most of the participants claimed to have at least one friend with whom they communicated mainly online. The level of secure attachment they felt for those friends, as well as offline friends, is reflected in Fig. 2below. As with all of the figures, offered here, findings should not be considered scalable due to the sample size, the exceptionality of outliers such as HN11 and the additional factors of the sister groups.All of the participants spoke about technology being a means for keeping day-to-day connections with friends. Some participants reflected a more nuanced understanding of the role technology was playing in those seemingly trivial uses, for example through long group gaming sessions (EE3, interview).Some younger participants were using technology to explore difficult relationship moments in ways they may have perceived as ‘safe’, but that could be of concern to families or schools, for example TL5 during her interview said:… then we have a text fight … And sometimes we just, like, make up.DTL: Do you think the fact that you’re texting makes it different to the kind of argument you might have face-to-face, or not?TL5: Different, I think … I think it is more of a … it’s safer to have text fights, just because then no-one gets hurt physically. (TL5, interview)For two participants, their use of technology was mediating very important friendships. MR8 had developed an online writing partnership and deep friendship with E, an American girl, which at the time of writing had been going for six years. MR8 and E had begun their writing together on a fansite. Over time, they had connected on Skype, developed their own secure writing portal, and extended their fanfiction to a wider range of source material.Their friendship continued throughout this study, and was a source of continuing support and inspiration to MR8.Personally, I enjoy writing with E more than I enjoy writing on my own. The two of us are so in sync, and yet our characters can be completely unpredictable sometimes. Actually often. But E and I learn about our characters and each other’s characters together … As to whether writing collaboratively has made the characters more real … Yes, I think it has. For one, they are real and for two; if I wrote on my own, then only I would see them as real, but because I write with someone else, i can share the reality with her and she with me. (MR8, I4)For EE3, technology was facilitating an ongoing friendship with a school peer, M, who had had mental health problems, resulting in her becoming agoraphobic. EE3 had a regular weekly Skype conversation with M.… And it turned out I was the only one that kept in touch with her … We still do it. Set time, Monday 8 o’clock, because she likes to have things organized in her head … And there was a period of time where she didn’t go out the house for month … And I used to speak to her on Skype and we still do, as I say. I do remember her saying at one point ’you’re the only friend I’ve got’ which was quite a sad conversation. (EE3, interview)From an attachment theory perspective, EE3 was demonstrating availability to M that made her a secure base for her friend. As an early foray into attachments outside the home, this was an interesting example to explore. EE3 had to maintain boundaries by limiting the amount of time she was available to M, but maintained the regularity and sincerity of the Skype connection.I felt kind of special, in that she wanted to keep in touch with me, because there were points where I was like ’Do you want to actually talk?’ and she was like ’Yeah, yeah, yeah’. And I felt like I was needed in a way. And I didn’t mind that. (EE3, interview)As well as examples of technology-mediated online secure attachments, a number of the participants expressed a need to guard their privacy and to maintain high levels of control over with whom they interacted online. This is counter to cultural perceptions of adolescents as high risk takers who are careless. It suggests that these participants have a more nuanced view of the role of technology in their lives.… I’m fine saying hello to you in a corridor. I’m fine becoming friends with you, but because I’m NOT friends with you, I don’t see the point. I don’t want you to see what I am doing, and I don’t particularly want to see what you’re doing, so why have you added me? (EE3, interview)Participants’ completion of the mental state Stories Interaction (I4) showed a different perspective of their ideas about relationships and technology. Here, they demonstrated an understanding of technology as a way of amplifying the effects of normal human interactions.This appeared in three main themes. Firstly, in relation to lying:I think technology makes it easier for people to lie because sending a text to someone doesn’t show your emotions or what you’re actually thinking, its a way to hide behind your true thoughts. (CI6, I4)I think that technology makes it easier to lie because you can give yourself a different character. (JL4, I4)Secondly, in relation to emotional engagement with friends and family:But sending texts or being online with your friends means that often your friends cannot see that you are sad through your words, as you cannot see people’s facial expressions for example, she had to use something drastic to make people think that she is in need of comfort. (EE3, I4)Finally, in relation to fear of loss of friendship. There were no examples of this fear in relation to parents.Overall, there were no obvious age differences in the ways participants were approaching their parents, or online and offline friendships. This was reflected most clearly in the adapted AAQ (I3) data in Figs. 3 and 4below, and was also the case for the wider data set.This was surprising. The literature on adolescence and attachment identify a change throughout the period from parents as a secure base from which to develop increasingly important peer relationships. As such, we might have expected to see this change reflected in these data, with older participants describing friends in more securely attached terms than parents, and perhaps offline friends more securely attached than online friends. These data do not reflect such a change. This could be for a number of reasons:a)It is a function of this particular sample.The length of the adapted AAQ has resulted in more automated responses than carefully thought through ones.Participants’ mental models of parental relationships are so different from their mental models of friendships that they continue to see parents in the same light throughout the adolescent period, even though their friendships are becoming increasingly important.Age is a poor proxy for pubertal change and the changing relationships that come with it. Future research focusing on a single aspect of social cognition (such as attachment) could include robust and continuous measurements of pubertal change in order to explore this in more depth.In contrast to popular representations of adolescents as being in almost unceasing conflict with parents, this study suggests that secure attachments with parents are crucial throughout this stage. The questions were grouped in such a way as to maximise participants thinking of parents and friends in similar mental models (i.e. all questions relating to one concept were grouped together, covering mother, father, online and offline friendships in turn), but it is possible that the mental models of ‘parent’ and ‘friend’ are so different by this point that we cannot expect to see a simple shift from one to the other, as described in the literature. Rather, perhaps the ‘parent mental model’ continues to be important in a different way as the girl progresses to adulthood.Future research exploring this would be interesting, administering the adapted AAQ more than once to the same individuals over a longer period of time.If seeing no obvious progression from parent-focus to friend-focus across participants’ age was unexpected, the data relating to participants’ socio-economic circumstances and their friendships was even more surprising.Before discussing the relevant figure, it must be said that the Acorn categorisation applied to each participant was done so on the basis of the researcher’s knowledge of the family and visits to their home. This is a significant limitation in that it cannot be considered a truly robust assessment in that parents were not asked to complete any questionnaires or undergo any assessments that would provide a more accurate picture. This is because the project was not explicitly seeking to explore technology-mediated social cognition and relationships in light of socio-economic circumstance. Rather, a provisional measure of socio-economic circumstance was used to flag up any potential issues arising from the data and worthy of future exploration.Fig. 5suggests such a relationship between socio-economic circumstances and the strength of secure attachment to both online and offline friends. Those participants in more challenging socio-economic circumstances (although, importantly, not necessarily in less secure relationships with their parents) appear to be much less likely to have secure attachments with their friends. There was no similarly distinctive curve in terms of relationships with parents.The broader data gathered in the rest of the project suggested that this pattern could be explained by variations in the sample, rather than being descriptive of more general trends. For example both FA1 and SS2 considered themselves to be great friends as well as siblings. They also socialized largely amongst other church-going young people, who they saw on a regular basis. They may not have felt the need to seek friendships outside these spheres.I don’t think I would know half as many fellow Christadelphians as well as I do if it wasn’t for Facebook, but I do tend to hang around with one circle of friends specifically when it comes to my church and its youth weekends etc. & I do keep in close contact with them all the time. (SS2, I1)Equally, HN11 sees herself as introverted and struggles to create and sustain friendships. Her placing may be less to do with her socio-economic circumstances specifically and more to do with significant wider challenges in her life. Her technology use is an escape into a fantasy anime world, rather than a mechanism for seeking others with similar interests.I like being on my own rather than with other people … Not many people like me at school … I am really annoying … I talk to myself … People make fun of my name … I have frequent mood swings … I’m not sure why I like all of this [anime, manga, J-pop], maybe because it’s different? … Most people laugh at me because of this. And usually, because I don’t have any manga’s myself, I look at them online or I watch anime online. (HN11, I1)We then separated out the online and offline scores. Fig. 6shows the Acorn categorisation in relation to online friends attachment scores. Fig. 7shows the Acorn categorisation in relation to offline friend attachment scores.These figures suggest that sample variation is the most plausible explanation for the relationships observed, as variation in attachment to friends by socio-economic status does not relate to online friends, and does relate to online friends. This points away from technology rather than towards it.However, the curve in Fig. 5 is so obvious and distinctive that it should not be wholly dismissed; there are other explanations that address the socio-economic issues more explicitly. For example, young girls in higher socio-economic groups may access technology from a younger age (since parents are able to afford the purchases) and therefore be more likely to develop online friendships. Perhaps they are more likely to make friends from a wider circle if they are involved in extra-curricular groups or take overseas trips that many families cannot afford, necessitating online contact. Perhaps girls from more affluent socio-economic circumstances have more confidence in navigating their online worlds. Perhaps online spaces provide opportunities for developing more secure attachment for girls from more challenging socio-economic circumstances than are afforded by offline spaces. All of these possible explanations have implications for adolescent risk-taking and online behaviours that need to be explored in future research; this finding raises more questions than it answers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
