@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The delayed effect of treadmill desk usage on recall and attention

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Walking while working with the use of a treadmill desk has a beneficial delayed effect on attention and memory.Participants who walked perceived themselves to be more attentive.Neurophysiological measures demonstrated increased attention and memory after walking.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Treadmill desk,Cognition,HCI,EEG,Neurophysiology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The treadmill desk is a new human–computer interaction (HCI) setup intended to reduce the time workers spend sitting. As most workers will not choose to spend their entire workday walking, this study investigated the short-term delayed effect of treadmill desk usage. An experiment was conducted in which participants either sat or walked while they read a text and received emails. Afterward, all participants performed a task to evaluate their attention and memory. Behavioral, neurophysiological, and perceptual evidence showed that participants who walked had a short-term increase in memory and attention, indicating that the use of a treadmill desk has a delayed effect. These findings suggest that the treadmill desk, in addition to having health benefits for workers, can also be beneficial for businesses by enhancing workforce performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
“Sitting is the new smoking” (Merchant, 2013). Research shows that some fundamentally negative effects stem from sitting for long periods of time (Levine, 2010; Van der Ploeg, Chey, Korda, Banks, & Bauman, 2012), such as increased risk of heart disease, diabetes, and musculoskeletal pain (Duvivier et al., 2013; Hill & Peters, 1998; Højbjerre et al., 2010). It has also been shown that sitting is a risk factor for death. Compared to more active people, the all-cause mortality is increased by 15% for people who sit over 8h per day and by 40% for people who sit over 11h per day (van der Ploeg et al., 2012).Thus, researchers and manufacturers are trying to design new forms of human–computer interaction (HCI) devices that will help workers to sit less and remain healthy while still being productive. One proposed HCI device is the treadmill desk, invented in 1988 (Edelson & Danoff, 1989) but only manufactured commercially since 2007 (Levine & Miller, 2007). As Fig. 1shows, a treadmill is positioned underneath an elevated desk. A computer is placed upon this desk with its mouse and keyboard. Users walk at low speed with their arms resting on the armrests to stabilize themselves, enabling them to interact with the computer in a normal way. The ideal speed has been identified as 2.25km/h (Funk et al., 2012).While the health benefits of the treadmill desk are well established (Levine & Miller, 2007), other types of impact relating to this model of HCI remain unknown. Proponents of the device claim that it is a much healthier alternative to the traditional form of HCI (i.e., a regular computer desk) and can improve users’ health and well-being (Duvivier et al., 2013; Højbjerre et al., 2010; Koepp et al., 2013; Levine & Miller, 2007). Skeptics feel that, while it is a healthy alternative to the traditional desk, the downside is that it may create a context in which employees are not in optimal conditions to perform their work (John, Bassett, Thompson, Fairbrother, & Baldwin, 2009).To date, three studies have used psychometric tests to investigate cognitive processes during the use of a treadmill desk, including processing speed, attention, working memory, inhibition and spatial memory (Alderman, Olson, Mattina, Studies, & Brunswick, 2014; Commissaris et al., 2014; Kline, Poggensee, & Ferris, 2014). All of these studies found that walking while working had no impact on these cognitive processes, confirming the authors’ hypothesis that the treadmill desk has no deleterious effects. This does not, however, demonstrate the absence of possible benefits. Any benefits could simply be canceled out by the cognitive demands of the dual tasks of walking and cognitive evaluation tests. Oppezzo and Schwartz (2014) found that creativity was improved while walking, but that performance was diminished on a convergent thinking task that required more cognitive workload. According to Oppezzo, creativity is generally considered not to engage cognitive workload, and thus the related benefits might have been immune from being canceled out by dual-task demands.Interestingly, Oppezzo and Schwartz (2014) is the only study whose results suggest a residual effect of walking on creativity after the treadmill usage. This result calls for further investigation of the treadmill desk’s post-usage effect on subsequent tasks. Such research appears crucial, as more and more people will use this type of desk for short periods of time during a workday. Understanding the delayed effect might be even more important than understanding the concurrent effects. So far, no other studies have looked at the delayed effects of the use of a treadmill desk on key cognitive processes.In the present study, we investigate the presence of a short-term delayed effect after the use of a treadmill desk on two cognitive abilities that are important for work performance: Memory and attention. As so few studies have looked at the effects of slow-speed walking on cognition, we chose to investigate two cognitive abilities that have been shown to receive a delayed benefit from exercise (McMorris, Tomporowski, & Audiffren, 2009). We used behavioral, neurophysiological, and perceptual measures to develop a rich understanding of those effects. We hypothesized that the use of a treadmill desk would have a beneficial delayed effect on attention and memory.The research questions were addressed using a laboratory-based empirical study. Study participants engaged in a reading task while receiving emails. One group did this while walking at a treadmill desk, while the control group was in a traditional HCI setup and sat at a regular desk. After the reading assignment, both groups had to perform a memory and attentional task while seated. Fig. 2illustrates the experimental procedure.Participants’ memory performance on the reading task (i.e., task recall) was evaluated with a validated objective questionnaire (Leger et al., 2014). Self-report task attention scores were obtained using validated measurement scales (Kanfer & Ackerman, 1989). Electroencephalography (EEG) recordings were made during the recall task and questionnaire administration.Participants were students at local universities. There were 18 in total: 9 who performed the reading task while seated and 9 who performed it while walking at the treadmill desk. Seated participants who matched the walking participants for age (M=23, SD=3.97), gender (5 women, 4 men) and level of education (7 undergraduate students, 2 masters students) were chosen from a larger group of participants from a parallel study using the method advocated by Jafari, Hearne, and Churilov (2013). Participants had to be over 18 and have no known health issues. They received a $20 gift card after participating.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
