@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
How social is Twitter use? Affiliative tendency and communication competence as predictors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Affiliative tendency and communication competence jointly affect Twitter motivations.Those high on both are more likely to use Twitter for network expansion.Communication competence has no influence on relationship maintenance motivation.Network expansion motivation positively predicts the number of tweets and retweets.Surveillance motivation is positively associated with Twitter network size.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Affiliative tendency,Communication competence,Social enhancement,Twitter,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An online survey (N=461) investigated how individuals’ interpersonal need and ability affect their motivations of Twitter use and how different motivations predict specific usage behavior. Based on the two competing views concerning the antecedents and consequences of online communication (social enhancement vs. social compensation), the joint effect of affiliative tendency and communication competence was hypothesized. For those high on affiliative tendency, communication competence positively predicted Twitter use for network expansion and negatively predicted more self-focused, intrapersonal Twitter use, but no such effect was found for less affiliative individuals. Those using Twitter for surveillance spent more time on Twitter and maintained a larger Twitter network, while those using Twitter for network expansion posted tweets and retweeted others’ posts more frequently.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As has been the case with every ‘new’ medium, communication researchers have examined who uses various forms of social media, for what specific purposes, and with what consequences (e.g., Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007; Hargittai, 2008; Liu, Cheung, & Lee, 2010; Pollet, Roberts, & Dunbar, 2011; Wilson, Fornasier, & White, 2010). Given that the primary function of social network services (SNSs) is to enable individuals to create personal profiles and social connections and share them with others within their network (boyd & Ellison, 2007), it seems only natural that the lion’s share of research has been devoted to exploring how users’ dispositional characteristics that are typically associated with social interaction, such as extraversion, shyness, loneliness, communication anxiety, and self-esteem, might affect social media use and yield different outcomes (e.g., Correa, Hinsley, & de Zuniga, 2010; Orr et al., 2009; Ryan & Xenos, 2011).Such scholarly attempts to understand how individuals’ interpersonal orientations and psychological traits shape their SNS use have been grounded in one of the two competing perspectives concerning the relationship between online and offline communication, which well predate SNSs. On the one hand, the social enhancement model, or the rich-get-richer model, suggests that more socially active and competent individuals are more inclined to utilize SNSs to corroborate and expand their interpersonal network. Consistent with this view, studies have shown that extraversion positively predicts SNS use and SNS addictive tendencies (Correa et al., 2010; Wilson et al., 2010) and Facebook users tend to be more extraverted than nonusers (Ryan & Xenos, 2011). On the other hand, the social compensation model, also known as the poor-get-richer model, posits that those more socially inept and less satisfied with their current relationships are more strongly motivated to compensate for their deficiency by turning to online communication venues as a functional alternative to face-to-face interaction. In line with this reasoning, shyness was positively associated with the time spent on Facebook and favorability of attitudes toward Facebook (Orr et al., 2009), and those with lower self-esteem reported spending more time on Facebook than their high self-esteem counterparts (Kalpidou, Costin, & Morris, 2011).Although these contradictory findings seem puzzling at first glance, a closer inspection points to substantial differences between the two perspectives. First, the social enhancement model highlights the individual’s need (i.e., who is more or less eager to engage in social interactions) as a major determinant of SNS use, whereas the social compensation model underscores the individual’s ability (i.e., who is better or worse at performing social interactions smoothly). Second, the social enhancement model remains silent about the very nature of online interactions, assuming that it somehow contributes to building and strengthening one’s social network, whereas the social compensation model emphasizes the unique characteristics of computer-mediated communication (CMC), as compared to face-to-face interaction. Specifically, the social compensation model is predicated on the notion that CMC is less anxiety-provoking and less risky than face-to-face interaction due largely to anonymity and reduced social context cues, and thus, those who normally shy away from social interactions and struggle to make connections can develop close relationships with greater ease via CMC (Caplan, 2003; McKenna, Green, & Gleason, 2002).However, both models seem to portray an incomplete picture by focusing on either the user’s need or ability regarding social interactions. For example, shy people are more likely to struggle when making friends via face-to-face encounters (lack of ability), but they will not turn to SNSs to build social connections, unless they desire such connections (lack of motivation). Nonetheless, even when both the individual’s need and ability were considered as predictors of SNS use, their independent influences were assessed and compared against each other, thereby leading to the failure to uncover their joint effect. For example, in their attempts to evaluate the social enhancement hypothesis and the social compensation hypothesis in the context of Facebook use, Zywica and Danowski (2008) examined how sociability (extraversion) and self-esteem, each representing one’s desire for social contact and general confidence, account for online and offline popularity, but did not investigate their interaction systematically.To address this limitation, the current research set out to probe the combined effect of interpersonal need and ability on the motivations of social media use. In so doing, we focused on Twitter, the most popular microblogging service worldwide, and compared the socio-relational motivation that centers on building and maintaining interpersonal networks with less social motivations gravitated toward other purposes, such as acquisition of information, self-documentation, and entertainment. Although some researchers characterized Twitter as an informational medium, rather than a social network (Kwak, Lee, Park, & Moon, 2010), considering that users turn to Twitter for a variety of social purposes similar to the ones documented for other social media (e.g., Liu et al., 2010; Zhao & Rosson, 2009), it seems worthwhile to investigate how users’ interpersonal orientation and communication skills shape the specific goals they pursue on this fastest-growing social platform. By examining how such motivations predict different usage patterns, we aimed to elucidate how Twitter is integrated into people’s everyday communication experiences.Although feeling connected to other people is considered a “fundamental human motivation” (Baumeister & Leary, 1995, p. 497), that does not mean that all people are equally motivated to engage in social interactions. Defined as “generalized positive expectations in social relationships,” (Mehrabian, 1994, p. 98) affiliative tendency is positively associated with preference for attachments (vs. independence) and group activities (vs. individual activities). As such, more affiliative individuals make greater efforts to affiliate with others and are more willing to talk to strangers (Miller, Rossbach, & Munson, 1981). In the sense that people would not use Twitter, or any other communication platforms for that matter, to build and sustain interpersonal networks unless they so desire, it seems reasonable to consider affiliative tendency as a motivational prerequisite for socio-relational Twitter use.Although it was conceptualized as gratifications obtained, rather than gratifications sought, Chen (2011) reported that Twitter use positively predicted the extent to which individuals gratify their intrinsic need to form relationships with other people via various communicative features, suggesting that Twitter use is driven by the need for social contact. Similarly, Chiu and Huang (2014) argued that “people may use an SNS to gratify their desire to affiliate with others” (p. 16) and recommended that future research should divide the need for affiliation into four sub-constructs (positive stimulation, attention, emotional support, and social comparison) and examine how each motivation is associated with SNS use. In addition, the findings that (a) students with higher levels of loneliness had more Facebook friends, presumably to compensate for their lack of offline relationships (Skues, Williams, & Wise, 2012), and that (b) those with stronger interdependent self-construal, characterized by greater concern about their relationships with others and their surroundings, reported stronger social motivations of Facebook use as well as greater satisfaction with the service (Kim, Kim, & Nam, 2010) seem to support this notion of need-driven SNS use.However, need alone is not likely to trigger Twitter-mediated social interaction. In earlier CMC research, by virtue of (perceived) anonymity and greater control over self-presentation, those with higher communication apprehension and social anxiety were considered to find online communication to be easier, safer, and more appealing than face-to-face interaction (Caplan, 2003) and become more willing to reveal their true self to their online friends (McKenna et al., 2002). By contrast, most Twitter users choose to reveal their identity and share a large amount of personal information in this public space. Moreover, if the primary reason for SNS use is to maintain existing ties, rather than to create new ones (Chen & Marcus, 2012; Kujath, 2011; see Brandtzaeg & Heim, 2009 for a different view), the notion of anonymity seems rather irrelevant in explaining Twitter use. Considering that Twitter messages (i.e., tweets) are often broadcast to a much larger audience than the communicator originally intended, even without his or her knowing it, it seems more appropriate to think of tweets as public announcements, rather than private conversations.If enhanced comfort and intimacy of CMC stems mostly from anonymity and a reduced sense of the public nature of interaction (i.e., dyadic boundary; McKenna et al., 2002), SNSs do not seem to have the advantages provided by earlier CMC systems, challenging the key assumption of the social compensation model. Rather, socially inept individuals may still find it difficult to build connections and expand their personal network on Twitter, and thus be less prone to use Twitter for relational purposes, compared to those confident about their communication skills. In line with this reasoning, Ledbetter et al. (2011) have found that individuals’ attitudes toward online self-disclosure, measured by the extent to which they feel more comfortable with online than offline self-disclosure (e.g., “I feel less shy when I am communicating online,” p. 37), inversely predicted the frequency of Facebook communication, suggesting that SNSs do not offer a low-risk communication environment. Similarly, in their investigation of how sociability and self-esteem affect popularity on Facebook, Zywica and Danowski (2008) acknowledge that “communication skills are particularly important in this pursuit” (p. 23) of enhanced self-image and popularity.If the ability to carry out face-to-face interactions smoothly transfers to SNS-based communication, with more competent individuals being more prone to use SNSs for relational purposes than less competent ones, such a difference will be more evident among those higher in affiliative tendency, because people will try to make friends, online or otherwise, only if they are so inclined. Alternatively, even if an individual has a strong affiliative tendency, he or she will turn to SNSs for interpersonal connections, only when confident about his or her ability to perform such actions. In fact, those with more positive attitudes toward online social connections were more likely to use Facebook communication, but such a relationship disappeared among those who feel more comfortable about online than offline self-disclosure (Ledbetter et al., 2011). Although the authors interpreted the findings on account of impression management, given that greater comfort with online than offline self-disclosure reflects social anxiety in face-to-face interaction, an alternative interpretation would be that high social anxiety suppresses the effect of the desire for social affiliation on socio-relational SNS use.If the lack of communication competence hinders Twitter use for interpersonal purposes, however, such inhibitory effect is more likely in the interactions with previously unacquainted others, as opposed to those with close friends and family members the person already feels comfortable with. In fact, although they focused on gratifications obtained, rather than gratifications sought, Zhang, Tang, and Leung (2011) reported network maintenance and network extension as distinct gratifications from Facebook use. What is more, those with higher levels of “anxiety about social situations and fear of negative peer evaluation and embarrassment” (p. 291) were more likely than their low-anxiety counterparts to engage in Facebook-mediated interaction with their friends, but they did not show the corresponding tendency with their acquaintances (Courtois, All, & Vanwynsberghe, 2012), suggesting that social anxiety does not hinder SNS interaction with close others.H1: Affiliative tendency positively predicts socio-relational Twitter use, but such relationship is more likely to be found among those high (vs. low) on communication competence.H2: The joint effect of affiliative tendency and communication competence (H1) is more pronounced for the network expansion motivation, rather than the relationship maintenance motivation.Although the current study is primarily concerned with the socio-relational use of Twitter, a recent study has also found that sociability, a tendency to enjoy social interactions and being the center of attention, not only positively predicted social use of Twitter, but was also negatively associated with informational Twitter use (Hughes, Rowe, Batey, & Lee, 2012). Given that sociability and affiliative tendency have conceptual overlap and that information-seeking is one of the commonly found motivations of SNS use (Hunt, Atkin, & Krishnan, 2012; Kim, Sohn, & Choi, 2011; Liu et al., 2010), it seems important to expand the scope of inquiry to include the surveillance motivation for a more comprehensive understanding of how users’ interpersonal orientations and communication skills shape their Twitter use. Consistent with this view, Wang and Zhu (2012) dichotomized the motives of Sina Weibo – a Chinese microblog – use into social (e.g., to keep in touch with others, to make friends, to share life experiences) and media (e.g., to get news fast, to follow one’s favorite celebrity, to collect information) motives, and found that only media satisfaction was positively associated with the usage amount, highlighting the divergent roles of each motivation.Although the previous research tends to contrast relational SNS use with an informational one, more internally oriented and self-focused Twitter use, such as self-documentation and diversion (Shim & Hwang, 2010), can also be positioned at the opposite end on the intrapersonal–interpersonal continuum. In their investigation on what prompts voluntary self-disclosure on Facebook, Waters and Ackerman (2011) found that relational development is only one of the goals people pursue through self-disclosure on Facebook and identified more self-focused motivations, including information storage. Similarly, Good (2013) argues that social media serve two primary functions, social and archival, and suggests that we need to “update our understanding of sites like Facebook as not only arenas of social activity, but also as expanding archives of personal artifacts” (p. 560). In keeping with media system dependency theory, Chiu and Huang (2014) classified individuals’ motivations of SNS use à la three different goals – understanding, orientation, play – and further divided each into personal and social dimensions, which roughly correspond to the intrapersonal and interpersonal division as employed in the current research. Yet, with the vast majority of SNS research emphasizing interpersonal motivations of SNS use, little is known about more inward-oriented, self-focused SNS use, such as what user characteristics prompt such a motivation and how it shapes the ways in which people use the service. By including the intrapersonal motive of Twitter use, along with informational and interpersonal motivations, this study aimed to fill this gap in the literature.RQ1: How do individuals’ affiliative tendency and communication competence predict Twitter use for surveillance and intrapersonal purposes?Lastly, the present study examined the links between motivations and specific usage patterns. Whether they are grounded in the social enhancement model or the social compensation model, previous studies have focused mostly on the relationships between personality traits or other dispositional variables and the intensity of SNS use (e.g., Correa et al., 2010; Kalpidou et al., 2011; Orr et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2010). When the researchers examined the motivations of SNS use, their primary goals were either to create an exhaustive list of reasons why people use SNSs (e.g., Brandtzaeg & Heim, 2009; Kim et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2010; Shim & Hwang, 2010) or to predict motivations of SNS use from different user characteristics (e.g., Hughes et al., 2012). A notable exception is Smock, Ellison, Lampe, and Wohn (2011) study, which differentiated between general use (i.e., the time spent on Facebook) and feature use (e.g., status updates, comments, Wall posts, groups) and showed that motivations of Facebook use predict each in a divergent manner. For example, the motive of habitual pastime was positively associated with the frequency of writing Wall posts, but was not significantly related to the time spent on Facebook. Moreover, the motive of expressive information sharing positively predicted the frequency of status updates and groups, but was negatively associated with general use. Likewise, Chen (2011) also reported that the number of tweets and the frequency of @replies (i.e., sending a message to another user in a way visible to other users) significantly predicted the extent to which Twitter users experienced gratifications of the need to connect with others, whereas the hours per week on Twitter did not. Therefore, on top of the overall amount of Twitter use, more specific usage behaviors, such as the number of posts (tweets) and the frequency of relaying others’ posts (retweets), were also measured, and their relationships with the motivations of Twitter use were examined.RQ2: How do people use Twitter differently depending on their motivations of use?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
