@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Personality and location-based social networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate personality and use of location based social networks.We examine the five-factor personality model against places that users check-in at.Conscientiousness positively correlates with the number of venues visited.Openness positively correlates with check-ins at both sociable and popular venues.Neuroticism negatively correlates with the number of sociable venues visited.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social network,Location-based social network,Personality,Foursquare,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Location-based social networks (LBSNs) are a recent phenomenon for sharing a presence at everyday locations with others and have the potential to give new insights into human behaviour. To date, due to barriers in data collection, there has been little research into how our personality relates to the categories of place that we visit. Using the Foursquare LBSN, we have released a web-based participatory application that examines the personality characteristics and checkin behaviour of volunteer Foursquare users. Over a four-month period, we examine the behaviour and the “Big Five” personality traits of 174 anonymous users who had collectively checked in 487,396 times at 119,746 venues. Significant correlations are found for Conscientiousness, Openness and Neuroticism. In contrast to some previous findings about online social networks, Conscientiousness is positively correlated with LBSN usage. Openness correlates mainly with location-based variables (average distance between venues visited, venue popularity, number of checkins at sociable venues). For Neuroticism, further negative correlations are found (number of venues visited, number of sociable venues visited). No correlations are found for the other personality traits, which is surprising for Extroversion. The study concludes that personality traits help to explain individual differences in LBSN usage and the type of places visited.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The patterns that emerge through collective human mobility behaviour are now understood for wide ranging and important applications (Song, Qu, Blumm, & Barabási, 2010). As well as identifying inherently similar personal travel patterns and interactions (Gonzalez, Hidalgo, & Barabasi, 2008), mobility has also been studied at the individual level (Williams, Whitaker, & Allen, 2012). However, the conclusions of these studies are primarily structural in nature. While they extract the patterns of where people go and when they go there, along with the groups that result, these studies do not address how individual differences in activity may correspond to personal characteristics. Characterisation of individual mobility behaviour, extending to the types of location visited and characteristics of the user, has until recently, been unachievable. Now, through the use of smartphones (Whitaker, Chorley, & Allen, 2015) we are able to examine data from location-based social networking applications that log a presence at a physical location, that is shared with others in real-time. Given the freedom that humans have in exercising choice over their activity, it is possible that personal character and disposition are important drivers for the places that people choose to visit.Currently, relatively little is known about the relationship between human mobility and personality. In this area, Wang and Stefanone (2013) examined the personality characteristics that lead individuals to share their location-based checkins with other Facebook users. This study considered how frequently users decided to checkin, based on self-reported data. However, it is possible that personality characteristics also relate to an individual’s choice of places to visit. To explore this, we use Foursquare,1http://www.foursquare.com.1a location-based social network,2Foursquare have recently reorganised their business model and check-ins are now made through a dedicated application called Swarm: http://www.swarmapp.com.2to examine the relationship between the types of location visited and the personality profile of the user. Using a new web-based participatory tool developed for this purpose, over a four month period we collected data on the personality characteristics and behaviour of 174 anonymous users of the Foursquare smartphone application, who collectively checked-in at 119,746 street-level locations a total of 487,396 times. This novel approach allows the first examination of human mobility behaviour at street level, in relation to human personality.Examples of location-based social networks (LBSNs) include Facebook, Foursquare and Google+. These services operate through location-aware smartphones, with users explicitly recording their presence at a location via an application. This action is a ‘checkin’, which is a message shared via a dedicated social network in near-real time. In a LBSN the geographical location of a user is normally represented as a venue, being a meaningful place at street level, for example a shop, park, or building. From massive user participation, taxonomies of venues have grown and have become widespread for urban areas throughout the developed world.For this study we use Foursquare, which has become the most popular dedicated LBSN, reaching 50 million users in 2014.3Source: statista.com.3Besides popularity, a major advantage of Foursquare is its focused functionality; unlike Google+ and Facebook, Foursquare only offers location-based services, hence users are not distracted by other communication. Locations in Foursquare can be defined anywhere by anyone, and are categorised under a hierarchical taxonomy with nine high level categories covering (at the time of data analysis) approximately 663 lower level categories. Consequently LBSNs provide a convenient means to investigate the characteristics of individual users and the places where they choose to record a visit.The dedicated LBSN provided by Foursquare makes an interesting comparison to Facebook and Twitter. Facebook is a highly popular social network service and in 2014, it exceeded 1.35 billion users.3The service enables users to curate an online representation of themselves through the information they choose to reveal on their profile, the content and comments they share as personal updates, and the communication their content receives from their ‘friends’. The user has a degree of control over the extent to which others can view their profile. Online social interaction is a dominant feature of Facebook, allowing users to connect and communicate online. Commenting on and ‘liking’ of status updates, uploaded photos, and shared content is commonplace, along with the sending of public and private messages between users. Since 2010 it has been possible to share a physical location with a status update in Facebook. However this is not the main focus of the Facebook service, which is geared towards facilitating online social interaction.The primary focus of Twitter is communication, sharing and consuming content in the briefest of forms, using micro-blog updates (called tweets) limited to a total of 140 characters in length. Twitter is also highly popular, reaching 300 million users in 2014.3Tweets are broadcast to a user’s ‘followers’, and this builds up a network structure. Users can republish content that they receive on their time line (called a retweet), which leads to content propagation (Webberley, Allen, & Whitaker, 2011). Along with knowledge of the follower, the retweet count represents useful meta-data (Chorley, Colombo, Allen, & Whitaker, 2015) that influences the selection of content for consumption. Twitter provides the opportunity to create an online persona through tweets, the numbers of followers and their response to content through replies and retweets. As with Facebook, Twitter provides a means to append tweets with a location, which can add further context. In contrast to Facebook, fewer opportunities are provided for social interaction through this network.While both Twitter and Facebook provide a means for communicating and sharing content online, the LBSN provided by Foursquare is focused on associating individuals with places through checkins and broadcasting these to friends in the online network. Although opportunities for communication are provided, these are more limited than in either Facebook or Twitter, and are focused around the checkin events; there is no method of communication between users other than comments or ‘likes’ on checkins. Users may represent themselves by the places they check into, and by the tips or photographs they leave at venues. Unlike Twitter and Facebook, user representations do not stem from what messages they post to the service, or from what content they share, but primarily from which physical places they checkin at.Arguably, personality traits are deep and natural human characteristics (Passini & Norman, 1966). These represent the persistent disposition of an individual, capturing how a person may approach and respond to wide-ranging situations throughout their lives. Traits theorists argue that these predispositions may influence behaviour, and personality traits have been demonstrated as influential for wide-ranging aspects of human activity, including consumer marketing (Odekerken-Schröder, De Wulf, & Schumacher, 2003), student behaviour (Greenberger, Lessard, Chen, & Farruggia, 2008), performance at work (Barrick & Mount, 1991), musical taste (Rentfrow & Gosling, 2003), leadership of change (Judge & Bono, 2000), travel behaviour and residence decisions (Prevedouros, 1992) and smoking (Terracciano & Costa, 2004).Concerning technology, dimensions of personality have been shown to be correlated with a number of activities including: computer self-efficacy (Saleem, Beaudry, & Croteau, 2011), mobile phone use (Butt & Phillips, 2008; de Montjoye, Quoidbach, Robic, & Pentland, 2013), social network activity for Twitter (Golbeck, Robles, Edmondson, & Turner, 2011; Quercia, Kosinski, Stillwell, & Crowcroft, 2011), online (rather than location-based) Facebook usage (Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky, 2010a; Correa, Hinsley, & De Zuniga, 2010; Quercia, Lambiotte, & Stillwell, 2012), media consumption (Cantador, Fernández-Tobías, Bellogín, Kosinski, & Stillwell, 2013) and wider Internet activity (Hamburger & Ben-Artzi, 2000; Landers & Lounsbury, 2006).Work on the types of scenario in which personal activity is congruent to personality traits (Sherman, Nave, & Funder, 2012) highlights scenarios with features including: freedom from structure, lack of behavioural expectations, autonomy, self-expression, opportunity to engage competencies and support for relations to others. This characterises the freedom in the decision making for many day-to-day activities, such as in consumer related and social scenarios. Although there has been some ongoing debate (Block, 2001), there has been a general convergence on the use of a five-factor model (Goldberg, 1990) that assesses personality in terms of Openness, Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, Extraversion and Neuroticism.Openness encompasses traits such as originality, curiosity, spontaneity and imagination. High levels of Openness may indicate an artistic nature, with a desire to increase the breadth and depth of ideas, views and experiences encountered. Low Openness may tend to indicate a more conservative or conventional attitude. Conscientiousness relates to characteristics such as organisation, resourcefulness, diligence and perseverance. A high score in Conscientiousness can indicate a focused and organised approach to everyday activity. Extraversion is associated with sociability, assertiveness, being outgoing and seeking interactions with others. High scorers tend to be very sociable with large groups of people, while low scorers are more likely to be more reserved and introverted. Agreeableness relates to cooperative, courteous and empathetic behaviours that are trusting and avoid conflict. Neuroticism relates to impulsiveness and emotional instability, also covering negative emotional expression. Neuroticism scores are high in those prone to experiencing stress, worry and sensitivity to threats.Consistent with other work, to quantify personality we use the dimensions of the five factor model (Gosling, Rentfrow, & Swann, 2003) assessed through a questionnaire. The shorter instrument presented by Gosling et al. (2003) assists in data collection when participants are unsupervised, such as for Internet-based scenarios.Compared to other online social networks, LBSNs have added a spatial dimension, allowing an individual’s mobility to be observed by their network neighbours. Rather than technology mediating discussion about places (Goodings, Locke, & Brown, 2007), the user is immersed in the physical environment and checkins act to signal a presence and persona online (Sutko & e Silva, 2011). This signalling process goes beyond a grid reference statement of location (Humphreys, 2012), revealing some of the place-identities that an individual is exposed to (Proshansky, Fabian, & Kaminoff, 1983) and chooses to expose to others (Wang & Stefanone, 2013; Whitaker et al., 2015). Although there have been developments towards a social psychology of place (Stedman, 2002), the role of LBSNs in this field is at a very early stage (Schwartz & Halegoua, 2014).In Section 2.1 we introduce the LBSN variables observed in this study. In Sections 2.2–2.6 we consider user personality and online social networks. We also consider why the LBSN variables have potential relationships with an individual’s personality.We investigate whether the traits embedded through personality correlate with an individual’s choice of venues, as revealed through participation in the LBSN. Reflecting the hybrid nature of LBSN, the variables we consider are location-based and social. For a given LBSN user, the variables we study are:•number of checkins;number of distinct venues visited;diversity of checkins;diversity of venues visited;number of checkins at sociable venues;number of sociable venues visited;average popularity of venues visited.Location-based variables (number of distinct venues visited, diversity of checkins, diversity of venues visited, number of sociable venues visited, average popularity of venues visited) reflect the characteristics of a place, venue categorisation or spatial distance. The social variables (number of checkins, number of checkins at sociable venues, number of sociable venues visited, number of distinct venues visited) reflect online sharing of knowledge with others through checkins, or being in a location that is affiliated with socialising. Number of distinct venues visited and number of sociable venues visited are both location-based and social variables.These variables capture user interaction with LBSNs and potential individual differences. The number of checkins reflects the overall intensity of usage, which can be influenced by a user’s diligence and the importance an individual user places on maintaining a social presence through the LBSN. The number of distinct venues visited also reflects this, but additionally provides insight into the variety of places visited between Foursquare categories. In measuring checkin diversity we assess the checkins a user makes across each of the Foursquare categories of place. We characterise this using the Shannon diversity index (Section 4.3) which we apply to identify the diversity of checkins and diversity of venues visited. The breadth of types of place visited is a function of the choices people make. These are based on functional needs and an individual’s disposition, which are likely to vary considerably between individuals. We also assess checkin diversity on a spatial basis, assessing the average distance between venues at which checkins are made. This measure also has relevance to assessment of venue popularity. To consider the number of checkins at sociable venues and number of sociable venues visited, we classified Foursquare venues on their sociability by crowdsourcing opinion on Foursquare categories of place (Section 4.4). These sociability variables are measured by the extent to which an individual prioritises checking into places one would expect to visit with friends to socialise or engage in activities together. Therefore these variables are influenced by individual differences in how people engage with others.Finally, to assess average popularity of venues visited, we consider ‘tips’, ‘likes’, checkins at venues and the average distanced between venues. A ‘tip’ in a LBSN represents a comment on a venue, made for others to see. A ‘like’ is a binary flag that is a quick way of expressing positive sentiment about a location, without posting a tip. We can consider the average popularity of venues visited from the perspective of a given user j in five ways:•average check-in popularity: a weighted average of the total number of checkins made by all Foursquare users at the venues that have been visited by user j;average number of venue visitors: a weighted average of the total number of all Foursquare users checking in at the venues that have been visited by user j;average ‘tip’ popularity: a weighted average of the total number of ‘tips’ left by all Foursquare users at the venues that have been visited by user j;average ‘like’ popularity: a weighted average of the total number of ‘likes’ left by all Foursquare users at the venues that have been visited by user j.average distance travelled: the average distance between all pairs of venues that have been visited by user j;To calculate these averages, letcibe the total number of checkins made by all Foursquare users at venue i, and letVjbe the total set of venues j visits. Letpijbe the proportion of checkins user j makes at venue i. Then the average check-in popularity for user j is defined as∑i∈Vjpijci. Average number of venue visitors, average ‘tip’ popularity and average ‘like’ popularity are defined similarly. We also assess popularity in terms of the distance a user travels to visit a venue, calculating the average distance between venues across all venue pairs visited by a user.As many of the experimental variables are closely related, we identify the extent of correlations between them, as presented in Table 1. Diversity of checkins holds the greatest number of significant correlations with others. For number of checkins and number of venues, weak negative correlations are held with the popularity-based variables. For number of checkins these are mostly insignificant correlations. Beyond the popularity variables, the number of checkins and number of distinct venues visited hold moderate to strong significant correlations with the other LBSN variables. The popularity-based variables, with the exception of distance travelled, are strongly correlated with each other at a significant level. The popularity-based variables hold mostly weak correlations with all other variables.Online social networks have inherent properties of Openness. For example, Correa et al. (2010) show correlation with the use of social networks for interaction on the web. Concerning Facebook content, Moore and McElroy (2012) considered posts and regret as predictors, but these did not perform well. In a further study of personality traits associated with Facebook use, Ross et al. (2009a) found that Openness did not necessarily translate to high levels of computer mediated communication knowledge. However in contrast, Amichai-Hamburger and Vinitzky (2010b) correlated this with a wider use of Facebook features. Further research with a student focus (Skues, Williams, & Wise, 2012) also found that individuals with high Openness interact through Facebook to discuss wide-ranging interests. McKinney, Kelly, and Duran (2012) considered narcissism among college students using Facebook and Twitter, with higher levels of narcissism being associated with larger numbers of Facebook friends and with the number of self-centric Tweets.As Openness captures curiosity and breadth of experience, this trait may be captured in the variables concerning check-in diversity. High Openness individuals could be expected to visit a relatively wide range of venues, consistent with a broader range of checkin categories, and these venues may be more geographically diverse. The number of distinct venues visited may not represent Openness well, because this does not necessarily capture the breadth of venue type. For example, it is possible to check into a large number of distinct venues providing a similar experience or function. Conversely checking into a relatively small number of venues in diverse categories could be explained by significant user curiosity. In addition, high Openness individuals may be positively disposed to using LBSN, and expressing their diverse presence without reservation.There has been relatively little consideration of Conscientiousness in terms of social network use. Ross et al. (2009a) found that there was little evidence to support social networks acting as an unwelcome distraction for individuals scoring highly on Conscientiousness. Contrary to this, Ryan and Xenos (2011) identified that Conscientiousness was correlated with less time using online social networks. Amichai-Hamburger and Vinitzky (2010b) identified that Conscientiousness is positively correlated with a higher number of friends and uploading less content. Hughes, Rowe, Batey, and Lee (2012) examined Conscientiousness and usage of Twitter and Facebook. For social use, a significant negative correlation was found between Twitter usage and Conscientiousness. In terms of the type of content and how social media is used, Moore and McElroy (2012) found that people with high levels of Conscientiousness made a significantly lower number of Facebook wall postings, both about themselves or others, and expressed more regret than their less conscientious counterparts. No relationship was found concerning this trait and frequency of usage, numbers of friends or numbers of photos.In terms of LBSN usage, Conscientiousness has potential correlation with the variables related to volume of activity, since these are influenced by the characteristics of diligence and persistence. The act of performing a checkin requires a degree of discipline to regularly access a mobile platform in situation, which is similar to regular online social network usage through smartphones. We consider that a LBSN checkin has a weak alignment with procrastination, as studied by Butt and Phillips (2008), since although the LBSN has a social dimension, it is not primarily a dialogue-based communication system. However use of LBSNs could be seen as exhibitionist. It could also be a distraction from the immediate physical environment and higher priority tasks, resulting in less engagement from highly conscientious individuals. This leads us to consider whether the number of checkins is negatively correlated with Conscientiousness, as found for social Twitter usage by Hughes et al. (2012). The extent to which this is true may indicate how participants view LBSN participation in terms of its cognitive burden.Extraversion is a dominant trait related to online social network usage that seems to cause two effects. Introverts may well gain advantage from interaction through online social networks because they can interface with others without direct interaction, thus removing the need for the same level of interpersonal skill, referred to as “social compensation” (Zywica & Danowski, 2008). Such users strive to gain popularity through Facebook and this has been evidenced in a range of settings such as those identified by Moore and McElroy (2012). Equally, users with high levels of extroversion and offline popularity have been identified as having high levels of Facebook activity and friendship (Wehrli, 2008), which one may naturally expect. In terms of exposing checkins through a social network, Wang and Stefanone (2013) found that Extraversion did not necessarily directly impact on location-based checkin intensity for Facebook, but it did contribute to exhibitionism and the ‘presentation of self’ (Zhao, Grasmuck, & Martin, 2008).Given that Extraversion is linked with sociability and seeking interactions with others, the number of check-ins at sociable venues is an important variable to consider. As with online social networks, it is possible that social compensation could occur for introverts, through selective checkins at venues that are more likely to convey an image of outgoing activity. However, from the physical nature of LBSNs, it is anticipated that the genuine characteristics of extraverts could take precedence, who naturally may seek to checkin and regularly display their presence at sociable venues.There is noticeably less research on the role of Agreeableness, where some authors have found no relationship with online social network usage (e.g., Amichai-Hamburger & Vinitzky (2010b)), in contrast to others who identify this with more general recreational Internet activity (Swickert, Hittner, Harris, & Herring, 2002). Ross et al. (2009a) postulated that high levels of Agreeableness could result in forming and sustaining larger social networks, but their results did not offer evidence to support this. Beyond social structures, Agreeableness has more relevance to the content that people choose to display online. Moore and McElroy (2012) showed that agreeable people expressed greater levels of regret about inappropriate content that they may have posted on Facebook. People with higher levels of Agreeableness made a greater number of postings about themselves as compared to less agreeable individuals.In terms of LBSNs, Agreeableness may be reflected in variables characterising location as a function of how tolerant an individual is in visiting unpopular venues. This assumes that the popularity measures of ‘tips’ and ‘likes’ capture the potential for venues to meet user’s expectations. In contrast, individuals with low levels of Agreeableness may be less likely to tolerate and repeat visits to these venues, assuming that such individuals have a higher propensity to challenge and respond to a situation through behaviour change.Individuals with high Neuroticism scores use the Internet to mitigate loneliness and facilitate a sense of inclusion (Butt & Phillips, 2008). Evidence has also been found that high Neuroticism leads to high likelihood of communication through the Internet (Wolfradt & Doll, 2001) when the individual is also socially disposed. For social networking and Neuroticism, positive correlation has been found with time spent on Facebook (Ryan & Xenos, 2011), with a slightly weaker correlation present for time spent socialising (as opposed to information seeking). Moore and McElroy (2012) showed that emotional stability was not significantly related to actual number of friends or photos in Facebook. Unexpectedly emotional instability was positively related to frequency of Facebook use to maintain relationships. However there is evidence from Hughes et al. (2012) that the type of social network is highly influential, where highly neurotic Twitter users were not correlated with its use to alleviate loneliness. Also of interest is that high Neuroticism has been linked to greater accuracy in the display of information on social networking profiles (Amichai-Hamburger, Wainapel, & Fox, 2002) which is possibly a mechanism by which social anxiety is suppressed.There are mixed findings on Neuroticism from online social networking studies. Compared to online social networks, LBSNs expose day-to-day physical activities. In particular, LBSNs allow others to observe ones own behaviour in a physical context, and this may make highly neurotic users susceptible to anxiety and negative emotions. Consequently there is a basis to investigate whether high levels of Neuroticism correlate with lower overall LBSN activity, such as numbers of checkins. This is contrary to the recent findings associated with Facebook and reflects the different form of social networking in Foursquare, which has more limited scope for dialogue.Based on the existing literature and observations on the characteristics of LBSNs (Sections 2.2–2.6), we formulate the following hypotheses:H1 Openness is positively correlated with checkin diversity;H2 Conscientiousness is negatively correlated with number of checkins;H3 Extraversion is positively correlated with number of checkins at sociable venues;H4 Agreeableness is negatively correlated with number of checkins at relatively popular venues;H5 Neuroticism is negatively correlated with number of checkins.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
