@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ambient awareness: From random noise to digital closeness in online social networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ambient awareness: Browsing social media enhances familiarity with online networks.In 2 surveys, we provide evidence for ambient awareness among Twitter users.Frequent users experienced higher ambient awareness.Ambient awareness was reflected in knowledge of various domains, such as expertise.Ambient awareness was associated with perceptions of approachability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ambient awareness,Social presence,Impression formation,Social media,Social capital,Twitter,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ambient awareness refers to the awareness social media users develop of their online network in result of being constantly exposed to social information, such as microblogging updates. Although each individual bit of information can seem like random noise, their incessant reception can amass to a coherent representation of social others. Despite its growing popularity and important implications for social media research, ambient awareness on public social media has not been studied empirically. We provide evidence for the occurrence of ambient awareness and examine key questions related to its content and functions. A diverse sample of participants reported experiencing awareness, both as a general feeling towards their network as a whole, and as knowledge of individual members of the network, whom they had not met in real life. Our results indicate that ambient awareness can develop peripherally, from fragmented information and in the relative absence of extensive one-to-one communication. We report the effects of demographics, media use, and network variables and discuss the implications of ambient awareness for relational and informational processes online.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
“What is happening right now?” is a question social media and networking sites constantly ask their users. The typically brief answers are then broadcasted to large audiences, often a person's entire network on the given site. At the same time, people receive and skim through updates from friends, relatives, acquaintances, or even strangers. This type of communication is perhaps best characterized by the incessant flow of brief and mundane bits of information. Closely linked to the ubiquity of social-networking sites and mobile devices that allow people to be permanently online and connected, such incessant mediated communication is unprecedented and scholars are yet to understand its interpersonal effects (Vorderer & Kohring, 2013). One intriguing possibility is that even if individual updates are brief and mundane, continuously receiving fragments of personal information can result in ambient awareness of what is going on in the lives of people who post them. Science writer Clive Thompson was the first to propose how ambient awareness can develop in the context of public social media sites, such as Facebook and Twitter (Thompson, 2013). Ambient awareness can be defined as awareness of social others, arising from the frequent reception of fragmented personal information, such as status updates and various digital footprints, while browsing social media. “Ambient” emphasizes the idea that the awareness develops peripherally, not through deliberately attending to information, but rather as an artifact of social media activity. Central to this definition is that browsing social media is sufficient for awareness to develop, even in the absence of directed communication.Prior research has looked into existing social networks, which afford directed communication (e.g., Facebook; Lampe, Ellison, & Steinfield, 2006), making it difficult to single out the contribution of mere browsing. Several scholars have considered ambient awareness, also referred to as peripheral or pervasive awareness, and its potential role in relational maintenance (Lampe et al., 2006; Resnick, 2001; Zhao, Rosson, Matthews, & Moran, 2011) and organizational knowledge exchange (Dimicco et al., 2008; Leonardi & Meyer, 2014; Zhao et al., 2011). However, the construct has been discussed primarily in theoretical terms and described qualitatively, without being empirically assessed.In the present research, we sought to establish an operational definition of ambient awareness, grounding it in relevant notions from computer-mediated communication (CMC) and psychology and to provide empirical data on primary questions related to its occurrence and functions.In face-to-face encounters, people naturally develop awareness of others by picking up on non-verbal cues. Co-workers who share the same office, for example, get a sense of each-other's daily moods and activities. Co-presence enhances communication by increasing familiarity and providing people with information. In mediated communication there is no physical presence, but a sense of social presence (i.e., quality of “being there”) and awareness can nevertheless emerge (Tu & McIsaac, 2002; Walther & Bazarova, 2008).We expect that browsing social media posts can also contribute to a sense of awareness of the people who post them (ambient awareness). A major difference from prior work is that browsing social media is a passive, non-directed activity. In contrast, the majority of research on social presence has focused on active, interpersonal communication (e.g., Gunawardena & Zittle, 1997; Walther, 2007). Since browsing is often done distractedly, ambient awareness is rather a product of automatic social processes, such as spontaneous inferences (Ambady & Rosenthal, 1992; Uleman, Adil Saribay, & Gonzalez, 2008), than of deliberately trying to get to know a person, for example through active, communication, information seeking, or mentalizing. We know from psychological research that people form impressions about social others after very brief exposure to minimal content, even without intention or awareness of doing so (Uleman et al., 2008; for a review). Person-judgments are spontaneous and ubiquitous and it is therefore likely that they occur during browsing. In addition to specific impressions, the mere exposure to people's posts might lead to greater familiarity (Bornstein, 1989; Moreland & Zajonc, 1982).Whether ambient awareness indeed develops on public social media sites, remains to be established. In qualitative studies of enterprise social media, that is, company-intern social media, people have reported experiencing ambient awareness towards their colleagues (Zhao et al., 2011). Although informative and compelling, these subjective accounts do not provide evidence as to whether awareness is actually present. That is, it is not clear whether people are indeed aware of their online contacts or merely experience a sense of awareness, but will not be able to recognize individual members of this network. Similar problem is reflected in research, where feature use (e.g., reading comments) is considered a proxy for ambient awareness, but ambient awareness itself is not measured (e.g., Leonardi & Meyer, 2014). Another problem is that enterprise social media are different from public social media, in that people use them in a work-related context, usually with the intention to get to know or keep in touch with their colleagues. Such clearly defined context and purpose of use are not necessarily present on public social media sites, such as Twitter and Facebook, where use motivations and network composition are far more diverse. Lastly, most social media platforms offer ways of active communication (e.g., private chats and messaging), which makes it difficult to claim that any increase of awareness and familiarity is due to mere browsing (ambient awareness).To gain insight into whether ambient awareness can develop in the relative absence of extensive, one-to-one communication, we focused on the microblogging site Twitter, where content is restricted to 140 characters and usually broadcasted to large audiences, rather than directed towards specific individuals. Thus our first research questions are:RQ1a. Do people experience ambient awareness from browsing a microblogging site (Twitter), in the relative absence of one-to-one communication?RQ1b. Is ambient awareness just a general sense of knowing, or does it involve recognizing individuals who are known primarily through social media?Provided that people are indeed able to gain awareness of social others based on social media exposure, it is important to assess what kind of information they gain. The content of social information is crucial for understanding its consequences.RQ1c. What specific information do social media users have about their online-only contacts?We further set out to explore how ambient awareness relates to media use. Network size and frequency of use influence the likelihood of stumbling upon the posts of a particular user and is therefore relevant to ambient awareness. According to the theory of electronic propinquity (Walther & Bazarova, 2008), a sense of closeness in mediated communication develops more readily when people have experience with the medium they are using. Ambient awareness should therefore be higher for experienced social media users. We consider duration and frequency of social media use as indicators of experience.RQ2a. What are the effects of network size and media use on the general experience of ambient awareness?Whether one would develop awareness for a specific individual is likely influenced by how frequently one stumbles upon information about this person. Awareness should therefore be related to frequency of reading a person's posts (passive communication). While active communication can be expected to contribute to ambient awareness, important in our conceptualization is that active communication is not imperative and that awareness can be develop in its absence. Relationship duration is another relevant factor. The social information processing theory (Walther, 1996) would predict that extended periods of time and interaction are needed for awareness to develop, whereas psychological theories on impression formation (Uleman et al., 2008) would suggest that short exposure is sufficient.RQ2b. How is ambient awareness of individuals influenced by passive exposure to content, active communication, and relationship duration?Enhancing awareness in mediated environments has been associated with positive effects on relationships in both personal (Cornejo, Tentori, & Favela, 2012; Ito, 2005; Liechti & Ichikawa, 2000; Romero et al., 2007) and professional context (Dourish & Bellotti, 1992; Gross, Stary, & Totter, 2005; Liechti & Ichikawa, 2000). Similarly, social media activity can help people form awareness of their online network in a subtle, unobtrusive way.Some evidence for the relational significance of ambient awareness comes from qualitative studies on enterprise social media. Employees who use enterprise social media have described developing ambient awareness of their colleagues, which in turn had a positive impact on relationships and information sharing (Dimicco et al., 2008; Ehrlich & Shami, 2010; Zhao et al., 2011). A recent study showed that participants who followed a person's activity on an enterprise networking site were more satisfied with subsequent information transfer from this person (Leonardi & Meyer, 2014).According to the idea of ambient awareness, people pick up on information about social others while browsing, which resembles informal communication. Informal communication contributes to establishing common ground (e.g., Duck, Rutt, Hoy, & Strejc, 1991); Zhao et al., 2011), thereby making it easier to approach a person (Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2011). Apart from serving as a conversation starter, information about people's hobbies and profession can serve as an indication of what they are knowledgeable about. Ambient awareness can thus help social media users identify potential sources of information (Leonardi, 2015).Understanding the role of ambient awareness in relational maintenance and information exchange is beyond the scope of this paper. However, determining whether browsing social media influences perceptions of approachability and provides knowledge of competencies is an important first step.RQ3a. Does ambient awareness contribute to perceptions of approachability?RQ3b. Do social media users develop awareness of their online-only contacts' hobbies and interests, including professional interests?To address these research questions, we conducted two surveys among users of the microblogging site Twitter and developed a Twitter Network Survey procedure to assess awareness of specific individuals in participants' online network. Twitter was chosen because of the large proportion of strangers and weak acquaintances in personal networks, which allowed us to minimize the effects of prior acquaintanceship and alternative means of communication. Furthermore, content on Twitter is primarily in the form of brief posts, ambient awareness can be studied in the relative absence of more extensive forms of communication.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
