@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Source does matter: Contextual effects on online media-embedded health campaigns against childhood obesity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First systematic research on variations of online source credibility perceptions.Experimental study on online re-contextualization effects.Stratified sample for education levels of 700 secondary school students.Provocative campaigning takes the risk of boomerang effects.Media and argumentation-type affects affective self-perceptions of weight.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online media,Source credibility,Health communication,Campaigning effects,Obesity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Provocative messages targeting childhood obesity are a central means to increase problem awareness. But what happens when different online media platforms take up the campaign, comment, re-contextualize, and evaluate it? Relating to preliminary findings of persuasion research, we postulate that source credibility perceptions vary across types of online media platforms and contextualization of the message. Individual characteristics, in particular weight-related factors, are assumed to influence message effects. A 3 (media type: blog, online news, Facebook) × 2 (reinforcement versus impairment context) experimental design with students (N = 749) aged between 13 and 18 years was conducted. Results show an interaction between media type and argumentation for affective self-perceptions of weight. Self-relevance varies based on different source credibility perceptions. Overall, campaign re-contextualization of provocative messages may result in negative persuasion effects and needs to be considered in campaign development.Childhood anti-obesity campaigns are often designed in a highly provocative way in order to increase attention. Social media platforms are a prominent online environment to spread such health-related public service announcements, raise awareness and motivate discussion. However, when applying this strategy, public healthcare runs the risk of losing control over the effects of its campaigns. Follow-up communication in different media platforms such as blogs, online news sites or social networking sites takes up the campaign, comments, re-contextualizes, and evaluates it. On the one hand, this strengthens the attention focused on the campaign, on the other hand, the question emerges how different context formats affect campaign perceptions. Even if the core messages of the campaigns are still equal, variations in the argumentative contextualization and the media platform change the representation of the message, or, in other words, the frame of the message (for an overview see Entman, 1993; Iyengar, 1991). In terms of how campaigns are embedded, two aspects stand out. First, the contextualization of the content could either reinforce the argumentation of the campaign or impair its original message. The arguments of the original message are either supported or rejected, which resembles value framing in political communication (Schemer, Wirth, & Matthes, 2012).Second, follow-up communication regarding the campaigns could be placed on different online media platforms, reaching from more traditional journalistic contexts, such as online newspapers, to social-media environments, such as Facebook or blogs. Both re-contextualization factors address the credibility and trustworthiness of the context, the message and of the communicator (e.g., Hovland & Weiss, 1951; Park & Cameron, 2014). However, research has failed to analyze the comparative effects of social campaigns in these different online media environments.A highly relevant example in regard to such concerns is the perception of obesity-related health messages, especially when these campaigns address children and adolescents, since such campaigns are increasingly at risk of offending and stigmatizing children affected by obesity. However, there is little research on the effects of campaigns against childhood obesity and the fact that they [can] convey negative or even shocking messages in online media. Considering the lack of research on this subject, our study aims to close the gap and investigate the effects of different types of context embedment on a controversial health campaign for source credibility perceptions. The object of inquiry in this study is the 2012 Children's Healthcare of Atlanta (CHOA) campaign Strong4Life, which triggered a highly controversial discussion in the United States, since it uses children talking about their own stereotyping. Our research is based on the assumption that especially such controversial campaigns disseminated via online media run the risk of being re-contextualized, at worst with the original communicators' intentions being jeopardized. In our study, we experimentally manipulated the embedment of the Strong4Life social health campaign, varying different online media environments (Facebook, blogs, online newspaper) and context argumentation (reinforcing or impairing). In contrast to message-centered empirical designs, we manipulated source-relevant information of the media environment (Metzger, 2007).Obesity and excess weight are issues of high social relevance (Dietz et al., 2015; Lobstein et al., 2015). At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the World Health Organization (WHO) determined that the spread of obesity was progressing at an alarming rate (WHO, 2000, p. 16). In industrialized nations in particular, the WHO predicted an almost epidemic spread of problems connected to excess weight and obesity. The problem started in the adult population, but in recent years it has increasingly shifted to the younger portion of the population (Lobstein et al., 2015). For several years, the number of overweight and obese children increased worldwide. In almost all OECD and emerging countries around 20% of all children between the ages of 5 and 17 years are now considered to be obese or affected by excess body weight (OECD, 2012).The consequences of this problem are no less than dramatic on both individual and social levels. It is not surprising that Linda Matzigkeit, senior vice-president of CHOA, wanted to confront the problem directly: “We needed something that was more arresting and in your face than some of the flowery campaigns out there - If we do not wake up, this will be disastrous for our state” (Hasan, 2012). The campaign that started in 2011 consists of posters showing close-ups of four overweight children in black and white with the word “Warning” written in large red letters, and television spots. In these black and white spots, the four children come to speak in short and poignant sentences about their problems: stigmatization, exclusion, fear of death and disease. In spring 2012, the campaign was finally covered by the media (Grinberg, 2012). In addition to newspapers, radio and television stations, numerous blogs and online newspapers also addressed the issue and offered space for further debate. For example, a single article on this subject in the online newspaper Huffington Post was followed with 1336 comments from readers. The goal to get people talking (Teegardin, 2011), and thus to highlight the perceived relevance of the problem, was achieved by the CHOA, even though opinions were not always positive concerning the organization and its campaign. The provocative message sharpens the problems posed by childhood obesity, but has to deal with the fact that people may perceive the message as exaggerated and untrustworthy. It therefore seems plausible to assume that embedding these campaigns in reinforcing argumentation in line with the core message increases the relevance perceptions of the audiences. It is assumed that an impairing contextualization on the other hand highlights doubts about the credibility of the message and the urgency of the problem, which should result in reduced self-relevance perceptions. However, research has shown that weight as well as body image play a vital role in an individual's perception of body size or obesity-related communication (Anderson & Bresnahan, 2013). Children and adolescents in particular are associated with the detrimental effects of media-promoted body ideals (Tiggemann, 2014), yet effects of anti-obesity campaigns on underweight or normal-weight recipients are hardly researched (Smeesters, Mussweiler, & Mandel, 2010). We are therefore interested in the adverse effects of anti-obesity messages on children's and adolescents' self-perception of weight, and the perceived self-relevance of these campaigns.Source credibility is a decisive and extensively researched factor for the evaluation of the likelihood of peripheral route elaboration in connection with persuasive messages (Petty & Briñol, 2008). However, when source credibility is addressed in communication research, designs mainly focus on the relation between a communicator and a message's argumentative strength in line with Hovland and Weiss (1951) tradition of researching the salience of source expertise or source trustworthiness. In accordance with this, recipients evaluate a message depending on the issue itself, the strength of arguments within the message, and their perception of the source. “Attitude change is an increasing monotonic function of message-discrepancy (Anderson & Hovland, 1957; McGuire, 1969, p. 223), except where polarity, absolute bounds, or strong counterarguing effects prevail” (Hamilton, Hunter, & Boster, 1993, p. 52). While these intervening variables were generally accepted as content-inherent boundaries in regard to elaboration likelihood, the prevalence of source-related context variables was hardly addressed (e.g. type of medium).The conceptual basis of a communicator's credibility – as an information source – refers to personal prestige (Hastak & Park, 1987; Hovland & Weiss, 1951). It is thus based on face-to-face or para-social assumptions of personal trust rather than on structural cues that relate to the media-source or to contextual information, such as accompanying text or comments that allow recipients to evaluate a message's relevance. Apart from empirical evidence, the concept of source credibility faces conceptual challenges when online as well as social media are affected. The establishment of source credibility based on personal interactions is improbable in an online environment. “People use simple heuristic cues or informational indicators, such as source credibility, to assess the believability of a message” (Chung, Sia, & Kuan, 2012, p. 620). Advertising research in particular has shown a long-term interest in source-related information processing (McGuire, 1969; Scholten, 1996). A great body of these studies focuses on platform-related effects on source credibility or contextual effects which depend on a persuasive message's environment, such as accompanying content, advertisements or user-generated content (Areni, Ferrell, & Wilcox, 2000; Jones, Sinclair, & Courneya, 2003; Wathen & Burkell, 2002). In various media types persuasive messages are embedded in programs, e.g. television advertisements, newspaper advertisements or radio campaigns. Perceptions of competing messages of different style and type depend on constraints of platform characteristics and implications result from source imputation, when shared or user-generated content is the focal point. Frewer, Howard, Hedderley, and Shepherd (1997, p. 760) therefore emphasize the importance of investigating “credibility effects in realistic and ecologically valid contexts if the true effects of information source credibility are to be assessed”.The previously addressed aspects also find support from authors in information science. Among others, Olaisen (1990) differentiates between factors classically related to source credibility versus design features of the medium in order to distinguish “cognitive” and “technical” qualities that mediate recipients' perceptions of credibility. Such a definition refines information quality judgments not solely by the message itself, but by the context in which a persuasive appeal appears, considering technical quality as a set of relevant factors of message embedment (Rieh & Danielson, 2007; Wathen & Burkell, 2002). Focusing on an extended source credibility framework that addresses contextual aspects of the embedding of a persuasive appeal, our study proposes that context type and media credibility are at the core of recipients' message evaluation. Our framework consequently focuses on the measurement of source credibility, (1) as a person-related attribute of a communicator as well as of a producer of a media offer (website and video), (2) as a feature of the medium itself, the specific type of site (news, blog or social media), and (3) as the credibility evaluation of the embedded anti-obesity campaign-video. As cognitive and technical qualities refer to quite different characteristics of a message and its medium, we assume that separate and independent measures are necessary in order to reveal the complexity of a source's trustworthiness as well as the assessment of a communicator or medium's expertise (Ohanian, 1990). Thus, the aim to assess perceptions of source credibility for re-contextualization processes in online environments needs to take these versatile medial conditions into account. In the following, we provide further information on these conditions.Recent research on the influence of media context as a situational factor of persuasive message elaboration (Aylesworth & Mackenzie, 1998; De Pelsmacker, Geuens, & Anckaert, 2002; Janssens, De Pelsmacker, & Geuens, 2012; Lynch & Stipp, 1999) showed congruency effects of placements and surrounding media content. Predominantly, two main lines of argumentation state either an effect of the thematic congruency (Janssens et al., 2012; Moorman, Willemsen, Neijens, & Smit, 2012; Perry et al., 1997) or mood congruency (Aylesworth & Mackenzie, 1998; Bower, 1991; Bower & Forgas, 2000; Fiedler & Bless, 2000) between the embedded messages and the surrounding information or tonality of the medium. Thematic as well as mood congruency as situational factors of media exposure showed significant effects on recipients' attitudes and behavior when the media content supported the placements’ messages. Apart from advertising research, especially internet-based information on health-related issues has become a research topic of contextual congruency in media exposure (Hu & Sundar, 2010; Jin, Phua, & Lee, 2015; Phua, 2014; Jin et al., 2015). We argue that an embedded health message targeting childhood obesity benefits from surrounding media content that reinforces the statements within the placement. This leads to the following hypotheses:Hypothesis 1a. In contrast to negative contextual argumentation (impairment), we predict a more positive change in self-perception of weight when the embedded health message is positively accompanied (reinforcement) by the contextual content.Hypothesis 1b. In contrast to negative contextual content (impairment), we predict a more highly perceived self-relevance of the message when the embedded health message is positively accompanied (reinforcement) by the contextual content.Internet-based health information appears in a variety of contexts, evaluations, and credibility-related issues. In regard to this growth of information sources, research has shown that internet-based information seeking is oriented by well-known expectations towards the media, namely classical gatekeeping (Flanagin & Metzger, 2007) or social expectations towards content that is generated by recipients’ own peer groups (Jin et al., 2015). Furthermore, in preceding research (Zurstiege, Meitz, & Ort, 2014), we identified that the thematization of the Strong4Life campaign was evaluated quite differently by media users in regard to the argumentative structure of user commentaries. In contrast to commenting on social media sites, our content analysis revealed a significant adoption of the argument structure of the source when users commented on online news sites. We assume that this reproduction of arguments depends on the trustworthiness of the source. Whereas online news sites refer to the credibility of “visible” (Hu & Sundar, 2010, p. 2) journalistic media, blogs and social media like Facebook miss this gatekeeping function of traditional mass media (Callister, 2000; Eastin, 2001; Metzger, Flanagin, & Medders, 2010). Concerning the differing media types (online news, blogs, and Facebook), the following hypotheses are posited:Hypothesis 2a. In contrast to Facebook and blogs, embedded campaigns in online news (displaying journalism-oriented formats) lead to a more positive self-perception of weight.Hypothesis 2b. In contrast to Facebook and blogs, embedded campaigns in online news (displaying journalism-oriented formats) increase self-relevance perceptions of the message.As our previous argumentation suggests, the trustworthiness of online sources plays a pivotal role in recipients' assessment of information sources and these expectation-based assessments in turn affect attitudes towards health. Furthermore, we assume that re-contextualized health campaigns highly depend on recipients’ heuristic processing (Metzger et al., 2010; Metzger, Flanagin, Markov, Grossman, & Bulger, 2015) of specific medium-related cues and contextual factors. Thus, the estimation of credibility is regarded as a mediator of message effects (Hilligoss & Rieh, 2008). This leads to the following hypothesis and research question:Hypothesis 3a. The effect of reinforcement on self-relevance is mediated by source credibility.RQ1. Is the effect of different media platforms on self-relevance perceptions mediated by source credibility ratings?

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
