@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Social Media Disorder Scale

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The 9-item Social Media Disorder (SMD) Scale is a psychometrically sound instrument.The development of the 9-item SMD-scale was based on the 9 DSM-5 criteria for IGD.The 9-item SMD-scale shows appropriate internal consistency and test-retest reliability.The 9-item SMD-scale demonstrates good convergent and criterion validity.The 9-item SMD-scale shows adequate sensitivity and good specificity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social Media Disorder,Social media addiction,Problematic social media use,Pathological social media use,Social media use,Internet addiction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There is growing evidence that social media addiction is an evolving problem, particularly among adolescents. However, the absence of an instrument measuring social media addiction hinders further development of the research field. The present study, therefore, aimed to test the reliability and validity of a short and easy to administer Social Media Disorder (SMD) Scale that contains a clear diagnostic cut-off point to distinguish between disordered (i.e. addicted) and high-engaging non-disordered social media users.Three online surveys were conducted among a total of 2198 Dutch adolescents aged 10 to 17. The 9-item scale showed solid structural validity, appropriate internal consistency, good convergent and criterion validity, sufficient test-retest reliability, and satisfactory sensitivity and specificity. In sum, this study generated evidence that the short 9-item scale is a psychometrically sound and valid instruments to measure SMD.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The research field of Internet addiction continues to suffer from definition and measurement problems. The concept Internet addiction, also referred to as compulsive (Meerkerk, Van den Eijnden, Vermulst, & Garretsen, 2009) or problematic Internet use (Caplan, 2010), is multi-dimensional by nature and can refer to different forms of compulsive online behaviors. Individuals do not seem to be addicted to the Internet itself, but rather to certain online activities (Griffiths & Szabo, 2013). Some of these activities, however, appear to elicit more compulsive tendencies than others. Among adolescents, the age group that rapidly adopts new technologies and is expected to be most vulnerable to possible negative influences of these new technologies (Valkenburg & Peter, 2011), Internet addiction has most convincingly been linked to gaming and to social media use (Rumpf, Meyer, Kreutzer, John & Meerkerk, 2011; Van Rooij, Schoenmakers, Van den Eijnden, & Van de Mheen, 2010). Although the latest version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) recognizes Internet gaming disorder as a tentative disorder in the appendix of this manual (APA, 2013), social media addiction still has no status in the DSM-5.While the exclusion of social media addiction from the DSM-5 may give the impression that social media addiction is not a legitimate mental disorder, there is a growing body of evidence suggesting otherwise (Pantic, 2014; Ryan, Chester, Reece, & Xenos, 2014). Moreover, there is empirical evidence indicating that compulsive social media use is a growing mental health problem, particularly among adolescent smartphone users (Van Rooij & Schoenmakers, 2013). However, the absence of a clear definition and a measure for social media addiction hampers research on the prevalence of this type of disordered behavior, thereby obstructing vital next steps in the research field of social media addiction. Therefore, the present study aims to develop and validate a new instrument for measuring social media addiction – that is, the Social Media Disorder (SMD) Scale.Currently, the research field of social media addiction largely lags behind research on game addiction. Whereas research on game addiction has a long history dating back before online games were available (e.g., Shotton, 1989; Soper & Miller, 1983), the social media addiction field is relatively young, with the first studies appearing after 2010 (for a review, see Ryan et al., 2014). Furthermore, while there are several validated instruments for measuring game addiction (e.g. Griffiths, 2005, Lemmens, Valkenburg, & Peter, 2009; Lemmens, Valkenburg, & Gentile, 2015; Van Rooij, Schoenmakers, Van den Eijnden, Vermulst, & Van de Mheen, 2010), no validated instruments exist measuring social media addiction. Instead, the field of social media addiction is characterized by an abundance of measurement instruments tapping into particular forms of compulsive social media use, such as Facebook addiction (Ryan et al., 2014), addiction to social network sites (Griffiths, Kuss, & Demetrovics, 2014), Twitter addiction (Saaid, Al-Rashid, & Abdullah, 2014), and microblogging dependence (Wang, Lee, & Hua, 2015).The fragmentation in the social media research field, along with the proliferation of measures targeting specific forms of social media addiction, is problematic for two reasons. First, the social media landscape is characterized by rapid changes, whereby existing social media platforms are expanded with new interactive functions or simply replaced by new platforms. Instruments targeting specific forms of social media addiction may thus be outdated easily. Second, existing measures tend to use slightly different criteria for –or operationalization of– social media addiction, thereby hampering the comparability of research data and stimulating further fragmentation of the field. Hence, to accomplish the necessary progress in the field of social media addiction, it is vital to develop and validate a general measure of social media addiction based on a solid set of existing diagnostic criteria.There is ample ground for the development of a general social media addiction instrument, since social media platforms share many characteristics such as facilitating social interaction, the sharing of ideas, formation and maintenance of relationships and/or interest groups, and development of one's presence, reputation, and identity (Kietzmann, Hermkens, McCarthy, & Silvestre, 2011). Moreover, the finding that excessive use of different person-based and group-based social media applications is related to Internet addiction (Kuss & Griffiths, 2012; Kuss, Van Rooij, Shorter, Griffiths, & Van de Mheen, 2013; Van den Eijnden, Meerkerk, Vermulst, Spijkerman & Engels, 2007; Van Rooij et al., 2010) justifies the development of a general social media addiction instrument.The basic theoretical assumption underlying the development of the Social Media Disorder (SMD) scale in the current study is that social media addiction and Internet Gaming Disorder (IGD; APA, 2013) are two forms of the same overarching construct Internet addiction and should therefore be defined by the same set of diagnostic criteria. As stated before, the Internet incorporates a variety of potential activities, and some of these activities, such as gaming and social media use, tend to elicit compulsive tendencies in a subgroup of users. Therefore, the measurement of SMD should correspond with the measurement of both Internet addiction and IGD. Thus, the same set of diagnostic criteria should be used when operationalizing these related concepts.In recent years, the addiction literature has extensively reflected on the existence of non-substance related or behavioral addictions, such as Internet addiction. In the absence of DSM-criteria for Internet addiction, most instruments were based on the DSM-IV criteria for substance dependence and/or pathological gambling. More specifically, most instruments developed to assess Internet addiction included at least six of the DSM-IV criteria for pathological gambling, namely preoccupation, tolerance, withdrawal, relapse, mood modification, and external consequences (see Van Rooij & Prause, 2014). These six criteria were also recognized as the core elements of behavioral addictions (Brown, 1993; Griffiths, 1999; Marks, 1990) and used for the development of most game addiction measures (King, Haagsma, Delfabbro, Gradisar, & Griffiths, 2013).Based on thorough consideration by a multidisciplinary expert group (see Petry et al., 2014), the APA decided to include three additional criteria when defining the criteria for the DSM-5 diagnosis of IGD, namely deception (e.g., Demetrovics et al., 2012; Gentile et al., 2011), displacement (e.g., Huang, Wang, Qian, Zhong, & Tao, 2007; Rehbein, Kleimann, & Mössle, 2010), and conflict (e.g., Lemmens et al., 2009; Young, 1996). Moreover, several authors in the field of IGD refer to relapse as persistence, to mood modification as escape, and to external consequences as problems (Lemmens et al., 2015; Petry et al., 2014).According to the DSM-5 definition, someone is diagnosed with having IGD if he or she meets five (or more) of the nine criteria for IGD during a period of 12 months. Since SMD and IGD are regarded as two specific forms of the overarching construct Internet addiction, it is reasoned that the nine criteria for IGD, which is the first internet-related disorder included in the DSM, can also be used to define SMD. The development of a SMD scale will thus be based on the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for IGD and will include the same nine diagnostic criteria.As suggested before, the development and validation of a theoretically grounded and well-defined instrument to measure SMD is essential in order to prevent the use of a large variety of slightly different measurement instruments that do not allow for clear-cut off points, and may not be applicable to multiple types of social media. Moreover, there is a vital need for utilizing actual clinical criteria in order to differentiate between pathological (i.e. addictive) and highly engaged social media users (Kuss et al., 2013). Thus, the development and validation of an instrument that is using a clear diagnostic cut-off point, as provided by DSM-5, is crucial for the development of this research field because such an instrument offers the opportunity to assess and monitor the prevalence of social media addiction in the population. Since SMD can be expected to be particularly disturbing for the psychosocial development of adolescents (Valkenburg & Peter, 2011), the SMD scale will be tuned to adolescents.The main aim of the present study was to develop and validate a scale to measure Social Media Disorder (SMD). Since SMD and IGD are conceptualized as meeting at least five of the nine DSM-5 criteria for IGD, this study builds on a previous study testing the reliability and validity of a short (9-item) and a long (27-item) scale to measure IGD (Lemmens et al., 2015). Lemmens et al. (2015) showed that the short 9-item scale, with a dichotomous (yes/no) response scale, provided a valid and reliable measure of IGD with good diagnostic accuracy, even in comparison to the long 27-item scale. Because of the important advantages of a short and easy to administer measurement instrument, such as the possibility to incorporate the scale into space-limited surveys, and in agreement with the findings by Lemmens et al. (2015), the ultimate aim of the present study was to develop and validate a short 9-item scale to measure SMD.Our starting point was the development of a 27-item SMD scale, consisting of three items for each of the nine DSM-5 criteria (see Appendix A). After testing the factor structure and factor loadings of this 27-item scale, the nine items with the highest factor loading per criterion were selected to constitute the short 9-item scale. Next, the psychometric properties of the short SMD scale were tested, and compared with some psychometric properties of the 27-item SMD scale. More specifically, we examined (1) the factor structure and internal consistency, (2) construct validity, as indicated by convergent validity, (3) criterion validity, (4) test-retest reliability, and (5) sensitivity and specificity of the short SMD scale. These psychometric properties were tested across three different samples of Dutch adolescents to establish population cross-validation. Finally, we established the prevalence of SMD in the current three samples, and tested for group differences in gender, age, and frequency of daily social media use between disordered and non-disordered adolescents.Construct validity is defined as the extent to which the scale measured the intended construct. Construct validity of the SMD scale was established by testing the strength of the relationships between scores on the SMD scale and constructs to which it should theoretically be related. An important aspect of construct validity is convergent validity, referring to the relation between the SMD scale and comparable constructs. In this study convergent validity was tested by relating scores on the SMD scale to Compulsive Internet Use, as measured by the Compulsive Internet Use Scale (CIUS; Meerkerk et al., 2009), and to self-declared social media addiction. In case of good convergent validity, we expect to find strong correlations between scores on the SMD scale and scores on the CIUS and on self-declared social media addiction.Criterion validity is defined as the extent to which a measure is related to an outcome. Criterion validity of the SMD scale was examined by testing the relationship between scores on the SMD scale and several psychosocial constructs that have previously been related to compulsive Internet use and (specific forms of) compulsive social media use: self-esteem (Mehdizadeh, 2010; Van Rooij et al., 2015), depression (Caplan, 2007; Hong, Huang, Lin, & Chiu, 2014; Koc & Gulyagci, 2013; Yen, Ko, Yen, Wu, & Yang, 2007), loneliness (Caplan, 2007; Odaci & Kalkan, 2010; Van Rooij et al., 2015), attention deficit (Dalbudak & Evren, 2014; Van Rooij et al., 2015; Weinstein & Lejoyeux, 2010; Yen et al., 2007), and impulsivity (Dalbudak & Evren, 2014; Wu, Cheung, Ku, & Hung, 2013). We expect to find weak to moderate correlations between scores on the SMD scale and these psychosocial constructs. Finally, in line with previous studies on the relationship between compulsive Internet use and daily time online (Meerkerk et al., 2009), and between IGD and time spent gaming (Lemmens et al., 2015; Van Rooij et al., 2012), we expect to find moderate associations between the SMD scale and frequency of daily social media use.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
