@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Work content influences on cognitive task load, emotional state and performance during a simulated 520-days' Mars mission

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We modelled performance affected by work content, cognitive and affective variables.Our model was fitted to data from the simulated Mars mission from the Mars500 project.We found two aspects of work content (task goals and missions phases) to affect cognitive and affective variables.Data indicated that performances can be predicted out of cognitive and affective variables.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Emotional state,Cognitive task load,Performance,Stress,Appraisal,Human space flight,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In high-risk domains such as human space flight, cognitive performances can be negatively affected by emotional responses to events and conditions in their working environment (e.g., isolation and health incidents). The COgnitive Performance and Error (COPE) model distinguishes effects of work content on cognitive task load and emotional state, and their effect on the professional's performance. This paper examines the relationships between these variables for a simulated Mars-mission. Six volunteers (well-educated and -motivated men) were isolated for 520 days in a simulated spacecraft in which they had to execute a (virtual) mission to Mars. As part of this mission, every other week, several computer tasks were performed. These tasks consisted of a negotiation game, a chat-based learning activity and an entertainment game. Before and after these tasks, and after post-task questionnaires, the participants rated their emotional state consisting of arousal, valence and dominance, and their cognitive task load consisting of level of information processing, time occupied and task-set switches. Results revealed significant differences between cognitive task load and emotional state levels when work content varied. Significant regression models were also found that could explain variation in task performance. These findings contribute to the validation of the COPE model and suggest that differences in appraisals for tasks may bring about different emotional states and task performances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Different professionals, such as police officers, military personnel, pilots and astronauts, occasionally enter high-risk situations, in which the risk for harm, information uncertainty and time pressure evoke stress in the professionals involved (Driskell & Johnston, 1998). Their job is to remain focused and perform well in these situations. Extreme levels of stress, however, can affect cognitive performances in negative ways and consequently deteriorate performances (Keinan, Friedland, & Ben-Porath, 1987; Ozel, 2001; Starcke & Brand, 2012).Insight into human and work content factors that determine cognitive task performance in these situations are useful for finding ways to counteract the performance decline. When the influences of these factors are known, the focus of support can be placed where the help is needed. It might also allow for better anticipation for such situations (e.g., an improved human resource deployment). By monitoring the human and content variables that affect task performance, content-sensitive and personalized task support can be provided.Based on a literature study and domain analyses, Cohen, Brinkman, and Neerincx (2012) proposed the COgnitive Performance and Error (COPE) model as a general foundation for task support in high-risk domains. In several empirical studies, this model was refined, “parameterized” and evaluated for different application domains. This paper studies the influences from different work contents on core variables of the COPE model (i.e. cognitive task load and emotional state) and the prediction of task performance based on these variables. The analysis centres around a unique experiment on human space flight: the Mars500 program11www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Human_Spaceflight/Mars500.(i.e., a simulated complete, 520-day' Mars mission of a group of six astronauts). In the Mission Execution Crew Assistant (MECA) project, as part of the Mars500 program, the astronauts performed a set of tasks every two weeks under the stressful conditions of a long-duration mission. This experiment was set-up to refine and test the MECA requirements baseline for electronic partners (ePartners) that enhance astronaut-automation groups' performance and resilience (M. A. Neerincx, 2011; M.A. Neerincx et al., 2008; Smets, Cohen, Neerincx, Brinkman, & Diggelen, 2012). Before the study is presented, this paper will discuss the COPE model briefly and continue discussing factors that affect performances during long-term isolation missions. The Mission Execution Crew Assistant (MECA) is developing personal ePartners that regularly monitor crew-members cognitive task load and emotional states during individual and joint task performances overall mission phases (M.A. Neerincx et al., 2008). This monitoring is a joint crew-ePartner activity and the basis of envisioned ePartner support functions that should help to better cope with the social, cognitive and affective burdens mentioned above (Diggelen & Neerincx, 2010; Gorbunov, Barakova, Ahn, & Rauterberg, 2011; Hennes, Tuyls, Neerincx, & Rauterberg, 2009). The COPE-model of the next section might provide such a basis.Fig. 1 shows a graphical representation of the COPE model which represents the influence of acute stress on working performances (Cohen et al., 2012). It consists of three components: work content, cognitive and affective factors, and the actions. Models have been proposed showing similar relationships between environment, appraisal and performance (Hart & Staveland, 1988; Salas, Driskell, & Hughes, 1996), the COPE model, however, includes measures of objective stress, such as physical measures, to assess and predict performance, instead of focussing merely on subjective levels and measures (Robert & Hockey, 1997; Sanders, 1983).The COPE model distinguishes work content aspects that influence the performance under stress: The specific task goals and task demands of the work will characterize the involved cognitive and affective processes (H. J. Veltman & Jansen, 2004; J. A. Veltman & Jansen, 2003). When an individual perceives a task (i.e., the demands and goal), an assessment is made that leads to the appraisal of the task as either a threat or a challenge (Lazarus, 1999), and a level of perceived task demand which can deviate from the ‘regular’ task demand level.Goals, often structured in a hierarchical way, drive the performance, but may be appraised differently (e.g., due to its relevance for a higher order goal). More challenging goals improve performance compared to easy goals (Locke, Shaw, Saari, & Latham, 1981). Tasks with different structures or characteristics might also provoke different goals and thereby show differences in task performance.The task demands need to be met to complete the task successfully. Simple tasks have low task demands; more complex tasks have higher task demands. In the COPE model, (perceived) task demand corresponds to the Cognitive Task Load (CTL) measures (M. A. Neerincx, 2003). The CTL model distinguishes three load dimensions: time occupied (TOC), level of information processing (LIP), and task set switches (TSS). TOC is the fraction of the time that is actually needed to complete the task and the time that is available to complete the task. TSS is a measure for switching between tasks; in complex situations, multiple tasks need to be performed at the same time. It takes attention and effort to complete one task, and activate (i.e., start or continue with) the next. LIP is based on the levels of cognitive processes by Rasmussen (1982) and dual process theories (e.g. (Evans, 2003)). Cognitive processes can be distinguished on a continuum from analytical to intuitively. Whether someone's cognitive processing leans more towards one or the other depends, according to Hammond (1988), on the failure or success of previous judgments, and on the task characteristics. As with the cognitive processes, tasks can also be placed upon a continuum from ‘inducing analytical cognition’ to ‘inducing intuitive cognition’.Emotional state can be divided in three levels: valence (pleasure), arousal (energetic) and dominance (control) (Mehrabian, 1996), and is an important factor in decision making (Mosier & Fischer, 2010). Affect can be induced by the decision task itself (integral affect) or can be present beforehand (incidental affect). Incidental affect influences heuristics and the way in which information is processed (Mosier & Fischer, 2010). This type of affect also influences judgments as explained by the Affect Infusion Model by Forgas (1995).The appraisal and perceived task demand will determine the individual's coping strategy. Research agrees that there are basic coping strategies that will be used when under stress, emotion-focusses and task-focussed coping (Endler & Parker, 1990) and that task-stress triggers different coping styles in different individuals (Matthews & Campbell, 1998). The chosen coping strategy, on its turn, influences how the individual reacts on the situation and the event and what decisions that will be made by the individual (Delahaij, 2009). Whether the behavioural reaction is appropriate for the stressful event or not will determine the performance on the task.Although appraisal, decision-making styles and coping strategies fit in the COPE-model, they are out of the scope of this study since there are no quick and easy ways to determine what appraisal and which style is used by the participants.As mentioned above, the goals that need to be achieved by the task performer are often hierarchical structured. Completing an overall training to learn a certain skill is a higher level goal. Such goals will be accomplished by achieving different lower level goals, or sub-goals, such as learning different components of the skill. For some lower level goals, the link to the higher level goals will not be as obvious as for other lower level goals, e.g., the mapping of the work goals on the computer tasks is not straightforward (cf. Kieras & Polson, 1985; Sutcliffe, Ryan, Doubleday, & Springett, 2000). This mismatch between the different hierarchical goals will be visible in the perception of the work content. In other words, the appraisal of the work content is dependent on the fit between the lower level and higher level goals.The simulated Mars mission described in this paper also contains goals from different levels. A few higher level goals will be present during different phases of the mission. Long-term missions to the ISS and MIR space stations have been divided according to a stage model by Manzey (2004) and Gushin, Kholin, and Ivanovsky (1993). These missions last between 4 and 6 months and every stage has its own psychological stressors. In the first phase, that last approximately 4–6 weeks, crewmembers mainly focus on adaptation to the physiological changes. Stress and performance problems in this phase are induced by these physical adaptations. Full adaptation to the new conditions is reached in the second phase that is followed by the most difficult third phase, were psychological problems are likely to occur. This third phase starts after approximately 6–12 weeks in space. Severe stressors in this phase are: monotony and (social) boredom, isolation from family and friends, and the omnipresent contact with the other crewmembers. The fourth phase starts shortly before the end of the mission. It evokes euphoria but also concerns as to ending and completing the mission. Within these different stages during a long-term mission, different higher level goals can play a role. In addition to the goal of exploring the Mars surface, the Mars500 mission distinguishes four phases with corresponding (higher level) goals: (1) adapt towards the (new) space environment, (2) establish efficient work procedures or routines, (3) prepare for the Mars landing, and (4) return to home (Earth). The different computer tasks that need to be performed during the different phase of the missions have lower level goals that, ideally, would contribute to such higher level goals (i.e., support the adaptation, the routine development, the landing preparation and the return).In an effort to gather knowledge on psychological effects of a Mars mission on its crewmembers, the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Institute of Biomedical Problems (IBP) carried out the Mars500 project. This project simulated a Mars mission in its full length of 520 days here on Earth including the isolation factors and the lack of contact with Earth. Obviously, the absence of gravity was not reproduced but the unique settings of a Mars mission simulation brought its own unique stress-factors. During the experimental sessions in the Mars500 project, emotional state (ES) and cognitive task load (CTL) were measured while the participants executed different tasks. In the COPE-model, ES and subjective CTL (i.e., perceived task demand) influence each other, and determine what the results will be of the task that is being performed. This leads to the following two hypotheses investigated in this study:1.The cognitive and affective variables in the COPE model are influenced by the work content:a.How well a task goal fits a higher level goal, reflects in the levels of the ES and CTL levels.Different overall mission phases evoke different levels of the ES and CTL levels.Variation in task performance can be explained by individuals' emotional state and perceived task load.It was expected that different tasks with different task goals, evoke different levels of ES and CTL. The different task goals can either fit with the higher level goals. If this is the case, valence, arousal and dominance are expected to increase compared to emotional state levels of tasks with unfitting goals. The same can be expected for cognitive task load. If a task is appropriate for reaching a higher-level goal, CTL will increase.The phase of the mission was also expected to influence these variables since different phases are related to higher-level goals, or not. Phases during a Mars mission are, however, of different nature that mission phases during MIR and ISS missions (Gushin et al., 1993; Manzey, 2004). For one, a Mars mission lasts 520 days instead of 2 or 3 months. Therefore, the influences of mission phases on ES and CTL levels are expected to differ from those in previous studies with MIS and ISS crewmembers. Euphoria caused by returning home, is present in ISS and MIR mission since the return home takes a few days. Returning home from Mars takes approximately 6 months and a euphoric feeling based on a return mission is not expected in the last phase.○Arousal is expected to decline during the entire mission since crewmembers get adapted to the situation. At the end of the mission, they are not as excited as at the beginning.Valence is expected to be quite stable over the mission. Except the period around the Mars landing, where a high valence is expected. Since the mission phases in the Mars500 project are quite long, this effect might not be strong enough to be visible in one phase compared to other phases.Dominance is expected to act in the same manner as valence.Cognitive task load is expected to decrease over the course of the mission. The tasks have been performed for a while and do not cause as much CTL as before. The perceived task demand might increase at the end of the mission when crewmembers are more fatigued.According to the COPE model, the cognitive and affective factors influence performances. It was therefore expected that variation in the two factors could be associated with observed performance variation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
