@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Is all Internet gambling equally problematic? Considering the relationship between mode of access and gambling problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Gamblers were matched on relevant demographic and behavioural variables.Internet gamblers preferring computers had lower rates of gambling problems.Internet gamblers preferring mobile and other devices had greater rates of gambling problems.Life cycle of combined age, marital and occupational status differed between groups.Policies should consider the role of various devices to access Internet gambling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet gambling,Mobile devices,Problem gambling,Characteristics,Risk factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Concerns exist that Internet gambling may increase rates of gambling harms, yet research to date has found inconsistent results. Internet gamblers are a heterogeneous group and considering this population as a whole may miss important differences between gamblers. The differential relationship of using mobile and other devices for gambling online has not been considered as compared to the use of computers. The true relationship of Internet gambling on related problems and differences between preferred modes for accessing online gambling may be obscured by confounding personal and behavioural factors. This paper thus uses the innovative approach of propensity score matching to estimate the consequence of gambling offline, or online through a computer, as compared to mobile or other supplementary devices by accounting for confounding effects of difference among groups of Australian gamblers (N = 4482). Gamblers who prefer to gamble online using computers had lower rates of gambling problems as compared to those using mobile and supplementary devices. Individual life cycle was useful to differentiate between groups, indicating age, marital, and employment status should be considered together to predict how people gamble online. This is the first empirical study to suggest that the mode of accessing Internet gambling may be related to subsequent harms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Debates around the legalization and regulation of gambling typically include consideration of the propensity for harm (Livingstone & Adams, 2011; Reith, 2011). Research suggests that increased availability and accessibility to gambling opportunities is related to increased levels of problems, although the impact is moderated by other factors (Reith, 2012). Technological advances, wide usage of new devices, and innovation led by the gambling industry has led to a plethora of new Internet gambling products available constantly via mobile and other non-computer devices. This has led to the situation where regulators attempt to devise policies that take into account forms of gambling that may not yet be developed (Orford, 2005). The current study aimed to explore the relationship between gambling online through computers as compared to supplementary devices (mobile, tablets, and interactive televisions) on gambling problems. Results should thus support prospective technology assessments in this social sensitive and technologically highly dynamic field.Much of the research in the gambling field has considered gamblers as a homogeneous population or has studied a single gambling activity in isolation. These studies fail to reflect the heterogeneous nature of gambling and to account for subtypes of gamblers based on how they engage with gambling in various ways (Nower, Martins, Lin, & Blanco, 2013). Theoretical models of disordered gambling indicate that differences between subgroups of gamblers are important to understand, particularly to inform prevention and treatment efforts (Blaszczynski & Nower, 2002). Studies of Internet gambling initially reported greater levels of gambling problems among Internet as compared to land-based gamblers (Gainsbury, Wood, Russell, Hing, & Blaszczynski, 2012; Griffiths, Wardle, Orford, Sproston, & Erens, 2009; Kairouz, Paradis, & Nadeau, 2012; Wood & Williams, 2011; Wu, Lai, & Tong, 2014). A primary concern was that the Internet became a conduit for gambling, resulting in uptake among non-gamblers and easy access for those with a propensity for problems (Philander & MacKay, 2014). Subsequent studies suggest that gambling problems are related to involvement in both land-based and online forms, as well as gambling on a greater total activities, and greater expenditure (Gainsbury, Russell, Blaszczynski, & Hing, 2015; LaPlante, Nelson, LaBrie, & Shaffer, 2011; Philander & MacKay, 2014). As such, the relationship between gambling problems and modes of access remains unclear (Kairouz et al., 2012). Research is urgently needed that controls for confounding variables such as demographics and gambling behaviours to enable an accurate understanding of the relationship between mode of access of gambling and related problems. The current study aims to address this need.Subgroups of gamblers have been identified based on their use of Internet and offline gambling and various gambling activities. Levels of problem gambling intensity vary between these groups (Gainsbury et al., 2015; Lloyd et al., 2010; Wardle, Moody, Griffiths, Orford, & Volberg, 2011), supporting the Pathways theoretical model of gambling (Blaszczynski & Nower, 2002). This is also consistent with the theory that the Internet is not inherently addictive, but that individual variables interact with gambling behaviour to determine level of involvement and subsequent problems (Shaffer, Hall, & Bilt, 2000). Therefore, a simplified dichotomy of Internet versus offline gambling is insufficient to conceptualise the relationship between Internet gambling and related problems. Internet gambling (also referred to as online, interactive, or remote) using mobile (including smartphones, tablets, and other wireless Internet devices) and other supplementary devices (e.g., interactive televisions, gaming consoles) potentially offers a very different gambling experience as compared to use of laptop and desktop computers. Understanding this differentiation and focussing on the specific impacts of supplementary devices becomes even more important as there is evidence that such devices may cause severe dependence patterns as nomophobia, that is, communication through virtual environments (King et al., 2013). Therefore, gambling via supplementary devices may have important implications for the theoretical understanding of gambling disorders. The current study aims to address this issue as well.The use of supplementary devices for gambling has disrupted the gambling market and introduced an entirely new way to engage with this activity. Total revenues from mobile gambling are predicted to reach nearly 45% of total interactive gambling gross win in 2018, up from 18% in 2012 (H2 Gambling Capital, 2013). Mobile gambling customers differ from other Internet gamblers and have been found to have longer and more frequent sessions, greater average bet size, and generate a higher gross margin than gamblers using a computer (Bennett, 2013; Sports Agent Blog, 2012). Many of the risk factors for problem gambling associated with Internet gambling may be heightened for gamblers who use mobile and supplementary devices. These include the convenience and easy accessibility and availability of gambling, enhanced privacy, perceived anonymity, and the reduced salience of electronic funds (Gainsbury et al., 2012; MacKay & Hodgins, 2012; Svensson & Romild, 2011; Wood, Williams, & Parke, 2012). It may be theorised that the greater access and convenience provided to gamblers by supplementary devices may interact with existing risk factors and vulnerabilities to make it more difficult for gamblers to control their urges and impulses to gamble, making them more likely to gamble excessively and subsequently develop problems. Using supplementary devices may allow greater engagement in gambling, which is associated with higher rates of gambling problems (Gainsbury et al., 2014; LaPlante et al., 2011; Philander & MacKay, 2014). Despite the potential advantages of using supplementary devices, the vast majority of Internet gamblers state a preference of using computers (Gainsbury et al., 2012; Wood & Williams, 2011). Interviews with Internet gamblers revealed that those who prefer to gamble on their mobile do so for convenience, while those who prefer computers prefer the ease of use, better security, larger screen and greater speed of the Internet connection (Hing et al., 2014).Conceptual models of disordered gambling suggest that problematic gambling develops as a result of a complex interaction of psychological, social, biological and environmental factors (Blaszczynski & Nower, 2002; Sharpe, 2002). Previous research has aimed to identify risk factors to determine when and why gambling becomes problematic. However, few studies have yet considered the complex interactions between sociodemographic variables. For example, younger males are repeatedly recognized as being at greater risk for gambling-related harm (Hayatbakhsh, Clavarino, Williams, Bor, & Najman, 2013; Welte, Barnes, Tidwell, & Hoffman, 2008). However, consumption behaviour is typically more accurately predicted by a more complex construct of family life cycle, which jointly considers age with marital and work status (Gourinchas & Parker, 2002). Conventional analysis on the effect of a variable is confounded by users’ other individual variables and behaviours, which hinders an estimation of the true consequence of variable. Consideration of the interactions between sociodemographic variables and mode of accessing Internet gambling thus is important to further develop conceptual models of disordered gambling that are specifically relevant to new technological developments.Propensity score matching (PSM) is such a statistical approach that estimates the effect of an action (e.g., using PC for gambling or not) by controlling for confounding factors that predict executing the action (c.f. Gum, Thamilarasan, Watanabe, Blackstone, & Lauer, 2001). Differing from prior studies, our research implements PSM analysis and estimates the consequence of different gambling behaviours by accounting for confounding effects of demographic difference among groups. Using the smallest group of supplementary device gamblers as a benchmark, only those offline- and PC gamblers are drawn for comparison which have similar probabilities to execute this gambling behaviour (i.e. propensity scores). This enables us to single out the effects of access mode (offline, internet via PC or via supplementary devices) on gambling behaviour and corresponding problems.Despite the extent to which mobile phones, tablets, and other devices have impacted gambling, no research has specifically examined the use of these devices and their relationship with subsequent problems. The current study attempts to establish whether problem gambling severity differs between individuals who gamble via different modes (land-based, computers, or mobile and supplementary devices) to further the understanding of the risk factors for gambling harms. Given the lack of previous research that differentiates between different modes of access for Internet gambling this study was largely exploratory. However, it was hypothesised that gamblers who prefer supplementary devices may have higher rates of gambling problems - due to the high accessibility and convenience that these devices provide, enabling greater gambling involvement than other modes of access, which is related to gambling problems. This research advances previous studies by using a novel statistical technique, propensity score matching, to identify the incremental effect of executing a specific behaviour (gambling offline, via computers, or mobile and supplementary devices) on behavioural consequences (problem gambling severity).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
