@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Information Seeking, Information Sharing, and going mobile: Three bridges to informal learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mobile access.Formal, informal learning.Information Seeking, sharing.Learner preference.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information Seeking,Information Sharing,Mobile access,Formal to informal learning,Instrument development,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a new perspective on information behavior in Web 2.0 environments, including the role of mobile access in bridging formal to informal learning. Kuhlthau’s (1991, 2007) Information Search Process (ISP) model is identified as a theoretical basis for exploring Information Seeking attitudes and behaviors, while social learning and literacy concepts of Vygotsky (1962, 1978), Bruner (1962, 1964) and Jenkins (2010) are identified as foundations for Information Sharing. The Guided Inquiry Spaces model (Maniotes, 2005) is proposed as an approach to bridging the student’s informal learning world and the curriculum-based teacher’s world. Research within this framework is operationalized through a recently validated Information and Communications Technology Learning (ICTL) survey instrument measuring learners’ preferences for self-expression, sharing, and knowledge acquisition interactions in technology-pervasive environments. Stepwise refinement of ICTL produced two reliable and valid psychometric scales, Information Sharing (alpha=.77) and Information Seeking (alpha=.72). Cross-validation with an established Mobile Learning Scale (Khaddage & Knezek, 2013) indicates that Information Sharing aligns significantly (p<.05) with Mobile Learning. Information Seeking, Information Sharing, and mobile access are presented as important, complimentary components important, complimentary components in the shift along the formal to informal learning continuum. Therefore, measures of these constructs can assist in understanding students’ preferences for 21st century learning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The ever-changing information technologies (IT) of our time are redefining traditional teaching and learning. Thirty years of noteworthy evidence has demonstrated that IT-supported learning contexts are at least comparable in efficacy to traditional, time-scheduled, face-to-face instruction (Francescato et al., 2006) and that appropriate applications of IT can, in fact, enhance student learning (Voogt & Knezek, 2008). However, the nature of formal to informal instruction has made it difficult to gain necessary acceptance of the significance of informal learning processes by many institutions and resulted in efforts such as the TRAILER project for recorded verification of informal learning (García-Peñalvo et al., 2012). Knowing that IT is capable of serving as a catalyst for change in pedagogical roles, Hawkridge (1990) emphasizes the pressing need to widen acceptance of informal learning and establish models of instruction that go beyond the provision of learning management systems (LMS) to the implementation of personalized learning environments (PLEs) (Conde, García-Peñalvo, & Alier, 2011).Research indicates that formal to informal learning models can offer readily available, user-centered learning options and services (Conde et al., 2012) that place the learner, as user, in control of the learning experience. Recognizing the many challenges facing educators in the rebalancing of formal to informal learning trends, the great variability of changing classroom roles, and the shifting level of teacher–student control over learning activities (Cox, 2012), there is great interest among educators and learning technologists in new instructional models that will capitalize on the affordances of the wide array of available information technology and mobile access tools. Educational institutions, teachers, and students are being challenged to demonstrate an active engagement in the open world as described by Bonk (2009) in his book The World is Open. Just as the availability of information on the Internet is causing the world to be more open, access to databases and academic courses available on demand, often via mobile devices, is changing the extent, the activities, and the timing of learning interactions (García-Peñalvo, de Figuerola, & Merlo, 2010). The interaction between communities, creative processes, Information Sharing, Information Seeking, and the wider social contexts enabled by mobile technologies and Web 2.0 applications can be used to enhance the creative process, create new learning contexts, and bridge the gap between formal and informal learning (Khaddage & Knezek, 2012).Dewey (1938) introduced the concept of informal learning as experiences requiring continuity of experience and interaction. Osborne and Dillon (2007) conducted a complex analysis of informal learning as a concept and associated definitions have evolved over time. Informal learning has been described as that which takes place outside the formal educational environment and is self-directed, intentional, interest-based rather than curriculum-based, non-assessment driven, and non-qualification oriented (Eshach 2007; Laurillard, 2009). Laurillard (2009) further defined informal learning as placing the learner at the center of the process and giving the learner the locus of control. A broader view of formal and informal learning, that is well suited to education in the digital information environments of our time, would be Bernstein’s (1971) view of learning—a formal to informal continuum that is based on the opportunity for learners to frame, classify, and evaluate knowledge.Certainly the use and availability of mobile technologies continue to redefine formal and informal learning. Lai, Khaddage, and Knezek (2013) identify collaboration, coordination, and communication as key components for the connection of formal to informal learning. The authors of the current research contend that mobile access and information behavior (Information Seeking, Information Sharing) are major components facilitating the shift in formal to informal learning in the digital age, as modeled in Fig. 1. They contend that the Information and Communications Technology Learning (ICTL) and Mobile Learning (ML) instruments are useful tools to assist in better understanding students’ learning preferences and information behaviors, thereby allowing for design and implementation of instructional models that will offer students, as end-users, with locus of control and opportunities for formal to informal learning.The evolution of digital technologies, from personal computers and Internet access to mobile devices with continuous access, have resulted in new opportunities for learning and a gradual blurring of the line between formal and informal learning (Cox, 2012). Many students today are reportedly using IT more during leisure time than in the school setting. Students’ formal and informal use of IT is of great interest to educators and learning technologists who recognize that learning, both in and outside of school, plays an important role in the intellectual growth and development of students (Passey, 2000), especially when IT can be used to create school-to-home links (Pachler, 2007). Pachler (2007) found that students with higher computer usage at home make greater use of computers at school. Students who have access to school learning resources at home reportedly benefit from the home-to-school links for class work and homework (Pachler & Redondo, 2005; Underwood et al., 2007). This cycle of computer use and connection between formal and informal learning environments creates a connection between school and home. It also results in a clouding of the concepts that separate (school) work and leisure activity (Pachler, 2007).Somekh and Davis (1991) introduced a model for transforming pedagogy with a view towards pupil autonomy in learning with computers. They recognized the need for a shift from a learning context within the confines of the classroom to a more interactive, complementary exchange between teacher and learner (Somekh & Davis, 1991). Learning environments of the 21st century include a wide array of hardware devices and software that support flexible use of connected laptops and mobile devices. Technology-driven learning environments enable students to seek information and communicate where and when they choose to do so, resulting in connections between informal and formal learning. Cox (2012) conducted a review of technological developments available in education from 1968 to 2011. Analysis of trends in educational applications of IT during the last several decades reveals a shift in the center of instructional control away from course designers and teachers in the direction of the teacher and the learner, and from the teacher to the learner (Cox, 2012). This shift in control from teacher to learner is thought to be related to information communications technology (ICT) developments, such as Web 2.0, that provide Internet interaction and the power to network, publish, share, and collaborate with experts and peers alike.School-to-home and student-to-instructor connections are important points of focus for new models of pedagogy that can connect informal and formal learning. Kuhlthau’s (1991) Information Search Process (ISP) model depicts the Information Search Process in traditional and digital environments (Kuhlthau, Maniotes, & Caspari, 2007), allowing educators to guide students’ learning interactions in and outside the traditional classroom. Viewed as an instructional model, guided inquiry depicts a teacher-to-student-to-curriculum connection that allows discourse to direct students’ information behavior towards educationally meaningful activities that are associated with knowledge construction. Maniotes’ (2005) guided inquiry model refers to the guided learning space as the third space, wherein curriculum intersects with the student’s world for complementary student–teacher communications that support formal to informal learning (Fig. 2).The influx of technology into formal and informal learning environments has created the need for better understanding of student information behaviors for formal and informal learning interactions in Web 2.0 environments. Information Seeking, as one of the earliest forms of learning through the World Wide Web, often takes the form of acquiring knowledge from a server-based system, which is a Web 1.0 function (Cox, 2012). However, as searches become more complex, two-way interaction and human guidance are also commonly involved. The field of information science provides a framework within which these ideas can be given analytical context. The model adopted for this research is based, in part, on the Information Search Process model established by Kuhlthau (1991).Kuhlthau’s Information Search Process model was devised in the 1980s and revised in the 1990s. This model depicts the six stages of student information searching activity: initiation, selection, exploration, formulation, collection, and presentation (Fig. 3) (Kuhlthau, 1991). These stages are helpful for understanding the primary tasks to be accomplished when students engage in complex Information Seeking behaviors that can be useful for directing learning activities. Within the educational context, emphasis should be placed on supporting information behavior tasks that are associated with independent learning and knowledge construction (George et al., 2006). Established for an understanding of student information behavior in support of guided instructional, diagnostic, and intervention programs, Kuhlthau’s ISP model was initially recognized for its usefulness in providing insight on Information Seeking behavior in traditional library environments. Kuhlthau (2007) revisited the Information Search Process in technology-pervasive environments by conducting an extensive review of related literature for a research inquiry project that examined student information behavior among n=574 school students. Results indicated that Kuhlthau’s ISP model continues to be useful for understanding affective, cognitive, and physical dimensions of student Information Seeking behavior and knowledge acquisition in the digital, technology-rich information environment of Web 2.0 (Kuhlthau, Heinstrom, & Todd, 2008). Additional findings indicate that while some stages in the search process may be intensified in new instantaneous information environments, “…the Information Search Process seems to be an over-arching process regardless of search venue, print, or digital format…” (Kuhlthau et al., 2008). Kuhlthau’s model serves as a foundation for the instrumentation developed and concepts explored as part of the learning preference study reported in this research.Information and communications technologies utilizing the Internet provide unprecedented options for social interactions that are being viewed as opportunities for knowledge seeking and sharing. The seemingly unlimited new media contexts, information access, and communications options in formal and informal settings are often regarded as venues for interactive and engaging teaching and learning (Arnone, Small, Chauncey, & McKenna, 2011). Bruner (1962) identified a relationship between social interactions and the development of higher order cognitive functions. He believed that technology tools support the development of cognition and the evolution of specialized human capabilities. He theorized that, over time, humanity “has changed by linking himself with new, external implementation systems rather than by any conspicuous change in morphology” (Bruner, 1964, p. 68). Vygotsky’s Social Development Theory recognized social interaction as a precursor to development, consciousness, and cognition in a progressive cognitive growth model. Vygotsky’s model depicts the development of cognitive function as a two-stage process: initially on a social level and subsequently on an individual level (Vygotsky, 1962; Vygotsky, 1978).The everyday presence and application of information and communications technology to teaching and learning in many parts of the world today (Christensen & Knezek, 2006) justifies efforts to address the concern that an education that does not include new media-based technologies will not adequately develop student potential, leaving students with a deficit in digital literacies that may contribute to student disengagement from classroom activities (Judson, 2010) and hinder academic achievement. Felt (2010) identifies new media literacy skills as a set of cultural competencies, social skills, and information communications tool skills that are essential for success in education in the 21st century. New media literacy skills have become necessary for content- and process-based learning interaction (Jenkins, 2010). Sometimes referred to as transmedia navigation in the framework of Jenkins, Clinton, Purushotma, Robison, and Weigel (2006), new media literacy skills for Information Sharing support and enrich social learning interactions with a variety of communications media. Learning with transmedia navigation is one of many developing theoretical paradigms relevant to information behavior as a basis for critical analysis of the scales developed and concepts explored in this paper.Measuring student technology attitudes towards new modes of learning interaction and Information Seeking in technology-pervasive learning environments is of particular interest to educators and learning technologists who seek to leverage the power of ICT for effective teaching and learning. Also of great interest are learners’ attitudes towards learning with mobile technologies. The role of mobile technology in education is yet to be clearly defined (Kearney, Schuck, Burden, & Aubusson, 2012), and given the prospective affordances of this technology, it is reasonable that many current papers present convincing arguments for the benefits that mobile technologies and applications can bring to learning environments. For example, Khaddage and Lattemann (2013) point out that mobile technologies and applications offer benefits such as portability, simplicity, and availability. A multi-year study conducted by Kolko, Rose, and Johnson (2007), researchers at the University of Washington, reported on the adoption of information and communication technologies in Central Asia stating that the rate of mobile phone usage is outpacing that of Internet adoption and that the Internet is being accessed primarily through public access sites. These researchers also reported a trend towards the combination and conflation of technology-related Information Seeking and communication usage patterns. Due to the rapid growth of mobile devices throughout the world (World Bank, 2012) and the rapid emergence of mobile technologies and applications (Henríquez & Organista, 2012; Khaddage & Knezek, 2012; Khaddage & Lattemann, 2009), the need has emerged for studies of affordances and barriers that might enhance or constrain the adoption of Mobile Learning in higher education.Mobile Learning is the desired outcome for application of mobile technologies to distance learning. However, its implementation and use in creating new bridges and avenues for learning has been relatively slow (Duncan-Howell & Lee, 2007). The widespread availability of mobile technology and the association of Mobile Learning with new forms of communications-related activities for engaged learning spotlight the affordances that Mobile Learning brings to a broad range of formal and informal learning activities in the 21st century (Andrews & Tynan, 2012). Cox (2012) contended that research approaches investigating innovative ways of teaching and learning with ICT in the future should address technology-enhanced learning “outside formal educational settings” (p. 2), as well as the opportunities presented by “the uptake of thin client technologies” (p. 5) that are mobile and personalized. Lai (2011) devoted a section of his work on digital technology and the culture of teaching and learning in higher education to “…how digital technologies may provide a more active and flexible learning experience by adopting a participatory pedagogical approach and by blending formal learning with informal learning…” (p. 1263).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A comprehensive review of informal learning research reveals a need to better understand teaching and learning with computer-related technologies. For this study, formal to informal learning was envisioned as a conceptual continuum in order to identify the relationships between formal to informal learning and mobile access, Information Seeking, and Information Sharing. Findings from the analysis of n=62 undergraduate college students revealed a measurable relationship between preferences towards information behavior (such as Information Sharing) and preference for Mobile Learning.Additional research is needed to advance the understanding of differences in learner perceptions of ICT use in online, classroom, and blended courses, as well as in learning outside structured curricular environments. The authors contend that mobile access, Information Sharing, and Information Seeking can be viewed as foundational components facilitating the shift in emphasis from formal to informal learning in the digital age. They suggest that an understanding of information behavior in technology-rich environments can help to answer pedagogical concerns associated with the following trends: (1) shifts in control of instruction from teacher to student, (2) student-driven informal learning activities that are often unguided, and (3) interest in tapping into the strengths of information technology for a connection between school and home, as well as informal to formal learning.For example, in a related study of preference for learning with social media, significant relationships were found between student perception of social media communications and information behaviors (Mills, Knezek, & Wakefield, 2013). Learner’s perceptions that social media can result in “rapid feedback from professors” trended positively with:•Preference for ICTL Total (r=.394, p=.002).Preference for Information Sharing (r=.394, p<.0005).Preference for ML (r=.372, p=.003).These magnitudes of the Pearson Product Moment Correlation reflect moderate effect sizes according to guidelines by Cohen (1988).There are many aspects to the choreography of teaching and learning that are richly facilitated through the appropriate use of technologies. Validated instrument scales such as the ICTL Information Seeking, Information Sharing, and ML can help to understand learning preferences for the purpose of supporting formal to informal learning. The scales of the ICTL, Information Sharing and Information Seeking, are also of interest as the basis of taxonomy for identification of student learning behaviors in Web 2.0 Internet environments. Cattell (1987), as one of the originators of factor analysis, observed that taxonomy built upon empirical data for general, group, and specific factors will support a theoretical framework and schemata for ordering data and further experimentation. Cheetham and Chivers (2005) developed a taxonomy of informal professional learning that includes over a dozen categories of experience for learning. The ICTL survey provides factors for a high-level taxonomy from which to gauge learners’ dispositions toward Information Seeking and Information Sharing in Web 2.0 Internet environments, and can therefore guide in the design of new instructional models for support of the formal to informal learning continuum.