@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using decision tree to hybrid morphology generation of Persian verb for English–Persian translation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analyzing the output of English to Persian machine translation systems.Presenting hybrid morphology generation using a parallel corpus.Using a set of linguistically motivated features.Making a model to predict six morphological features of the verb.Applying our model to the output of two MTs and improving the results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Persian verb morphology,Morphological analysis,Machine translation,SMT,Rule-based MT,Decision tree,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Languages such as English need to be morphologically analyzed in translation into morphologically rich languages such as Persian. Analyzing the output of English to Persian machine translation systems illustrates that Persian morphology comes with many challenges especially in the verb conjugation. In this paper, we investigate three ways to deal with the morphology of Persian verb in machine translation (MT): no morphology generation in statistical MT, rule-based morphology generation in rule-based MT and a hybrid-model-independent morphology generation. By model-independent we mean that it is not based on statistical or rule-based MT and could be applied to any English to Persian MT as a post-processor. We select Google translator (translate.google.com) to show the performance of a statistical MT without any morphology generation component for the verb conjugation. Rule-based morphology generation is implemented as a part of a rule-based MT. Finally, we enrich the rule-based approach by statistical methods and information to present a hybrid model. A set of linguistically motivated features are defined using both English and Persian linguistic knowledge obtained from a parallel corpus. Then we make a model to predict six morphological features of the verb in Persian using decision tree classifier and generate an inflected verb form. In a real translation process, by applying our model to the output of Google translator and a rule-based MT as a post-processor, we achieve an improvement of about 0.7% absolute BLEU score in the best case. When we are given the gold lemma in our reference experiments, using the most common feature values as a baseline shows an improvement of almost 2.8% absolute BLEU score on a test set containing 15K sentences.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Translating morphologically rich languages is a challenge in machine translation. One of the main issues in statistical model is the lack of suitable data to see and learn all possible conditions. In fact, since a word stem appears in many completely different surface forms, available data is sparse. Therefore, statistical machine translation (SMT) is faced a serious difficulty because it uses word-based or phrased-based model (Koehn et al., 2003). In morphologically complex languages like Persian, this problem becomes severe in translation of verbs. Persian verbs depend on some of the sentence parts such as the subject of the verb. In the rule-based model this problem is dominated using a large number of manually designed rules. However, considering all possible cases is not easily feasible and makes the number of these rules to grow rapidly. Hence, the complexity of translation could be related directly to the morphologically richness of the language  (Somers, 1999). Both two approaches have advantages that could not be ignored. The idea of hybrid approach is presenting a new model combining these advantages and the best properties of different machine translation (MT) paradigms. Two architectures are used in this approach. In the main architecture a statistical core translation is used to be modified by linguistic information, or a rule-based core is selected to be enriched by statistical techniques. The latter architecture refers to the combination of two or more existing systems to produce improved MT output. Our goal is to modify a rule-based machine translation (RBMT) architecture to include statistical knowledge. Hence, in this paper we enrich the rule-based morphology generation component of a RBMT by statistical information and present a hybrid morphology generation of Persian verb for English–Persian translation.In our previous work (Mahmoudi et al., 2013b), we have analyzed the output of a RBMT to categorize the errors appearing in the system output. But here, we investigate the distribution of such errors in Google translate as a SMT to compare the results. Based on our error analysis, verb conjugation is found as one of the most problematic phenomenons in the context of English-to-Persian MT and this is why we focus on the morphology generation of the verb. Later, in Section 3 we review challenges in translating of English to Persian and Persian verb conjugation followed by the result of our error analysis. In this paper, we investigate three ways to deal with morphology for Persian verb in MT: no morphology generation in SMT, rule-based morphology generation in RBMT and a hybrid-model-independent morphology generation. By model-independent we mean that it is not based on statistical or rule-based MT and could be applied to any English to Persian MT as a post-processor. We use Google translator to show the performance of a statistical English–Persian MT without any morphology generation component. Then, a rule-based morphology generation is implemented as a part of an English–Persian RBMT. Finally, we present a hybrid model to rich morphology generation for Persian verbs incorporating decision tree classifier (DTC)  (Quinlan, 1986) to predict morphological features (MF) of the verb, and compare this technique with two different ways of dealing with morphology in the real translation process. We use an English–Persian parallel corpus to train DTC. English side is used to produce linguistic information such as syntactic parse tree and dependency relations. Persian side is used to extract linguistic information to generate an appropriate inflected Persian verb as well. Section 4 presents a rule-based morphology generation and our proposed hybrid model. To compare our model with the output of RBMT and SMT, we apply our model to the output of these systems and the results are presented in Section 5; and finally, Section 6 covers our conclusions and proposes future works.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper reviewed some challenges which exist in the context of English–Persian MT. Since Persian is known as a morphologically rich language it requires further efforts to enhance the quality of MT systems in this language. Analyzing the output of English–Persian MT revealed that verbs have an important role in the translation quality. Hence, we have focused on the verb inflections as a highly inflecting class of words in Persian. In this paper, we investigated three ways to deal with the morphology of Persian verb in machine translation (MT): no morphology generation in statistical MT, rule-based morphology generation in rule-based MT and a hybrid-model-independent morphology generation.As the main contribution of this work, we have implemented a rule-based morphology generation component for a RBMT and presented a hybrid morphology prediction and generation method to improve RBMT. The rule-based paradigm uses manually extracted linguistic rules and generates inflected verb form. The hybrid model uses DTC as a machine learning technique and predicts MFs of the verb. Then, we used a FSA to generate inflected verb form using predicted MFs. We have evaluated our approach on a test set containing 15K sentences and obtain better BLEU scores compared with our baseline, morphology generation with lemma plus the most common feature values and rule-based morphology generation.As our proposed method is model-independent, it could be applied to any English to Persian MT as a post-processor and improves its output, if it is given an English sentence and the corresponding output, and an alignment for English verbs. Fig. 6shows the general schema of this process. Therefore, we applied our model to the output of a RBMT and Google translator as a SMT and significant improvements acquired, according to the results of the experiments.