@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the identification of piston slap events in internal combustion engines using tribodynamic analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Six methods are used to identify piston slap events in internal combustion engines.The number of slap events increases as the engine speed increases.Quasi-static/transient force methods can predict slap position at lower engine speed.The transient minimum film thickness method is more successful at higher engine speed.The piston-impact angular duration method predicts slap events through all tests.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Piston slap,Internal combustion engines,Tribology,Dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Piston slap is a major source of vibration and noise in internal combustion engines. Therefore, better understanding of the conditions favouring piston slap can be beneficial for the reduction of engine Noise, Vibration and Harshness (NVH). Past research has attempted to determine the exact position of piston slap events during the engine cycle and correlate them to the engine block vibration response. Validated numerical/analytical models of the piston assembly can be very useful towards this aim, since extracting the relevant information from experimental measurements can be a tedious and complicated process.In the present work, a coupled simulation of piston dynamics and engine tribology (tribodynamics) has been performed using quasi-static and transient numerical codes. Thus, the inertia and reaction forces developed in the piston are calculated. The occurrence of piston slap events in the engine cycle is monitored by introducing six alternative concepts: (i) the quasi-static lateral force, (ii) the transient lateral force, (iii) the minimum film thickness occurrence, (iv) the maximum energy transfer, (v) the lubricant squeeze velocity and (vi) the piston-impact angular duration.The validation of the proposed methods is achieved using experimental measurements taken from a single cylinder petrol engine in laboratory conditions. The surface acceleration of the engine block is measured at the thrust- and anti-thrust side locations. The correlation between the theoretically predicted events and the measured acceleration signals has been satisfactory in determining piston slap incidents, using the aforementioned concepts. The results also exhibit good repeatability throughout the set of measurements obtained in terms of the number of events occurring and their locations during the engine cycle.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The ever increasing importance of fuel efficiency, noise reduction and engine performance is forcing researchers to better understand the mechanism and effective parameters of piston dynamics. The piston assembly plays a key role in the generation of engine mechanical losses, including noise [1]. The latter is well known as piston impact (also slap) noise. In order to better study the occurrence of slap noise events, one should carefully monitor the piston׳s secondary motion, which leads to skirt-to-cylinder liner contacts. The excitation conditions (forces and moments) on the piston are responsible for the secondary motion, which occurs laterally within the clearance (translation) and around the piston pin (rotation). The schematic of these motions is given inFig. 1. ϑ andϕare the crank and connecting rod angles, respectively [2].Ris the piston crown radius (later used to calculate the crown area). When the crankshaft rotation is clockwise, the left side of the cylinder liner is called the thrust side (TS) and the opposite side is known as the anti-thrust side (ATS). Piston impacts can occur on either side of the liner. Piston slap excites the engine block and manifests itself in the form of surface vibrations, which are eventually radiated as noise in the vicinity of the engine. In addition to the perceived benefits for engine NVH, good understanding of the number and location of piston slap events can be helpful for fuel efficiency purposes through improved system tribodynamics [2].Previous numerical/analytical and experimental studies on piston slapping differ with regard to the way they consider lubrication effects, piston׳s rotation and piston skirt deformation. The common aspect in all these approaches is that they determine piston slap events (number and angular position of occurrences). In general, three approaches have been proposed in the literature to identify piston slap events based on the secondary motion of the piston. In the most simplified approach, the effects of lubrication and piston rotation are neglected. In this case, the piston׳s secondary motion (translation) is directly investigated using the contribution of forces in the primary direction [3–5]. This method will be referred to as quasi-static lateral force in this paper. Nevertheless, accurate investigation of the piston׳s secondary motion requires inclusion of the piston׳s angular motion and oil-film hydrodynamic effects. In this approach, a coupled simulation of piston dynamics and engine tribology (tribodynamics) is necessary prior to the extraction of the secondary motion [1,6,7]. Thus, the piston dynamics equations of motion are described using Lagrange׳s method and are coupled to the Reynolds equation for the piston skirt-liner conjunction [8]. The piston side force is extracted from the tribodynamic solution. The direction change in the side force can be used to identify the initiation of piston-slap events. Therefore, this method will be referred as transient lateral force in the present study. Finally, the third approach exploits the same tribodynamic analysis. In this method, the minimum film thickness occurrence is considered as the criterion for slap events instead of the lateral force. When the film thickness takes its minimum value (at either TS or ATS), it can be inferred that piston-liner interaction is intensified and piston slap occurs [9]. Perera et al. studied the piston-cylinder film thickness utilising the multi-physics model of a single cylinder engine. However, they considered the piston as a rigid body in their approach. The effects of friction and bearing load were included in their studies [10,11]. Three new approaches to identify piston slap events based on the tribodynamic analysis are also investigated in this study. The first approach utilises the film thickness and force variations together to calculate the transferred energy to the cylinder wall. Whenever the maximum energy is transferred, piston slap occurrence is assumed. This method will be called maximum energy transfer. In another approach, the rate of change in the minimum film thickness is traced to pinpoint the initiation of piston slap. As the minimum film thickness velocity changes from positive to negative, film squeeze action initiates and piston slap is assumed. This method is referred as lubricant squeeze velocity. The final method differs in that piston slap is indicated within a crank angular interval, whose limits are defined by the initiation of the squeeze action and the minimum film thickness occurrence methods. This interval represents the initiation and completion of piston slap. The method will be called piston-impact angular duration.The six approaches chosen for investigation of the piston׳s secondary motion involve numerical/analytical calculations. Up to 16 potential slap events can be identified theoretically but only about 6 to 10 impacts in each cycle are observed in practice [4,12]. In order to validate the position and number of events, the experimental set-up of a single-cylinder, 4-stroke Honda petrol engine is utilised. A common practice is the attachment of accelerometers on the engine block surface. There are different experimental set-up arrangements, depending on the measurement purposes. Chiollaz and Favre have studied noise transfer mechanisms inside the engine using several transducers [13]. Geng and Chen [4] used three accelerometers to position piston events more accurately. Richmond [14] used only one accelerometer on the engine block to capture surface vibrations. The measured acceleration contains contributions from the piston secondary motion, as well as other sources; therefore, signal processing is required to filter out the irrelevant signal content. Combustion and piston impact are difficult to separate, since their noise levels are of the same order. Moreover, they occur almost at the same time in the vicinity of the top dead centre (TDC) and are highly correlated. Pruvost et al. introduced a spectrofilter to implement the impact-source separation [15]. Geng and Chen [4] used wavelet decomposition and a fast reconstruction algorithm for this purpose. Another identification method is the blind source separation (BSS) of vibration components. The principles of this method are explained by Antoni [16]. Liu and Randall used the BSS method for the separation of internal combustion engine piston slap from other measured vibration signals [17]. Badaoui et al. [18] and Serviere et al. [19] compared Wiener filtering and BSS techniques to isolate mechanical and combustion noises. They also established a comparison between the two methods. Chen and Randall [20] have exploited the “pseudo angular acceleration” of the block to extract mechanical signals. A further study of the phase variation and frequency behaviour was applied to separate piston slap events from other mechanical sources by the same authors.In the present study, the six aforementioned concepts will be applied in a single-cylinder engine case study for different engine speeds and loads. The surface vibration acceleration is recorded on both TS and ATS sides of the engine block. The accuracy of each method will be discussed in terms of the number and position of the mechanical events predicted, including piston slap events. The predictions are verified with experimental measurements, revealing the potential of each method for identifying piston slap events.Prior to explicitly investigating the proposed concepts, a brief description is provided about the forces and moments acting on the piston. InFig. 2, the free body diagrams of the piston and pin are presented [7].FGis the gas force acting on the piston crown,Fhydrepresents the force supported by the lubricant andFfis the friction developed between piston and liner.moandmpare piston and pin masses,Ioindicates the piston mass moment of inertia acting on piston tilt angleβabout its centre of gravity.dCOGanddpare the centre of gravity distance and pin offset from the piston׳s centre line. In the current study, pin offset is assumed to be zero and gas forceFGis assumed to act along the pin centre. As the piston reciprocates inside the liner, the connecting rod sways from side to side with its inclination introducing the forceFLat angleϕwith respect to the cylinder axis. The inclinedFLimposes a force component,Ft, in the secondary direction. The lateral force component is given in Eq. (1). The inertial force due to gravity is considered as insignificant.(1)Ft=(mo+mp)x¨−Fhyd=FLsinϕ=(FG−((mo+mp)y¨+Ffsgn(y)))tanϕThe effect of friction forceFfonFtis less than 2.4% and it will be neglected in this study [3].Fhydin Eq. (1) is determined using Reynolds equation, which is solved in the form of Eq. (2)[21].(2)∂∂y(ρh312η∂P∂y)+∂∂z(ρh312η∂P∂z)=∂∂y(ρhU2)+∂(ρh)∂twhere,ρ,η,U,P, andhare density, viscosity, entrainment velocity, pressure and film thickness of the lubricant. The directionsyandzcorrespond to the primary and tangential directions along the piston skirt (shown in Fig. 2).In order to investigate the tilt action of the piston, the moments about the piston-pin are described by Eq. (3).yhydshows the distance of resultant lubricant force from pin position.aandbare the pin and centre of gravity locations with respect to the upper edge of piston skirt.TfandTGare torques due to friction and gas force about piston pin.(3)(I0+m0[dCOG2+(a−b)2])β¨−modCOGy¨+mo(a−b)x¨=−Tf+TG+FhydyhydThese three equations are the basics to the six concepts used in this study.In literature, the change of direction in lateral force is the criterion to identify piston slap [4,5]. In the first two concepts here, different methods for the identification of lateral force will be discussed. In the first concept, oil film hydrodynamic force and piston tilt are neglected. Therefore, lateral force is calculated using Eq. (1) and neglecting theFhydand friction terms. Slap events can then be directly determined using forces in the primary direction. In other words, wheneverFG=(mo+mp)y¨ortanϕ=0, piston slap may initiate.tanϕis equal to zero at the TDC and bottom dead centre (BDC). For engines without crankshaft offset, TDC and BDC are defined atϕ=0andϑ=kπ(k=0,1,2,…). When crankshaft offset is present, theϕ=0positions will slightly shift in terms of crank angle. The exactϕvalue is calculated using Eq. (4).r,landϑare the crank radius, connecting rod length and crank angle, respectively.Ccsis the crankshaft offset [22].(4)ϕ=asin(rsinϑ+Ccsl)In order to determine whether piston slap occurs at TS or ATS of the cylinder liner, the value oftanϕshould be investigated along with the variations of the gas and inertia forces. Two general cases could occur within the cycle: (i) angular condition,tanϕ=0and (ii) force condition,∑F=0.tanϕhas periodic behaviour. At the position wheretanϕ=0, if the gas force is greater than the inertia force, piston slap is expected at TS, while if the inertia force is greater than the gas force, the event happens at ATS. Alternatively, regarding the force condition, the total force can equal zero in the primary direction. This behaviour is interpreted as equality between gas and inertia forces in the graphical representation ofFig. 3. The coincidence point means that the resultant force changes direction. The sign of the force andtanϕprior to the coincidence point can be used to identify the direction of the piston slap event. If the resultant force is greater than zero andtanϕ>0, the piston moves from TS to ATS. Iftanϕ<0, slap occurs at TS. Providing that the force is smaller than zero prior to the incidence point andtanϕ>0, then piston slides from ATS to TS. Iftanϕ<0, then the piston impacts the cylinder at ATS. Fig. 3 shows typical plots of the dimensionless gas force (ψG) and piston/pin inertia forces (ψ0y+ψpy) in the primary direction (obtained by dividing by(m0+mp)rω2sinϑto form the dimensionless contributions [5]).ωis the engine angular speed. The graph of Fig. 3 demonstrates how the method works [5]. Curves forψGwith higher subscript values correspond to higher engine speeds (the engine speed is increased by 1000rpm steps for each curve). For the lowest engine speed (ψG1), the gas and inertia forces do not intersect; therefore, no piston slap is expected except at dead centres. As the engine speed increases, an incident is observed atψG2, while atψG3the number of incidents (slap events) increases to two. Considering the case forψG3, there are five possible piston slap events between −180 and 180 degrees. Three of these occur at the dead centre positions. According to the method, all three events are expected at the thrust side becauseFG>(mo+mp)y¨. Two incidents are observed between the gas and inertia forces at about −65 and −27 degrees. The first one happens at the ATS (with the gas force initially being higher than the inertia force andtanϕbeing negative, while after the event the inertia force is higher). The second position happens at TS with the gas force being smaller than inertia forces prior to the event.The consideration of the oil-film effect and piston rotation provides a more comprehensive description of the system׳s secondary dynamics. Thus, the prediction of the lateral force is achieved by solving piston dynamics with oil film tribology (solution of Eqs. (1)–(3) simultaneously). The dependency of oil density and viscosity on pressure is taken into account using Dowson-Higginson [23] and Roelands [24] expressions, respectively. The elastic deformation of the piston is considered in the film thickness expression. The elasto-hydrodynamic force is then applied on piston dynamics to calculate the lateral force as the criterion for slap events [1,9,25]. When the lateral force crosses zero and changes direction, piston slap is expected. In this approach, TS contact is indicated by negative side force values and ATS contact by positive values. Therefore, when the lateral force changes from positive to negative, piston slap is expected at TS. On the other hand, a lateral force change from negative to positive indicates events at ATS.In this approach, the EHL minimum film thickness occurrence is the variable that identifies piston-cylinder interactions [9]. The film thickness is estimated for both TS and ATS. The solution method is similar to that of the transient lateral force criteria with the only difference being that the EHL minimum film thickness represents the exact position of piston events rather than their initiation. If the side force on the skirt is high enough to make the oil-film squeeze, then a slap event initiates. Because of the piston׳s tilt motion, squeeze action may take place at either side of the cylinder liner simultaneously. The side of the piston skirt, where the EHL minimum film thickness occurs, defines whether piston slap direction is towards TS or ATS.Oil-film thickness and pressure are available for TS and ATS directions using piston tribodynamics. The transferred energy to the cylinder wall can be calculated between time-steps using the film properties. The product of force and oil film displacement yields the work produced. When lubricant gets squeezed, the energy is transferred to the cylinder liner. As squeeze action continues, the side force increases and work produced is expected to rise. Due to lubricant׳s hydrodynamic pressure, squeeze action gradually slows down. The position of the maximum work produced is assumed as that of piston slap occurrence. The direction of the event depends on whether the exploited oil properties pertain to the TS or ATS direction.In piston-cylinder tribodynamics, a transient solution of the Reynolds equation is obtained (the oil-film thickness and pressure depend on the oil properties, as well as its history). In Eq. (2), the term∂h/∂treflects oil film time history and indicates the rate of change in the film thickness. Thus, this term can be referred as lubricant squeeze velocity, which can be either negative (squeeze) or positive (separation). In order to highlight the piston slap events, the squeeze velocity is investigated for the position of the minimum film thickness. The change of sign in squeeze velocity means the squeeze action turns into separation and vice versa. The initiation of squeeze action describes piston impact; therefore, whenever squeeze velocity moves from negative towards positive values, a piston slap event is defined. The direction of the event is identified by the side of piston skirt where squeeze velocity is observed.In all previous concepts, the exact positions of piston slap events are sought. In this method, angular intervals are given to cover the entire piston impact process (from the initiation to the event completion). In order to pinpoint the positions that piston impact initiates, the lubricant squeeze velocity is exploited. The EHL minimum film thickness occurrence highlights the completion of the corresponding events. The initiation and completion positions are paired using both angular positions and directions. The angular intervals are smaller at the parts of engine cycle where greater film variations are available. The direction of the events depends on the predicted directions in the EHL minimum film thickness occurrence and the minimum film squeeze velocity criteria.The experimental measurements to verify the theoretical findings were made on a Honda CRF 450 R single-cylinder, four-stroke petrol engine. The engine specifications are given inTable 1. The cylinder pressure, engine speed and time-based crank angle are recorded to be used in the theoretical calculations. Surface accelerations at TS and ATS are measured by two accelerometers, which are attached to the engine block. The optical shaft encoder correlates measured acceleration with crank angle and in-cylinder pressure. The data are captured and stored using LABVIEW. The experimental setup schematic is given inFig. 4. The gas force is calculated by multiplying the in-cylinder pressure by the piston-crown area.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, six concepts have been used to study potential piston slap events in internal combustion engines. In the available literature, identification methods for piston-liner impacts have been proposed based on the quasi-static contribution of forces in the lateral direction of piston motion, on sign change of the transient lateral force and on occurrence of the minimum film thickness. Three additional concepts were introduced in this study, which are the maximum transferred energy, the lubricant squeeze velocity and the piston-impact angular duration. A single cylinder petrol engine experimental rig was employed to validate the concepts studied. It is shown that the quasi-static and transient lateral force concepts are successful in the prediction of angular position and location of events at lower engine speeds and loads. At higher engine speed/load combinations (with larger inertia contributions), the transient mechanism of the minimum film thickness occurrence proves to be a more successful criterion. The piston-impact angular duration and maximum energy methods are those techniques sustaining their effectiveness in estimating impact events through all the engine tests. The angular duration method suggests an interval for the occurrence of each event, while the maximum energy method points out the accurate event position. It is also shown that the number of events increases in theory as the engine speed increases. The examined concepts reveal that transient tribodynamic analysis is a very useful technique to identify the number of piston slap events, as well as their severity as a result of the engine speed/load conditions (particularly at higher speeds necessitating capture of faster impact events). As future work, the accuracy of the examined methods may be investigated in different engine configurations (higher number of cylinders) and various speed/load ranges. In addition, the effects of connecting rod inertia and friction force can be added in the systems modelled.