@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prior and contextual emotion of words in sentential context

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Words have prior emotion and emotion in context.We automate this distinction, and explore features useful in this task.We put words by emotion or lack thereof into seven classes, and group features.Our features work best when all groups are combined.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sentiment analysis,Polarity,Emotion,Prior emotion,Contextual emotion,Syntactic features,Natural language processing,Machine learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A set of words labeled with their prior emotion is an obvious place to start on the automatic discovery of the emotion of a sentence, but it is clear that context must also be considered. It may be that no simple function of the labels on the individual words captures the overall emotion of the sentence; words are interrelated and they mutually influence their affect-related interpretation. It happens quite often that a word which invokes emotion appears in a neutral sentence, or that a sentence with no emotional word carries an emotion. This could also happen among different emotion classes. The goal of this work is to distinguish automatically between prior and contextual emotion, with a focus on exploring features important in this task. We present a set of features which enable us to take the contextual emotion of a word and the syntactic structure of the sentence into account to put sentences into emotion classes. The evaluation includes assessing the performance of different feature sets across multiple classification methods. We show the features and a promising learning method which significantly outperforms two reasonable baselines. We group our features by the similarity of their nature. That is why another facet of our evaluation is to consider each group of the features separately and investigate how well they contribute to the result. The experiments show that all features contribute to the result, but it is the combination of all the features that gives the best performance.Recognition, interpretation and representation of affect have been investigated by researchers in the field of affective computing (Picard, 1997). They have considered a wide range of modalities such as affect in speech, facial display, posture and physiological activity. It is only recently that there has been a growing interest in automatic identification and extraction of sentiment, opinions and emotions in text.Sentiment analysis and opinion mining constitute the field of study which analyzes people's opinions, sentiments, evaluations, attitudes and emotions occurring in written language. In the early 2000s sentiment analysis has become one of the most active research areas in natural language processing (NLP), and a major application of data mining, Web mining and text mining. This wave of activity is due to the rapid growth of the social media – in particular reviews, discussion fora, blogs, micro-blogs, Twitter and social networks – and the ensuing easy access to a mass of subjective and emotional data recorded in the digital form.Another reason why sentiment analysis is such an active area of NLP research is that its applications have spread to multiple domains, from consumer product reviews, health care and financial services to social events and political elections (Liu, 2012). Here are some of the best known applications: classifying positive and negative movie reviews (Pang et al., 2002; Turney, 2002), opinion question-answering (Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Stoyanov et al., 2005), and summarizing customer reviews (Hu and Li, 2004).Early research has mainly focused on determining the presence of sentiment in the given text, and on determining its polarity – the positive or negative orientation, a finding which is useful but insufficient in most real-life applications. Practicality often dictates a more in-depth and fine-grained analysis. The analysis of sentiment must therefore go beyond differentiating positive from negative emotions toward giving a systematic account of the qualitative differences among individual emotions (Ortony et al., 1988).Emotions are among of the most pervasive aspects of human experience. They have been studied in multiple fields, psychology, philosophy, sociology among them. Recently, emotions have attracted the attention of researchers in computer science and particularly in computational linguistics. Computational methods of emotion analysis have also focused on various emotion modalities, but there was only limited effort in the direction of automatic recognition of emotion in text (Alm et al., 2005; Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007; Neviarouskaya et al., 2011).In this work, we deal with assigning fine-grained emotion classes to sentences in text. On the face of it, our task is strongly related to polarity analysis, but categorization into distinct emotion classes is more difficult. That is not only because emotion recognition in general requires deeper insights but also because there are similarities between emotions which make clean classification a challenge. Particularly notable in this regard are anger and disgust, two emotion classes which even human annotators often find hard to distinguish (Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007).A number of theories have been proposed, each with its own set of basic emotions, though with significant overlap. Ekman (1992) argued for six basic emotions with universally accepted distinctive facial expressions: joy, sadness, anger, fear, disgust and surprise. Plutchik (1962) added trust and anticipation to Ekman's set. Izard (1971) defined ten basic emotions: anger, contempt, disgust, distress, fear, guilt, interest, joy, shame and surprise. More recently, Parrot (2002) proposed six primary emotions: love, joy, surprise, anger, sadness and fear.We categorize sentences into six basic emotions defined in Ekman (1992), a set most frequently adopted by NLP researchers. There also may, naturally, be no emotion in a sentence; that is, tagged as neutral/non-emotional.Sentiment can be sought in text units at three levels (Wilson et al., 2009). While much work in sentiment analysis has targeted documents, more has been done with sentences. The third level of sentiment analysis is phrase-level, which, to the best of our knowledge, has not been used in emotion recognition research due to its complication and lack of data.Document-level analysis assumes that each document expresses a single sentiment. While it is not unlikely for a document to express a single polarity, it is quite rare to find a document with only one emotion. On the other hand, one emotion is quite feasible in a sentence, though it is not uncommon for more than one emotion to be conveyed. For example, the sentence “Although the service is not that great, I still love this restaurant.” has a positive tone, but is not entirely positive. In such cases, we would have to classify emotions at the phrase level and allow sentences with multiple emotions. To train a classifier, we would need a dataset with mixed emotions marked. To the best of our knowledge, however, no such dataset is available yet. That is why we work with datasets from which sentences with conflicting emotion annotations have been removed, so we can assume that each sentence only indicates one emotion.In order to recognize and analyze affect in written text – seldom explicitly marked for emotions – NLP researchers have come up with a variety of techniques, including machine learning, rule-based methods and the lexical method (Neviarouskaya et al., 2011).The existence of an annotated corpus with rich information about opinions and emotions would support the development and evaluation of NLP systems which exploit such information. In particular, statistical NLP and machine learning have become the methods of choice for constructing a wide variety of practical NLP applications (Wiebe et al., 2005). Such methods have been previously applied to corpus-based features, mainly unigrams, combined with lexical features (Pang et al., 2002; Alm et al., 2005; Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007; Katz et al., 2007). The study by Pang et al. (2002) was among the first to describe a classification of movie reviews into positive and negative. The authors showed that using unigrams as features in classification performed quite well with Naive Bayes and with Support Vector Machines (SVM). In general, these two supervised machine learning algorithms have long been the methods of choice for sentiment recognition in text. SVM has been shown to outperform Naive Bayes consistently in our particular task (Pang et al., 2002; Alm et al., 2005; Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007; Ghazi et al., 2010). The weakness of such methods is that they disregard negation, syntactic relations and semantic dependencies. They also require large annotated corpora for meaningful statistics and good performance. Processing may take time, and annotation effort is inevitably high.Rule-based methods (Chaumartin, 2007; Neviarouskaya et al., 2011) have not been as popular as machine learning. They require a substantial manual rule-creation effort, an expensive process with weak guarantee of consistency and coverage, and likely very task-dependent. The set of rules for an affect analysis task (Neviarouskaya et al., 2011) can differ drastically from what underlies other tasks such as rule-based part-of-speech tagger, discourse parsers, word sense disambiguation and machine translation.Another common take on emotion analysis is to use a lexicon with information about which words and phrases carry which emotion. The study of emotions in lexical semantics was the theme of a SemEval 2007 task (Strapparava and Mihalcea, 2007), carried out in an unsupervised setting (Strapparava and Mihalcea, 2008; Chaumartin, 2007; Kozareva, 2007; Katz et al., 2007). The participants were encouraged to work with WordNet-Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004) and SentiWordNet (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006) to classify news headline sentences into six emotions. Word-level analysis, however, will not suffice when affect is expressed by phrases which require complex phrase- and sentence-level analyses: words are interrelated and they mutually influence their affect-related interpretation. On the other hand, words can have more than one sense, and they can only be disambiguated in context. Let us highlight several issues.•An emotional word may have different orientation in different application domains (Fahrni and Klenner, 2008) – like the word cool when used to describe a car or someone's demeanor.A sentence containing an emotional word may not express any emotion. Consider the vacuous polite afraid in “I’m afraid it's going to rain.”Many sentences without emotional words can also convey emotions. Consider the rather negative opinion in “This washer uses a lot of water.”As a result, the emotion conveyed by a word in a sentence can differ drastically from the emotion of the word on its own. We refer to the emotion listed for a word in an emotion lexicon as the word's prior emotion. A word's contextual emotion is the emotion of the sentence in which that word appears, when we take the context into account.In this work, we focus on disambiguating the contextual emotion of words, taking a sentence as the context. Our method combines several ways of tackling the problem. First, we find keywords listed in the lexicon we use, and select the sentences which include emotional words from that lexicon. Next, we study the syntactic structure and semantic relations in the text surrounding the emotional word. We explore features important in emotion recognition, and we consider their effect on the emotion expressed by the sentence. Finally, we use machine learning to classify the sentence, represented by the chosen features, based on the contextual emotion of emotional words which occur in that sentence.We evaluate our results by comparing our method applied to our set of features with Support Vector Machine (SVM) applied to Bag-of-Words, which was found to give the best performance among supervised methods (Yang and Li, 1999; Pang et al., 2002; Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007; Ghazi et al., 2010). We show that our method is promising and that it outperforms both a system which works only with prior emotions of words, ignoring context, and a system which applies SVM to Bag-of-Words. We also evaluate the usefulness of our features for this task by comparing the performance of each group of features with the baseline. We find that all the features help the performance of the classifier somewhat, and that certain features – such as part-of-speech and negation – improve the results significantly.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the dataset and the lexicons used in our experiments. Section 3 discusses the features which we find useful for recognizing contextual emotions. Experiments and results are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, we sum up our findings and discuss future work.Supervised statistical methods typically require training data and test data, manually annotated with respect to each language-processing task to be learned. Due to the contributions of many researchers, several subjectivity and emotion datasets and lexicons have been constructed, most of them publicly available. In this section, we explain the dataset and lexicons used in our experiments.WordNet-Affect. The first resource we require is an emotional lexicon, a set of words which indicate the presence of a particular emotion. WordNet-Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004)11It was among the resources at www.cse.unt.edu/~rada/affectivetext/ provided for SemEval 2007 Task 14.is organized exactly as its parent, WordNet: into a synset hierarchy by hypernymy/hyponymy. Affective labels are simply attached to synsets in that hierarchy. There is information in this resource – additional labels for positive, negative, neutral or ambiguous affect – which we did not use in this work. WordNet-Affect contains six lists of words corresponding to the six basic emotion categories. Table 1shows their distribution.The prior-polarity lexicon. The prior-polarity subjectivity lexicon (Wilson et al., 2009) contains over 8000 subjectivity clues collected from a number of sources. To create this lexicon, the authors began with the list of subjectivity clues extracted by Riloff (2003). The list was expanded using a dictionary and a thesaurus, and adding positive and negative word lists from the General Inquirer (www.wjh.harvard.edu/~inquirer/). Words are grouped into strong subjective and weak subjective clues; Table 2presents the distribution of their polarity.The NRC-Emotion lexicon. This lexicon (Mohammad and Turney, 2010) is a list of words and their associations with eight emotions (anger, fear, anticipation, trust, surprise, sadness, joy, and disgust) and two sentiments (negative and positive); this dataset has recently become publicly available. The manual annotation was constructed by crowd-sourcing, using Amazon's Mechanical Turk. Each word-sense pair had at least three annotators, and the lexicon was created by taking the union of emotions associated with all the senses of a word. Table 3displays the distribution of the emotion and polarity of words. In our experiments, we only consider Ekman's six emotions, so we remove the trust and anticipation emotional words from the lexicon. The main difference between this lexicon and WordNet-Affect is that each word in the lexicon can belong to multiple emotion classes as well as both sentiment classes. As a result, while there are 6195 emotion words and their emotion class pairs for six emotion classes in the lexicon, it only has 3462 emotion word types. We do not use the positive and negative words, because the prior-polarity lexicon is larger and covers more words.The intensifier lexicon. It is a list of 112 modifiers (adverbs) (Neviarouskaya et al., 2010). Two annotators gave coefficients for intensity degree – strengthening or weakening, from 0.0 to 2.0 – and the result was averaged.Emotion dataset. The main consideration in the selection of data for emotional classification task is that the data should be rich in emotion expressions. That is why we chose for our experiments a corpus of blog sentences annotated with emotion labels, discussed by Aman and Szpakowicz (2007). Each sentence is tagged by its dominant emotion, or as non-emotional if it does not include any emotion. The annotation is based on Ekman's six emotions at the sentence level. The dataset contains 4090 annotated sentences, 68% of which were marked as non-emotional. The highly unbalanced dataset with non-emotional sentences as by far the largest class, and merely 3% in the fear and surprise classes, prompted us to remove randomly 2000 of the non-emotional sentences. This brought the number of non-emotional sentences down to 38% of all the sentences, and thus reduced the imbalance. Table 4shows the details of the chosen dataset.For our particular task we cannot even use the whole dataset. Our main consideration is to classify a sentence based on the contextual emotion of the words (known as emotional in the lexicon). The two emotion lexicons described in Section 2.1 serve this purpose; we use them separately to choose only the sentences which contain at least one emotional word according to the lexicon.In the NRC-Emotion lexicon, however, each word can belong to multiple emotion classes. This actually happens quite often among negative emotion classes. For example, the word “hate” belongs to four negative emotion classes: anger, disgust, fear and sadness. As a result, if we choose sentences which contain at least one emotional word according to the NRC-Emotion lexicon, we will have 1010 sentences. Only 361 of those sentences will have one emotional word from exactly one emotion class (201 of them are Happy words). Part of our experiments are based on sentences with only one emotional word, so this makes the NRC-Emotion lexicon not suitable for our task, particularly for negative emotion classes. Even so, we use it for comparison purposes and to evaluate our features.In effect, to prepare the dataset for our task, we use the WordNet-Affect lexicon. In the dataset, we only choose sentences which contain at least one emotional word according to WordNet-Affect. This gives us 783 sentences, 625 of which contain only one emotional word. The details appear in Table 5.As is any other application of supervised machine learning, the key in sentiment classification is the engineering of a set of effective features. Terms and their frequency are the most common features in traditional text classification, and they have been shown highly effective for sentiment classification as well (Liu, 2012). They cannot, however, detect relations and semantic dependencies. Those most common features serve only for comparison purposes.The features used in our experiments were motivated both by the literature (Wilson et al., 2009; Choi et al., 2005) and by the exploration of contextual emotion of words in the annotated data. The counts of the feature values were based on the occurrences in the sentence of emotional words from the lexicons. For ease of description, we group the features into four distinct sets: emotion-word features, part-of-speech (POS) features, sentence features and dependency-tree features. We will describe some of the features as multi-valued or categorical features. In practice, however, all features have been binarized.Emotion-word features. This set of features is based on the emotion words themselves. Although the prior emotion and polarity of the emotional word in the sentence are insufficient for emotion analysis, they are useful for simple sentences such as “I am happy”, where the prior and contextual emotion of the sentence are exactly the same and there are no emotion shifters and influencers. These features have also been widely adopted and found useful in detecting sentiment and emotions:(a)the emotion of a word according to the emotion lexicon;the polarity of a word according to the prior-polarity lexicon;the presence of a word on a small list of modifiers.POS features. Words in certain grammatical classes have been shown to be more effective in recognizing the emotion of a sentence. For example, adjectives and adverbs are important indicators of emotions (Mohammad and Turney, 2010). We use the Stanford tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003), which gives every word in a sentence a Penn Treebank tag.The WordNet-Affect emotion lexicon lists the POS of the words along with their corresponding emotion. That is why we use the POS of the emotional word itself, both according to the emotion lexicon and to the Stanford tagger.The POS of neighboring words in the same sentence are an important factor. We chose a [−2, +2] window, as suggested by the literature (Choi et al., 2005).Sentence features. At present, we only have one feature in this group: the number of words in the sentence.Dependency-tree features. These features capture the various types of relationships which involve the emotional word. The feature values come from a dependency parse tree of the sentence, obtained by parsing the sentence and then converting it to dependencies. We work with the Stanford parser (Marneffe et al., 2006). The dependencies are all binary relations: a grammatical relation holds between a governor (head) and a dependent (modifier). Fig. 1shows an example.According to Mohammad and Turney (2010), adverbs and adjectives are some of the most emotion-inspiring terms.22This is not surprising given that adjectives qualify nouns and adverbs qualify verbs.That is why we have decided to consider only a handful of the 52 different dependencies. In order to keep the number of features small, we only chose the negation, adverb and adjective modifier dependencies.After parsing the sentence and getting the dependencies, we count three dependency-tree Boolean features for the emotional word.(a)If the word is in a “neg” dependency (negation modifier): true when there is a negation word which modifies the emotional word.If the word is in a “amod” dependency (adjectival modifier): true when the emotional word is (i) a noun modified by an adjective or (ii) an adjective modifying a noun.If the word is in a “advmod” dependency (adverbial modifier): true when the emotional word (i) is a non-clausal adverb or the head of an adverbial phrase which serves to modify the meaning of a word or (ii) has been modified by an adverb.We also have several modification features based on the dependency tree. These Boolean features capture different types of relationships involving the emotional word. We list the feature name and the condition on the emotional wordwwhich makes the feature true.(i)Modifies-positive:wmodifies a positive word from the prior-polarity lexicon.Modifies-negative:wmodifies a negative word from the prior-polarity lexicon.Modified-by-positive:wis the head of the dependency, which is modified by a positive word from the prior-polarity lexicon.Modified-by-negative:wis the head of the dependency, which is modified by a negative word from the prior-polarity lexicon.Modifies-intensifier-strengthen:wmodifies a strengthening intensifier from the intensifier lexicon.Modifies-intensifier-weaken:wmodifies a weakening intensifier from the intensifier lexicon.Modified-by-intensifier-strengthen:wis the head of the dependency, which is modified by a strengthening intensifier from the intensifier lexicon.Modified-by-intensifier-weaken:wis the head of the dependency, which is modified by a weakening intensifier from the intensifiers lexicon.Our main goal is to evaluate the usefulness of the features described in Section 3 in recognizing the contextual emotion of an emotional word in a sentence. To evaluate those features, we investigate their performance, both together and separately. In the experiments, we use the emotion dataset presented in Section 2. Next, we represent the data with the features presented in Section 3. Those features, however, were defined for each emotional word based on its context; we will therefore proceed differently for sentences with one emotional word and sentences with more than one emotional word.(1)In sentences with one emotional word, we assume that the contextual emotion of the emotional word is the same as the emotion assigned to the sentence by the human annotators; therefore all the 625 sentences with one emotional word are represented with the set of features presented in Section 3 and the sentence's emotion will be considered as the contextual emotion of these words.For sentences with more than one emotional word, the emotion of the sentence depends on all emotional words and their syntactic and semantic relations. We have 158 sentences where no value can be given to the contextual emotion of their emotional words, and all we know is the overall emotion of the sentence.We will, therefore, have two different sets of experiments. For the first set of sentences, the data are all annotated, so we will consider supervised learning. In the first set of experiments, we also investigate the performance of our features separately. In these experiments, we group the features defined in Section 3 based on their nature and we assess the usefulness of each group of the features individually. For their evaluation, we use the t-test to find out which group contributes to the results significantly. We also look at how the data representation features are related to classes learnt by the machine learning algorithm.For the second set of sentences, we combine supervised and unsupervised learning. We train a classifier on the first set of data and we use the model to classify the emotional words into their contextual emotion in the second set of data. Finally, we propose an unsupervised method to combine the contextual emotion of all the emotional words in a sentence and calculate the emotion of the sentence. For evaluation, we report precision, recall, F-measure and accuracy to compare the results. We also define two baselines for each set of experiments to compare our results with. The experiments are presented in the next three subsections.In these experiments, we only work with the sentences which include exactly one emotional word. We first explain the baselines and then the results of our experiments.Baselines. We develop two baseline systems to assess the difficulty of our task. The first baseline labels the sentences the same as the emotion of the most frequent class, which is a typical baseline in machine learning tasks (Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007; Alm et al., 2005). This baseline will result in 31% accuracy.The second baseline labels the emotion of the sentence the same as the prior emotion of the only emotional word in the sentence. The accuracy of this experiment is 51%, remarkably higher than the first baseline's accuracy. The second baseline is particularly designed to address the emotion of the sentence only via the prior emotion of the emotional words. It will allow us to assess the difference between the emotion of the sentence based on the prior emotion of the words in the sentence and the emotion which we determine when we consider the context and its effect on the emotion of the sentence.Learning experiments. In this part, we apply two classification algorithms, Support Vector Machines (SVM) and logistic regression (LR), and two different set of features, the set of features from Section 3 and Bag-of-Words (unigram). Unigram models have been widely employed in text classification and shown to give good results in sentiment classification tasks.In general, SVM has long been a method of choice for sentiment recognition in text. SVM has been shown to give good performance in text classification experiments because it scales well to the large numbers of features (Yang and Li, 1999; Pang et al., 2002; Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007). In the classification, we apply the SMO algorithm (Platt, 1998) from Weka (Hall et al., 2009), setting 10-fold cross validation as a test option. We compare applying SMO to two sets of features: (i) Bag-of-Words, which are binary features defining whether a unigram exists in a sentence and (ii) our set of features. In our experiments we use unigrams from the corpus, selected using feature selection methods from Weka.We also compare those two results with the third experiment: apply SimpleLogistic (Sumner et al., 2005) from Weka to our set of features, again setting 10-fold cross validation as a test option. Logistic regression is a discriminative probabilistic classification model which operates over real-valued vector inputs. It is relatively slow to train compared to the other classifiers. It also requires extensive tuning in the form of feature selection and implementation to achieve state-of-the-art classification performance. Logistic regression models with large numbers of features and limited amounts of training data are highly prone to over-fitting (Alias, 2009). Besides, logistic regression is really slow and it is known to only work on data represented by a small set of features. That is why we do not apply SimpleLogistic to Bag-of-Words features. On the other hand, the number of our features is relatively low, so we find logistic regression to be a good choice of classifier for our representation method. The classification results are shown in Table 6.We note consistent improvement. The results of both experiments using our set of features significantly outperform (on the basis of a paired t-test, p=0.005) both the baselines and SVM applied to Bag-of-Words features. We get the best result, however, when we apply logistic regression to our feature set. The number of our features and the nature of the features we introduce make them an appropriate choice of data representation for logistic regression methods.In this section, we evaluate the contribution of each group of features to the logistic regression classification results. We perform two series of evaluations. In the first set of evaluations, we use the regression coefficient of the features. The coefficient indicates the nature of the relationship between a particular independent variable and the dependent variable, while a negative value implies an inverse relationship. As a result of applying logistic regression to the sentences with one emotional word, we get the coefficients which are all shown in Table 7(we only show non-zero values). Although the coefficient values are not a measure of significance per se, we use them to roughly estimate the relation of features with each emotion class. Here, we highlight those relations between the coefficients and each emotion class which we find interesting.First, we consider the features related to the prior emotion and the prior polarity of the emotional word and their relation with the emotion classes. We will assess the relation of part-of-speech and dependency features later. In the Sadness class, there is a positive relation between the emotion class and two features, ‘sad’ and ‘negative’. The ‘sad’ feature indicates whether the prior emotion of the emotional word is sadness; the ‘negative’ feature shows whether the prior polarity of the emotional word is negative based on the lexicon.In the Happiness class, as expected, there is an inverse relation between the ‘negative’ feature and this class, while it has a direct relation with ‘positive’ and ‘happy’ features.In the Fear class, other than a direct relation with the ‘fear’ feature, it also has an inverse relation with the ‘surprise’ feature. This probably indicates the relation of the two emotion classes, as it can be seen in the sentence “She was shocked to see him with a gun”.The Disgust class has a direct relation with ‘negative’, ‘anger’, and ‘disgust’ features and an inverse relation with ‘sad’. This is, however, in agreement with the fact that Disgust is considered as a challenging and difficult emotion class, which the human annotators often find hard to distinguish from Anger (Aman and Szpakowicz, 2007).The Anger class is also in the inverse relation with the ‘fear’ feature, for which we have not found any particular reason.One interesting relation in the Surprise class is its inverse relation with the ‘negative’ feature, which may seem odd if we consider surprise as a negative emotion. A closer look into the dataset, however, shows many sentences such as “my night last night turned out amazing”, which definitely carry a positive surprise.An investigation of the relation of POS features with each emotion class shows that there is a strong connection, but we do not see any regular pattern worth noting.Last but not least, we only find very few relations between “dependency” features and emotion classes, which are mainly the polarity and negation modifiers. Particularly the two dependency features, ‘neg’ and ‘modified-by-positive’, can be highlighted for the Non-Emotional class. Also, the Happiness class has an inverse relation with the ‘neg’ feature which indicated whether the emotional word is modified by a negation word. We can also see that none of the intensity-related features can be observed among the features related with emotion classes; the main reason could be the size of the list (only 112 words) used as an intensifier lexicon, which barely covers any of the words in our dataset. The sparseness of the “dependency” features is problematic. Our observations suggest that very few features in the “dependency” group can occur together in one sentence.In the second set of experiments meant to evaluate the features, we go more deeply into investigating the significance of the features. For these experiments, we group the features by similarity. The groups are listed below.(1)Prior polarity indicates whether the prior polarity of the emotional word is positive or negative.Lexical includes all the features from our lexicons: the prior emotion, the prior polarity, the intensity and the part-of-speech of the emotional word from the emotion lexicon.Part-of-speech is the same as the part-of-speech features explained in Section 3.Dependency includes all the features defined as dependency-tree features in Section 3, except the intensity-related features which form a separate group.Negation includes two negation features. First, is the prior polarity of the emotional word negative? Second, is the emotional word modified by a negative word?Intensity groups all the features based on the intensifier lexicon. It includes the feature which defines the presence of the emotional word on the intensifier list, and the features which identify the dependency between the emotional word and the words from the intensity lexicon.Length is the length of the sentence in words.We perform a series of experiments in which different sets of features are added to the prior-emotion features and new classifiers are trained. Each group of features is applied separately, and the accuracy of the method is calculated. Afterwards, we compare their accuracy with the baseline of 53.44%, which is the classifier's result only on the prior-emotion feature of the emotional word.As shown in Table 8, all groups of the features except length contribute positively to the classification result. POS and lexical features, with the accuracy of 60.25% and 57.25% respectively, have the strongest effect and significantly outperform the baseline (on the basis of a paired t-test, p=0.001). While dependency and negation features, with the accuracy of 55.20% and 55.90%, improve the results significantly (paired t-test, p=0.01), the improvements from the prior polarity, intensity and length of the sentence are not significant.In this set of experiments, we work with sentences with more than one emotional word, and we combine supervised and unsupervised learning to place each sentence in one of six emotion classes or the non-emotion class. Here, we have two-step classification. The first step is to learn the classification model from the sentences with one emotion word, explained in Section 2. Next, using that model we get the probability distribution of emotional classes for each emotional word in the sentences with more than one emotional word. The second step is to combine the probability distribution of each emotional word by the unsupervised method; we propose to cluster the sentences into one of the seven classes. While the first step is supervised – using the classifier model learned from the sentences with one emotional word – in the second step the method is unsupervised because there is no training.Baselines. We develop two baseline systems. The first baseline labels all the sentences the same, as the emotion of the most frequent class, giving 32% accuracy. The second baseline labels the emotion of the sentence the same as the most frequently occurring prior-emotion of the emotional words in the sentence. In the case of a tie, we randomly pick one of the emotions. The accuracy of this experiment is 45%. Again, as a second baseline we choose a baseline that is based on the prior emotion of the emotional words so that we can compare it with the results based on contextual emotion of the emotional words in the sentence.Learning experiments. We first train the classifier on the part of the dataset which only includes sentences with one emotional word. For sentences with more than one emotional word, we represent each emotional word and its context by the set of features explained in Section 3. For each emotional word, we get the probability distribution of emotional classes (calculated by the logistic regression function learned from the annotated data in the previous step). We add up the probabilities of each class for all emotional words and select the class with the maximum probability. The result, shown in Table 9, is compared using supervised learning, SVM, with Bag-of-Words features, explained in the previous section, with 10-fold cross validation as a test option.33Since SVM does not return a distribution probability, we cannot apply SVM to our features in this set of experiments.The results in Table 9 suggest that the result of learning applied to our set of features significantly outperforms (on the basis of a paired t-test, p=0.005) both baselines and the result of SVM algorithm applied to Bag-of-Words features.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
