@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measuring the impact of translation on the accuracy and fluency of vocabulary acquisition of English

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study how translation affects ESL vocabulary learning.A reading tutor using language technologies measures each student's learning.Use of translation increases the retrieval time of L2 lexical items.Excessive use of translation decreases long-term retention of L2 lexical items.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reading tutor,Vocabulary acquisition,Translation,ESOL,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article assesses the impact of translation on the acquisition of vocabulary for higher-intermediate level students of English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL). The use of translation is a relevant issue in the research of Second Language (L2) acquisition and different authors provide arguments on both sides of the issue. Language technologies serve this issue in both the usability of automatic translation and the automatic detection of lexical phenomena. This paper will explore translation as it affects the acquisition of new words in context when students are given real texts retrieved from the Internet in a web-based interface. The students can instantly obtain the dictionary definition of a word and its translation to their native language. This platform can accurately measure how much each student relies on translation and compare this to their accuracy and fluency on a lexical retrieval task using words seen in the texts. Results show that abundant use of translation may increase accuracy in the short term, but in the longer term, it negatively affects accuracy and possibly fluency. However, students who use translation in moderation seem to benefit the most in this lexical task. This paper provides a focused and precise way to measure the relevant variables for each individual student, and new findings that contribute to our understanding of the impact of the use of translation in language learning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many language technologies are useful for language learning. Synthesizing written words, generating pertinent assessment questions and disambiguating meanings are only some of the contributions that language technologies can bring to this domain. Another contribution could be the automatic translation of parts of texts. Yet, the use of translation is a subject of controversy in the language acquisition realm and in the general language learning area. Translation is usually seen as scaffolding that builds the new language around the native language of the student. It aids in the initial acquisition of the new language and Sweet (1964), Sheen (1996) and Cook (2010) have shown that it is also helpful when there is a need to explain subtle details. However, translation, seen as a scaffold, has to be removed or avoided in order for the student to become fluent in the new language according to Krashen (1981), Stieglitz (1955) and Stern (1983). A major limitation to our understanding of how translation actually affects the students production and perception is the difficulty of accurately measuring how much an individual student relies on translation and how much their fluency in the new language is affected by it. Language technologies and intelligent tutoring can provide new ways to obtain these measurements. Intelligent tutors can be used to store all the actions of a student during a learning event and furnish precise measurements of accuracy and response time in a variety of evaluation tasks.The use of the student's First Language (L1) in the Second Language (L2) learning classroom, and specifically in the English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) classroom, has been historically avoided since the Direct Method became mainstream at the end of the 19th century (Cook, 2001). The main reason for this avoidance of the student's L1 is the comparison of L2 acquisition with L1 acquisition. Since the L1 is successfully acquired without the scaffolding of a previous language, it was assumed that the L2 should follow the same process. Thus authors like Asher (1986) proposed to avoid all use of the L1 in the classroom. Other reasons to avoid using the L1 include the fact that sometimes teachers might not speak the L1 of their students, and that there might usually be several students in the class with different L1s.This view has been challenged. Studies by Levine (2003), Grace (1998) and Prince (1996) have argued that using the L1 actually reinforces learning of the L2, since it aids in the construction of the new language. Another reason to use the L1 in class is the student's lack of self-confidence when using the L2 alone due to the limitations that it imposes on them (Levine, 2003). Moreover, the introduction of intelligent tutors provides resources in the L1 of each student without teacher intervention. Off-line and on-line bilingual dictionaries, for example, are now totally accessible and easy to integrate into language learning tutors.More specifically, the use of the L1 in L2 vocabulary acquisition has also elicited divergent opinions. Models of L2 lexical acquisition by Jiang (2000) and Kroll and Sunderman (2003) consider that the new L2 words are assimilated through an L1 lemma that is generalized and applied to concepts in the L2. Excessive use of the L1 is then believed to reduce the L2 fluency of the students and to fossilize errors. Context, dictionary definitions and examples of other sentences in which a word could be used are considered to be the most effective tools for teaching new words since students can assimilate the concept of the new word without any reliance in their L1. This implies that the use of such techniques can lead to better learning and improved fluency than the direct use of L1 translation would. Some research has challenged this claim, with results in Grace (1998) that show higher scores on vocabulary tests when translation is provided, both in the short-term and long-term use of the new words. Prince (1996) also claimed that the more proficient students benefit more from translation on short-term lexical recall tasks, since they can get rid of the L1 scaffolding more easily. More recently, Laufer and Girsai (2008) also showed that higher results were attained in incidental vocabulary acquisition using translation exercises and contrastive analysis.The study of the use of translation in vocabulary acquisition has been hampered by the difficulty of determining how much each student uses translation. It is not feasible for teachers to keep track of the patterns of use of bilingual dictionaries and other resources that provide translation in a class with many students. Thus when students are allowed to consult these resources, there has been no controlled measure of how much they actually use them. Furthermore, while teachers can measure the accuracy of their students in assessment tasks they cannot precisely measure how much time it takes for each one of them to respond to a given question. This measure could be used to determine the student's speed of response, thus implying how quickly that student can access the lexical information and consequently how fluently they can use a given word. Although teachers have a rough estimate of the aggregate time spent on a test, they cannot measure the time taken for a specific question.The use of Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) tutors in vocabulary acquisition can provide useful interfaces where dictionaries, translation tools and other resources can be integrated into a reading activity. CALL tools can also be a very useful platform for language learning research. Horst et al. (2005) developed a corpus-based on-line collaboration tool to help in vocabulary acquisition. In this platform, the students could all work together and provide input to the tool database, showing solid results in facilitating deep processing of new vocabulary. Laufer and Hill (2000) performed a reading comprehension and vocabulary learning experiment with students in Israel and Hong Kong. In the students’ immediate post-test results they were shown to perform well when multiple options for understanding the vocabulary were provided (dictionary definition, translation or word lexeme). With the use of the logs of their reading comprehension tool the authors could reliably know which and how many help options a student requested.A much wider review of existing tutors was performed by Abraham (2008) who did a meta-analysis of eleven studies of reading comprehension and vocabulary acquisition in CALL. All the eleven studies had experimental groups that were provided with glosses during reading sessions. Overall, there were clear effects in accuracy in immediate and delayed post-tests for providing the glosses during the readings.Based on this previous knowledge, this article attempts to answer several research questions related to the use of translation in ESOL vocabulary acquisition. First is how intelligent tutors can provide a precise measure of the use of translation by ESOL students and of their accuracy and fluency in lexical tasks. The second is how accuracy and fluency in lexical tasks are affected by the use of translation. And the final question is how the amount of reliance on translation has an influence on each individual student's accuracy and fluency.The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 will introduce the Reader-Specific Lexical Practice (REAP) reading tutor as a platform for vocabulary acquisition in English. Section 3 will present the experimental setup and methodology followed in our classroom studies. Section 4 will report the results of the studies. Finally, Section 5 will give a discussion of the results presented; and Section 6 will summarize the conclusions of this work.The REAP project aims at providing appropriate curriculum for vocabulary acquisition in ESOL classes while serving as a platform for research studies (Brown and Eskenazi, 2005). REAP provides ESOL students with texts retrieved from the Internet according to their reading level and their preferences (Heilman et al., 2008) and helps them acquire new words from context (Juffs et al., 2006). REAP incorporates several features that help in the process of vocabulary acquisition like reading the definition of words from a dictionary, text-to-speech synthesis of words and translation of words to the student's native language.REAP presents the reading prepared for the student in any web browser with the interface shown in Fig. 1. The student can get a definition of a word: a pop-up window opens showing the definition and examples of use of that word and a button for hearing the pronunciation of the word. When a translation is requested, another pop-up window appears showing the translation. To provide the translation, students must provide their native language when registering into the system. Focus words, the words that the teacher has chosen for the students to learn, are highlighted in the text.Since its initial deployment, REAP has shown that it can improve the acquisition of new vocabulary in ESOL students (Heilman et al., 2006). Features embedded in REAP have been validated in several experimental studies which showed the learning outcomes achieved by the students due to, for example, the use of definition ordering (Dela Rosa and Eskenazi, 2011) and text-to-speech synthesis (Dela Rosa et al., 2010). Motivational issues in the use of REAP have also been studied and a significant correlation of motivation and positive learning gains has been found (Heilman et al., 2007; Dela Rosa and Eskenazi, 2011).The Cambridge Advanced Learners’ Dictionary (CALD) (Walter, 2005) is embedded in REAP and is used by the students to look up definitions of both focus words and other difficult words as they are encountered. At the same time, the students can listen to the pronunciation of the word with the Cepstral11http://www.cepstral.com.test-to-speech synthesizer. The translation (bilingual dictionary) of the words is provided by WordReference22http://www.wordreference.com.and the Bing Translator,33http://www.microsofttranslator.com.verified and embedded in REAP. REAP takes the request from the student, queries the translation engine and presents the results within the REAP interface. The definitions and translations of the words in all of the different L1s of the students can be manually verified off-line to make sure that the definition or a translated word corresponded with the specific context in which it appeared. If necessary, a change in the definition and/or the translation can be made to make it context-appropriate.Two in-vivo classroom studies were carried out at the English Language Institute (ELI) of the University of Pittsburgh, the first one during the Fall semester of 2011 and the second one during the Spring semester of 2012. We will refer to them as Fall 2011 and Spring 2012 respectively. An interval of 3 months elapsed between the ending of Fall 2011 and the beginning of Spring 2012. The ELI students are adult learners of English, typically college students. They have intensive courses in Grammar, Listening, Reading, Speaking and Writing at different levels. The two studies described herein were carried out in the Level 5 Reading courses, which is the topmost ELI level. The students in Level 5 are described as “higher-intermediate or advanced learners of English”. All the students who enter in the ELI take a test for Level placement to ensure the students are properly matched to their Level and the groups are homogeneous. These placement tests were comprehensive and covered reading, writing, speaking and listening through cloze questions and writing assignments. In both studies, the students used the REAP tutor with the goal of improving vocabulary acquisition.The first study initially involved 43 students taking the ELI Level 5 Reading course. Eventually 27 of them completed the study. The other 16 students withdrew from the course for various reasons such as medical leaves or withdrawal from the ELI due to relocation to another university or city. The results in this paper refer to the 27 students who completed the study. 25 of the students were native speakers of Arabic, 1 spoke Spanish and 1 spoke Turkish.The second study initially involved 40 students in the Level 5 Reading course. 26 students finished this study: 22 of them were native Arabic speakers, 2 were Mandarin Chinese speakers and 2 were Korean speakers. There were five students that took the Level 5 Reading class during both semesters and participated in both the Fall 2011 and Spring 2012 studies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
