@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Translating noun compounds using semantic relations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hybrid scheme for noun compound translation from English to Hindi.A scheme for semantic relation identification is proposed for 2-word noun compounds.A scheme for generation of translation pattern(s) for 2/3/4-word noun compounds.Bracketing scheme for 4-word noun compounds.Results of the proposed system compared with the state-of-the-art translators.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Noun compounds,Semantic relation,Translation pattern,Bracketing,Machine translation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite having a research history of more than 20 years, English to Hindi machine translation often suffers badly from incorrect translations of noun compounds. The problems envisaged can be of various types, such as, the absence of proper postpositions, inappropriate word order, incorrect semantics. Different existing English to Hindi machine translation systems show their vulnerability, irrespective of the underlying technique. A potential solution to this problem lies in understanding the semantics of the noun compounds. The present paper proposes a scheme based on semantic relations to address this issue. The scheme works in three steps: identification of the noun compounds in a given text, determination of the semantic relationship(s) between them, and finally, selecting the right translation pattern. The scheme provides translation patterns for different semantic relations for 2-word noun compounds first. These patterns are used recursively to find the semantic relations and the translation patterns for 3-word and 4-word noun compounds. Frequency and probability based adjacency and dependency models are used for bracketing (grouping) the constituent words of 3-word and 4-word noun compounds into 2-word noun compounds. The semantic relations and the translation patterns generated for 2-word, 3-word and 4-word noun compounds are evaluated. The proposed scheme is compared with some well-known English to Hindi translators, viz. AnglaMT, Anuvadaksh, Bing, Google, and also with the Moses baseline system. The results obtained, show significant improvement over the Moses baseline system. Also, it performs better than the other online MT systems in terms of recall and precision.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A compound noun is a noun that is made up of two or more words, such as, noun+noun (e.g. water tank, football), adjective+noun (e.g. full moon, blackboard), verb+noun (e.g. washing machine, swimming pool), noun+verb (e.g. haircut, rainfall), preposition+noun (e.g. underworld). Single (1-word) compound nouns, such as football, blackboard and rainfall are mostly a part of the lexicon and hence the translation of these single compound nouns is obtained from the lexicon. In this paper we have considered compound nouns that are sequence of nouns occurring as separate words. Henceforth, we call these compound nouns as noun compounds (NCs) in the rest of the paper. Noun compounds can be freely constructed in English (Jones, 1983), and sometimes these can be quite long. For illustration consider NCs such as “colon cancer tumor suppressor protein”, “water meter cover adjustment screw”, which are made of 5 words.Noun compounds form an important and substantial part of an English corpus. For illustration, the written portion of British National Corpus (BNC) consisting of 84M words (Burnard, 2000) has 2.6% bigram nominal compounds and the Reuters corpus consisting of 108M words (Rose et al., 2002) has 3.9% (Kim and Baldwin, 2005). It is also estimated that 88.4% of noun compounds in the Wall Street Journal section of the Penn Treebank are binary i.e. 2-word (Baldwin and Tanaka, 2004).As a consequence, any machine translation (MT) system needs to take sincere care of the English noun compounds while translating them into a target language. This is particularly true for a language like Hindi where nouns in an English noun compound after translation are often separated by postpositions; and their inappropriate usage may render the translation syntactically and/or semantically incorrect. This can be observed by analyzing the outputs of different English to Hindi machine translation systems available online. The present study, in particular, is based on five such systems, viz. AnglaMT,22http://www.tdil-dc.in/.Anuvadaksh,33http://www.tdil-dc.in/.Bing,44http://www.bing.com/translator/.Google55http://translate.google.com/.and MaTra66http://www.cdacmumbai.in/matra/.translators. Our analysis finds that several different types of problems may be encountered while translating the English noun compounds into Hindi. Some major problems in this regard are:•Omission of appropriate postpositions: In certain cases simple juxtaposition of nouns does not convey the semantics in Hindi. They need to be separated by appropriate postpositions. Omission or incorrect postpositions during translation of the noun compounds may result in erroneous semantics. For example: “mustard oil”∼sarson (mustard) kaa (of) tel (oil); “body ache”∼shareer (body) mein(in) dard (ache). The postpositions that convey the correct sense in the two cases discussed above are, kaa and mein respectively.Use of a single word: Often the Hindi translation of an English noun compound comprising two or more nouns is a single word. Any attempt to translate the nouns separately with a separator word (such as postpositions) is erroneous. For illustration, “boys’ hostel”∼chhaatraavaas, “cow dung”∼gobar, “blood pressure”∼raktchaap and “wine bar”∼madhushaalaa. In some cases the translated Hindi word is completely a new word, and in no way related to the constituent nouns of the noun compound. Whereas, in certain cases a single word is formed by concatenating or combining the translation of the constituent nouns of the noun compound.Bracketing (Sequential grouping): As the number of nouns in a noun compound increases, the number of possible combinations also increases. For illustration, the following 3-word NCs “olympic gold medal” and “rolled gold medal” have very similar structure, but have different grouping of the nouns as their semantic structures are different:olympic gold medal→(olympic (gold medal)).rolled gold medal→((rolled gold) medal).For a 3-word NC “N1N2N3” there are two possibilities, viz. (N1 (N2N3)) and ((N1N2)N3) of grouping the nouns; while for a 4-word NC there are 6 possibilities. In a similar vein, there exist 13 different ways of grouping a 5-word NC. According to Nakov (2013) longer (i.e. no. of terms≥5) noun compounds, are rarely dealt with except for scientific texts and technical literature. Thus, in this work we restricted ourselves to noun compounds with a maximum length of 4 only. However, appropriate grouping of the nouns of a noun compound and preserving its semantics still poses a big challenge for any English to Hindi machine translation system.The present work focuses on the development of a scheme for efficient handling of the above issues corresponding to English to Hindi machine translation. The necessity also arises from the fact that the above shortcomings are not due to the underlying translation paradigm; rather the problem is inherent in the language characteristics. For elucidation, the systems considered in this work follow different translation schemes. While AnglaMT (Sinha et al., 1995) is a rule-based system, Google and Bing use statistical approaches, and Anuvadaksh and MaTra (Ananthakrishanan et al., 2006) are hybrid MT systems – yet each of the systems suffers from the above problems. Consequently, interpretation of noun compounds assumes a very important role in English to Hindi machine translation.In this work we develop a scheme based on semantic relations for interpretation of the noun compounds. The intuition behind the proposed scheme is that an appropriate set of rules can be generated in a supervised way if the right semantic relation can be established between the nouns of a noun compound. Here the term “semantic relation” implies the underlying relation between the head noun, and the other nouns of the noun compound. Proper interpretation of a noun compound can be made with the help of discovering the semantic relations between the constituent nouns.Most of the related researches have proposed semantic labels based on the theory that a compound noun expresses one of the small number of covert semantic relations (Barker and Szpakowicz, 1998). Levi (1978) offers nine semantic labels representing underlying predicates deleted during compound formation. Warren (1978) describes a multi-level system of semantic labels for noun-noun relationships. We have used some of these semantic labels for this work.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 looks at some of the related works in this domain. Section 3 discusses the proposed scheme. It also discusses noun compound identification, and the semantic relations. Section 4 describes the algorithms for semantic relation identification and translation pattern generation for a 2-word noun compound. Section 5 deals with handling of the 3-word and 4-word noun compounds. The experimental setup and results are given in Section 6. Section 7 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
