@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A rule-based translation from written Spanish to Spanish Sign Language glosses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Rule-based approach for a Spanish-to-LSE machine translation system for wide-domain application.The proposed approach is based on the transfer at the level of syntatic functions from dependency analysis and employs three different stages: analysis, transfer and generation.Morpho-lexical and lexical-semantic relationships are used in to expand the bilingual Spanish-LSE lexicon aiming at reducing the lexical gap between Spanish and LSE.The rule-based approach also integrates classifier predicate generation.Results present a 0.30 BLEU and 42% TER. Includes experiments and comparison with data-driven approaches, experiments with surface order, and linguistic-oriented error analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Machine translation,Spanish,Spanish Sign Language,LSE,Deaf people communication,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One of the aims of Assistive Technologies is to help people with disabilities to communicate with others and to provide means of access to information. As an aid to Deaf people, we present in this work a production-quality rule-based machine system for translating from Spanish to Spanish Sign Language (LSE) glosses, which is a necessary precursor to building a full machine translation system that eventually produces animation output. The system implements a transfer-based architecture from the syntactic functions of dependency analyses. A sketch of LSE is also presented. Several topics regarding translation to sign languages are addressed: the lexical gap, the bootstrapping of a bilingual lexicon, the generation of word order for topic-oriented languages, and the treatment of classifier predicates and classifier names. The system has been evaluated with an open-domain testbed, reporting a 0.30 BLEU (BiLingual Evaluation Understudy) and 42% TER (Translation Error Rate). These results show consistent improvements over a statistical machine translation baseline, and some improvements over the same system preserving the word order in the source sentence. Finally, the linguistic analysis of errors has identified some differences due to a certain degree of structural variation in LSE.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Translation helps people to communicate across linguistic and cultural barriers. However, according to Isabelle and Foster (2005), translation is too expensive, and its cost is unlikely to fall substantially enough, to constitute it as a practical solution to the everyday needs of ordinary people. Although it remains to be seen if machines will ultimately compete seriously with humans in translation, machine translation can help break linguistic barriers and can make translation affordable to many people. This situation is especially important for Deaf people, since translation helps Deaf and Hearing communities to communicate with each other, and provides Deaf people with the same opportunities to access information as everyone else.Sign Languages (SLs) exploit a different physical medium from the oral-aural system of spoken languages. SLs are gestural-visual languages, and this difference in modality causes SLs to constitute another branch within the typology of languages. However, there are still many myths around SLs. One of the most common and enduring myths is that sign language is universal; however, every Deaf community has its own SL, even within the same country. For example, in Spain, apart from Spanish Sign Language (LSE), there exists another recognised SL, known as Catalan Sign Language (LSC) and used within the Catalan Deaf community. Another common myth is that there is a correlation between spoken and SL families. American Sign Language (ASL) and British Sign Language (BSL), however, despite the fact that both are SLs used in English-speaking countries, are mutually unintelligible. Sign languages do not derive from spoken languages, but, as any other languages, can be influenced by contact with other languages. As with spoken languages, when the use of an SL is extended, dialects and varieties are developed. In other words, SLs are natural languages that arise spontaneously in Deaf communities to fulfil the function of communication.Phonocentrism is a view in which speech is considered to be superior to, or more natural than, written language. This attitude, which is still dominant in western culture, has negatively affected the consideration of sign languages, adding to their status of minority languages the status of minorised languages, i.e., languages whose value is not recognized on the interactional scene by speakers of a sociolinguistically dominant language. This also encourages the assumption that speakers of the minorised language conform to the usage and interactive norms set by their interlocutors. Nevertheless, scientific claims regarding the status of SLs as “real” human languages have been made since the work of W. Stokoe on the ASL (Stokoe, 1960). SLs in developed countries, especially SLs in Europe and North America, dominated research during the first decades of study. Currently, language typologists still have some difficulties accessing research on a number of regions like Central and South America, Africa, or Asia because most publications are written in national languages not accessible to a wider international audience. According to Zesman (2007), the state of knowledge regarding SLs has developed like a mosaic with many untiled gaps, but this is increasingly giving typologists a clearer picture of the range of diversity in SLs. Some cross-linguistic and typological studies of SLs, such as those by Sandler and Lillo-Martin (2006) or Brentari (2010), have shed light on both the universals and the diversity of SLs, contributing to the understanding of human languages in general.The lack of a writing system is characteristic of SLs, and one shared with two-thirds of the spoken languages of the world. Strictly speaking, the only way of representing SLs is to use motion pictures. However, several notational systems exist. The most important today are SignWriting (Sutton, 1974) and HamNoSys (Prillwitz et al., 1989). SignWriting was conceived primarily as a writing system, and has its roots in DanceWriting (Sutton, 1973), a notation for reading and writing dance movements. HamNoSys was conceived as a phonological transcription system for SLs, with the same objective as the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) for spoken languages. There is another alphabetic writing system, designed specifically for LSE, and called SEA (Sistema de escritura alfabética) (Herrero et al., 2001); this uses the Latin alphabet, and has LSE's phonology as its basis. As this paper focuses primarily on syntax, glosses will be used here instead of a phonological notation. Glossing is a commonly used system for explaining or representing the meaning of signs and the grammatical structure of signed phrases and sentences in a text written in another language. However, glossing is not a writing system that could be understood by sign language users. A machine translation (MT) system needs to produce an animation to be considered a complete and useful system.Most contemporary works on SLs have adopted language theories created for spoken language instead of developing new theories. This adoption leads naturally not only to the study of the phonology, morphology, and morpho-syntax of SLs, but also to the study of all other descriptive levels found in spoken languages. However, from the point of view of natural language processing, SLs are still under-resourced or low-density languages – that is to say, little or no specific technology is available for these languages, and computerised linguistic resources, such as corpora or lexicons, are very scarce. This situation, of course, is not exclusive to SLs, since it in fact applies to most of the languages of the world.According to INE11Instituto Nacional de Estadística (Spanish National Statistics Institute).and MEC22Ministerio de Educación y Cultura (Spanish Ministry of Education)., there are 1,064,000 Deaf people in Spain. Half of that population is more than 65 years old. Among the Spanish Deaf population, 47% of people do not have basic-level education, and in many cases are illiterate. Only one to three percent of Spanish Deaf people have graduated from basic school (INE, 1999; MEC, 2000). Moreover, about 92% of the Spanish Deaf population has significant difficulties in using written Spanish (INE, 2008). The unemployment rate for Deaf people is almost 20%, and that of Deaf women is as high as 30% (INE, 2003).LSE is the name of the most widespread gestural-visual language used by the Spanish Deaf community and by persons who live and interact with them. The estimated number of users of LSE is 100,000. For about 20–30% of those users, LSE is their second language. LSE was finally recognised as an official language in Spain in 2007, but the ratio of interpreters to LSE users in Spain is 1/221, below the European average. From a linguistic point of view, LSE refers to a variety of the Sign Language used in a large central area of Spain, with Madrid being its cultural and linguistic epicentre. There are other local varieties in some areas of Asturias, Aragón, Murcia, Western Andalucía (Seville), etc. The mutual intelligibility among these varieties is high due to their lexical similarities.Technology can help with the integration of the Deaf into general society. This paper describes the machine translation module used by the TARTESO translation service (López-Colino et al., 2011), which translates Spanish into LSE. This service is composed of three main modules (see Fig. 1): a speech recognition module, which transcribes speech into text; the machine translation module, which uses speech transcriptions or regular text and translates them into a gloss notation; and the SL synthesis module (López-Colino and Colás, 2012), which generates animations using an avatar technology.The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 presents a sketch of LSE describing phenomena common to many other SLs. Section 3 presents a review of machine translation systems for SLs and SL corpora that have been built to date. Section 4 presents our rule-based Spanish-LSE machine translation system. The corpus used for experimentation, the evaluation procedure, and the results are presented in Section 5, together with some discussion. Finally, the work is concluded in Section 6.The most important documentation for a language is a reference grammar, which documents the principles governing the construction of words and all kinds of grammatical structures found in a language. Fortunately, the first LSE grammar has recently been published as Gramática didáctica de la lengua de signos española (GDLSE) (Herrero Blanco, 2009). It is a complete grammar, describing the linguistic structures of LSE with a pedagogical orientation. Since the grammar is addressed to students and teachers of LSE, it includes exercises and multimedia material. Furthermore, the Diccionario normativo de la LSE (DILSE) (Fundación CNSE, 2008) represents another milestone for LSE. Despite being descriptive works, both works have a normative-oriented guidance, so it is in their aim to represent the contemporary standard for LSE.The articulators in SLs are the hands, the arms, the face (including eyes, eyebrows, mouth, cheeks and tongue), the head, the neck, the shoulders, and the body. During signing, the visual field of one signer covers all the articulatory elements, hands and body, of the other signer. However, in a conversation, attention is focused on the gaze of the other signer, leaving the rest in the peripheral vision. The gaze, as in spoken communication, plays a major role in SL communication. In LSE and in other SLs, hands are the main articulator. The dominant hand is the hand involved in the articulation of one-handed signs. In two-handed signs, each hand can act either symmetrically or antisymmetrically, or there can be a dominant hand acting as a coordinator and a so-called non-dominant hand, or passive hand, used as the place of articulation. In right-handed signers, the dominant hand is the right hand and the left hand is the non-dominant hand. The role of the hands is reversed in the case of left-handed signers. This difference, however, generates no confusion in understanding. Signs are formed by a set of minimal, meaningless elements or parameters (formerly called cheremes), whose variation expresses the appearance of a new sign. There are four main kinds of these articulatory parameters or phonemes: the handshape, the hand orientation, the place of articulation, and the movement. Moreover, the contact of the hand with the body or the other hand, and the type of symmetry in two-handed signs, are also considered phonologically relevant in LSE. Some studies also consider the non-manual components (NMCs) of a sign as parameters of that sign, but the number of signs whose meaning depends on NMCs in LSE is so few that this is usually ignored in phonology.NMCs have several functions in morphology, and can be performed alone or in conjunction with the manual component. In LSE, the most significant functions are the expression of intensification or restriction, and the expression of the verbal modality. Intensification/restriction is usually applied to adjectives, and can be alternatively expressed in LSE by means of adverbs as ‘mucho (much)’ or ‘algo (some)’. In the case of the non-manual expression of intensification, clenched teeth, semi-closed eyes, and tense articulation denote the intensification of a positive property, as for ‘altísimo (very tall)’, and intensive negative properties are denoted by inflated cheeks and blowing, as for ‘muy-cerca (very close)’. These NMCs can be also applied to classifiers representing adjectives. Some verbal aspects have no manual realisation. This is the case with inchoative aspect value, for which the performance of the sign is suspended, with open mouth and raised eyebrows. Deontic modality is marked with raised eyebrows and pursed lips, whereas epistemic modality uses frowns and a u-like mouth shape, along with an affirmative movement of the head. The main functions of NMCs in syntax are the distribution of information and agreement. Information as topic is marked with pauses and eyebrows. Agreement can be marked by the gaze and directing the body towards the position of the space where the object or the subject of a verb has been previously placed. The interrogative construction in LSE is realised by raising the eyebrows and bending the torso forward while signing the verb of the sentence. The negative constructions may be realised by including the sign ‘no (not)’ after signing the verb. However, it is also common simply to negate with the head while signing the verb. NMCs also have other roles in discourse and in conversation (in particular in turn-taking), but these fall outside the scope of this work.Signs are produced in the signing space, i.e., the physical space around the signer. The space used for the articulation of signs is a lexical space and has a phonological value. This space comprises some body areas and the central and lateral planes of symmetry. However, space has additional and complex uses. Space can be used topographically, i.e., as a map, when visible objects used in communication are signalled, or analogically, when objects are placed in analogy to the real world, this use being iconic or metaphoric. Some extensions of the frontal lexical space have grammatical purposes. They are used for deixis, anaphora, and agreement. Space is used syntactically, assigning arbitrary places (the locus) for pronominal reference. These locations have no relation to the physical locations of the objects situated there, since these objects can be abstract. In subsequent references, grammatical relationships to objects can be established through locations, which can act as morphemes.Hengeveld et al. (2004) distinguish among specialised, flexible, and rigid languages, depending on how grammatical functions and lexemes relate to each other. In specialised or rigid languages, each function has a particular lexeme, whereas flexible languages display classes of lexemes that can be used in more than one function without requiring lexical or syntactic derivation. Flexibility generates homography. Spanish is considered a specialised language but, as Herrero Blanco (2009) points out, LSE displays some flexibility in its part-of-speech (PoS) system. Sometimes the noun, the adjective, and the verb are represented by the same sign, as is the case for ‘dolor (pain)’, ‘doloroso (painful)’ and ‘doler (to hurt)’, which are all represented by the single sign dolor. The topic of LSE flexibility will be further explored in Section 4.2.1.According to Aikhenvald (2000), almost all languages have some grammatical means for the linguistic categorisation of nouns and nominals. Classification is a categorisation device found in languages for marking humanness, animacy, shape, size, and other inherent and salient properties of objects. In SLs, the phenomenon of classification is pervasive, and has received different analyses in the SL literature (Schembri, 2003). Supalla (1986) defined classifiers as morphemes incorporated into verbs, but Sutton-Spence and Woll (1999) imposed three conditions on classifiers: to reference a group of elements sharing some common features; to be a proform; and to be found in verbs of movement and location. Proforms have an anaphoric primary function (Engberg-Pedersen, 1989), and can be defined as anything that refers to, and stands in the place of, something previously presented in the discourse. Consequently, pronouns are a subclass of proforms. Proforms are realised as a handshape with a specific orientation, which represents the prototypical orientation of the object. Both parameters can be considered morphological components of the proform. For example, a proform can represent a person, using a particular handshape with a horizontal orientation to indicate that the person is lying down.Broadly speaking, we will refer to classifiers as handshapes that substitute for other signs and have a morphological value. There are three groups of classifiers in LSE: entity classifiers, handle classifiers, and extension classifiers. Entity classifiers are descriptive classifiers that represent objects by their dominant dimension or shape. Therefore, an object can be classified according to its dominant dimension as one-dimensional (pen, spoon, etc.), two-dimensional (book, sheet, table, etc.), circular (dish, coin, etc.), three-dimensional (ball, building, fruit, etc.), cylindrical (bottle, column, etc.), or fluid (water, smoke, crowds, etc.). Four-wheeled and two-wheeled vehicles have different classifiers, as do objects having frameworks (swimming pool, picture, etc.). Other classifiers can represent the thickness of an object or stacked objects. Persons, animals, and parts of the body also have classifiers. Handle or instrument classifiers describe the handling of an entity rather than representing the entity itself. Extension classifiers depict the perimeters of objects or make reference to their surfaces. Classifiers, as well as path movements, are among the most iconic elements of SLs.Grammatical values can be expressed in the form of independent single words, called free morphemes, or as additions or alterations to the phonology of words, in which case they are called bound morphemes. Not all languages have the same grammatical values or express them in a similar way. For example, Spanish has gender morphemes, but LSE expresses gender values by other means, using free morphemes. Languages can be classified according to the degree of presence of the two kinds of morphemes. At one end of the spectrum there are isolating languages, like Chinese, with a low morpheme-per-word ratio, and at the opposite end there are synthetic languages, like Inuit languages, with lengthy words. However, in general, the vast majority of languages, including SLs, contain both kinds of morphemes. In addition, SLs have a widely used morphological resource for the phenomenon of classification noted in Section 2.4.SLs contain not only inflection but also derivation, compounding, and classification (see Section 2.6). Inflectional morphology is the study of the changes undergone by words in expressing grammatical values. LSE, and virtually all SLs studied, have a rich inflection system. Bound morphemes found in LSE belong to one of two classes, flective or introflective. Flective morphemes are concatenated to the phonological form, like a movement or a repetition33Repetition can be seen as reduplication, another non-concatenative operation found in some languages as Tagalog.of the original movement, sometimes in a direction. They are mainly used for expressing several forms of plural, some values of the verbal aspect, or as a mechanism for morphological derivation. Introflective morphemes cause internal changes to the phonological form of the sign, and hence they are non-concatenative in nature. This kind of morpheme is also found in Semitic languages. Introflection is used to agree with the subject, the object, the receiver or the place. The classifier of the subject and/or the object are also introflected in verbs. The number is introflected in pronouns, etc. LSE has, in some cases, irregularities such as suppletive base forms, i.e., different unrelated base forms for the same sign, indicating different grammatical values.LSE does not mark gender in signs, and hence gender is expressed by adding ‘hombre (man)’/‘mujer (woman)’ after the sign. Nouns and adjectives can inflect, changing some of their phonological components to express number, to be classified, to express place or agreement with a subject, etc. Nouns admit adjectival inflection of size and shape. There are several ways of forming plurals in LSE, depending partly on the phonological structure of signs. Personal pronouns inflect in number and, like some temporal nouns, they can incorporate numerals, e.g., ‘vosotros-3 (you three)’ or ‘semana-2 (week two)’. Place deictics have values for first person ‘aquí (here)’/‘este (this)’, second person ‘ahí (there)’/‘ese (that)’, and third person ‘allí (there)’/‘aquel (that)’.Additionally, in LSE, the third person deictics and the personal pronoun ‘él (he)’ are split into two values – proximal or present, and distant or absent. It is worth noting that this distinction does not exist in ASL. Adverbs can be modified to express intensification or restriction by means of the execution speed and accompanying facial and other non-manual components. Verbs can inflect for both subject and object agreements, and can express a variety of aspectual values such as habitual, continuous, etc. Verbal agreement in LSE is not as systematic as in Spanish, where all verbs agree in number. Padden (1990) proposed a classification for verbs of several SLs on the basis of which affixes may be added. She proposed three basic classes: plain, agreement, and spatial verbs. Plain verbs neither inflect for person and number nor take locative affixes. Agreement verbs use the syntactic space and can inflect in person and number, but cannot incorporate spatial information. Finally, spatial verbs use the topographical space and incorporate spatial information, but cannot incorporate person and number. Aspect marking is widely used by SLs. In LSE, reduplicating a sign rapidly can mark habitual aspect. An abrupt stop before the completion of the sign marks an unrealised inceptive aspect. If the sign is repeated with a slower circular movement, its aspect value is continuous. Some nouns and adjectives can undergo aspect marking, for instance with habitual values, e.g., ‘enfermo (sick)’ >‘enfermizo (sickly)’, and continuous (monotonous) values. All the classes of verbs can be slightly modified to incorporate aspectual values.A classifier noun is a common noun acting as a free morpheme prepended to another noun to complement its lexical meaning, or to other lexical categories to produce lexical derivatives. The use of classifier nouns is common to all SLs. For instance, LSE resorts to classifier nouns for tree names, so that the Spanish noun ‘naranjo (orange tree)’ is translated as a construction headed with the sign ‘árbol (tree)’ and followed by the sign for the fruit of the tree ‘naranja (orange)’ forming ‘árbol naranja (lit. tree orange)’. The deverbal noun ‘trabajador (worker)’ is translated as ‘persona trabajar (lit. person to-work)’ and the adjective ‘envidioso (envious)’ as ‘persona envidia (lit. person envy)’. For LSE, the most widely used classifier nouns are ‘agua (water)’, ‘árbol (tree)’, ‘casa (house)’, ‘dinero (money)’, ‘trabajo (work)’, ‘persona (person)’ and ‘tienda (shop)’. They present a different degree of grammaticalisation so that some of them can be suppressed, as is the case with ‘persona (person)’ but not with ‘tienda (shop)’. However, in general, classifier nouns do not need to be realised when they have been used before or when the context contains enough information to infer them. More examples of Spanish words translated to classifier noun constructions are ‘cuartel (barracks)’ → ‘casa militar (lit. house military)’, demonyms (the name given to a person from a particular region or country), like ‘europeo (european)’ → ‘persona europa (lit. person Europe)’, ‘billete (bill)’ → ‘dinero tarjeta (lit. money card)’, and ‘apicultura (beekeeping)’ → ‘trabajo abeja (lit. work bee)’.Classifier predicates (CPs) pose a challenge to the definition of what constitutes a linguistic expression. Many times, CPs are spatial metaphors, scene visualisations, or even pantomimic descriptions. A CP is a complex sign typically preceded by a nominal phrase. A CP is created by selecting a classifier. The signer performs a three-dimensional movement with the hand that communicates an outline, a position in the space around the signer, a movement through the dimensional space, a physical or abstract dimension, or any other property of the object that needs to be communicated. This type of predicate is ideal for describing scenes, manipulation tools, movements, size, and other information of visual or spatial scenes or processes.Traditionally, languages have been classified according to the prevailing order of syntactic functions (Greenberg, 1963). Thus, both Spanish and English have a Subject–Verb–Object (SVO) basic order, although the Spanish word order is freer than that of English due to the richer morphology of Spanish. Early research in ASL word order during the 60's was influenced by the functional-oriented typology of that decade. In the 80s, the description of other SLs led other researchers to consider other motivations, such as semantics or pragmatics, to explain the word order of different SLs. Other typological studies have highlighted the fact that some languages do not organise the structure of the basic components of the sentence from the syntactic functions of subject and object, but from the grammaticalisation of the functions of topic and comment, as do Mandarin, Mayan languages, and the languages of the Philippines. However, still other studies (Li and Thompson, 1976) have shown that some languages use both types of organisation, resulting in four types of languages: subject-prominent languages, topic-prominent languages, languages prominent in either subject or topic, and languages organised according to other parameters. LSE is considered a topic-prominent language. Topicalisation, i.e., movement of the topic element at the beginning of the sentence, is widespread in SLs, but to varying degrees. The topic is usually marked by NMCs and followed by an intonation break. In general, topicalisation occurs only in the main clause. SLs have a considerable variation of basic word order of a sort very similar to that found in the so-called discourse-oriented languages, including Chinese and Russian. SLs productively employ devices for presenting information in a different order determined by discourse factors, such as presenting the old information (topic) before the new (comment). The presence of specific non-manual markers is noted when the order is other than basic.As was reported by Huenerfauth (2003), all MT systems for SLs published up to 2003 were just works in progress or simple demonstrators. However, some systems were particularly distinguished, including the ZARDOZ system (Veale and Conway, 1994), the ViSiCAST Translator (Bangham et al., 2000), the ASL Workbench (Speers, 2001) and the TEAM project (Zhao et al., 2000). All these systems were rule-based, following the predominant MT model of that time, and made use of either transfer-based or interlingua-based approaches. The only approach dealing with classifier predicates was that of Huenerfauth (2006), who presented a multi-path approach combining interlingua, transfer, and direct approaches as a whole.Today's prevalent research approaches for MT are data-driven. Example-based machine translation (EBMT) and statistical machine translation (SMT) have replaced the earlier rule-based machine translation (RBMT) approaches. Results obtained using these EBMT and SMT approaches have reached such a high level of quality that they make machine translation genuinely useful, especially when the target language is English. However, data-driven approaches estimate their parameters from an aligned bilingual corpus, and their accuracy depends heavily on the quality and size of this corpus. Unfortunately, corpora for SLs are still far from reaching the state of the art of those for spoken languages. The problem of modality and the lack of a standardised writing system make data acquisition for SLs a time-consuming and expensive task compared to the acquisition of spoken or written data. SL data are usually acquired first by video-recording the signer's performance, and then aligning the video sequence with multi-channel annotations that describe in a gloss format the signs and the non-manual components. The use of annotation tools such as ANVIL (Kipp, 2001), SignStream (Neidle, 2002), iLex (Hanke, 2002), ELAN (Wittenburg et al., 2002), or the annotation tool presented in (Braffort et al., 2004) makes easy the construction and annotation of new corpora for SLs. On the whole, if corpora are essential for language research, parallel corpora are essential for machine translation. To construct machine translation corpora, SL data annotations are extracted and aligned with the equivalent expressions in other languages. The amount of parallel data currently available for SLs is typically a few hundred sentences or even just isolated words in restricted domains and on very few topics. However, some parallel corpora are being used for research in machine translation; these are summarised in Table 1.Despite the lack of parallel corpora, the success of data-driven approaches to machine translation between spoken languages has led to the application of the same techniques to SLs. However, according to Morrissey (2011), most research in SL MT, with a few exceptions, has emanated from sporadic and short-term projects as opposed to long-term research investment. Some works are still worth mentioning: the Thai-to-Thai SL machine translation system (Dangsaart et al., 2008) presents a direct translation system with reordering rules. The system for Thai reaches an F-score of about 97% for a set of 297 test sentences. Morrissey (2008) presented exhaustive experiments on the MaTrEx, a hybrid approach combining EBMT and SMT (Stroppa and Way, 2006). Results of MaTrEx on the ATIS corpus were about 0.39 BLEU for English-to-Irish Sign Language translation, and about 50% for German-to-German Sign Language (DGS) translation.For Spanish to LSE, Baldassarri and Royo-Santas (2009) described a rule-based demonstrator. Spanish is analysed using FreeLing (Atserias et al., 2006) dependency analysis, in which the relations between words are interpreted as the relations between blocks, such as subject, predicate, verb, etc. Through the application of a series of grammatical rules, the dependency analysis is transformed into a series of glosses. These grammatical transformations are carried out in reverse order. During transformation, some information flows in a bottom-up direction: partial translation and semantic information. Semantic information includes meaning, temporal and numeral information, and information regarding the type of block. A morphological transformation is applied to glosses before generating signs. In this stage, some glosses are replaced by their synonyms when they do not correspond to signs, or by their hyponyms when they have neither equivalent sign nor synonyms. In addition, some individual glosses can be replaced by sequences of signs. All these replacements are based on a dictionary of equivalences. The system was tested with 92 sentences containing a total of 561 words. Sentences varied in length, ranging from simple phrases to more complex ones containing up to 25 words and several verbs along with subordination structures. Appropriate dictionary entries were created for the evaluation, with very satisfactory results: 96% of the words were correctly translated, and 93.7% of them were in correct order. Also worth mentioning is the existence of another rule-based Spanish-to-LSE MT system based in Apertium, a free/open-source platform (Forcada et al., 2011). The system uses shallow transfer rules and delivers an SEA representation of LSE. To our knowledge, there are no published results on this system but it is available on the Internet.44http://aplica.prompsit.com/en/text_es_ssp (accessed September 2012).The most complete work in Spanish-to-LSE translation to date is summarized in San-Segundo et al. (2011). Their system focuses on helping Deaf people in a highly specific domain, the renewal of driving licenses. The final version of the system combines three approaches in the following order of decreasing priority: an EBMT strategy, a rule-based translation method, and an SMT approach. All three approaches compute a confidence value, and thresholds determine when to use the next approach. EBMT uses a set of translated sentences and a heuristic distance function based on the Levenshtein distance (Levenshtein, 1966). In the rule-based approach, every word is first mapped into syntactic-pragmatic categories. After that, handcrafted rules are applied bottom-up to convert tagged words into signs. Rules define short- and long-scope relationships between concepts or signs. Categorisation, as described in López-Ludeña et al. (2011), consists of tagging a word as non-relevant or giving it a list of manually defined tags such as lemmas or word categories. For the SMT approach, two methods were evaluated: the Moses system and a Stochastic Finite-State Transducer using the GIATI algorithm (Casacuberta and Vidal, 2004). Both methods use the same alignments between words and signs. However, to improve their Spanish-to-LSE SMT system, Factored Translation Models are combined with the phrase-based SMT model (López-Ludeña et al., 2011). Factors are semantic categories and linguistic information such as part of speech or morphological features. The best BLEU obtained is above 0.70.Examining the brief history of MT systems for SL, it seems that research and development of such systems generally followed contemporary MT trends. Within rule-based MT, emphasis has been placed on the modelling of particular phenomena, using the computational linguistic theories and formalisms available at the time of any given study. Conversely, the data-driven paradigm exploits statistical regularities found in available parallel data, which are scarce for SLs. Scarceness has led to an attempt to reduce parameters by using semantic classes and incorporating linguistic information as factors. Doing so has resulted in some level of success, but only in very limited domains. However, parallel data for SLs are expected to remain scarce in the foreseeable future, unless research efforts are focused on their acquisition.The rule-based approach to translation is mainly motivated by the fact that available resources for data-driven approaches, especially corpora as seen in Section 3, are costly to acquire, and it is difficult for data-driven systems to estimate parameters from small corpora and still have reasonable coverage in wider domains. The source of knowledge for rule-based machine translation is contrastive linguistic studies. Contrastive linguistics focuses on similarities and differences in the structure and functioning of two or more languages. For the case of Spanish and LSE, contrastive studies have been carried out by Minguet (2000) and by Gramática contrastiva español/LSE, published as an electronic resource at the Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes55http://bib.cervantesvirtual.com/seccion/signos (accessed January 2012).. Additionally, some other, more specific contrastive studies, such as that of Villameriel (2008), can be found for discourse markers and other linguistic phenomena occurring in discourse or in conversations, such as role shifting or turn-taking.The strategy chosen in this paper for translating Spanish to LSE is the transfer at the level of syntactic functions from dependency analyses. Fig. 1 shows the architecture of the system presented here and its connection to other external modules. A dependency tree from the analysis module abstracts the constituency structure and the surface word order in the source sentence. Only functional relations between words are represented in a dependency tree. The transfer module makes use of the bilingual lexicon and of the knowledge in the language pair-specific rule database to map dependency structures and to transfer a Spanish dependency tree into the corresponding dependency tree in LSE. Word ordering and morphological rules are applied to the transferred dependency tree so that the output of the generation stage is a sequence of glosses with morphological indications. It is important to note here that glossing is a transcribing system that abstracts away the phonological representation of signs. That is why, properly speaking, the system presented in this paper does not produce a true translation. However, glosses should be considered an intermediate result from which signs, after being translated to phonological forms, will be synthesised by some avatar technology. The different stages of the machine translation strategy are detailed next.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The choice of a particular type of technology to process a language is greatly influenced by the density of the language, i.e., the availability of digital stored resources. Commercial research and development have concentrated on high-density languages. According to Varga et al. (2007), for medium-density languages, spoken by over half of humanity, parallel corpora can be compiled using digital resources like literary and religious texts, international law, movie captioning, software documentation, bilingual magazines, corporate home pages, and annual reports. Today, LSE, like any other sign language, is a low-density or under-resourced language. Because of modality, acquisition of sign language data is a time-consuming and expensive task compared to the acquisition of spoken or written data. For LSE, no parallel corpus currently exists of sufficient size to enable data-driven approaches to machine translation in non-restricted domains. However, LSE is being standardised, and the language's first grammar, as well as a normative dictionary, have recently been published. All these factors make the rule-based approach the only viable approach today for the development of a production-quality Spanish-to-LSE machine translation system for non-restricted domains.This paper has presented a transfer-based approach for Spanish-to-LSE translation by delivering LSE glosses. A wide-coverage Spanish parser was used to obtain a dependency analysis. The PoS flexibility of LSE enables the augmentation of the bilingual lexicon by bootstrapping the initial lexicon using morpho-lexical relationships. Lexical-semantic relationships were used to bridge the lexical gap. Classifier names were also deduced using lexical-semantic relationships. A word order generation algorithm was presented to deal with the topic-oriented surface order of LSE. The algorithm made use of linear precedence rules operating at the level of syntactic functions and dealing with topicalisation. Glosses were annotated with number, aspect, or other morphological information. Finally, classifier predicates, which are one of the cornerstones of sign languages, had a translatable subclass corresponding to Spanish prepositional expressions with locative and temporal meanings. Moreover, some of the solutions presented in this paper to the problems found for machine translation between Spanish and LSE could be equally valid, with minor adaptations, for the translation between other spoken languages and other sign languages.A parallel Spanish-LSE corpus was created from the data used in a psycholinguistic study. Although the corpus is comparable in size to other corpora used in data-driven approaches, it is not domain-specific. A parallel testbed was used to evaluate the system. Experiments reported a BLEU about 0.30 and a TER at about 42%. On the one hand, these results confirm the intuition that when data are scarce, or in sparse domains, induction is difficult or impossible, and hence bilingual data and handcrafted grammars are good alternatives. On the other hand, experiments show that LSE word order generation has played some little role in this corpus. This does not mean that word order in LSE is the same than in Spanish. In fact, they have been reported to be very different. However, order in LSE is free enough to accommodate the word order of the source sentences. Finally, a linguistic-oriented error analysis has shown that many differences between the system output and the reference translations arise from variations in the realisation of the linguistic structures, and that classifier predicates are the most difficult expressions to generate.In spite of the relatively good results obtained with the approach presented in this paper, experiments should be extended in several directions in order to assess properly the performance of the system. The corpus should incorporate more linguistic phenomena in order to evaluate the coverage of the system and its components. In addition, the corpus should conform to standard LSE, since, from a sociolinguistic point of view, the standard is the variant used in addressing a linguistic community, in this case the LSE community. This paper is also incomplete, since it addresses only the translation of written Spanish-to-LSE glosses. Glosses are used as an intermediate symbolic representation for guiding the development and assessing the performance of the system in sign choices and in generating sign sequences. However, glosses are merely an underspecified symbolic representation of a signed message. Glosses are not even a writing system for Sign Languages that could be understood by Deaf people. A complete MT system for Sign Languages should produce animations, and a genuine and proper evaluation should involve Deaf people and should measure comprehension. Many other important aspects have been left unaddressed for the moment, and there is still a great deal of work to do, even in the field of animation synthesis, in order to make MT systems operational and useful.