@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
General framework for transfer path analysis: History, theory and classification of techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In this paper a general framework for Transfer Path Analysis is presented.The vibration transfer problem is derived conceptually, based on the admittances of the active and passive subsystems.Eleven methods are derived and classified into classical, component-based and transmissibility-based TPA.The evolution of historical developments to practical TPA methodologies is presented.Several practicalities are discussed that may be important when conducting a TPA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transfer path analysis,Source characterisation,Vibration transmission,Dynamic substructuring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Transfer Path Analysis (TPA) designates the family of test-based methodologies to study the transmission of mechanical vibrations. Since the first adaptation of electric network analogies in the field of mechanical engineering a century ago, a multitude of TPA methods have emerged and found their way into industrial development processes. Nowadays the TPA paradigm is largely commercialised into out-of-the-box testing products, making it difficult to articulate the differences and underlying concepts that are paramount to understanding the vibration transmission problem. The aim of this paper is to derive and review a wide repertoire of TPA techniques from their conceptual basics, liberating them from their typical field of application. A selection of historical references is provided to align methodological developments with particular milestones in science. Eleven variants of TPA are derived from a unified framework and classified into three categories, namely classical, component-based and transmissibility-based TPA. Current challenges and practical aspects are discussed and reference is made to related fields of research.degree of freedomfrequency response functiondynamic displacements/rotationsapplied forces/momentsinterface forces/momentsadmittance FRF matriximpedance FRF matrixtransmissibility matrixpertaining to the assembled systempertaining to the active/passive componentpertaining to the test rigsource excitation DoFinterface DoFreceiver DoFindicator DoFpseudo-force DoF

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Transfer Path Analysis (TPA) has been a valuable engineering tool for as long as noise and vibrations of products have been of interest. A TPA concerns a product׳s actively vibrating components (such as engines, gearing systems or turbochargers) and the transmission of these vibrations to the connected passive structures. TPA is particularly useful when the actual vibrating mechanisms are too complex to model or measure directly, as it allows us to represent a source by forces and vibrations displayed at the interfaces with the passive side.In this way the source excitations can be separated from the structural/acoustic transfer characteristics, allowing us to troubleshoot the dominant paths of vibration transmission. The engineer can then anticipate by making changes to either the source itself or the receiving structures that are connected to it.A TPA often rises from the need to reduce some sort of undesired noise or vibration, for instance to improve product comfort or lifetime, ensure safety or preserve stealthiness. Aside from automotive development, applications are also seen in industries such as marine and aeroplane engineering, building acoustics and acoustic modelling of musical instruments. A TPA is generally motivated by one of the following desires:1.Secrecy: perhaps the earliest TPA studies were triggered by the need to reduce the transmission of engine vibrations in military ships and submarines in order to make them stealthy. Many publications in the 1950s and 1960s document on isolation of ship engines by means of absorbers and decoupling mechanisms [1–5] to minimise the transmission through the interfaces.Safety: along with the rapid development of aeroplanes and spacecraft in the 1960s, TPA concepts started to be of use to study fatigue and stability (flutter) problems due to active or induced vibrations. As sources of vibrations are much more persistent in aeronautics – think of vortex-induced vibrations – focus was on characterising the passive transfer paths by means of modal analysis [6,7].Comfort: over the last decades TPA tends to be particularly associated with noise, vibration and harshness (NVH) engineering as commonly encountered in the automotive industry. The majority of recent developments and commercial solutions have been tailored towards this engineering society or related industries, driven by the increasing customer expectations on acoustic comfort [8–12].In response to the evolving demands, TPA methods have been under continuous development and their family members have grown numerous. Some designations that found their way into the literature include Operational TPA (OTPA), Operational Path Analysis with exogenous inputs (OPAX), blocked-force TPA, Gear Noise Propagation, in situ Source Path Characterisation and Virtual Acoustic Prototyping. Very often those methods are presented from highly case-specific derivations. Not surprisingly, as the underlying physical concepts are similar, some of the above-mentioned show strong similarities or are even identical.A TPA work flow can typically be subdivided in the following steps: (a) operational measurement on the active component; (b) determination of the passive (sub)system characteristics (commonly by means of FRFs); (c) identification of interface loads; (d) calculation of path contributions. The steps are shown schematically in Fig. 1. Depending on the TPA method at hand, some or all of these steps may be performed in arbitrary order. The optimisation actions that follow from such an analysis are generally not considered part of the work flow.This paper presents a unified framework for derivation of a large range of TPA methods. It is chosen to present and classify the methods separate from their typical fields of application, such that the underlying physical concepts are exposed and can be compared. Section 2 presents an account of some early developments and their relation to currently established TPA methods. This should by no means be regarded as a complete historical overview; rather it was chosen to highlight some key publications that have inspired the methodological developments in different ways. In Section 3 a general framework for TPA is introduced, starting by depicting the transfer problem using the Dynamic Substructuring paradigm [13]. Hereafter the TPA methods are derived and classified along three families, namely the classical (Section 3.2), component-based (Section 3.3) and transmissibility-based (Section 3.4) TPA methods, as depicted vertically in Fig. 1. The paper is concluded in Section 4 with a discussion of some practical aspects that are more common to TPA and partly application-specific.Transfer Path Analysis has been developed mostly during the second half of the 20th century, although some fundamental concepts date back to the 1880s. As often occurs in science, inspiration was found in different fields of research. This section starts with describing the adaptation of linear electric network theory to describe the transfer of structural vibrations. These form the foundations on which many analytical, and later also experimental TPA techniques have been built.The inherent task of analysing a transfer problem is to describe the relation between the inputs and outputs of systems, preferably in a systematic or lumped way. Some of the major contributions in system theory originate from electric network science, founded on the laws for electric circuits of Kirchhoff [14], the superposition principle and the definitions of electric quantities such as admittance and impedance by Heaviside [15]. The equivalent source theorems of Thévenin [16] and Norton [17] were stated11Actually it was Helmholtz who posed the equivalent source theorem already in 1853 in one of his fundamental works [18]. Like many scientist in that time, Thévenin was not aware of this early finding, as can be read in [19,20].by the turn of the 20th century, allowing us to substitute a group of active and passive components by an equivalent voltage/current and a single impedance. Altogether these discoveries provided a handful of tools to depict complex electrical systems as a set of lumped subsystems, characterised by frequency dependent properties (e.g. impedance, admittance) and interacting by the so-called “through” and “across” quantities, e.g. current and voltage.The electric network principles appeared equally useful to describe structural vibrations of mechanical systems. Gardonio and Brennan published an extensive review [21] of the system description based on impedance and mobility (admittance) concepts in structural dynamics. They regard the article of Webster in 1914 [22] as the first effort to demonstrate analogies between electrical and mechanical impedance properties. In an attempt to describe the acoustic pressure in horns and musical instruments, Webster defined the acoustical impedance as the complex frequency-dependent ratio between pressure and volume of flowing air. From thereon analogies have been derived for mechanical systems,22The initial analogy regarded force analogous to voltage, which seemed the most intuitive choice. Firestone however disqualified this mechanical-impedance analogy in 1933 [23], arguing that it infringes Kirchhoff׳s definitions of the terms through and across. The mechanical-mobility analogy, linking force with electrical current, is indeed the correct analogy for drawing mechanical circuits using parallel and series addition [24]. Nevertheless, the terms impedance and mobility have never changed definition in common use., which is thoroughly reviewed in [21,25].Impedance and mobility have since been well established as concepts to model and understand all sorts of vibratory systems [26–29]. The adaptation of the four-pole matrix method [30] furthermore introduced means to model systems consisting of a larger sequence of subsystems. However, most applications remained limited to fairly analytic cases [2–4]. In particular, the topic of experimental source characterisation has received little attention until the 1970s.Between 1971 and 1981 Bendat and Piersol provided a comprehensive set of spectral correlation and coherence functions with special attention for digital data acquisition [31–34]. These publications have empowered multiple-input/multiple-output (MIMO) measurement techniques that are instrumental to many advanced analyses, such as multi-reference modal testing [35]. Indeed the engineers were now given the chance to analyse vibration problems in their full complexity (e.g. multi-path, multi-DoF) rather than by simplified or analytical descriptions.During the decades that followed, various simultaneous developments have been observed that led to a rapid expansion of practical TPA methods:•The first exploration of techniques nowadays denoted as classical TPA is often attributed to the work of Verheij around 1980 who studied the transmission of ship machinery vibrations through resilient mounts [36,37]. Although theory on mount stiffness had been around already for years [5], Verheij was one of the first to successfully determine interface forces and moments by experiment. Although attractive from an academical point of view, practical engineering called for less elaborate force determination methods. The matrix-inverse technique proved to be a good alternative [38–41] and is up to today one of the most popular classical TPA methods in practice. The theory of classical TPA is presented in Section 3.2.In 1981 Magrans proposed a general method of measuring transmissibility between terminals in a network [42]. The so-called Global Transfer Direct Transfer (GTDT) method was further explored by Guasch [43–45] and later put into practice as the Advanced TPA [46]. Independently, Liu and Ewins [47] and Varoto and McConnell [48] explored properties of transmissibility matrices for structural vibrational problems, followed up by Ribeiro, Maia, Silva and Fontul [49–52]. Surprisingly though, the transmissibility-based method known as Operational TPA was first presented (again independently) by Noumura and Yoshida in Japan [53]. Section 3.4 discusses the theory and related techniques; reviews and benchmark studies are found in [54–57].Inspired on acoustics, Mondot and Petersson proposed a method in 1987 to depict the vibration transfer problem using the characteristic power of the source itself (the so-called source descriptor) and a coupling function accounting for the added dynamics of the receiving structure [58]. This triggered the idea to characterise a source by means of blocked forces or free velocities [59–61], as seen in e.g. the in situ method by Moorhouse and Elliott [62,63] and the pseudo-forces method by Janssens and Verheij [64,65]. These and other strategies based on source component description are discussed in Section 3.3.Most TPA methods require admittance of either the source, receiver or assembled structure. Dynamic Substructuring (DS) techniques are particularly useful for this purpose, as they allow us to assemble systems from the dynamics of its substructures [13]. Component Mode Synthesis (CMS) and model reduction [66–68] emerged in the 1960s as the first application of DS. Rather than characterising an input/output problem, their main purpose was to compute natural modes and frequencies of aerospace structures. This perhaps explains why DS techniques were hardly ever brought in context with TPA.33Early examples that suggest relations between TPA and dynamic substructuring are papers of Rubin [69,70] (who later published an important modal reduction method [71]) and a NASA report [7].Yet with the introduction of Frequency Based Substructuring (FBS) [72,73] in the late 1980s, methods became available to assemble multiple substructures from FRFs, either obtained from numerical modelling or admittance tests [74]. In fact, DS theory appeared very convenient to derive hybrid numerical/experimental TPA schemes and perform component optimisation [75,76]. This is particularly effective in combination with component-based TPA schemes [77,78], as discussed in Section 3.3.The abundance of developments brought prosperity to the engineering community, yet at the same time raised misunderstanding about the interrelations between the methods. In 1980 the ISO work group TC43/SC1/WG22 was established, dedicated to investigating and standardising the present technologies for structure-borne TPA [79,80]. An intermediate report [81] already presented a comprehensive overview, addressing aspects such as the required number of DoFs, source description by means of equivalent quantities (forces/velocities/power), reciprocal measurement techniques and potential integration of Statistical Energy Analysis (SEA) principles. Although well accepted by acoustical engineers, the standardisations failed to gain broad popularity in the field of structure-borne TPA.Nevertheless, popular methods such as operational TPA and matrix-inverse TPA have nowadays been integrated into many commercial noise and vibration solutions. Extensive literature is currently available, often discussing the application of a particular technique in a case-specific fashion. From such perspective the relation with other TPA techniques can be vague. In the remaining of this paper it is attempted to review the landscape of TPA techniques in a unified way, namely from the framework as presented next.The framework for Transfer Path Analysis as presented here follows the notation and terminology of Frequency Based Substructuring (FBS) [13]. Although different styles of derivation are encountered in the literature, it is the authors׳ belief that the transfer path problem is best understood by describing the dynamic interaction between the active and passive subsystems.In Section 3.1 the subsystem definition is introduced and the transfer problem is formulated based on the admittances44Dynamic systems can be characterised and assembled using either impedance or admittance notations [27–29,82]. As admittances are obtained more naturally in experimental practice, they are favoured throughout the derivations.of the active and passive subsystems. Thereafter a distinction is made between three families of TPA methods, respectively denoted as classical TPA (Section 3.2), component-based TPA (Section 3.3) and transmissibility-based TPA (Section 3.4). A summary is presented in Section 3.5.Let us consider the dynamic system AB as schematically depicted in Fig. 2a. Two subsystems can be distinguished: an active subsystem A containing an excitation at node 1 and a passive subsystem B comprising the responses of interest at node 3. The subsystems are rigidly interconnected at the interface node 2. For simplicity of derivation, the Degrees of Freedom (DoFs) in this example are restricted to three distinct nodes. These may however represent a larger set of DoFs, representing respectively1.source: internal DoFs belonging to the active component that cause the operational excitation but are unmeasurable in practice;interface: coupling DoFs residing on the interface between the active and the passive component;receiver: response DoFs at locations of interest at the passive component, possibly including acoustic pressures and other physical quantities.Hence, the example of Fig. 2a is illustrative for a wide range of practical problems, provided that the structure of interest can be decomposed into an active and a passive part. In what follows, all methods assume that the operational excitation at node 1 is unmeasurable in practice, but transmits vibrations through the interfaces at node 2 to receiving locations at node 3. The responses shall then be built up from a certain description of the vibrations measured at the interface (node1→2) and an appropriate set of transfer functions relating these vibrations to the receiving responses (node2→3). The fundamental choices herein dictate to which TPA family the method is classified.Let us first approach the transfer problem top-down for the assembled system AB, see Fig. 2a. We are interested in the response spectra at the receiving locationsu3(ω)for source excitations at node 1, given by the force spectraf1(ω). For the assembled problem, this is simply obtained from a superposition of the individual contributions, i.e. the excitation force spectra multiplied with their respective linear(ised) transfer functions, contained in the columns of admittance FRF matrixYABω(1)uiω=∑jYijABωfjω⟹u3ω=Y31ABωf1ωIn the equations that follow the explicit frequency dependency(ω)will be omitted to improve readability. Also note that the response set u can include displacements, velocities, accelerations or any other quantity, provided that the rows of the FRF matrices are obtained accordingly. Furthermore, in order to keep the derivations brief and understandable, it is chosen to only consider the structure-borne paths. Nevertheless, Eq. (1) can easily be extended to include contributions of airborne paths if the application so requires. In that case Y and f need to be augmented with a set of (responses to) acoustic loads such as volume velocities (m3/s), as further discussed in Section 4.3.The same transfer function is now derived for an assembly of the individual subsystems, as depicted in Fig. 2b. Let us first put the subsystem׳s FRF matricesYAandYBin a block-diagonal format. The force vector comprising the excitation force is augmented with interface forces g2 for both sides of node 2 that are yet to be determined. The obtained system of equations resembles the admittance variant of dual assembly, which is a standard form of Dynamic Substructuring [13](2)u1u2Au2Bu3=Y11AY12A00Y21AY22A0000Y22BY23B00Y32BY33Bf1000+0g2Ag2B0oru=Yf+gThe following physical explanation can now be reasoned to solve Eq. (2). The excitation force at node 1 induces a motion at node 2 of subsystem A. As subsystem B is not directly affected by forces at A (due to the block-diagonal form of the global FRF matrix), an incompatibility is caused between uA2 and uB2. This is denoted by the interface “gap” δ, which can conveniently be written using a signed Boolean matrix55The signed Boolean matrix B establishes the relations for all interface DoFs of A and B that are vectorially associated, e.g. uA2xand uB2x. Guidelines on the construction and properties of the signed Boolean matrix are found in [13].B as shown in Eqs. (3a) and (3c). Next, assuming that no additional mass is present between the subsystems, the equilibrium condition is satisfied, requiring the interface forces g2 on both sides to be equal in magnitude and opposing in sign. The interface forces are expressed by Eqs. (3b) and (3c), using a Lagrange multiplierλfor the magnitude and the transposed Boolean matrix to account for the interface force direction(3a)δ=u2B−u2Aorδ≜Bu(3b)g2A=-g2B=λorg≜-BTλ(3c)withB=0-II0The interface forcesλthat pull the two subsystems together can be determined from Eq. (3a) by requiring δ=0, which enforces the compatibility conditionu2A=u2B. Considering Eq. (3b), the interface forces that ensure compatibility can be determined by equating the second and the third line of Eq. (2) and solving forλ(4)Y21Af1+Y22Ag2A=Y22Bg2BY22A+Y22Bλ=-Y21Af1λ=-(Y22A+Y22B)-1Y21Af1⇒g2B=(Y22A+Y22B)-1Y21Af1Eq. (4) provides the interface forces at the coinciding interface DoFs caused by the operational excitation f1 inside subsystem A. The response at the receiving sideu3Bis found by substituting Eq. (4) into the last line of Eq. (2)(5)u3=Y32Bg2B=[Y32B(Y22A+Y22B)−1Y21A]︸Y31ABf1Comparing with Eq. (1), it follows that the terms between the brackets indeed represent the admittance of the assemblyY31ABby coupling of the subsystems׳ admittances. It can be verified that this result is in accordance with Lagrange Multiplier Frequency Based Substructuring (LM-FBS) assembly [13], which is further elaborated in Appendix A.So far it has been assumed that the excitation at node 1 is measurable. In reality however it is impossible or impractical to identify the exact force loading. This is solved in TPA by assuming that the dynamics at the interface node 2 due to this excitation are measurable and may very well represent the source excitation. In what follows, different approaches are examined to describe the transmission of vibrations, or rather, the response at the passive subsystem B for a non-measurable excitation somewhere inside (or on) the active subsystem A. The notation of Dynamic Substructuring is used to reveal the relations between different approaches.The family of Classical TPA methods is essentially intended to identify transfer path contributions in existing products. They have nowadays become standard practice to troubleshoot NVH problems in automotive engineering [9,10]. A classical TPA performs operational tests on the assembled product AB to obtain interface forces between the active and the passive side, namelyλin Eq. (4). It can be verified from Eqs. (2) and (5) that these interface forces fully determine the responses at the passive side and are thus representative for the effects of the source vibrations at the receiver locations u3. To calculate the receiver responses,66In this framework the resulting responses u3 are formulated as a matrix–vector product, namely the sum of the partial responses. Techniques to evaluate the individual transfer paths contributions are discussed in Section 4.5.the passive-side interface forcesg2B=−λare applied to the interfaces of subsystem B, as shown in Fig. 4a(6)u3=Y32Bg2BBoth steps pose some challenges in practice. The FRFs of the passive side are typically determined from impact or shaker tests, or in a reciprocal fashion using for instance an acoustic source at the receiving location and accelerometers at the interface nodes [83–87]. Either way it requires dismounting of the active part(s) from the passive side. With respect to the determination of operational interface forcesg2B, it could be impractical to mount force sensors between the active and the passive part. Therefore a number of indirect methods have been developed to circumvent direct force measurement.Hence, the variants of classical TPA are defined according to howg2Bis obtained from operational tests, which are discussed next.The most straightforward technique to obtain the interface forces is from force transducers mounted directly between the active and the passive side, as depicted in Fig. 3a. It was demonstrated by Eq. (4) that the interface force caused by the operational excitation is given by(7)λ=−(Y22A+Y22B)−1Y21Af1⟹g2B=−λThis is valid under the assumption thatu2B=u2A, which requires the stiffness of the transducers to be high enough (relative to the stiffness of the actual subsystems) in the frequency range of interest. In fact, the main drawback of the method is the inconvenience of placing the transducers between the active component and the receiving structure. Lack of space, distortion of the original mounting situation and the incapability to measure all desired degrees of freedom at a connection point render the method impractical, especially for typical automotive applications. In case of large-scale systems such as ship machinery, this method may still be preferred [37].An effective way of reducing vibration transmission is by placing resilient mounts between the components instead of rigid fixtures, as illustrated in Fig. 3b. By proper tuning of the mount flexibility (stiffness) and absorption (damping) properties, a high level of vibration suppression can be achieved. The mount stiffness method uses these mount properties to determine the interface forces. Assumed that the added mass of the mounts is negligible, the interface force equilibrium condition Eq. (3b) is still satisfied. However, the compatibility condition of Eq. (3a) is “weakened”, henceu2B−u2Ais no longer zero. Instead the m interface forces and coordinate incompatibilities are related by the dynamic stiffnesses of the mounts, denoted byzjjmt, j representing a single interface DoF[gjAgjB]=−zjjmt[1−1−11][ujAujB]⟹gjB=zjjmt(ujA−ujB),j∈1,…,mA spring-like stiffness matrix can be recognised, however with a minus sign because the interface forces gjact on the connected subsystems A and B instead of the mount. Introducing the diagonal mount stiffness matrixZmt, the full set of m interface forcesg2Bcan be estimated from the differential interface displacements between the source and the receiver side, i.e. the measured displacements at both sides of the mounts(8)g2B=Zmt(u2A−u2B)withZmt=diag(z11mt…zmmmt)In most cases the flexible mounts are already integrated in the design to attenuate the vibration transmission. If they are however placed in the system for the mere purpose of TPA, it can be shown that the interface forces and thus the vibrations of the coupled system are altered significantly [88,89], namelyg2B=(Y22A+Y22B+Ymt)−1Y21Af1withYmt=(Zmt)−1Although the mount stiffness method can be powerful and easy to conduct, the accuracy is highly subject to the terms77Note that the terms in the dynamic stiffness matrixZmtcorrespond to differential displacements of the associated interface DoFsu2A−u2Band not the coordinates of both A and B. Some implications for the terms inZmtare discussed in [89,90].inZmt. Typical absorbers exhibit amplitude-dependent non-linearities and directional characteristics [1,2,91]. An advanced TPA method that estimates the mount properties from operational tests is discussed in Section 3.4.3.The third and perhaps most popular classical TPA member is the matrix-inverse method [38–41]. It was observed from Eq. (6) that responses at the passive side are found from the application of the interface forces to the passive subsystem׳s FRFs. Recalling these responses from Eq. (2)[u2Bu3]=[Y22BY32B]g2BThis problem can be inverted if the left-hand side contains sufficient independent responses to describe all m interface forces and moments ing2B. The set of receiver responses u3 is typically too small in number and too distant from the interfaces to be suitable for inversion. Inversion of the first row is theoretically sufficient, but requires complete instrumentation of the assembled structure׳s interfaces to measure all DoFsu2Bassociated withg2B. In addition, a symmetric FRF matrixY22Bwould be required for the passive subsystem׳s interfaces, which is challenging to obtain accurately.88See Section 4.4 for a discussion on obtaining a full and reciprocal set of translational and rotational DoFs.In practice, the passive side is equipped with the so-called indicator responsesu4 as shown in Fig. 3c. An amount ofn≥mresponses shall be located in the proximity of the interfaces, such that the full set of m interface forces is properly observable from these points (this is addressed below). As these indicator DoFs merely assist in the determination of the interface forces, the sensor type can be chosen rather arbitrarily, although (tri-axial) accelerometers are the most common choice.Two sets of measurements are now required to reconstruct the interface force spectra. First, responses u4 are measured on the assembled system AB during operational tests. These can be expressed in terms of subsystem admittances, similar to Eq. (5) (see also Appendix A)(9)u4=Y41ABf1=Y42B(Y22A+Y22B)−1Y21Af1︸g2BNext, FRFs need to be measured for the passive subsystem B, relating the motion at these indicator points to forces at the interface, namelyY42B. Note that this requires dismounting of the active components from the assembly. Nevertheless, the FRFsY42B(needed for the matrix-inverse force determination) andY32B(to calculate responses at the target locations, Eq. (6)) can be obtained from the same FRF measurement campaign, as it only involves mounting of additional sensors. The operational interface forces can be reconstructed from a pseudo-inverse of the indicator response spectra u4 with the subsystem FRFs(10)g2B=(Y42B)+u4IfY42Bis full rank, it holds that(Y42B)+Y42B=I, such that in theory the correct interface forces from Eq. (4) are obtained by subsequent application of Eqs. (9) and (10). Hence the conditioning of the FRF matrix is crucial, which should have (a) sufficient rank to describe all interface forcesg2Bindependently from the set u4 and (b) a reasonably low condition number in order not to amplify measurement errors in the inversion. As a rule of thumb, it is common to use at least twice as many response DoFs as strictly required to fully determine the interface forces. Much attention has been devoted to improving the conditioning of the inverse problem by means of singular value decomposition, see for instance the work of Thite and Dobson [39–41,92,93] or an early review of techniques [94]. Time domain implementations have also been developed, such as the inverse structural filtering methods described in [38,95].Recently there has been interest in the application of strain gages instead of the commonly used accelerometers at the indicator points. It is argued that strain responses possess a more direct relation to interface forces and are better able to capture the local phenomena of the structure. Consequently it is expected that strain measurements lead to better conditioning of the matrix to be inverted [96,97]. More research is currently needed to further verify this assumption.A fundamentally different class of methods is that of the component-based TPA. As shown in Eq. (7), the interface forces obtained from a classical TPA are not a characteristic of the source alone but of the assembled dynamics. For that reason, a classical TPA cannot predict the effects of subsystem modification, as one would need to conduct a new operational test for every change in design. Hence, the interface forces measured in an assembly AB are not transferable to an assembly with another receiving side B.Component-based TPA tries to characterise the source excitation by a set of equivalent forces or velocities that are an inherent property of the active component itself. The responses at the receiving side can be simulated by applying these forces to the FRFs of an assembled system with the active part shut down, as illustrated in Fig. 4b. Hence, the dynamic interaction with the passive side is accounted for in a later stage, at least not during operational measurements. This allows defining a testing environment99The dependency of the source excitation on the mounting conditions is discussed in Section 4.1.that is ideal for operational measurement on the active component, explaining the denotation component-based.Interestingly, with respect to the origin of component-based TPA theory, literature has been very unambiguous. As mentioned in Section 2, some researchers have found inspiration in acoustics or electronic network theory (particularly the equivalent source identities of Thévenin and Norton), such as [58–63,98]. Others derived similar theories from a structural–mechanical point of view [64,65,99] or dynamic substructuring techniques [77,78]. As a consequence, a wide variety of component-based TPA methods have been derived, largely independent of each other. This section presents a more generic derivation in order to unite all component methods and compare the various concepts.Approaching the problem top-down, one is looking for a set of equivalent forcesf2eqthat, applied to the interface of the assembled system AB at rest, yields the correct responses at u3. This can be directly formulated using the admittance of the assemblyY32AB, or expanded in terms of its subsystem admittances (see Appendix A)(11)u3=Y32ABf2eq=[Y32B(Y22A+Y22B)−1Y22A]f2eqThe response u3, as a result of the equivalent forces, should equal the response obtained when the active component is running in the same assembly, caused by f1 in Eq. (5). Comparing Eqs. (11) with (5), it follows naturally that the equivalent forces should take the form(12)Y32B(Y22A+Y22B)−1Y22Af2eq=Y32B(Y22A+Y22B)−1Y21Af1⟹f2eq=(Y22A)−1Y21Af1Eq. (12) shows that the equivalent forces are indeed a property on the active component A only. The existence of such an equivalent source problem offers tremendous potential for practical component-based TPA methods. There is however one important limitation: the equivalent forces only properly represent the operational excitations for responses on the receiving structure or on the interface. Responses obtained on the source will be different and therefore of no use. This limitation was already mentioned in [77,78] and can be understood by examining the system of Eq. (2): responses at the passive side B are caused only by forces through or onto the interface, whereas the responses at the source side A are a result of both the direct contribution of f1 and its reflection through the coupled subsystem B. This is further substantiated in Appendix A.In the next sections, several approaches are discussed that yield a set of equivalent forces from operational tests, following the definition of Eq. (12).Consider the case where the boundary of subsystem A is rigidly fixed, as depicted in Fig. 5a. The operational excitation f1 is entirely portrayed by the reaction forces at the “blocked” interfaceg2bl, such that the interface displacementsu2A=0. A direct relation is found, leading to the following equivalent force:(13)u1u2=0=Y11AY12AY21AY22Af1g2A=−g2bl⟹{g2bl=Y22A−1Y21Af1f2eq=g2blThe so-called blocked-force TPA is perhaps the most commonly known variant of component-based TPA methods because of its straight-forward applicability. It can be seen as an application of the Thévenin equivalent source problem [16], that found its way into popular mechanics halfway the 20th century [2,27,70]. Mathematically one can regard the blocked-force method as imposing a Dirichlet boundary condition on the active subsystem׳s interface.The blocked-force method assumes the boundary to be infinitely stiff in all directions, which is in practice rarely the case.1010For numerical analysis the blocked-force concept can be particularly effective to reduce a distributed load on the active component to fewer DoFs of the interfaces. This was recently demonstrated for transient simulation of offshore structures [100].Hence the accuracy of the blocked forces is highly subject to the stiffness of the boundary relative to the component at hand [77,101,102]. An additional difficulty is the measurement of rotational moments, as most commonly used sensors are unable to measure collocated 6-DoF interface loads. As a consequence, the blocked-force method is expected to perform best at the low frequency end for which the rigid boundary assumption is most valid and rotational effects are in practice least prominent.The direct counterpart of the blocked-force method is the free-velocity TPA as depicted in Fig. 5b. In this case the component׳s interfaces are left free, such that all vibrations are seen as “free displacements”u2freeat the interface DoFs. From here on, equivalent forces1111If the admittances of the subsystems are available separately, one may also apply the free velocities directly, as shown in [82,103].can be calculated by inverting the admittance measured at the free subsystem׳s interfaces, which can be understood by comparing the free displacements with the blocked force definition of Eq. (12)(14)u1u2A=u2free=Y11AY12AY21AY22Af1g2A=0⟹{u2free=Y21Af1f2eq=Y22A−1u2freeAnalogue to the blocked-force TPA, this method can be seen as a strict application of a Neumann boundary condition and is furthermore related to Norton׳s equivalent source theorem for electric networks [17]. Again, imposing free boundary conditions can be troublesome as the vibrating system often needs to be mounted at one or more connection points to be able to run in operation. Therefore the method is in practice expected to perform best for frequencies well above the rigid body modes of the structure. Also note that effects such as friction and damping, which would occur at the interfaces of the assembled system, are absent in the operational measurement on the free component.The fact that the method makes reference to free velocities rather than free displacements has an historical motive, as the former quantity is commonly applied in acoustical engineering in combination with acoustic pressure. For such acoustic problems, dynamic coupling of admittance is normally discarded. This is a fair assumption, considering that the impedance of the radiating source is much larger than the impedance of the receiving surrounding fluid, i.e. air. In structure-borne vibrations the source and the receiving system often exhibit similar dynamics, hence explicit coupling is needed. This was realised for a single-DoF problem by means of a non-dimensional coupling function in [58]. Extensions to multi-DoF systems and further discussion of this topic are found in [59–61]. As a final note, the free-velocity concept has been standardised into an ISO norm for characterisation of structure borne sound sources [80].As both above-mentioned methods pose their limitations in practice, one often prefers to conduct operational tests on an appropriate support structure. Such a coupled structure unavoidably displays its own dynamics on the interfaces, which need to be accounted for in order to render the equivalent forces independent of any connected part. Let us therefore imagine the active component fixed onto a test bench or test rig R as illustrated in Fig. 5c. Denoting the interface admittance of the test rig byY22R, we obtain for the extended system of equations(15)u1Au2Au2R=Y11AY12A0Y21AY22A000Y22Rf1g2Ag2Rwithu2A=u2R(displacementcompatibility)g2A=-g2R(forceequilibrium)After enforcing the compatibility and equilibrium conditions on the interface DoFs, a derivation similar to Section 3.1.2 can be followed to find the operational interface forcesg2R. These forces are now dependent on the properties of both the active component A and the test rig R. Substituting the forces back into the second row of Eq. (15), the corresponding interface displacements u2 are obtained as well (the superscript is dropped because of compatibility){g2R=(Y22A+Y22R)−1Y21Af1(16a)u2=[I−Y22A(Y22A+Y22R)−1]Y21Af1(16b)Eqs. (16a) and (16b) hold for anyY22R, as long as no external force is acting on the test rig. The desired set of equivalent forces equation (12) is obtained by combining Eqs. (16a) and (16b) in such way that the dynamics of the test rigY22Rare eliminated(17)f2eq=Y22A-1Y21Af1⟹f2eq=g2R+Y22A-1u2As it turns out, Eq. (17) forms the sum of contributions of both the blocked force and the free velocity experiment, respectively, Eqs. (13) and (14). One could therefore speak of a hybrid interface condition, or Robin boundary condition in a mathematical sense. It can indeed be verified that Eqs. (16a) and (16b) converge1212A intuitive presentation of the range between the two limit cases is given in [61].to the blocked forces forYR→0and to free velocities whenYR→∞.The hybrid interface approach combining force and motion was originally published in [78]; the displacement term was regarded in this work as the “non-rigid test bench compensation” to the imperfect blocked forces. Although generally applicable in theory, it should be mentioned that the method can be rather costly and time-consuming in practice, as one needs to explicitly measure collocated forces and motion in all directions for every interface node [101].In lack of force measurement, one may substitute the third row of (15) forg2B. The so obtained approach was suggested in [102] and takes displacement measurement only(18)f2eq=(Y22R)−1u2+(Y22A)−1u2The price for not having to measure interface forces is that separate FRF measurements should now be conducted, to obtain the subsystem admittances of the active component and the test rig.Looking again at Eq. (18) we observe that the two inverted admittance FRF matrices in fact represent the dynamic stiffness matrices of respectively component A and R for the same set of collocated interface DoFs. They can be combined by simple impedance addition1313This is standard practice for FEM assembly.(19)f2eq=(Z22R+Z22A)u2=Z22ARu2The result of Eq. (19) is indeed indifferent to the dynamics of R or any other mounting structure that component A is connected to. Transforming back to admittance notation, we find that the blocked forces can be calculated inversely from the admittance of the assembly׳s interface or, in an overdetermined fashion, using a sufficient set of indicator points u4 on the receiving subsystem(20)f2eq=(Y22AR)−1u2orf2eq=(Y42AR)+u4Obtained from a different derivation, the approach of Eq. (20) has first been proposed by Moorhouse and Elliott [62,63] as the in situ method. As implied by the name, the operational measurement may even be conducted in the target assembly AB, avoiding dismounting of any part, namely(21)f2eq=(Y22AB)−1u2orf2eq=(Y42AB)+u4The equivalent forces resulting from application of Eq. (21) are nonetheless a property of component A only and thus transferable to an assembly with another passive side.The in situ force determination procedure is illustrated in Fig. 5d. Indeed, Eq. (21) represents the inverse of Eq. (11) yet with an extended set of response DoFs in order to render the system (over) determined and thus invertible. As a consequence, the method shows great resemblance with the classical matrix-inverse method of Eq. (10) the difference being the choice for the assembled admittance instead of the passive subsystem׳s admittance. Similar techniques regarding matrix conditioning (e.g. over-determination, singular value rejection) apply as well to the in situ method. Most remarkable is that the receiving side can be chosen arbitrarily, as the equivalent forces identified by Eq. (20) or (21) are theoretically invariant of any subsystem coupled to it. In that respect, two important conditions need to be kept in mind:1.Operational excitations f1 may only originate from the domain of component A. Any excitation coming from the passive side will disturb the determination of equivalent forces.Although the responses used for the matrix inversion (u2oru4) can be positioned rather arbitrarily, they are bounded to the domain of the interface and the passive side. This relates back to the remark made after Eq. (12) and discussed in Appendix A: vibrations at the source structure are not only caused by the interface forces but also by the source excitations directly.Several numerical and experimental studies of in situ source characterisation have been reported [98,102,107–110]. A time-domain force reconstruction algorithm was proposed by Sturm [111,112]; see also Section 4.5. Further generalisation of the in situ concept can be recognised in the pseudo-forces method that is discussed next.The last member of the component-based TPA family to discuss is the pseudo-forces method as proposed by Janssens and Verweij in the late 1990s [64,65,113]. It assumes the existence of a non-unique set of pseudo-forces acting on the outer surface of the active component, cancelling out the effect of the operational vibrations transmitted through the interface to the passive side. This is illustrated in Fig. 6a. If those forces are now applied in the opposite direction to the assembly with the source shut-down, an identical response at the receiving side should be obtained, see Fig. 6c. In other words, the pseudo-forces are supposed to represent the source excitation for responses at the passive side.The fact that it can be regarded as a component TPA method lies in the former assumption: if there exists a set of pseudo-forces that cancels out the operational dynamics at the interface, the responses beyond this interface shall be zero as well, hence these forces are invariant of any structure attached to it. A similar reasoning may as well be applied to the previously discussed equivalent force methods, yet the locations of the pseudo-forces are not bounded to the interface but extend to the full domain of the active component (see Fig. 6).The actual determination of the pseudo-forces is carried out slightly differently. The first step is to define a set of s pseudo-forcesfpson the active component that is (a) sufficient to represent the excitation source and (b) easily accessible for impact hammer or shaker measurement. One could think of a minimum of s=6 forces when the interface behaviour can be considered as rigid, or a larger number in case of more intricate connectivity. Secondly, a set ofn≥sindicator response DoFs has to be chosen on the passive side from which the operational excitation is monitored. These responses are denoted by u4 and can be written as a result of f1, similar to Eq. (9)(22a)u4=Y41ABf1=Y42B(Y22A+Y22B)−1u2,f1freewithu2,f1free≜Y21Af1A substitution is made here using the free velocity caused by the excitation f1, or in other words: the theoretical motion at the interface of component A if the interfaces were left free, see also Section 3.3.3. This is by no means a quantity that needs to be measured, but will prove useful for the derivation later on.The next step is to determine pseudo-forcesfpsthat best recreate the operational responses at the indicator DoFs u4 when the source excitation is shut down. Note that the assumption is similar to the equivalent forces problem stated in Section 3.3.1, yet the pseudo-forces act on the outer surface of the active component rather than its interfaces. Similar to Eq. (22a), the response at the indicator DoFs as a result of the pseudo-forces reads(22b)u4=Y4psABfps=Y42B(Y22A+Y22B)−1u2,fpsfreewithu2,fpsfree≜Y21AfpsNow, the pseudo-forcesfpsthat best describe the operational source excitations are found from solving an overdetermined system with the response set u4 that was measured under operation (see Fig. 6b)(23)fps=(Y4psAB)+u4It can be shown that these forces, under certain conditions, are a property of component A only. A sufficient condition is that the free interface velocitiesu2freeas a result of the original source excitation can be fully represented by the set of pseudo-forces determined from Eq. (23). In that case the definitions of Eqs. (22a) and (22b) may be equated and one finds that the pseudo-forces are specific for the source component(24)u2,fpsfree=u2,f1free⟹fps=(Y2psA)+Y21Af1Applying these pseudo-forces to the FRFs of an assembled system of interest, i.e.Y3psAB, it can be verified that the correct receiver responses u3 at the passive side are obtained(25)u3=Y3psABfps=[Y32B(Y22A+Y22B)−1Y2psA](Y2psA)+Y21Af1=Y31ABf1The pseudo-forces determined from Eq. (23) are indeed transferable to an assembly with another passive side. Eq. (25) yields the responses for this new assembly, provided that the columns of the FRF matrixY3psABcorrespond to the same pseudo-forces, i.e. excitation points at the source.The previously discussed in situ method can be regarded as a special case of the pseudo-force method, namely for the case where the pseudo-forces are located at the interfaces. The pseudo-forces calculated from Eq. (23) shall then equal the equivalent (blocked) forces from Eq. (12), namelyfps=f2eq. With regard to the positioning of the indicator DoFs u4, the same restriction holds as for the in situ method, namely that they must be located at the passive system B or at the interface.1515This was erroneously stated in the original work [65].A related idea was proposed [78] to calculate pseudo-forces (or substitute forces in the original work) from equivalent forces that were in turn obtained from test bench measurementsfps=(Y2psA)+Y22Af2eqTo find the receiver responses u3, Eq. (25) can now be applied instead of Eq. (11). This is useful ifY32ABis unmeasurable, namely when the interfaces of the assembled system AB are inaccessible for FRF measurement.The two previously discussed families of TPA have in common that they attempt to model the vibration transmission in a physically correct sense, namely by determining as many forces and moments as required to describe the subsystem connectivity in full. Consequently, both families explicitly require the corresponding FRFs for the interface DoFs to the receiving response locations. It is evident that this approach ultimately reveals a wealth of information on the particular functioning of the active component, force distribution over the interface, resonances in the structure, etc. If however the mere purpose of a TPA is to identify the dominant path contributions in the assembled product, the efforts to set up and conduct the full experiment can be fairly disproportionate and costly. This is especially the case when multiple incoherent vibration sources are to be investigated.The last family to discuss avoids the stage of explicit force determination. Instead the path contributions are determined from so-called “transmissibilities” between sensors, possibly calculated from operational measurements. Various methods are discussed in the following sections that share the following properties:1.Measurements are conducted on the assembled product only, saving time to dismount the active components. In fact the interfaces between the active and passive components are no longer of principal interest.Path contributions are determined from well-chosen indicator points around the sources or connections. These indicator points function as inputs to the TPA.The result of the analysis is highly subject to the choice for these indicator points; care should therefore be taken to include all transmission paths.To discuss the theoretical concepts behind transmissibility-based methods, consider an assembled system AB with two connection points1616An example with two connection points was chosen here merely to provide better insight into some important cross-correlation properties. There is no fundamental consequence for the generality of the methods derived.as shown in Fig. 7. The active side contains a vibration mechanism that is characterised by internal forces f1; the receiver responses at the passive side are denoted by p DoFs in u3. To monitor the vibrations transmitted across the interfaces, n indicator DoFs u4 are positioned around the connection points.Let us first assume that the source excitation f1 can be described by o forces (or independent force distributions) and that FRFs are measurable for all of the above-mentioned DoFs. The equations for the passive-side responses then read{u3=Y31ABf1forpreceiverDoFs(26a)u4=Y41ABf1fornindicatorDoFs(26b)Provided thatn≥oandY41ABis full rank, all excitation forces f1 are observable from u4. Hence Eq. (26b) can be inverted and substituted into Eq. (26a). The responses u3 are now expressed in terms of the DoFs u4 that can be measured under operation:(27)u3=T34,f1ABu4withT34,f1AB≜Y31AB(Y41AB)+The so obtained transmissibility matrixT34,f1ABrelates motion at the indicator DoFs u4 (the inputs) to the receiver DoFs u3 (the outputs) for excitation forces f1. Interestingly, the size of the transmissibility matrix has becomep×n, obfuscating the o excitations associated with the original FRFs. This raises the question which excitations are really needed to construct the transmissibility matrix and to what extend this matrix is generally valid for the problem(u4→u3)under different excitations of the source structure.To gain more insight in the transmissibility problem stated by Eq. (27), let us expand Eqs. (26a) and (26b) in terms of the subsystems׳ admittances. As seen in previous derivations, the terms that couple the subsystems are identical for all responses(u3,u4)at the passive side[u3u4]=[Y31ABY41AB]f1=[Y32BY42B](Y22A+Y22B)−1Y21Af1Recalling now the expressions for the interface force and free velocity, respectively Eqs. (4) and (14), the following substitutions can be made:(28)[u3u4]=[Y32BY42B]g2Bwith{g2B=(Y22A+Y22B)−1u2freeforminterfaceforcesu2free=Y21Af1formfreevelocitiesHence, Eq. (28) shows that the transmission of vibrations from o forces f1 to n responses u4 is limited by the number of DoFs of the interface forces/displacements m. This means that the interface acts as a bottleneck: it limits the effective rank of the transmissibility problem to a maximum of m. Furthermore, Eq. (28) exposes two interesting properties of the transmissibility concept:1.Regarding the source excitation, Eq. (28) shows a direct relation between the interface forcesg2Bof the coupled system and the theoretical free velocitiesu2freeat the disconnected interfaces of component A. As understood from the component-based TPA methods, various sets of forces can be defined that equivalently produce these free interface velocitiesu2free, such as the pseudo-forces of Eq. (22b). This is illustrated in Fig. 7b. In fact, any set of forces on the source that renders the interface fully controllable will guarantee convergence to a transmissibility matrix that generally captures the transmission of vibrations caused in component A. This property is used in the operational TPA method as discussed in the next section.Regarding the transmissibility, the problem(u4→u3)is in fact specific to the passive side only, provided that the interface forcesg2Bare fully observable from u4. That means that the second line of Eq. (28) can be inverted, which is equivalent to Eq. (10) from the classical matrix-inverse method. With respect to transmissibility-based TPA, it implies that if u4 is chosen in such way that all interface forces are observable,g2Bcan be eliminated from Eq. (28) and the transmissibility matrix becomes a property of the passive side only, namely(29)u3=T34Bu4withT34B≜Y32B(Y42B)+An elegant duality can be observed here with the component-based TPA concept that characterises the excitation as a property of the source component. More properties of the transmissibility matrix are discussed in [45,114].In practice, to obtain T34 from FRFs as illustrated by Fig. 7a or b, one requires sufficient excitations and indicator DoFs to respectively control and observe the dynamics at the interface. However the foremost reason for using a transmissibility-based TPA method is to identify source path contributions without the need to conduct a tedious FRF measurement campaign. The next section discusses how to obtain T34 from operational responses only.The transmissibility matrix T34 can be estimated statistically from the correlation between u3 and u4 when monitored under a variety of operational test conditions. The fundamental assumption is that, by testing the vibration source under different operational conditions (e.g a motor operating at different speeds or torques), multiple load cases are exercised that are slightly independent. However, as seen in the previous section, the effect of these load cases across the interface is theoretically limited to a maximum of m independent modes of vibration at the passive side, because of the bottleneck-effect of the interface. This is further discussed below.Let us now assume that the operational excitation is able to generate sufficient independent load casesf1(α,β…), where α and β represent independent operational parameters.1818In [115] it is suggested that external excitation on the source structure, e.g. by use of a non-instrumented hammer, leads to better conditioning of the transmissibility matrix compared to a sequence of operational excitations. This resembles the approach depicted in Fig. 7b.This is illustrated in Fig. 8a. Eq. (27) can be established for r sets of measured responses obtained under different operational conditions, e.g. the sliced time-blocks of a run-up measurement. This amounts to stacking the r measured spectra of the receiving DoFs and indicator DoFs column-wise into arraysU3andU4to construct the following system of equations (the superscript on u indicates the measurement block number)(30)[u3(1)u3(2)⋯u3(r)]︸p×r=T34︸p×n[u4(1)u4(2)⋯u4(r)]︸n×r⟹U3=T34U4When sufficient measurement data is acquired to ensurer≥n, the problem of Eq. (30) can be made invertible by post-multiplying withU4H. The transmissibility matrix is then found from solving this system or, more conveniently, from the H1 estimator1919The H1 estimator is a well-known principle in experimental modal analysis to determine FRFs from a multiple input–output (MIMO) test, see for instance [32,35]. Alternative ways to obtain the transmissibility matrix have recently been explored, such as the H2 or Hsestimator to balance the error contributions between the inputs and outputs [116].of the cross-power spectra (CPS) and auto-power spectra (APS) of the measured DoFs(31)T34=U3U4HU4U4H-1⟹T34=S34S44with{S34=1rU3U4HCPSS44=1rU4U4HAPSEq. (31) performs cross-talk cancellation similar to Eq. (27). Now that the transmissibility matrix T34 has been estimated globally, the actual path contributions can be analysed for each measurement cycle. If performed correctly (i.e. all transfer paths were included), the reconstructed response spectra equal the response spectra that were measured directly(32)u3(l)=T34u4(l),l∈{1,…,r}The approach governed by Eqs. (30) and (31) is generally known as Operational Transfer Path Analysis (OTPA) [53]. Clearly, the performance of this method is subject to the choice and positioning of the indicator sensors u4, that function as “inputs” to the analysis. Too few sensors (or too distant from the source connections) could lead to neglecting important transmission paths, resulting in unrealistic prognoses [117]. On the other hand, having too many sensors (or too close to each other) might complicate the inversion ofS44due to poor conditioning, resulting in amplification of measurement noise [118].Theoretically, the rank ofU4is limited by the number of DoFs at the interface m. This implies thatU4and thusS44is rank deficient, even ifr>n. It is therefore common practice to perform a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) in order to identify how many independent modes of vibration are present in the system and transferred across the interfaces. Principle components are calculated from the singular value decomposition ofU4. The left-singular vectors represent the vibration mode shapes that build up to the vibrations in the indicator DoFs, sorted from the largest contribution to the smallest. By controlling the amount of principle components that are used in the computation of the transmissibility by Eq. (31), the condition number can be kept low such that one balances between the completeness of path descriptions and attenuation of measurement noise. This is not discussed in detail here, guidelines can be found in specific literature on OTPA [53,55,119].Another strong advantage of OTPA is the ease of combining various types of sensors, both for the input (indicator) and output (receiver) DoFs. Quantities such as accelerations, velocities, sound pressures and even forces and strains can be used in a mixed fashion, as long as proper scaling (unit normalisation) is taken into account [53]. This makes OTPA a suitable method to quickly investigate the proportion of structure-borne and airborne contributions [120]. Other related extensions or applications include Response Modification Analysis (RMA) for providing structural sensitivities to the target responses [57], pass-by analysis of road vehicle noise [121,122] and time-domain auralisation of OTPA, sometimes referred to as Transfer Path Synthesis (TPS) [123].The Operational Path Analysis with eXogenous Inputs (OPAX) [124,125] is a hybrid TPA method that aims at combining the physical understanding gained from classical TPA methodology with the identification potential of operational TPA principles. OPAX combines the classical mount-stiffness and matrix-inverse TPA principles as discussed in Sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3, but adds the ability to estimate mount stiffness parameters from operational tests. Regarding these mount parameters, a mount model can be selected that fits the system under test and yields the right balance between analysis time/accuracy that was targeted for. This way the OPAX method can be adjusted to suit systems with resilient mounts as well as rigid connections and include airborne paths in the analysis with similar ease.In what follows, an interpretation of the original publication [125] is presented step-by-step, such that it fits in the proposed framework. A schematic overview of the subsystems instrumentation is provided in Fig. 8b.Classical mount-stiffness scheme: Central to the OPAX method stands the classical TPA assumption, stating that passive side responses are obtained by application of operational interface forces to the FRFs of subsystem B, similar to Eq. (6). The interface forces are modelled as the product of mount-stiffnesses inZmtand the differential interface displacements between the active and the passive side, as in Eq. (8). Let us write the corresponding equations for the receiver responses u3 and additional indicator DoFs u4(33)[u3u4]=[Y32BY42B]g2Band for the interface forces(34a)g2B=Zmt(u2A−u2B)One of the aims of OPAX is to identify the mount stiffnessesZmtfrom operation tests. It is assumed that the mounts do not exhibit cross-directional effects, such thatZmtis a diagonal matrix. Eq. (34a) can therefore be reformulated using the element-wise or Hadamard product of the set of m single-DoF mount stiffnesses and the differential displacements across the mounts in the corresponding directions(34b)g2B=u2A-u2B∘zmtwithzmt=z1mt…zmmtTMount parametrisation: The next step is to define a model to parametrise the mount stiffnesses inzmt(ω). As suggested in the original work [125], one can choose a single-DoF mount model consisting of linear mass, damping and stiffness terms(m,c,k)or a frequency-dependent model that accommodates for constant dynamic stiffness (zb) in selected frequency bands. Both models are illustrated in Fig. 9.Let us continue the discussion with the single-DoF mount model. This model introduces q=3 unknowns per interface DoF, contained in the parameter setx(1)(35a)z1mt(ω)=f(ω,x(1))=[−ω2jω1][mck](1)=ψ(ω)x(1)It is important to note thatx(1)is a frequency independent parametrisation of the stiffnessz1mt(ω)of mount DoF with index 1; the frequency dependent part is governed byψ(ω)which is common for all DoFs. Extending now for all m interface forces, the system reads(35b)[z1mt(ω)⋮zmmt(ω)]︸m×1=[−ω2jω1⋱−ω2jω1]︸m×qm[x(1)⋮x(m)]︸qm×1⟹zmt(ω)=Ψ(ω)xDifferent mount models can be imagined, such as the multi-band model as mentioned before and functions of higher-order polynomials as long asxcan be written as frequency-independent parameters. A priori available mount stiffness parameters can also be implemented in Eq. (35b).Identification of mount parameters: Substituting Eqs. (34b) and (35b) into the original classic TPA scheme of Eq. (33), a system of equations is obtained that includes the parametrised mount model(36)[u3(ω)u4(ω)]=[Y32B(ω)Y42B(ω)](u2A(ω)−u2B(ω))∘Ψ(ω)x︸≈g2BThe aim is now to construct a standard linear system of equations that allows us to solve for x. Let us first collect all frequency-dependent terms into matricesA(ω). These include the FRFs of the passive subsystem and the interface displacements measured under operational tests(37)u3ωu4ω=A3ωA4ωxwith{A3ω=Y32Bu2A−u2B∘Ψωp×qmA4ω=Y42Bu2A−u2B∘Ψωn×qmNoticing the matrix dimensions, the system of Eq. (37) is likely to be under-determined to estimate the full set of mount parameters x, i.e.q·m<(p+n). Fortunately the mount parameters in x are assumed to be invariant of frequency and operational conditions. Hence the conditioning of the problem can be improved by stacking all acquired data vertically, namely for one of the following combinations of dimensions:•frequency lines(ω1,…,ωk)and measurement cycles(1,…,r), in case of unprocessed measurement data;motor orders and RPM points, if available from post-processing or order analysis.Operational loads & path contributions: Interface forces can be calculated for each operational test by substituting the estimated mount stiffnesses into Eq. (34b). The interface forces are finally multiplied with their respective FRFs of the passive side to compute the path contributions to the receiver DoFs of interest(39)u3=Y32Bg2B=Y32Bu2Aω−u2Bω∘ΨωxSeveral variants and case studies of OPAX are discussed in [125]. Some special cases are noted here:•In case that all mount parameters are available a priori, the mount identification steps can be skipped and no indicator DoFs are required. The interface forces can be calculated directly from Eq. (34a) or (34b). This results in the classical mount-stiffness TPA approach as discussed in Section 3.2.2.For systems with rigid connections, the differential displacement becomes zero. In other words, displacement compatibility is fully satisfied(u2A=u2B), hence Eq. (34a) or (34b) can no longer be used to determine the interface forces. For this case it is suggested in [125] to use the passive-side interface displacement only in combination with a narrow-band mount modelg2B=Zmtu2BIf the mount model bandwidth reduces to single frequency lines, this formulation is said to be equivalent to the classical matrix-inverse TPA (see Section 3.2.3), whereZmtnow represents the impedance of the passive side׳s interfaces. In fact, to be exactly consistent,Zmtshould equal(Y22B)as can be verified by comparing the interface force with Eq. (4). This matrix is generally non-diagonal and operational identification of all its elements can be cumbersome.Acoustic loads related to air-borne transmission paths cannot be described by Eq. (34a) or (34b). Each acoustic pressure p2 (measured near the source) needs to be associated with a single volumetric velocity q2 at the source structure. These are related through an acoustic impedancezairwhich is best described using a multi-band model. The total system of acoustic load-pressure relations then readsq2=Zairp2The volumetric velocitiesq2function as acoustic loads; they can be identified together with the structural interface forcesg2Bby applying Eqs. (36)–(38). Further remarks and guidelines with respect to air-borne transmission paths are provided in Section 4.3.In this framework 11 TPA methods have been derived and classified into three families. The global steps required for each family were schematically summarised in Fig. 1. A brief overview of the discussed methodologies is presented in Table 1. All 11 methods prescribe a task of operational measurement. Various testing environments can be handled, namely in assembly with the targeted passive structure (AB), on a test rig (AR) or against fixed or free boundary conditions (A). However, as can be observed from Table 1, the chosen test environment and measurement equipment does not necessarily confine the choice of TPA family to be applied.Let us substantiate this statement with the following example. Suppose one has conducted a series of operational tests on an assembled system AB that had been equipped with receiver DoFs u3 and indicator DoFs u4, for instance as depicted in Fig. 3c. Naturally, after demounting the source component and measuring the passive side FRFsYB(for instance from impact measurement interfaces), a classical matrix-inverse TPA (Section 3.2.3) can be performed, providing insight in the interface forces and path contributions for the particular assembly.Alternatively one could choose to measure the assembled system FRFsYAB, allowing us to calculate source-specific equivalent forces by the application of the in situ TPA method (Section 3.3.5). If the geometry of the assembly prevents proper excitation at the interfaces, one might instead revert to the pseudo-forces TPA methodology (Section 3.3.6) and excite alternative points on the source. Still, the same operational response data u4 can be used here.However if one runs short of time or motivation, the Operational TPA method (Section 3.4.2) would probably be appropriate. Transmissibility can be estimated purely from the available operational response data(u3,u4), provided that enough independent operational cases were measured. The transmissibility T34 allows us to calculate partial responses corresponding to the indicator DoFs.As demonstrated, the TPA classification ultimately determines how the source is characterised. The methods pertaining to the family of classical TPA describe the source vibrations for a particular assembly with a passive receiving structure. The component-based approaches depict the source by forces that are a property of the source only. Lastly the methods based on transmissibility skip the stage of source characterisation and only provide information on the source׳s path contributions.Key to conducting a successful TPA is to understand the conceptual basics of the methods applied. However, proper application of experimental techniques is perhaps equally important. This section discusses a couple of practical aspects that are frequently – but certainly not always – encountered when conducting a TPA. Theoretical derivations have been kept brief; the intention is to address a couple of aspects and provide useful references to related literature.Several component TPA methods propose to perform the operational test in an environment different from the targeted assembly. A crucial assumption herein is that the operational source excitation f1 is independent of the mounting condition. This dependency only refers to the internal mechanisms creating the excitation f1. The effect of f1 on the interface DoFs u2 is governed by the transfer dynamics, which is correctly accounted for by each method.2121It is arguable whether a vibrating mechanism is best characterised by applied forces or imposed displacements. Both cases are discussed in [82] and it is shown that a displacement source can be implemented with similar ease as an applied force.The blocked-force and free-velocity methods constitute the two extreme boundary conditions for which the active system can be tested. The hybrid interface method imposes boundary conditions depending on the dynamic stiffness of the test rig. For all three cases, the excitation may thus be influenced by the different mounting stiffness. Note that the in situ and pseudo-forces method both allow us to conduct operational measurement in the target assembly, such that the boundary condition is already the one aimed for.Some typical sources of excitation and their potential sensitivity to the imposed boundary conditions are discussed below:•Rotational orders: Excitations related to the speed of some rotating system are not expected to be influenced by the boundary conditions. Such excitations are typically identified as orders relative to the RPM, i.e. distinct harmonics in the frequency spectrum with a fixed ratio to the fundamental frequency of the rotational source. Orders arise whenever a periodic excitation is not purely sinusoidal, such as the combustions in an engine, unbalance of a shaft or the torque ripple related to the number of poles in an electric machine.Pre-loading: Gearing systems are known to be affected by pre-loading. For instance, if the housing of a gearbox is bent, a slight misalignment of the gears can occur which may result in a dramatic increase of the internal excitations. However pre-loading relates to the static mounting condition (ω=0) rather than the dynamic interaction. As long as the static stiffness of the testing environment is in the same order as the targeted passive system, the influence should be minimal [77].Internal non-linearities: Vibrations that are caused or influenced by internal non-linearities may be affected by dynamic interaction. Discussion of this topic is beyond the scope of this paper. In general, it is advised to design the mounting structure such that it exhibits similar dynamic behaviour on the interfaces.Many products contain multiple sources of vibration that operate simultaneously. To a large extend, these components can be analysed separately and their contributions superimposed. However separate analysis of components is not always possible in practice. Either the components require simultaneous operation for functionality (think of a gearbox driven by an engine), or secondary sources of vibration, not of interest for the analysis, can simply not be deactivated during operational test. In any event, one should pay special attention to make sure that contributions of one source do not spill over into the analysis of the other.Imagine simultaneous operation of two sources A andA′, as illustrated in Fig. 10. Although f1 andf1′may be independent mechanisms, the resulting interface forcesg2Bandg2′Bcomprise contributions of each other, being intrinsic to the total systemABA′. When the interface forces are measured directly (Section 3.2.1), the responses u3 (omitted in the figure) follow from simple superposition(40)u3=Y32Bg2B+Y32′Bg2′BHence, even when considering the contributions in Eq. (40) individually, effects of other sources are blended in, because the interface forces (g2B) contain contributions of the other sources.A second problem arises when determining interface forces indirectly from measured responses, for instance using the matrix inverse method (Section 3.2.3). Provided that both interfaces are sufficiently monitored by indicator DoFs, i.e. u4 andu4′, the correct interface forces can be retrieved by solving the following system forg2Bandg2′B:(41)[u4u4′]=[Y42BY42′BY4′2BY4′2′B][g2Bg2′B]Indeed, the crosstalk is cancelled due to inversion of the fully determined FRF matrix, that was obtained by exciting both interfaces of the disassembled receiving subsystem B. However, if the interfaces with source A′ are not instrumented with indicator DoFsu4′(perhaps because a vibration source was not recognised at all), one cannot distinguish the contributions of A fromA′. This clearly leads to a contamination of the estimated interface forceg^2Bby application of Eq. (10), as onlyY42Band u4 are available(42)g^2B=(Y42B)+u4=g2B+[(Y42B)+Y42′B]g2′B≠g2BRegarding component-based TPA, the blocked force, free velocity and hybrid interface method are essentially not suited for simultaneous operation, given their particular boundary conditions. For the in situ and pseudo-forces method, a similar reasoning holds as for the classical matrix inverse discussion. FRFs of the fully assembled systemABA′are required to construct the in situ TPA problem (Section 3.3.5)(43)[u4u4′]=[Y42ABY42′ABY4′2ABY4′2′AB][f2eqf2′eq]Interestingly, if the problem is properly conditioned, solving of Eq. (43) leads to equivalent forcesf2eqandf2′eqthat describe the sources independently. After all, the equivalent forces correspond to the theoretical blocked forces measured in separate isolated environments. Therefore, equivalent forces potentially yield a clearer, more distinct characterisation of the separate source contributions than the classical TPA interface forces, which may be noted as an additional benefit of component-based TPA.With respect to transmissibility-based TPA, sources can only be distinguished in terms of the monitored transition paths [78]. The main problem of neglecting such paths is that vibrations of sourceA′appear as contributions coming from source A. This is not easily recognised, as the summed contributions at u3 would probably match the measured u3 all the same [117].In general, when performing tests in an assembled system, results should be interpreted with caution when active systems are present that are not considered in the analysis. Neglecting sources or paths results in incorrect estimation of forces and path contributions by applying matrix inversion. Nevertheless, when all sources are properly monitored, there is no fundamental restriction involved in simultaneous analysis of multiple sources.An essential question in NVH studies is the relative importance of structure-borne and air-borne paths. If the sound pressure at target locations is predominantly caused by radiation from parts at the passive side (e.g. panels in the interior of a vehicle), one can assume that the transfer problem is mainly of structure-borne nature. After all these parts radiate due to vibrations that are transmitted over the structural interfaces. The relation between acoustic pressure and forces is governed by structural-acoustic FRFs in [Pa/N]. As mentioned in Section 3.1, such response functions can straightforwardly be combined with structural response functions in an FRF matrix, since both types of responses are force-induced.However when a significant part of the acoustic pressure is related to direct radiation of the source, air-borne paths should be analysed separately. Analogue to structural transfer functions Y, acoustic transfer functions H describe the responses of acoustic pressures to acoustic loads q, commonly expressed as volume velocities in [m3/s]. A typical situation is sketched in Fig. 11; the acoustic load generated by the source is denoted byq1. The combined problem, including both structural and acoustic path contributions, reads(44)p3=Y31ABf1+H31ABq1Analysis of air-borne transmission paths is a delicate task that poses many practical challenges. First, a typical sound-radiating source does by no means behave as an ideal mono-pole, meaning that one cannot easily characterise the radiation of the sourceq1. Instead one has to surround the source component by a number of “substitute” mono-poles [129,130], representing the spatial distribution of the radiated sound by a finite number of volume velocity DoFsq2.2222Note that this is conceptually analogue to the structure-borne TPA assumption, namely characterising the unmeasurable source vibrations f1 by means of forces at the interfaces g2.A second challenge lies in the measurement of the acoustic transfer pathsH32AB. Whereas impact hammers or shakers are very well capable of applying a concentrated force onto a structure, the acoustic counterpart requires excitation by a volume source which is far from trivial. Reciprocal measurement techniques are often used, reducing the required number of acoustic excitations. Theory and applications of reciprocity have been extensively studied, see for instance [83–85,131] and reviews [86,87].Finally, not all TPA methods are suitable for air-borne problems in practice. Direct measurement of acoustic loadsq2has only recently been enabled by means of a directional particle velocity sensing device [132,133] but practical TPA examples are rare [134]. It is more common to determine acoustic loads inversely, for instance from pressure indicator microphonesp4around the source [135,136] or by the use of advanced imaging techniques such as Near-field Acoustic Holography (NAH) [137–139]. For quick estimation of air-borne path contributions, transmissibility-based methods such as Operational TPA are suitable, avoiding explicit treatment of the acoustic loads. The various concepts are illustrated in Fig. 11 and formulated by Eqs. (45a)–(45c)(45a)p3=H32ABq2(directmeasurement)(45b)p3=H32ABq2withq2=H42AB+p4matrix-inverse(45c)p3=T34ABp4withT34AB=S34S44−1(operationalTPA)The operational TPA method, when strictly applied to air-borne path analysis, requires APS and CPS spectra to be calculated from the operational pressure responses(p3,p4). When combined with structural indicator points u4, a quick investigation can be made of the proportion between structure-borne and air-borne path contributions [55]. Note that the OPAX method actually implements the matrix-inverse concept of Eq. (45b), with the remark that the acoustical impedance, represented by the term(H42AB)+, is parametrised and estimated during operational tests.Regarding source characterisation in a component-TPA fashion, interesting equivalent source concepts have been explored such as blocked pressure and surface impedance; see for instance [140–142] and references therein.A crucial factor in TPA is correct and complete description of the interfaces that constitute the transfer paths from active to passive components. It is commonly known that neglecting transfer paths can result in a highly distorted depiction of the transfer problem, especially for TPA methods that employ matrix-inversion techniques [10,117]. So far it has been discussed how the seemingly complex problem of vibration transmission can be analysed using a limited number of transfer functions and corresponding forcing degrees of freedom. These DoFs must however be sufficient to model the behaviour of the interface in full.Interface modelling is an active research topic in the field of experimental dynamic substructuring and the requirements for TPA are in fact very similar. Some aspects related to interface modelling and rotational DoFs are addressed here.Rotational DoFs: As rotation sensors and transducers have not been the practical standard over the past,2323Some examples of unconventional hardware for rotation measurement or excitation can be found in [143–145].rotational DoFs are in practice often handled indirectly, e.g. by means of multiple translational DoFs at certain distances from each other [146,147]. Simple finite difference approaches such asθ=(u0−ud)/dmay suffice for simple plate or beam problems [148,149], but do not provide full 6-DoF kinematics needed to model all translational and rotational transmission paths.More promising approaches [150,151] employ a kinematic mapping matrix R that relatesn>6translational displacements u to 6 generalised coordinatesu˜per connection point. This assumes local rigid behaviour of the interface, which can be described by 3 translations and 3 rotations. When the DoFs u are properly positioned and oriented, a pseudo-inverseR+exists that linearly transforms the original measurement data to collocated 6-DoF information. An analogue approach exists for the mapping ofm>6translational forces. Collocated 6-DoF FRFsY˜are obtained by applying both transformations sequentially to the measured FRF matrix Y. A summary based on [152] is presented here{u=Ru˜withR∈Rn×6u˜=R+u{f˜=GfwithG∈Rm×6f=G+f˜{u=Yfu˜=Y˜f˜withY˜=R+YG+∈R6×6Transformation to a so-called virtual point has some additional advantages. First, the virtual point can be positioned freely, such that it can be made compatible with the interfaces of the connected subsystems, possibly obtained from FE modelling. Secondly, by monitoring the residual of the transformation, a quantitative value can be obtained for the consistency of the measured data and “rigidness” of the motion around the interface. Regarding virtual point FRFs, reciprocity can be evaluated since the virtual motion and loads are concentrated in the virtual point. Lastly, driving-point FRFs can be obtained without actually exciting onto or in line with the sensors, as the transformation matrix for displacements and forces may be different. Details on the virtual point transformation and applications to substructuring and TPA are discussed in [101,152,153].Inverse determination of rotational forces: Several TPA techniques rely on matrix-inverse force determination schemes. If the application requires to describe both translational and rotational transmission, 6 forces per connection point are to be determined. Nevertheless, one can retain the original FRFs for translational motion u4 and employ virtual point mapping for the forces only. Let us illustrate this for the case of interface force determination, based on Eq. (10)g˜2B=(Y42BG2+)+u4The part between the brackets forms the admittance FRFs relating the set of 6 virtual-point interface forces and momentsg˜2Bto translational indicator DoFs u4. The fundamental condition here is that the full set of interface loadsg˜2Bis observable from the set of indicator DoFs u4.2424Transmissibility-based techniques also benefit from double instrumentation along transmission paths, e.g. two tri-axial accelerometers close to each other. Although rotational moments are not explicitly being characterised, it can be reasoned that the effects are better observable from the increased set of indicator DoFs u4, leading to a more truthful reconstruction of the target responses.Continuous interfaces: Not all interface problems can be properly described by a small number of connection points. Some systems (such as the interface between gearbox and engine of a vehicle or turbine blades and hub of a wind turbine) comprise larger connecting surfaces, flanges or patterns of closely spaced bolts. Hence, simplification of connectivity is no longer acceptable and the trivial 6 rigid interface modes need to be augmented by a number of flexible modes, which are not naturally obtained from measurement. Information from static FEM analysis can be used to extrapolate the measured points, for instance using the System Equivalent Reduction Expansion Process (SEREP) [154]. Another interesting concept is the temporary attachment of a flexible fixture, allowing us to better measure and/or excite the rotational and flexible modes of a subsystem [155]. This concept, better known as the transmission simulator, has recently gained popularity in the field of dynamic substructuring [156]. Applications to TPA have not yet been reported; however the decoupling techniques involved [106,157] are related to inverse source characterisation ideas as seen in e.g. the in situ method.The set of receiver responses u3 are in this framework often considered as the end result of a TPA method. However, the actual purpose of a TPA is rather to identify the individual contributions that sum up to these responses, because these contributions reveal the amount of vibrations transmitted through each path. Transfer path contributions can be evaluated in various ways; the most common methods are summarised here:•Partial responses: Receiver response spectra are composed from the complex sum of the partial response spectra, i.e. the sum of all contributions over the considered transfer paths. To illustrate for classical TPA Eq. (6) the p receiver response spectra uiare composed from their m path contributions as follows:ui,j(ω)=YijB(ω)gjB(ω)⟹ui(ω)=∑j=1mui,j(ω){i∈1,…,pj∈1,…,mPartial responses are obtained for all three families and can thus be used to compare the results of various methods. They are typically visualised in 3D images with frequency ω on one axis and the m path contributions on the other axis. Such graphics allow for quick visual troubleshooting of the dominant transfer paths and critical frequency ranges. Other typical diagrams derived from partial responses include Campbell plots, nth-octave plots, engine order plots, phase vector plots and sum levels over RPM; see for instance the graphics in [9–11,120].Power flow: Power flow investigations are used for instance to determine the activity of the source, localise energy concentrations or quantify damping over the interfaces [89,158–160]. Complex power is commonly expressed as the conjugated product of force and velocity spectra, which can be related to AC current and voltage in electrical engineering. As velocity is a result of force times mobility (i.e. velocity FRF, denoted byẎ), the phase of the power flow is directly related to the phase of the mobility FRFsP=12fHu̇=12fHẎfWhen considered for interface DoFs, the real part ofPrepresents the dissipated power over the interfaces whereas the imaginary part quantifies the dynamic interaction between the components. As separate knowledge of forces and motion is required, transmissibility-based methods are not suitable for power flow analysis.Auralisation: Auralisation is time-domain evaluation of path contributions by means of audible sound [161]. Some commercial packages offer the possibility to listen to partial responses, but the implementation often remains proprietary. In many cases, the essential TPA calculations are performed in the frequency domain. The outputs of the analysis, e.g. receiver responsesu3(t), are ultimately calculated in the time domain, for instance using approximated FIR filter banks or by convolution with Impulse Response Functions (IRFs)2525Computation of structural responses by convolution of IRFs of substructures relates to the field of Impulse Based Substructuring (IBS) [162,163], which solves the interface problem in the time-domain.u3(t)=∫0tY32B(t−τ)g2B(τ)dτSome methods are specifically formulated for time-domain operation, such as the classical TPA force reconstruction algorithms as proposed by [38,95]. For the purpose of component-based TPA, an interesting blocked-force reconstruction technique was developed by Sturm et al. [111,112] based on the in situ TPA concept. This method is essentially a modification of the Least Mean Square (LMS) algorithm and is inverse-free. Time-domain variants of operational TPA are often referred to as Transfer Path Synthesis (TPS) [123] or time-domain Independent Component Analysis (time-domain ICA) [164].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a systematic derivation of several methods to analyse vibration transmission problems, together defining a large part of the landscape of Transfer Path Analysis. The evolution of TPA has been discussed, from early theoretical developments to practical TPA methods. A general framework for the derivation of TPA methods has been presented, proposing a classification into the families of classical, component-based and transmissibility-based TPA. The classification defines the principle of source characterisation, but does not necessarily prescribe the environment for operational testing. It was emphasised that the three families are highly interrelated and that similar accuracy can be reached, provided that the theoretical assumptions are properly transposed to application. Common practicalities have been discussed, such as superposition of sources in a system, analysis of air-borne paths and measurement of rotational DoFs. Altogether this paper could be a useful asset to help understanding the countless possibilities and combinations within the TPA paradigm.At present, little has been suggested about the methods’ relative success for typical industrial cases and sensitivity to various sources of error. Further research, in both numerical simulation and experimental validation, would substantiate this TPA framework in that respect.The methodology of Frequency Based Substructuring (FBS) provides us with means to conveniently compute assembled FRFs for an arbitrary number of subsystems [13]. The transfer problem in this framework is limited to an assembly of only two subsystems: the first containing the excitation and the second the receiving responses. Still, this problem is representative for a large range of TPA applications. Note that the task of source characterisation is normally not considered part of substructuring; guidelines are proposed in [82].Let us examine how this problem can be expressed from application of Lagrange-Multiplier Frequency Based Substructuring. LM-FBS prescribes the following three-field formulation, similar to Eqs. (2) and (3):u=Yf+g;Bu=0;g=-BTλwhich leads to the general equation for the dually assembled system(A.1)u=Yf−YBT(BYBT)−1BYfNote that the set of interface forcesgwas eliminated by enforcing coordinate compatibility and force equilibrium. For the TPA example as discussed in this framework, the vectorised terms can be defined as follows:Y≜Y11AY12A000Y21AY21A00000Y22BY23BY24B00Y32BY33BY34B00Y42BY43BY44B;u≜u1u2Au2Bu3u4;f≜f10000;B≜0−II00This simplifies the composition of all responses considerably as forces are only applied at the source DoFs of subsystem A. The combined responses read(A.2)[u1u2Au2Bu3u4]︸u=[Y11AY21A000]︸yff1−[−Y12A−Y22AY22BY32BY42B]︸YBT(Y22A+Y22B)−1︸(BYBT)−1(−Y21Af1)︸YBfBased on Eq. (A.2), two different forms can be distinguished, namely the responses at the side of respectively subsystem A and subsystem B. The first includes the direct response to the excitation (the term Yf), such that an assembled response readsua=Ya1ABf1=Ya1Af1−Ya2A(Y22A+Y22B)−1Y21Af1forua∈(u1,u2A)For subsystem B, the responses are only due to the vibrations that are transferred over the interface. Consequently one obtains for a passive-side responseub=Yb1ABf1=0+Yb2BY22A+Y22B-1Y21Af1forub∈u2B,u3,u4This difference has profound implications with respect to the equivalent source properties in the component-based TPA methods, as was discussed in Section 3.3.