@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Periodic responses of a structure with 3:1 internal resonance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Experimental demonstration of 3:1 internal resonance in an easy to reproduce structure with transparent underlying physics.Experimental demonstration of isolated region in frequency response.Normal forms/backbone analysis of the free structure used to explain the rich dynamics seen.Reasonable match with continuation analysis in AUTO; the revealed structure of bifurcations sheds further light on the response of the forced and damped system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internal resonance,Vibration testing,Normal form,Isola,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work presents a conceptually simple experiment consisting of a cantilever beam with a nonlinear spring at the tip. The configuration allows manipulation of the relative spacing between the modal frequencies of the underlying linear structure, and this permits the deliberate introduction of internal resonance. A 3:1 resonance is studied in detail; the response around the first mode shows a classic stiffening response, with the addition of more complex dynamic behaviour and an isola region. Quasiperiodic responses are also observed but in this work the focus remains on periodic responses. Predictions using Normal Form analysis and continuation methods show good agreement with experimental observations. The experiment provides valuable insight into frequency responses of nonlinear modal structures, and the implications of nonlinearity for vibration tests.Young's modulusvector of Fourier components of the forcing signalnth modal variablefirst modal response amplitude taken at drive frequencysecond modal response amplitude taken at third harmonic of drive frequencyvector of Fourier components of the voltage signal sent to the shaker amplifierresonant component of the nth modal variableresponse amplitude of unaxial coordinatelateral coordinatelinear modal damping ratiophasePoisson's ratiomass densitynth mode shape functionshorthand forϕn(xi),ϕn(xL)linear natural angular frequency of nth moderesonant response frequency of nth modal variable

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is significant research interest in the vibrations of structures that exhibit nonlinear responses. This is due to the ubiquity of such structures; for example numerous fundamental structural forms such as plates, shells and beams will exhibit nonlinear phenomena when vibrating at sufficient amplitude. Furthermore, flexible materials exhibit nonlinear stress/strain when at large strains, and mechanisms can introduce nonlinear phenomena due to geometrical effects, as well as non-smooth nonlinearities due to friction, freeplay, impact and backlash [1–3].In addition to the academic interest in such systems, there is strong interest within industry. This is driven by the increasing demand for lightweight and flexible structures such as large wind turbine blades, or long span bridges [1]. Furthermore, new technologies such as Micro Electromechanical Systems (MEMS) utilise structures that operate on scales where effects such as electromagnetic forces generate significant nonlinear forces [4]. Nonlinearity is also being exploited in applications such as vibration isolation [5] and energy harvesting [6].Of particular interest is the requirement to use dynamic testing methods to characterise the vibratory response of structures in order to make performance predictions, so-called system identification. While this practice has the well established methodology of modal testing in the case of linear systems [7], the presence of nonlinearity greatly complicates this task, due to the wide range of phenomena that nonlinear systems may exhibit [8,9]. Nonlinearity introduces phenomena including amplitude dependant response frequencies, super and sub harmonic responses, and multiple stable responses to a given excitation [1]. Yet more complexity emerges when multiple degrees of freedom are present, because the principle of superposition that greatly simplifies the decomposition of linear problems no longer applies. Despite this, the concept of normal modes has been extended, initially into the so-called weakly nonlinear regime [10]. The concept of Nonlinear Normal Modes (NNM) has since been shown to remain as an invaluable framework even when nonlinearity becomes strong [11]. Many nonlinear continuous or multi-degree of freedom systems exhibit some particularly novel responses whenever one mode of free vibration has a natural frequency that approaches an integer ratio to that of another, a condition known as internal resonance [12,11]. Forms of this behaviour have been shown in structures ranging from jointed pendulums to sagging cables [12,13].The interest in nonlinear system identification has led to a demand for experimental demonstrators featuring continuous structures with nonlinearity; however experimental works on these types of systems are heavily outnumbered by analytical and numerical studies. In [14], Amabili presents comprehensive results on the amplitude dependence of modes of plates of different dimensions that arise due to Von Karman strains that are created by moderate amplitudes of deflection. Zaretzky and Crespo Da Silva considered one-to-one resonance between modes in different planes of a vertical cantilever subject to large amplitude and gravitational nonlinearity [15]. In a two-part paper, Rega et al. demonstrated numerous internal resonance conditions of an oscillating sagging cable [13,16]. Westra et al. use an intriguing microscopic beam with electromagnetic exciting forces to demonstrate that nonlinear effects cause one mode to affect the frequency of another [17]. Platten et al. describe a simplified experimental structure representing an aircraft wing, with two masses mounted on short beams representing pylon-mounted aircraft engines, which introduce nonlinearity via large deflections and through the joints used to attach them [18]. This structure has also been studied by Londoño et al. [19], who has also studied a nonlinear swept wing configuration [20]. Noël et al. [21] performed an experimental identification on a small space satellite structure. At the microscale, Cho et al. present an interesting study on a nonlinear coupled beam resonator, demonstrating jump phenomena and hardening softening behaviour [22].Many further studies of this kind are based on the configuration first presented by Thouverez [23], widely known as the ‘Liege beam’, for example see [24,25]. This consists of a large cantilever and a far smaller cantilever, attached at the tip. The small cantilever is driven into geometrically nonlinear oscillations by the large cantilever, and may be idealised as a cubic spring attached to the tip of the large cantilever. The advantage of this approach is that the cantilever offers a straightforward underlying linear structure, which therefore greatly facilitates the recognition of nonlinear effects. Recent numerical work on this type of structure has shown that it has rich dynamics, exhibiting internal resonance effects including isolated response regions and torus bifurcations [26,27].The current work draws on the approach of the Liege beam, but replaces the nonlinearity at the tip with a spring mechanism. This results in an experiment with straightforward underlying physics, with significant scope to adjust both the nonlinearity and the underlying linear modes of the system. The ability to adjust the underlying modes of the system means that a three-to-one internal resonance can be obtained. Stepped sine tests on this structure reveal some fascinating responses, including an experimental demonstration of an isolated region (or isola) of periodic responses, and also quasiperiodic response regions. The periodic phenomena are explained in terms of an underlying backbone structure (i.e. the free response) revealed by normal forms analysis, and show reasonable agreement with a continuation analysis of the reduced order system.The work proceeds as follows: in Section 2 the experimental structure is described, along with discussion of how the dynamics may be tuned to internal resonance between the first two modes of the system, the linear modal properties of the beam, and the method of control. In Section 3, the decomposed equations of motion are presented, and backbone curves for the system are derived using the method of normal forms [28]. The backbone curves show that, if the first two modes are considered, three types of free resonant response are possible. In Section 4, experimental results are presented for forcing near the first modal frequency of the beam. These results fall into two groups; the first of which may be discerned with standard upward and downward stepped sine tests. The second group of results form an isola, and required a ‘kick’ procedure to give the initial conditions that access these results. The effect of control strategy on the accuracy of results is also described. In Section 5, the experimental results are decomposed into modal coordinates, and this is compared to results of a continuation study on the underlying modal equations. This gives the bifurcations of the forced and damped system, and reveals that a torus bifurcation leads to a region of quasiperiodic behaviour. An experimental example of this response is briefly presented. Finally conclusions are summarised in Section 6.Fig. 1(a) presents a diagram of the experiment. The main structure is a cantilever beam of lengthL=380mm. At its tip is a nonlinear spring mechanism, detailed in Fig. 1(b). The motion of the beam is recorded by three PCB 352 C03 piezoelectric accelerometers at axial locationsx1=40mm,x2=150mmandx3=370mmas shown. The beam is excited by a Data Physics GW-V4 electrodynamic shaker at x1, connected by a lightweight stinger made of 1mm wire, and a PCB 208 C03 force transducer to record the force input to the beam.The arrangement of springs shown in Fig. 1(b) gives rise to geometric nonlinearity at large amplitudes. The force displacement curve for this arrangement is given by:(1)P(z)=2kz(1−ℓ0a2+z2)where k is the rate of each spring, ℓ0 is the original length of each spring and a is the half span of the mechanism. This may be approximated in the form:(2)P(z)≈k1z+k3z3by the use of a Maclaurin expansion, wherek1=2k(1−ℓ0/a)andk3=kℓ0/a3. The comparison between the exact (1) and approximate (2) forms of the nonlinearity is given in Fig. 2, showing that the mechanism is well approximated as a cubic nonlinearity.Note that the ratioℓ0/a, which must be between 0 and 1 for springs to maintain tension, has an important effect on the amount of nonlinearity and the underlying linear modes of the beam. A ratio of 1 will givek1=0, meaning that the underlying linear modeshapes of the beam will be those of a free ended cantilever, and this value will also give the maximum value for k3[29]. As this ratio approaches zero, the pretension in the springs will increase, maximising the linear stiffness k1, and setting k3 to zero. If k is sufficient the linear stiffness may restrict the motion of the beam tip, so that the linear mode shapes are similar to those of a clamped-pinned beam. Therefore the distance a, along with the length of the beam L, allows manipulation of the modes and natural frequencies of the structure. Fig. 3shows this trend, using a classical analysis of the modes assuming that the structure is simply a cantilever with a small mass and a linear spring given by k1 at the tip. The figure shows that values ofℓ0/aof around 0.925 will give an approximate ratio of 3:1 between the 2nd modal frequency and the first; we will examine this internal resonance in detail, although clearly other internal resonances can be achieved. In the experiment that follows, the ratioℓ0/a=0.957, which gives a higher ratio of ωn2 to ωn1; however as the response frequency of mode 1 increases due to the stiffening nonlinearity, it shall be seen that the 3:1 interaction becomes exact.Fig. 1(c) and (d) shows photographs of the physical set up. Note that care was taken to ensure that the accelerometer cables had sufficient free length that they exerted no significant forces on the structure, but were not so long that they could form large oscillations during tests, potentially influencing test results.The dimensions of the spring mechanism were measured to be as follows:k=0.910Nmm−1,a=18.6mm,ℓ0=17.8mm. However, due to the sensitivity of Eq. (1) to these parameters, a static force–displacement measurement was performed on the beam tip in order to verify the model. This was achieved with the use of a sensitive spring-balance attached to the beam tip via a thread, with displacements measured using a laser displacement sensor (Microtrak LTC-120-40-SA). The results of this measurement are shown in Fig. 2.As previously discussed, the linear component of the spring has a significant effect on the linearised natural frequencies and mode shapes; therefore this component was estimated using least-squares regression on the subset of data marked with circles (○) in Fig. 2, to obtain greater accuracy for this value. It was found to bek^1=0.121Nmm−1. This value includes a contribution from the beam stiffness, measured to be0.0432Nmm−1in a similar test with the springs removed. Therefore, for the spring mechanism alone,k1=0.0779Nmm−1. The cubic coefficient was estimated using a least squares regression on the data in Fig. 2 with all linear components subtracted, and found to bek3=2.516×10−3Nmm−3. These values compare well to the values calculated using the formulas given with (2), which predict thatk1=0.0783Nmm−1andk3=2.517×10−3Nmm−3.In Fig. 2 raw data is compared to the fitted linear and cubic models, and the results of Eq. (1) using the measured values of k, a, andℓ0. All of these graphs show good agreement up to displacements of approximately7mmin magnitude, whereupon they begin to diverge slightly. There is some asymmetry visible in the raw data.An FEA model created in ABAQUS was used to obtain mass normalised mode shapes for the structure. The main beam was represented by 39 beam elements (B21), with the section modelled as a rectangle with height30mmand breadth1.0mm, made from steel (E=210×109N/m2,ρ=7850kg/m3,ν=0.3). It was found that the presence of the stinger caused a slight increase in the first natural frequency; this effect could not easily be eliminated on account of the high flexibility of the main structure. Therefore, the stinger was approximately modelled in the FEA model as a steel beam of circular section,1.0mmin diameter and85mmin length, using 12 elements. The node at the tip of this beam is restrained from motion in the x direction and rotation, whilst free to move in the z direction. Therefore this boundary condition approximated the sliding boundary condition imposed by the presence of the shaker. The accelerometers were represented as 10.0g point masses; this is an approximate value as it is hard to estimate how much mass due to cabling should be included. A grounded linear spring element was located at the tip with a constant equal to k1 as established in Section 2.2.The resulting mode shapes are given in Fig. 4and the frequencies and amplitudes at the sensor points and tip are given in Table 1. The FEA frequencies are compared to those measured on the experiment using low level voltage controlled sweeps, showing reasonable agreement.The testing approach used is essentially a stepped sine test. However, some modification to this approach is needed for testing the nonlinear system. A nonlinear response to forced harmonic vibration typically includes higher harmonics of the main forcing frequency [30]; this contrasts with a linear system where the steady state response will be entirely at the forcing frequency. In practice, these higher harmonic responses interact with the stiffness and mass of the shaker, and thus distort the force signal that the shaker supplies to the structure. In many cases, such as when the harmonics do not affect the resonant responses of the structure, the effect is minor and may be disregarded. However, this structure features a deliberate interaction between the third harmonic of the first modal frequency and the second mode, and so this effect is potentially important.In order to monitor and control this effect, custom signal acquisition and control software created in the Labview [31] environment was used to drive the shaker and monitor the experiment. The control strategy is based on a feed-forward method used by Barton et al. [32]. Suppose that the voltage signal sent to the shaker amplifier is approximately represented as:(3)v(t)≈∑iVc,icos(iΩt)+Vs,isin(iΩt)i.e. as a truncated Fourier series based on the drive frequency. The coefficients may be formed into a vectorV→. A similar vectorF→can be created for the actual steady state force signal measured between the beam and the stinger:(4)f(t)≈∑iFc,icos(iΩt)+Fs,isin(iΩt)The values of i used need not be consecutive, but chosen based on a compromise between speed of data acquisition and quality of input control. In this work, results are compared for three different choices:•i={1}– only the drive frequency amplitude controlled.i={1,3}– drive frequency and third harmonic amplitude controlled.i={1,2,3,4,5}– first five harmonics controlled.It is assumed that the system comprising the electromagnetic shaker and the nonlinear structure acts as a one-to-one function i.e.F→=F→(V→). This assumption is locally valid, so long as no bifurcations or system changes occur. Therefore, achieving a desired force signalF→⁎(i.e. the required pure cosine signal) requires the numerical solution of:(5)F→(V→)−F→⁎=0The solution of (5) is found using a Newton–Raphson approach, using Broyden updates to reduce time required to evaluate the Jacobian matrix in a method similar that used in [32]. The maximum relative magnitude of error in solving (5) was 1%; the results given in Section 4.1.2 suggest that this tolerance permits small errors in the location of bifurcations and on harmonic responses, but has a negligible effect on the drive frequency response. Any points that failed to solve within this tolerance within a maximum number of iterations are omitted from the results, and if two consecutive points on a sweep failed the sweep was terminated. In all cases presented in this work,F→⁎is chosen to give a pure cosine signal; i.e. the first element is the required force amplitude and all other elements are zero.In order to determine whether a signal had settled, the controller evaluated Fourier components up to the fifth harmonic of the force signal and the accelerometer at x3, for each forcing period. For each signal, the components were formed into a vector, and this vector compared to that for the previous cycle. Only when the magnitude of the difference in vectors was within tolerance for both signals was the signal judged to be settled. The settling tolerance used in these results was either 0.5% or 0.25%, depending on the rate of convergence and the required accuracy traded against the execution speed of the sweep.In order to understand the underlying behaviour of the beam structure, we consider its backbone curves. Backbone curves describe the response of the unforced, undamped equivalent system, and can be used to gain an understanding of how the structure will respond when subjected to forcing and damping [33,34]. To find the backbone curves we use the second-order normal form technique [28]. The analytical nature of this technique, along with its ability to describe harmonics, allows for additional insight into the nature of the responses.Assuming that the forcing is sinusoidal, the forced and damped modal equation of motion is written(6)q¨+Λq+Nq(q,q̇)=Pqcos(Ωt)where Ω denotes the forcing frequency and where it is assumed that the response is dominated by the first two modes, such that:(7)q=(q1q2),Λ=[ωn1200ωn22],Pq=F(ϕ1,1ϕ2,1),Nq=(2ζωn1q̇1+ϕ1,Lk3(ϕ1,Lq1+ϕ2,Lq2)32ζωn2q̇2+ϕ2,Lk3(ϕ1,Lq1+ϕ2,Lq2)3).From this we find the backbone curves by first setting the forcing and damping to zero, i.e.ζ=0andF=0. This allows us to writeNqas(8)Nq=(ϕ1,Lϕ2,L)k3[ϕ1,L3q13+3ϕ1,L2ϕ2,Lq12q2+3ϕ1,Lϕ2,L2q1q22+ϕ2,L3q23]where the cubic approximation to the nonlinearity, Eq. (2), has been assumed. Next, we separate the modal responses into resonant and non-resonant components, writtenuandhrespectively, such thatq=u+h. Assuming that the resonant responses are sinusoidal, we may write(9)un=Uncos(ωrnt−θn),where unis the resonant component of thenthmode and where Un, ωrnand θnare the amplitude, frequency and phase of unrespectively. Note that ωrnand ωnnare distinct, and represent the resonant response frequency and linear natural frequency respectively. Here, it is known that the resonant component of the second linear mode responds at three times that of the first linear mode, hence we chooseωr1=Ωandωr2=3Ω.We now apply the second-order normal form technique, as described in [28,33–35], which results in the frequency–amplitude relationship(10a){(ωn12−Ω2)+14[3α0U12+3pα1U1U2+6α2U22]}U1=0,(10b)(ωn22−9Ω2)U2+14[pα1U13+6α2U12U2+3α4U23]=0,whereαi=k3ϕ1,L4−iϕ2,Li. It is found that, on the backbone curves, the resonant responses, u1 and u2, may either be in-phase, such that3θ1−θ2=0, or in anti-phase, such that3θ1−θ2=π. These two cases result in different values of p, such that(11)p={+1when3θ1−θ2=0,−1when3θ1−θ2=π.Aside from the trivial solution to Eqs. (10), whereU1=U2=0, there exists a single-mode backbone curve in whichU1=0, denoted S2. This is given by(12)S2:U1=0,4(ωn22−9Ω2)+3α4U22=0.Another set of solutions exist whenU1≠U2andU2≠0. In this case, from Eq. (11), two sets of solutions (or backbone curves) exist – one in-phase solution wherep=+1, and one anti-phase solution wherep=−1. These two cases are denotedS1,2+andS1,2−respectively (orS1,2±when referring to both). From Eqs. (10) these backbone curves have frequency-amplitude relationships described by(13a)S1,2+:Ω2=ωn12+34[α0U12+α1U1U2+2α2U22],Ω2=ωn229+136[3α4U22+6α2U12+α1U13/U2],(13b)S1,2−:Ω2=ωn12+34[α0U12−α1U1U2+2α2U22],Ω2=ωn229+136[3α4U22+6α2U12−α1U13/U2].These backbone curves are represented in Fig. 5, where the U2 components have been shown to be responding at3Ω, demonstrating that the resonant component of q2 is responding at 3 times that of q1. It is important to note, however, that the U1 and U2 solutions inS1,2±occur simultaneously.Proceeding from low frequency, the U1 and U2 components of theS1,2±solution begin at ωn1 and 3ωn1 respectively, and then proceed along theS1,2−backbone curve. Initially it forms a classically stiffening response, but as the response frequency of u2 approaches the second linear natural frequency, ωn2, U1 rapidly approaches zero as U2 increases. The point at whichU1=0, corresponds to the point at which theS1,2±and S2 backbone curves share a solution. It is also at this point that theS1,2±solution switches fromS1,2−toS1,2+. This demonstrates the transition from an anti-phase response between u1 and u2, to an in-phase response. Additionally, the S2 branch produces a response identical to that of a single degree of freedom Duffing oscillator. Whilst this is an interesting feature of the response, the remainder of this document focusses on the two-mode responses relating to theS1,2±branch.In order to gain insight into how the behaviour of these modes manifests in the response of the physical structure, we may use the second-order normal form technique to describe the response at the tip of the beam. This also allows us to compare the magnitude of the predicted tip displacements to Fig. 2, to ensure that the cubic approximation is valid. To find the tip displacements, however, we must also consider the non-resonant components of these modes. The method for finding the non-resonant components is detailed in [28,35] and results in modal displacements writtenq1=u1+∑i={3,5,7,9}h1,iandq2=u2+∑i={1,5,7,9}h2,i, wherehn,iis the component of thenthmode responding atiΩ. From this, we may then find the tip displacement, z, usingz=ϕ1,Lq1+ϕ2,Lq2, and hence find the maximum tip displacement. This is shown in Fig. 6, from which it can be seen that forΩ≤12Hzthe displacement remains within levels where the cubic approximation to the force displacement is almost exact, as shown in Fig. 2. Beyond this frequency, the cubic approximation begins to lose accuracy. Fig. 6 shows a very complex shape in the region ofΩ≈ωn2/3, caused by the interaction and complicated response of the two modes; however this response is not seen in the forced and damped experiment, where fold and torus bifurcations will be shown to prevent periodic measurements in this region.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work has shown experimentally how a local nonlinearity can introduce rich dynamics into a structure that would otherwise form a classical example of linear modal dynamics. In particular, the presence of a 3:1 internal resonance has been shown to cause effects including isolated response regions and quasiperiodicity. Many of the practical issues in exploring these features experimentally have been discussed.The response to harmonic forcing has been shown to be largely governed by a complex backbone structure, derived using the method of normal forms with the modal properties of the underlying linear structure. At many frequencies, the backbone structure is seen to have a far more significant effect than the forcing amplitude. Finally, continuation analysis of the forced and damped system has revealed a pattern of bifurcations that qualitatively explain many of the observed responses, and show reasonable quantitative agreement, albeit potentially limited numerically by the use of a simplistic damping model, and possible experimental control issues near the torus bifurcation.The presence of these rich dynamical phenomena pose a formidable challenge in identifying an underlying dynamic model from purely experimental data, in a manner similar to that achieved by the practice of experimental modal analysis for linear structures. It is hoped that this work can provide an invaluable test case for future research efforts to achieve this goal.