@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Capitalising on North American speech resources for the development of a South African English large vocabulary speech recognition system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We try to develop or improve a South African (SA) speech recogniser with US data.The SA domain is under-resourced while the US domain is very well-resourced.US pronunciations and language models can feasibly replace SA counterparts.US acoustic data used in a SA system results in a large performance penalty.US acoustic and language model data slightly improve a SA system by adaptation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Under-resourced languages,Accented speech,South African English,Varieties of English,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
South African English is currently considered an under-resourced variety of English. Extensive speech resources are, however, available for North American (US) English. In this paper we consider the use of these US resources in the development of a South African large vocabulary speech recognition system. Specifically we consider two research questions. Firstly, we determine the performance penalties that are incurred when using US instead of South African language models, pronunciation dictionaries and acoustic models. Secondly, we determine whether US acoustic and language modelling data can be used in addition to the much more limited South African resources to improve speech recognition performance. In the first case we find that using a US pronunciation dictionary or a US language model in a South African system results in fairly small penalties. However, a substantial penalty is incurred when using a US acoustic model. In the second investigation we find that small but consistent improvements over a baseline South African system can be obtained by the additional use of US acoustic data. Larger improvements are obtained when complementing the South African language modelling data with US and/or UK material. We conclude that, when developing resources for an under-resourced variety of English, the compilation of acoustic data should be prioritised, language modelling data has a weaker effect on performance and the pronunciation dictionary the smallest.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
We will describe the development of large vocabulary speech recognition systems for South African English (SAE), which is considered an under-resourced variety of English because exceedingly little annotated speech data is currently available (Davel et al., 2011; Kamper et al., 2012a). However, although SAE may be considered under-resourced, other varieties of English, notably North American (US) English, have abundant resources for the development of speech technology. The primary aim of the research presented in this paper is to determine how best to capitalise on these existing and extensive language, pronunciation and acoustic modelling resources in the development of our South African (SA) speech transcription system. We consider the following two research scenarios and have structured the paper accordingly.Firstly, we investigate the performance penalty incurred when a specific SA system component is absent and its US counterpart is used instead. To achieve this, we perform a balanced comparison in which SA and US systems are developed under equivalent model training conditions using speech corpora of similar size and character. We highlight language, pronunciation and acoustic differences through cross-domain experiments in which SA language models, pronunciation dictionaries and acoustic models are replaced by their US counterparts and vice-versa. By balancing the training conditions of the SA and US systems we try to minimise performance differences due to mismatches in training corpus nature and size. The results of this investigation identify the components upon which future SA resource collection and system development efforts should focus and the components which can feasibly be replaced by their US counterparts.Secondly, we determine whether the extensive US acoustic and language modelling resources could be used to improve on the performance of an SA system. Here the US dataset is not limited artificially in size. Rather, the complete and much larger US dataset is considered and experiments are performed in order to determine the extent to which the US resources can be useful in the development of the SA system. These experiments reflect a typical under-resourced setting in which the in-domain data is limited but can be supplemented from extensive out-of-domain sources.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
