@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An adaptive post-filtering method producing an artificial Lombard-like effect for intelligibility enhancement of narrowband telephone speech

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Lombard effect is modeled in post-filtering to improve speech intelligibility.The proposed method works with narrowband telephone speech with minimal delay.The proposed method improves intelligibility in difficult noise conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Speech enhancement,Telephone speech,Post-filtering,Intelligibility,Lombard effect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Post-filtering can be used in mobile communications to improve the quality and intelligibility of speech. Energy reallocation with a high-pass type filter has been shown to work effectively in improving the intelligibility of speech in difficult noise conditions. This paper introduces a post-filtering algorithm that adapts to the background noise level as well as to the fundamental frequency of the speaker and models the spectral effects observed in natural Lombard speech. The introduced method and another post-filtering technique were compared to unprocessed telephone speech in subjective listening tests in terms of intelligibility and quality. The results indicate that the proposed method outperforms the reference method in difficult noise conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In mobile communications, pre- and post-processing methods are used to enhance the quality and intelligibility of degraded speech. The degradation can be caused by quantization noise or acoustical background noise from the sending or receiving side of the communication channel, referred to as far end or near end, respectively. Noise reduction methods are typically used in mobile phones as a pre-processing step to remove far-end noise before speech is transmitted over the communication channel. In contrast, techniques that process speech in order to enhance its quality and intelligibility when listened to in noisy near-end conditions are implemented as a post-processing step in the receiving side of the channel. In the case of speech signals with negligible noise, post-processing is typically implemented in the form of post-filtering, which refers to filtering the decoded speech signal at the mobile phone receiver with an adaptive filter. A conventional post-filtering method, introduced by Chen and Gersho (1995), contains a short-term formant filter and a long-term pitch filter which are used to emphasize the formant and pitch peaks, respectively, and to attenuate noise components in the valleys between the peaks. This straightforward filter structure has shown good performance in improving the perceptual quality of speech. The approach proposed by Chen and Gersho (1995) has been developed further in several studies, for instance, by utilizing a modified Yule-Walker filter (Mustapha and Yeldener, 1999) and psychoacoustic models (Chen et al., 2005). Additionally, a modified version with better adaptability to varying noise conditions was proposed by Grancharov et al. (2008). They replaced the post-filter parameters controlling the formant and pitch emphasis with new parameters that were adapted to the statistics of the background noise and showed this modification to improve the performance of the basic post-filter with different noise types and varying signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). However, as in most of the previous studies on post-filtering, the tests were conducted in moderate noise conditions where the quality of speech is the main focus. Mobile communications might, however, involve scenarios in which speech is listened to in difficult background noise conditions. In these circumstances, quality is no longer essential, and speech intelligibility becomes the most important factor affecting the communication.Several post-processing methods addressing the improvement of intelligibility in adverse noise conditions have been proposed. For instance, Sauert and Vary (2006, 2010) presented several slightly modified algorithms, which try to find optimal gains for the sub-bands of the unprocessed speech signal by maximizing the speech intelligibility index (SII). The proposed methods have been shown to improve intelligibility as measured with SII, but the authors did not conduct any subjective tests on the algorithms. Similarly, Tang and Cooke (2012) used reallocation of speech energy across frequency by determining optimal frequency band weights with glimpse proportion as the objective intelligibility metric. Their approach was evaluated in several noise conditions with subjective listening tests and was shown to improve intelligibility over unprocessed speech, but the effects of the processing on quality were not studied. In addition, Skowronski and Harris (2006) have used a similar energy reallocation approach to transfer energy from voiced sounds to unvoiced utterances while preserving the overall energy.Energy reallocation can also be used in post-filtering algorithms by utilizing a high-pass type post-filter to attenuate low frequency regions and to enhance higher frequencies, effectively transferring more energy to upper frequencies. Niederjohn and Grotelueschen (1976) used high-pass filtering in combination with amplitude compression and demonstrated that this approach produced intelligibility gain compared to unprocessed speech in noisy conditions. Additionally, Hall and Flanagan (2010) studied the effects of two techniques utilizing high-pass type filters, differentiation and formant equalization, on the intelligibility of telephone speech and concluded that both approaches provided more intelligible speech. However, while this kind of post-filtering has been shown to provide intelligibility enhancement, it is worth noting that the improvement is due to high-pass filtering which is unable to model the spectral changes occurring in the production of natural speech when, for instance, vocal effort is increased to enhance loudness. Therefore, it would be desirable to have a post-filtering method capable of better modeling the spectral effects that occur in natural human-to-human communication when talkers change their speaking style in order to make their speech more intelligible.The Lombard effect is a natural phenomenon observed when talkers modify their speaking style in the presence of background noise (Lombard, 1911; Summers et al., 1988). The speech signal produced due to this effect is called Lombard speech. Naturally produced Lombard speech contains multiple modifications compared to normal speech, such as increased vocal intensity, fundamental frequency (F0), formant frequencies, and word durations, as well as decreased spectral tilt (Junqua, 1993), and it has been shown to increase intelligibility (Summers et al., 1988). Furthermore, for instance Lu and Cooke (2009) studied the effects of these changes on intelligibility and showed that the decrease in spectral tilt is a major factor in improving the intelligibility, although other modifications contribute as well. Post-processing algorithms based on energy reallocation from low to high frequencies produce similarly some decrease in the overall spectral tilt, and thus they can be said to take advantage of this aspect of Lombard speech. Additionally, Huang et al. (2009) used an analysis-synthesis approach to mimic the modifications present in Lombard speech more closely and obtained positive results in subjective intelligibility tests. However, their method utilizes a computationally expensive analysis system, which makes the algorithm unsuitable for mobile phones. In this application area, limitations, such as the need for frame-based analysis with low delay enabling real-time processing as well as low computational demand, complicate the implementation of post-processing algorithms. Consequently, with the exception of the present authors’ recent conference paper (Jokinen et al., 2012), there are no previous studies, to the knowledge of the authors, attempting to utilize spectral tilt compensation and formant shaping introduced by Lombard speech in post-processing methods suitable for mobile phones.In this study, an adaptive post-filtering method motivated by the natural Lombard effect is introduced. The approach is aimed at the intelligibility improvement of narrowband telephone speech in severe near-end background noise conditions. The far-end speech signal is assumed to have negligible noise, and at the near end of the communication channel, a Lombard-like effect is artificially created to enhance the intelligibility of the received narrowband speech signal. Narrowband speech contains less information and acoustical cues in comparison to wideband speech and it therefore constitutes a more challenging speech material for intelligibility enhancement algorithms. However, narrowband speech is still prevalent in mobile communications and is, therefore, a natural choice as the focus of this study. The post-filter implementation also fulfills the other requirements set by the mobile communications framework mentioned above and, additionally, adapts to the level of the background noise in a robust manner. The performance of the proposed method was compared to the post-filtering technique proposed by Hall and Flanagan (2010) in terms of intelligibility as well as subjective quality in listening tests.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
