@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Information density and overlap in spoken dialogue

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Information density, related to entropy, is related to overlaps in spoken language.Humans prefer overlaps based on information density and suprasegmental features.This is confirmed in a speech-based rating study (p<0.0001).Our results are relevant for spoken dialogue systems, especially incremental ones.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Overlap,Turn-taking,Information density,Incremental processing,Spoken dialogue systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Incremental dialogue systems are often perceived as more responsive and natural because they are able to address phenomena of turn-taking and overlapping speech, such as backchannels or barge-ins. Previous work in this area has often identified distinctive prosodic features, or features relating to syntactic or semantic completeness, as marking appropriate places of turn-taking. In a separate strand of work, psycholinguistic studies have established a connection between information density and prominence in language—the less expected a linguistic unit is in a particular context, the more likely it is to be linguistically marked. This has been observed across linguistic levels, including the prosodic, which plays an important role in predicting overlapping speech.In this article, we explore the hypothesis that information density (ID) also plays a role in turn-taking. Specifically, we aim to show that humans are sensitive to the peaks and troughs of information density in speech, and that overlapping speech at ID troughs is perceived as more acceptable than overlaps at ID peaks. To test our hypothesis, we collect human ratings for three models of generating overlapping speech based on features of: (1) prosody and semantic or syntactic completeness, (2) information density, and (3) both types of information. Results show that over 50% of users preferred the version using both types of features, followed by a preference for information density features alone. This indicates a clear human sensitivity to the effects of information density in spoken language and provides a strong motivation to adopt this metric for the design, development and evaluation of turn-taking modules in spoken and incremental dialogue systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traditionally, the smallest unit of processing in spoken dialogue systems has been a full utterance with strict, rigid turn-taking. More recently, however, work on incremental systems has shown that processing smaller ‘chunks’ of user input can improve the user experience by providing faster responses and allow more flexibility in turn-taking (Skantze and Schlangen, 2009; Purver and Otsuka, 2003; Skantze and Hjalmarsson, 2010; Baumann et al., 2011; Raux and Eskenazi, 2009; Dethlefs et al., 2012b). Incrementality in spoken dialogue systems enables the system designer to model several dialogue phenomena that play a vital role in human conversation (Levelt, 1989), but have so far been absent from most systems. These include more natural turn-taking and grounding through the generation of backchannels and barge-ins—which we will refer to jointly as overlaps in this article.Previous studies on the triggers of backchannels and barge-ins in human–human conversation have revealed the importance of prosodic features, such as pitch, duration, and energy, and features relating to syntactic and semantic completeness (Koiso et al., 1998; Ward and Tsukahara, 2000; Cathcart et al., 2003; Morency et al., 2008; Gravano and Hirschberg, 2009; Oertel et al., 2012). The latter can refer to the grammatical completeness of constituents, e.g., such as a full NP versus just the determiner. We will refer to such features jointly as suprasegmental. Most previous studies have relied on manually annotated corpora for their analyses and reported results from held-out datasets, and few findings have been implemented in real spoken dialogue systems.In a separate strand of research, psycholinguistic studies have shown that humans distribute information across linguistic units in a way so that more prominence is given to units that are less expected in a given context (Genzel and Charniak, 2002; Bell et al., 2003; Aylett and Turk, 2004; Levy and Jaeger, 2007). This evidence led us to hypothesise that there is a relation between information density and suitable places for backchannels or barge-ins in spoken conversation. Information density can be seen as a measure of entropy in human language and is computed from a language model of the domain at hand (Shannon, 1948). One advantage is therefore that it can easily be obtained incrementally for incoming strings of user speech. A further advantage of information density over other features, relating e.g. to syntactic completeness, is that it can be seen as an ‘abstract’ type of information. Information is estimated solely based on n-grams and we do not need to understand what is being said on a semantic level.In a study that explored the relationship between information density and overlaps (Dethlefs et al., 2012a), we trained a hierarchical reinforcement learner that could generate backchannels and barge-ins in conversations with human users. The model compared a reward function that was sensitive to information density against a reward function that was not. Results showed that significantly higher human ratings were obtained for the version that took information density into account. While these results are promising, they were drawn from an exclusively text-based rating study, which potentially does not account for the peculiarities of spoken language. In this article, we therefore replicate our earlier experiments in a speech-based rating study, involving word-based as well as suprasegmental features, in order to see whether the earlier results hold in a realistic dialogue setting. Results show a clear human preference for a model that generates overlapping speech based on both suprasegmental and information density features. This is followed by overlaps based on information density features alone and then suprasegmental features alone. The results indicate a strong human sensitivity to the peaks and troughs in evolving information density in spoken language. These results hold even in the face of ASR errors.We will start Section 2 by discussing related work on overlap in spoken dialogue systems, mainly from the perspective of incremental processing architectures. We will then describe the types of features that previous work has identified as predicting different types of overlaps, and finally the information density effects that have been observed across linguistic units in human language. Section 3 will introduce the notion of information density and exemplify some of its effects on a spoken corpus from the information-seeking dialogue domain. The relation between information density and suprasegmental features in spoken language is also discussed. In Section 4, we describe our experimental setting, data and methodology, and present results on the effect of information density on spoken overlap in dialogue. Section 5 finally draws conclusions and lays out the directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Previous work investigating spoken overlap in human–human conversation has often highlighted the importance of suprasegmental features in marking suitable points for backchannels or barge-ins. A separate strand of investigations has established that there is a strong relationship between entropy and prominence in language, manifesting itself in less expected linguistic units being realised in a marked form. The notion of entropy or expectation in language has often been related to information density and has been shown to be operational at the phonetic and prosodic levels of language, among others.In this article, we bring these two strands together. We explore the hypothesis that information density can also be related to the occurrence of overlapping speech, such as backchannels and barge-ins, in spoken dialogue. In an experiment with human judges, we collected ratings of three models that generate overlaps based on features relating to (1) prosody and semantic and syntactic completeness, (2) information density, and (3) both types of information. Human raters showed a significant preference for the third model (p<0.001). This demonstrates that besides prosodic and completeness features, humans are indeed sensitive to the evolving information density in spoken language. They significantly preferred overlaps at points of low information density over such occurring at points of high information density. These results are relevant to research on spoken dialogue systems, especially those that make use of incremental processing, and are therefore able to address communicative features such as backchannels or barge-ins. Previous work has provided evidence that interactive feedback mechanisms such as backchannels and barge-ins have important positive effects on spoken dialogue systems in terms of indicating the system's status to the user (Yankelovich et al., 1995; Hirasawa et al., 1999). Our work represents a further step in the direction of equipping spoken dialogue systems with interactive feedback mechanisms, which are easy to implement based on a measure of entropy that requires access to only the words spoken and a language model of the domain. In particular, we have made the following novel contributions:•We have presented the first study that investigates experimentally the effects of different suprasegmental features on human turn-taking preferences in spoken dialogue (previous studies have relied on classification experiments only).Our experiment shows that humans are (at least partially) sensitive to the peaks and troughs of information density in spoken language.We have demonstrated that the effects found hold for transcribed utterances and for (potentially erroneous) outputs of an ASR module equally.Our results show that humans are sensitive to the troughs and peaks in information density in spoken language and that this sensitivity does at least partially guide their preferences on system-initiated overlap. Equipping spoken dialogue systems therefore with more interactive feedback mechanisms, such as spoken overlaps in the form of backchannels or barge-ins, could help to make them more responsive to user overlaps, more communicative of their own status and more natural and human-like to interact with.Future research will explore the following directions:1.In this article, we have been able to confirm the positive effect of information density on overlap in spoken language reported earlier in Dethlefs et al. (2012a). While the present speech-based scenario was more natural than the earlier text-based rating study, we plan further experiments using a full spoken dialogue system. This step is essential to show that users perceive and approve of the points of overlap predicted by our method even in a task-based scenario when they are not particularly focused on the differences. This will also be important to show whether system-initiated overlaps are preferable to users over repetition or clarification requests.Information density has been shown to be operational across linguistic levels in human language. However, its effects in natural language processing have not been explored, with a few exceptions (Rajkumar and White, 2011; Dethlefs et al., 2012a). It would be interesting and important to further explore the role that information density can play within spoken dialogue systems or natural language generators. This could address the rankings of a set of competing dialogue acts or surface realisations in the face of the communicative channel and its capacity at different times during an interaction.While this paper has focused on system-initiated overlaps, future work could also explore phenomena of user-initiated overlap. For example, information density might help the system to decide whether the user is offering a backchannel or is barging-in on the system. In the latter case, the system could weigh up the importance of what the user is saying in order to decide whether to yield or try to keep the current turn.Our experiments were based on conventional n-gram language models in accordance with earlier work on information density in language. Since the quality of overlap prediction crucially depends on the robustness of the underlying language model, future work could explore alternative methods. A candidate for investigation are recurrent neural networks, which have been shown to superior to conventional n-gram models in a number of respects (Mikolov et al., 2010).Information density has so far only been explored at the linguistic level. However, it has been shown that phenomena of salience and information structure are also at work in visual and multimodal language scenarios (Elsner et al., 2014). Future work could attempt to establish a relationship between information density and multimodal dialogue or natural language generation scenarios or investigate the effect of information density on multimodal turn-taking scenarios (Chao and Thomaz, 2013; Nalin et al., 2012).Throughout this article, we have followed previous work in assuming that the principles of human–human turn taking are readily transferable to turn taking in human–computer interaction. In a recent study on the occurrence of barge-ins of users over a spoken dialogue system, however, Cuayáhuitl et al. (2013) find that the most likely place for a user to barge-in on a system is after the first or second dialogue act. This substantially differs from human–human communication, where barge-ins tend to occur much later, supposedly because very early barge-ins may be less socially acceptable among humans. As a conclusion, it may be that not all findings from human–human data are as readily transferable to spoken dialogue systems as is often assumed. Future work could provide a systematic comparison of the differences between the two modes of interaction.