@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multivariate empirical mode decomposition and its application to fault diagnosis of rolling bearing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multiple sensors are used to collect signals at different locations on the machine.Multivariate EMD is used to simultaneously analyze multivariate signal.The correlation analysis between matrixes is employed to determine effective IMFs.The NL-means denoising method is used to preprocess the multivariate signals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multivariate EMD,Multiple sensors,Fault correlation factor,Rolling bearing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rolling bearings are widely used in rotary machinery systems. The measured vibration signal of any part linked to rolling bearings contains fault information when failure occurs, differing only by energy levels. Bearing failure will cause the vibration of other components, and therefore the collected bearing vibration signals are mixed with vibration signal of other parts and noise. Using multiple sensors to collect signals at different locations on the machine to obtain multivariate signal can avoid the loss of local information. Subsequently using the multivariate empirical mode decomposition (multivariate EMD) to simultaneously analyze the multivariate signal is beneficial to extract fault information, especially for weak fault characteristics during the period of early failure. This paper proposes a novel method for fault feature extraction of rolling bearing based on multivariate EMD. The nonlocal means (NL-means) denoising method is used to preprocess the multivariate signal and the correlation analysis is employed to calculate fault correlation factors to select effective intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). Finally characteristic frequencies are extracted from the selected IMFs by spectrum analysis. The numerical simulations and applications to bearing monitoring verify the effectiveness of the proposed method and indicate that this novel method is promising in the field of signal decomposition and fault diagnosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rolling bearings are widely used in mechanical drive systems in manufacturing. The failure of a rolling bearing may lead to the failure of the mechanical system, thus resulting in the loss of production, even personal injury or death. Therefore it is of vital importance to monitor rolling bearings to detect early damage in manufacturing systems. As a load bearing component, a rolling bearing usually works with the input mechanism and loading devices, and its corresponding vibrations are always mixed with the vibratory responses of other components within the entire machine [1]. At the beginning phase of bearing failure, the vibration signal of the bearings is usually accompanied by various types of noise. At this phase, using multiple sensors [2] to collect the vibratory signal of the bearing and obtain the common frequency components through analysis is very beneficial to obtain accurate fault characteristic frequencies.The analysis of vibration signal is vital for monitoring the operating condition of rolling bearings, and the accurate extraction of fault characteristic frequencies from vibration signal is particularly important [3]. In the process of monitoring rotating machinery, using signal processing methods to analyze and extract fault characteristic frequencies is becoming a common technique. Several signal processing methods, such as wavelet transform (WT) [4], independent component analysis (ICA) [5], and empirical mode decomposition (EMD) [6], are widely used in this field. In the wavelet transform, different wavelet basis functions need to be chosen to determine wavelet coefficients, thus allowing reconstruction of the signal [4]. While EMD is a kind of adaptive nonlinear and nonstationary data analysis method, compared to WT, there is no basis functions requirement in the extraction of complex mechanical vibration signal characteristic frequencies [7]. The EMD method decomposes the nonlinear and nonstationary signal into an approximating stationary time series representing the time scale of the signal, namely intrinsic mode function (IMF) [8], to describe the frequency components of the signal. The IMF is a kind of complete, adaptive, and basically orthogonal expression which is determined by the original signal rather than the preset basis functions. In the field of signal processing, EMD is widely used in the nonlinear and nonstationary signal processing [9], however most studies are primarily aimed at univariate signal. When dealing with multivariate signal [10] collected from multiple sensors, which are placed in different locations on the machine, EMD can only process multivariate signal individually in extracting fault frequency components from individual IMF groups of different lengths, thus causing the uncertainty problem of scale arrangement between different IMF groups. For example, the order and frequency components of one IMF group do not correspond to the same order and frequency components of other IMF groups [11]. The problem mentioned above leads to difficulty in the subsequent process of determining the effective IMFs [12], and the resulting multiple IMF groups cannot show the correlation information among relevant sensors. Therefore the existing EMD method has its limitations when using EMD method to process multivariate signal.In 2007, Rilling et al. [13] proposed a bivariate EMD. In the bivariate EMD, the projection of bivariate signal in a number of directions is used to calculate the local mean of the bivariate signal. The direction vectors are unevenly distributed on a complex plane after the projection. Performing an interpolation on the maximum value of the projection, by using a complex spline function, gives the envelope curve. The local mean approximation can be acquired through calculating the mean values [14]. In 2010, Rehman and Mandic [15] improved the EMD algorithm to a trivariate EMD, which regards trivariate signal as a pure quaternion (hypercomplex number), with each component being a real numerical time series. Performing the interpolation on the maximum value of projection, by using a specific spline function after obtaining the signal projection in a number of directions in three-dimensional space, gives three dimensional pure quaternion envelope curves [16]. The application of spline interpolation conducting on specific components of pure quaternion represents the expansion of rich spline function. Finally, the average of quaternion envelop curves can be calculated to obtain the local mean of trivariate signal. In the following studies, Rehman [11] extended EMD to multivariate EMD by introducing the theory of multivariate EMD. It allows simultaneous processing of multivariate signal which are composed of signal collected by multiple sensors from different locations on the machine. The improvement has all the advantages of existing EMD in processing nonlinear and nonstationary signal and additionally can successfully solve the uncertainty of IMFs arrangement, which contain characteristic frequency components. Through multivariate EMD decomposition of multivariate signal, the same characteristic frequencies appear in the same order in different IMF groups, which facilitates the determination of the orders of effective IMFs so as to extract the characteristic frequencies [17]. In a few cases, when one of the sensors does not work or a set of collected data goes wrong, the multivariate EMD can decompose the multivariate signal to multiple IMF groups, and comparison of IMF groups can contribute to extraction of the fault characteristic frequencies. The relationships among different sensors [18] can be reflected from the same frequency components found among different IMF groups. In summary, the multivariate EMD is of great significance in the field of multivariate signal processing.This paper proposes a novel approach to fault feature extraction of rolling bearings based on the multivariate EMD, using NL-Means denoising method to preprocess the multivariate signal. In addition, the approach utilizes correlation analysis to compute fault correlation factor (FCF) so as to select effective IMFs, and then extract characteristic frequencies by spectrum analysis. The organization of this paper is as follows: Section 2 introduces the basic principles and characteristics of multivariate EMD. Section 3 describes the theory of fault feature extraction based on multivariate EMD using the NL-Means denoising method. Section 4 presents the numerical simulations, including the mixing of three original signal, which contain frequency modulated signal, by using a random matrix, and adding noise to simulate the multivariate signal collected by three sensors placed in different locations on the machine; conducting simulation analysis on the signal and finally extracting the characteristic frequencies. Section 5 presents the applications to bearing monitoring with practical experimental signal collected by multiple sensors to verify the validity of the proposed approach described in this paper. The conclusions of the studies and necessary discussions are given in Section 6.Standard EMD [6] uses an interpolation method to calculate the mean value of the upper and lower envelop curve of univariate signal so as to obtain the local mean value. However, the value of the local maximum and the minimum cannot be directly defined, and the IMF concept defined by the vibration mode is not clear. In order to address these issues, multivariate EMD was developed by Rehman et al. in 2013. This method regards n-variate signal (n≥2) as N-dimensional time series and chooses the appropriate direction vectors in N-dimensional space. The N-variate signal are respectively projected to the selected direction vectors to form the projection signal and to calculate all envelops of each projection signal, finally averaging all of those to get the local mean of the multivariate signal. Then, following the steps of the standard EMD, all the IMF groups can be calculated, thus achieving the multivariate EMD decomposition of the original multivariate signal. The direction vector sets of N-dimensional space can be regarded as the point sets of an (n−1) dimensional sphere, so the problem of calculating the direction vector sets of the N-dimensional space can be converted into the problem of computing uniform sampling point sets on an (n−1) dimensional sphere.There are two main methods for realizing the uniform sampling point sets in multivariate EMD: (1) Uniform angular sampling method. There is a high density in the two poles of the sphere, which is bad for uniform projection. (2) Use quasi Monte Carlo lower deviation sequence (Hammersley sequence and Halton sequence) [19] to generate the point sets on (n−1) dimensional sphere, which can produce more uniform direction vectors. The Hammersley sequence is introduced as an example of the quasi Monte Carlo lower deviation sequence in the following paragraphs. The discrepancy can be used as an indicator of quantitative analysis to determine the uniformity of the vectors distribution. The computing method of the Hammersley sequence [20] is described as follows: For any non-negative integer k and a prime number p in satisfied relationships of Eq. (1)(1)k=a0+a1p+a2P2+⋯+arprwhere ai∈[0, p−1] and is an integer, i∈[0, r], and the function ϕpof variate k is given by(2)ϕp(k)=a0p+a1p2+a2p3+⋯+arpr+1Suppose the dimension of the sampling space is d, utilize a group of prime number sequences p1, p2, p3,…, pd−1to define function sequences ϕp1(k), ϕp2(k),ϕp3(k),…, ϕpd−1(k), then k Hammersley points of d dimensions can be defined as(3)(kn,φp1(k),φp2(k),φp3(k),⋯,φpd−1(k))where k=0, 1, 2,…, n−1, p1<p2<…<pd−1, and n is the total number of Hammersley sequence points.The process of obtaining IMFs is called sifting process which is an iterative process [6], and the iteration conditions of multivariate EMD and EMD are substantially the same. Currently, there are three kinds of stopping criterion [21] of the sifting iterative process. (1) The application of a Cauchy-type convergence condition means the iterative will stop if the discrepancy between adjacent sifting results is less than a threshold, 0.2–0.3 is a typical threshold value range. (2) The iterative will stop when the two sequential sifting processes have the same number of zero crossing points and continuous extreme points for N times (N is determined by the practical application). (3) The energy difference tracking method guarantees that the energy difference between different IMFs is as small as possible in order to approximately satisfy the orthogonality of EMD.For defining q dimensional observation signalx=[x1, x2,…, xq]T and the lth directional vector of the directional vector setsDl=[d1l, d2l,…, dql]. The algorithms of multivariate EMD are given inTable 1.In terms of signal decomposition, the multivariate EMD decomposes multivariate signal into several IMF groups, and each IMF group has the same length and components containing the same frequency distribution, in the same order of the group. EMD method is sensitive to noise [22], and with the development of EMD from univariate signal processing to multivariate signal processing, multivariate EMD is found to be more sensitive to noise [23]. Here simulated multivariate signal are used to verify the characteristics of the multivariate EMD decomposition method and its sensitivity to noise.The multivariate signal in Eq. (4) was applied for simulation:(4)x1(t)=0.5sin(2πf1t)+cos(2πf2t)+cos(2πf3t)x2(t)=sin(2πf1t)+0.6cos(2πf2t)+cos(2πf3t)x3(t)=sin(2πf1t)+0.5cos(2πf2t)+0.7cos(2πf3t)The frequencies of the above signal are as follows: f1=20Hz, f2=60Hz, f3=110Hz, sampling point N=1024, sampling frequency fs=1024Hz. Multivariate EMD is employed to decompose the signal into three IMF groups. The time domain plots of three IMF groups are shown inFig. 1 and the frequency domain plots of three IMF groups are shown inFig. 2.From the time and frequency domain plots in Figs. 1 and 2, it is can be verified that, after the decomposition, the same frequency appears in the same order in different IMF groups. This characteristic of multivariate EMD is very meaningful in facilitating the determination of the orders of effective IMFs so as to extract the characteristic frequencies. In order to test the effect of noise on this method, random noises were added with a Gaussian distribution, a variance of 0.2 and an average of 0. Then the multivariate EMD decomposition was performed again. The time domain plots of the IMF groups are shown inFig. 3 and the frequency domain plots of the IMF groups are shown inFig. 4.It can be seen from the time and frequency domain plots in Figs. 3 and 4 that, after adding noise, the length of different IMF groups are the same. However, the orders of both IMF groups increase because of the redundant components generated by the noise. In the 2nd and the 3th order, the IMF contains the same frequency component, namely the excessive repetitive extraction. This resulted in unnecessary error calculations during the decomposition.Due to the analysis of multivariate signal, both, with and without adding noise and the comparison of two numerical simulations, the following observations can be made:1)When the multivariate EMD is used to decompose multivariate signal, the same characteristic frequencies appear in the same order in different IMF groups, which is significant for the subsequent data integration and determination of the effective IMFs.The multivariate EMD method is sensitive to noise and produces more irrelevant and redundant components in the process of decomposition, which makes it difficult for subsequent spectral analysis and leads to repetitive and aliasing phenomenon. Therefore, when using the proposed method to decompose multivariate signal, an appropriate denoising method is needed to preprocess multivariate signal.Owing to the noise sensitivity of multivariate EMD, a denoising algorithm is needed to preprocess the multivariate signal collected by multiple sensors. As one kind of multiscale noise reduction [24] algorithm, NL-means is usually applied to two-dimensional fields. However due to the characteristics of similar patches that can also be found in one-dimensional mechanical vibration signal, the NL-means algorithm can be used in reducing the effects of noise in bearing signal. After signal has been denoised, the multivariate EMD decomposition method is employed on the preprocessed multivariate signal to obtain the multiple IMF groups. In order to determine the specific orders of effective IMFs, correlations between each vector are usually taken into consideration. In multivariate EMD decomposition, IMFs with the same order of each IMF group constitute a matrix. For this research, correlations between matrixes were adopted by defining the fault correlation factor (FCF), through an integral approach, to determine the effective IMFs containing fault information.The basic idea of NL-Means [25] is that there are numerous similar ingredients in natural images which contain lots of redundant information, and noise randomly superposed on these ingredients. Therefore noise can be eliminated by weighting all similar components in order to achieve a denoising effect. Buades et al. [26] proposed the NL-Means method by weighting the similarity of image neighborhoods. There are also a large number of similar ingredients in one-dimensional signal with random additive noise, making it possible to apply NL-Means to mechanical bearing signal for the purpose of denoising.The main problem of applying the NL-Means algorithm to one-dimensional signal is in restoring original signal in a noisy environment. In the presence of the additive noise model, noisy signal can be expressed as: y(i)=x(i)+n, where y is the observed signal, x is the original signal, and n is the Gaussian white noise.In NL-Means filtering, xeis the estimation of x, and it can be calculated as the weighted average of all similar ingredients. Thus, the process of NLM method can be expressed as(5)xe(s)=1Z(t)∑t∈M(s)w(s,t)y(t),Z(t)=∑t∈M(s)w(s,t)where Z(t) is a standardized constant which represents the sum of all the similar module weights around the central s, while w(s, t) represents the degree of similarity between the similar modules. This is defined as(6)w(s,t)=exp(−∑δ∈Δ(y(s+δ)−y(t+δ))22LΔλ2)≡exp(−d2(s,t)2LΔλ2)where λ is a filter parameter, which represents similar ingredients surrounding s and t respectively, and d2(s, t) is the square of the point-by-point difference between two similar components centered on s and t.In order to determinate whether the frequency components obtained by EMD decomposition are meaningful to the analysis of the original signal, it is necessary to calculate the correlation coefficients between each IMF and their original signal to determine the effective IMFs. If the correlation coefficient of one IMF is too small, it can be regarded as noise or a redundant component. According to correlation analysis [27], it is possible to accurately determine the noise component and the effective IMFs which contain fault features in order to analyze the main component of the signal to extract fault frequencies, thereby improving the reliability of the signal analysis process. However, there are multiple sets of IMFs in multivariate EMD decomposition [11], therefore the information obtained by the individual calculation of correlation between an IMF and one collected signal is not comprehensive and cannot reflect the relationships between multiple sets of the IMFs.Hence this paper proposes a novel method of fault correlation factor analysis to conduct the analysis. In the multivariate EMD decomposition of n-variate signal, all the mth IMFs corresponding to each signal constitute the matrix of n groups which all contain m IMFs. Here a matrix is used as the basic unit when performing the correlation analysis between n IMF groups and multivariate collected signal. The multivariate signal constitute the observation signal matrix(7)X(t)=[x1(t),x2(t),⋯,xn(t)]In the IMF groups obtained by multivariate EMD decomposition, the kth IMFs of n IMF groups corresponding to each collected signal constitute the matrix(8)C(t)=[c1k(t),c2k(t),⋯,cnk(t)]By defining the FCF of the kth IMF of nth IMF group as λnk, in signal processing applications, the correlation coefficient can be simplified as(9)λxy=∑n=1Nx(t)c(t)∑n=1Nx(t)2∑n=1Nc(t)2where t is the time and N represents the total number of sampling points. Conducting correlation analysis on ith IMF of C(t) with each n-variate signal respectively, and then averaging all the correlation coefficients, will give the FCF of this order IMF, namely λik. This value can only reflect the correlation between this IMF and the original collected signal and cannot show the relationship between this order IMF and the same order IMF of other IMF groups decomposed by multivariate EMD. Theoretically, the same order IMF contains the same fault frequency, which means the degree of correlation with original signal should be roughly the same. In matrix correlation analysis, the value is the average of all the vector’s correlations. Therefore taking the average processing on all the FCFs of IMFs with the same order of n IMF groups gives(10)λk=∑i=1nλik/nwhere i=1, 2,…, n. The larger value of λkin the correlation analysis means the greater degree of fault frequency correlation between kth IMF of n IMF groups and the original signal. Based on the criterion of Pearson Correlation Coefficients, when the value is greater than 0.3, it can be regarded that two quantities are relevant. So the orders of effective IMFs can be determined through this integral approach so as to extract the fault characteristic frequency.As mentioned above, after theoretical derivation and extensive testings, as a multiscale noise reduction method, the NL-means algorithm proved to be very effective in reducing the interference of noise in bearing signal. Therefore the NL-means method was determined to be used to denoise multivariate signal which contain a lot of noise. After multivariate signal, which are collected by multiple sensors from different locations on the machine, have been denoised by this method, the multivariate EMD can decompose preprocessed multivariate signal into multiple IMF groups which all have the same length. In these IMF groups, the same frequency components of the signal appear in the same order of each group which is the characteristic of multivariate EMD and has been validated in Section 2. In order to determine the specific orders of effective IMFs, the correlations between each vector are usually adopted, but in multivariate EMD decomposition, the same order of each IMF group constitute a matrix. In this research, correlation analysis between matrixes is adopted to determine the orders of the effective IMFs which contain fault information by defining and calculating FCF. Finally, fault characteristic frequencies are extracted through spectral analysis of the effective IMFs. The realization of multivariate signal acquisition and processing has become particularly important in the field of fault diagnosis; such a method can extract more useful and valuable information and can achieve an integrated and comprehensive failure analysis. The basic idea of the proposed method is illustrated inFig. 5.The vibration signal of rolling bearings which have an outer ring fixed to the structure can be simplified to a signal model [28] as(11)xb(t)=αsin(2πfbt)[1+βsin(2πfrt)]where fbis the characteristic frequency of the bearing roller going through the inner ring and fris the rotational frequency. Three simulated original signal in Eq. (12) can be used in the numerical simulations.(12)x1(t)=0.4cos(2πf1t+10)x2(t)=0.6cos(2πf2t−15)x3(t)=sin(2πfbt)[1+sin(2πfrt)]where the frequencies of three original signal are as follows: f1=20Hz, f2=45Hz, fb=100Hz, fr=10Hz, the sampling point N=1024, the sampling frequency fs=1024Hz. The time and frequency domain plot of the simulated original signal are shown inFig. 6.In the process of simulating a multiple-sensor system, where three original signal are simultaneously collected by any sensor, it is the case that each of the collected multiple signal is a mixture of the multivariate original signal. The signal collected by sensor always has additive noise, and in the numerical simulations, many researchers have applied Gaussian white noise to simulate the real signal in practice. Gaussian white noise amplitudes obey the Gaussian distribution, and its power spectral density is uniformly distributed, it is very suitable for simulation analysis [29]. Here random noise of the Gaussian distribution, whose variance is 0.3 and average is 0, is used. In order to randomly mix the three simulated original signal, a random 3×3 matrix (A) is optionally employed by computer as(13)A=(0.52140.45550.20130.42780.20020.44160.31220.38180.6058)The simulated collected signal can be obtained by(14)A(x1(t)x2(t)x3(t))+(snoisesnoisesnoise)=(S1(t)S2(t)S3(t))The time and frequency domain plots of three simulated signal collected by sensors are shown inFig. 7.Using the method proposed in this paper, the multivariate collected signal is decomposed by multivariate EMD. Due to the noise sensitivity of the multivariate EMD, the NL-Means denoising method was used to preprocess the simulated signal, optimization of the parameters can be found in the paper [30]. In this numerical simulation, the decomposition of multivariate EMD generates three IMF groups of the same length and all contain 9 IMFs, as shown inFig. 8. According to the theoretical basis, signal components of the same frequency appear in the same order of the IMF group.In the three IMF groups, the effective IMFs which contain feature information of the original signal can be determined by correlation analysis. The FCF analysis that is presented above is used to analyze the correlation between the matrix formed by IMFs of the same order and the matrix formed by the simulated signal. The calculated results of FCF values are shown inTable 2.In Table 2, the FCF values show the correlation between the specific order of IMF groups and the collected signal. The larger this value is, the greater the correlation is. In correlation analysis, when the value is greater than 0.3, it can be considered that they are related to each other, and value increasing means relevance becoming greater. When the value is less than 0.3, they can be considered irrelevant. In this FCF analysis, three maximum values were selected, of 2nd, 3rd, and 4th order IMF (all greater than 0.3), in all seven FCFs. Hence these three orders IMFs have the maximum correlation to the simulated collected signal. Through spectrum analysis, the frequency domain plots of these three orders IMFs are shown inFig. 9.As shown in the frequency domain plots in Fig. 9, the characteristic frequencies fb, fb−fr, fb+fr, f2 and f1, can be clearly recognized. The characteristic frequency amplitudes are obvious. This means that after preprocessing and decomposition, the specific orders IMFs obtained by using the matrix correlation can be used to extract the characteristic frequencies. Since the simulated signal contain a common frequency modulated signal that usually exists in bearing signal, the proposed method can be applied to extract the fault frequencies of multivariate bearing signal.Through numerical simulations, the proposed fault frequency extraction method based on multivariate EMD can be applied to the multivariate signal which contain frequency modulated signal in this section. The fault bearing data from Case Western Reserve University Bearing Data Center Website[31] is used to verify the proposed method. The website provides a large collection of experimental bearing data that are related to both normal and faulty bearings, and among those the data for faulty bearings are acquired by using electric spark machining. In this paper, 211 inner race fault data are adopted. The sampling frequency in the experiment is 12,000Hz, and the rotational speed is 1730rpm. Experimental fault bearing type is 6205-2RS JEM SKF, and its specific parameters are shown inTable 3. The computing methods for obtaining bearing fault frequencies are shown inTable 4. The fault characteristic frequencies of 6205-2RS JEM SKF rolling element bearing in this experiment are shown inTable 5.The multivariate signal of the inner race fault of rolling bearing is composed of three signal collected by three sensors from different locations on the experimental device. The test equipment of Case Western Reserve University includes two motors, a coupling (containing torque sensor and encoder) and other related devices, as shown inFig. 10. Accelerometers are placed on the testing site to collect acceleration signal that can be used for bearing fault analysis. The schematic diagram of a signal acquisition device and a picture are shown in Fig. 10.The time and frequency domain plots of the collected multivariate signal are shown inFig. 11.The method proposed in this paper is used to decompose the multivariate signal, and the resulting IMF groups are shown inFig. 12.Among all the IMF groups obtained by multivariate EMD decomposition, the orders of the effective IMFs, containing fault frequencies of the original signal, can be determined by correlation analysis. By employing the FCF analysis that is presented above, the correlation between the matrixes formed by IMFs of the same order and the matrix formed by collected signal can be analyzed. The calculated results of FCF values are shown inTable 6.In Table 6, the FCF values show the correlation between the specific order of IMF groups and the collected signal. The larger this value is, the greater the correlation is. In this FCF analysis, the maximum value of the 4th order IMF (greater than 0.3) was selected. The conclusion is that this order IMF has the maximum correlation with the collected signal. Through spectrum analysis, the frequency domain plot of this order IMFs is shown inFig.13.In the frequency domain plots, the characteristic frequency fi, fi-faand fi+facan be clearly recognized. The characteristic frequencies are obvious. This means that after preprocessing and multivariate EMD decomposition, the specific order IMFs, obtained by using the matrix correlation, can be extracted with their characteristic frequencies. For this reason, the bearing inner race fault can be detected by the proposed method. Therefore this experiment demonstrates the effectiveness of this proposed method in an application to bearing monitoring.To further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, it is used to analyze the collected signal of the Drivetrain Diagnostics Simulator, manufactured by the SQI Company of United States. The test collects the multivariate signal of the outer race fault of rolling bearing and the data is composed of four signal collected by four sensors from different locations on the experimental apparatus. The experimental apparatus, which is shown inFig. 14, contains a variable speed drive, a torque transducer and encoder, a gear box comprising two parallel shaft rolling or sliding bearings, a load bearing device and a programmable electromagnetic brake.The fault characteristic frequencies of a FAFNIR deep groove ball bearing (used in this experiment) are shown inTable 7.The time and frequency domain plots of the collected multivariate signal are shown inFig. 15.Using the proposed method to decompose the multivariate signal gives the resulting IMF groups, as shown inFig. 16.Among all the IMF groups which are obtained by multivariate EMD decomposition, the orders of the effective IMFs which contain fault frequency of the original signal can be determined by correlation analysis. The FCF analysis is employed to analyze the correlation between the matrixes formed by IMFs of the same order and the matrix formed by collected signal. The calculated results of FCF values are shown inTable 8.In Table 8, the FCF values show the correlation between the specific order of IMF groups and the collected signal. The larger this value is, the greater the correlation is. Here, in this FCF analysis, the maximum value of the 6th order IMF, which is also greater than 0.3, is selected. Therefore the conclusion is that this order IMF has the maximum correlation with the collected signal. Through the spectrum analysis, the frequency domain plots of this order IMFs are shown inFig. 17.Through the frequency domain plot, the characteristic frequency focan be clearly recognized. This means that after preprocessing and multivariate EMD decomposition, the specific order IMFs, obtained by using the matrix correlation, can be extracted with the characteristic frequencies. For this reason, the bearing outer race fault can be detected by the proposed method. Therefore this experiment further demonstrates the effectiveness of this proposed method in the applications to bearing monitoring.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The research work in this paper elaborates on the theoretical effectiveness of the proposed method based on the multivariate EMD. It also clearly indicates through numerical simulations and applications to bearing monitoring that the expansion from standard EMD to multivariate EMD is a successful exploration. Using multiple sensors to collect signal from different locations of the machine and using the multivariate EMD to analyze multivariate signal can contribute to comprehensively collect all the frequency components related to any bearing fault, and is beneficial to extract fault information, especially for early weak fault characteristics. Both the characteristic frequencies of simulated signal and the fault frequencies of practical rolling bearing signal can be extracted from the same order of IMF groups, thus showing that multivariate EMD is an effective signal decomposition algorithm and can be competently applied to fault diagnosis of rolling bearings when combined with a multiscale reduction method and fault correlation factor analysis. In signal acquisition and processing, given the circumstance that there is a trend toward the use of multiple sensors, multivariate EMD appears to be very useful and meaningful as a kind of multivariate data processing algorithm. By analyzing the simulated signal and two different practical multivariate signals, the results demonstrate the significance of the proposed method in the field of fault diagnosis of rolling bearing.