@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Systematic review of virtual speech therapists for speech disorders

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A systematic review on virtual speech therapists (VSTs) was presented.The comparison of VSTs and traditional speech therapy was discussed.We analyzed intervention methods used in VSTs such as articulation therapy.Hearing impairments was observed as the most frequent disorder targeted by VSTs.We explored 3D virtual heads and games as efficient therapy delivery approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtual speech therapist,Computer-based speech therapy,Speech and language disorders,Computer-based intervention,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a systematic review of relevant published studies on computer-based speech therapy systems or virtual speech therapists (VSTs) for people with speech disorders is presented. We structured this work based on the PRISMA framework. The advancements in speech technology and the increased number of successful real-world projects in this area point to a thriving market for VSTs in the near future; however, there is no standard roadmap to pinpoint how these systems should be designed, implemented, customized, and evaluated with respect to the various speech disorders. The focus of this systematic review is on articulation and phonological impairments. This systematic review addresses three research questions: what types of articulation and phonological disorders do VSTs address, how effective are virtual speech therapists, and what technological elements have been utilized in VST projects. The reviewed papers were sourced from comprehensive digital libraries, and were published in English between 2004 and 2014. All the selected studies involve computer-based intervention in the form of a VST regarding articulation or phonological impairments, followed by qualitative and/or quantitative assessments. To generate this review, we encountered several challenges. Studies were heterogeneous in terms of disorders, type and frequency of therapy, sample size, level of functionality, etc. Thus, overall conclusions were difficult to draw. Commonly, publications with rigorous study designs did not describe the technical elements used in their VST, and publications that did describe technical elements had poor study designs. Despite this heterogeneity, the selected studies reported the effectiveness of computers as a more engaging type of intervention with more tools to enrich the intervention programs, particularly when it comes to children; however, it was emphasized that virtual therapists should not drive the intervention but must be used as a medium to deliver the intervention planned by speech-language pathologists. Based on the reviewed papers, VSTs are significantly effective in training people with a variety of speech disorders; however, it cannot be claimed that a consensus exists in the superiority of VSTs over speech-language pathologists regarding rehabilitation outcomes. Our review shows that hearing-impaired cases were the most frequently addressed disorder in the reviewed studies. Automatic speech recognition, speech corpus, and speech synthesizers were the most popular technologies used in the VSTs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Humans are social creatures and communication via speech enables humans to interact and share thoughts in a way which is not possible for any other species. Speech impairment has been shown to have an adverse impact on learning, literacy, applying knowledge, developing and maintaining relationships with friends and family, and securing and keeping a job (McCormack et al., 2009). Any disorder in speech will degrade a person's role in society, dissuading them from interacting in social activities in a way that exploits their potential. This may lead to other social anxiety disorders and avoidance behavior (Beilby et al., 2012; Hawley et al., 2013; McLeod et al., 2013). Considering the wide range of speech impairments, the prevalence of people with such disorders, and the related undesirable consequences on society, the importance of appropriate and comprehensive rehabilitation programs is evident (Bhattacharyya, 2014). An inquiry published by the Senate Standing Committees on Community Affairs of Australia in 2014 (Report, 2014), for instance, reported an estimation of more than 1.1 million Australians with a communication disorder which is around 5% of the Australia population. Taking advantage of the advances in both software and hardware in computer systems and also the micro-miniaturization and mobility, computer-based speech therapy (CBST) environments, referred to as virtual speech therapists (VSTs), are becoming increasingly popular (Kagohara et al., 2013). Compared with traditional speech therapy, these environments are gaining increasing acceptance because of their versatility, availability, portability, and controllability (Abad et al., 2013; van Vuuren and Cherney, 2014). They can provide a solution to the shortage of speech-language pathologists (SLPs) in schools or in regional areas by reducing the number of face-to-face therapy sessions, resulting in more affordable services as well. They are also capable of delivering impartial judgements as feedback and provide useful automatic profiling materials (Henshaw and Ferguson, 2013; van Vuuren and Cherney, 2014).To the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic review on virtual speech therapists (VSTs). It contains studies that state the intention to test the effects of VST programs on articulation and phonological disorders due to conditions such as dyslalia, aphasia, dysarthria, childhood speech-sound disorder, residual articulation errors (e.g. lisping), or hearing impairment; however, we did not consider other disorders that may affect people's voice and speech such as Alzheimer's disease (Mesulam et al., 2014), autism (Khowaja and Salim, 2013) and Down's syndrome (Laws and Hall, 2014) to exclude individuals with concomitant cognitive impairment that can affect the success rate of articulation and/or phonological therapies and potential ability to engage with VSTs versus face-to-face therapy. To select the related studies, extract the information and present the results, we followed the PRISMA Statement (Liberati et al., 2009) focusing on three research questions: (1) what types of articulation and phonological disorders have VSTs addressed, (2) how effective was the VSTs in the therapy, and (3) what technological elements have been utilized in VST projects.In the next section, we propose a description for VST and several features that a VST should support. This definition will be our reference for the term VST throughout the paper. Section 3 deals with previous reviews on VST. Section 4 describes our method to prepare this systematic review. We study the extracted results in detail in Section 5. An overall discussion on the results is presented in Section 6, and finally Section 7 concludes the paper.Considering different intervention frameworks, an overall regime for the majority of speech-communication therapy starts with the assessment of the patient's strengths and weaknesses. The SLP designs an appropriate therapy program based on the profile of the person under therapy, the disorder, and short and long-term targets. The outcomes of the therapy sessions are evaluated using specific materials and tables (Chien et al., 2014). To the best of our knowledge, no computer-assisted speech therapy system has been developed to deliver the whole cycle of the therapy. The cognitive pattern of SLPs driving and managing the therapy, based on their knowledge and experience, is too complicated to be completely coded into the algorithmic nature of software applications (Wren et al., 2010). However, none of the studied VSTs claim to be an option to replace SLPs in the whole therapy.We did not find a complete and comprehensive definition for VST in the literature on speech pathology and computer science. On one hand, there were many studies on speech pathology using computer-based intervention in which computers were not involved to the degree where they could be referred to as VSTs, and on the other hand, we found many published studies on disordered speech processing, where no formal intervention frameworks were considered. To specify a domain for this systematic review and define a discriminative concept for selecting publications from the existing huge number of studies, we defined VST as:Definition 1An interactive computer program that targets a specific speech deficit11For this systematic review, the speech disorders are limited to articulation and phonological disorders and speech-language problems in hearing-impaired people.based on a predefined therapy program, but not a program designed to facilitate improvement in speech or language skills in learning a non-native language, in the absence of a diagnosed speech or language deficit, or to tutor individuals whose abilities are already within the normal range.In the above definition, a computer refers to any electronic device which uses a processor to run a stored program in its memory; therefore, the platform can be a personal computer (PC) in the form of desktops or laptops, personal digital assistants (PDAs), tablets, or mobile phones. All 20 studies reported PCs as the platform, while two studies reported VSTs that could be run on PDAs as well (Danubianu et al., 2009; Schipor et al., 2010).We carried out a search to find any types of reviews on virtual speech therapy and to the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first systematic review on VSTs. We found several reviews in other related fields which address computer-assisted language learning (Golonka et al., 2012; Henshaw and Ferguson, 2013; Lidström and Hemmingsson, 2014) which may be useful for the reader; however, we do not include them in this paper since the focus is on articulatory and phonological skills in speech pathology.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
