@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A lexicon of multiword expressions for linguistically precise, wide-coverage natural language processing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We show a lexicon of multiword expressions compiled for Japanese processing.111,000 expressions and their exceeding 820,000 notational variants are contained.Syntactic functions, structures and flexibilities of each expression are given in it.Its validity is implied by comparing with N-gram frequency big data: LDC2009T08.The lexicon is compiled manually, i.e., beyond the “empiricism” in these 30 years.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing,Multiword expression (MWE),Lexicon,Linguistic idiosyncrasy,Non-compositionality,Dependency structure,Internal modification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since Sag et al. (2002) highlighted a key problem that had been underappreciated in the past in natural language processing (NLP), namely idiosyncratic multiword expressions (MWEs) such as idioms, quasi-idioms, clichés, quasi-clichés, institutionalized phrases, proverbs and old sayings, and how to deal with them, many attempts have been made to extract these expressions from corpora and construct a lexicon of them. However, no extensive, reliable solution has yet been realized. This paper presents an overview of a comprehensive lexicon of Japanese multiword expressions (Japanese MWE Lexicon: JMWEL), which has been compiled in order to realize linguistically precise and wide-coverage natural Japanese processing systems. The JMWEL is characterized by significant notational, syntactic, and semantic diversity as well as a detailed description of the syntactic functions, structures, and flexibilities of MWEs. The lexicon contains about 111,000 header entries written in kana (phonetic characters) and their almost 820,000 variants written in kana and kanji (ideographic characters). The paper demonstrates the JMWEL's validity, supported mainly by comparing the lexicon with a large-scale Japanese N-gram frequency dataset, namely the LDC2009T08 generated by Google Inc. (Kudo and Kazawa, 2009). The present work is an attempt to provide a tentative answer for Japanese, from outside statistical empiricism, to the question posed by Church (2011): “How many multiword expressions do people know?”

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The fact that linguistically idiosyncratic multiword expressions occur in authentic sentences with unexpectedly high frequency causes serious problems in linguistically comprehensive and precise natural language processing (NLP) based on compositionality. Since Sag et al. (2002), NLP researchers have become aware that proper treatment of such idiosyncratic multiword expressions (MWEs) is one of the most central and intriguing problems in the field.In principle, the nature of the idiosyncrasy of MWEs is twofold: one is idiomaticity, i.e., non-compositionality of meaning; the other is the strong probabilistic affinity between component words. Many attempts have been made to extract these expressions from corpora capturing these properties, mainly using automatic methods that exploit statistical means. However, to our knowledge, no reliable, extensive solution has yet been made available, presumably because of the data-sparseness problem in the corpus-based approach and the difficulty of extracting correctly without human insight. Recognizing the crucial importance of such expressions, one of the authors of the current paper began in the late 1960s to construct for general use a Japanese computational lexicon with comprehensive inclusion of idioms, idiom-like expressions, and probabilistically idiosyncratic expressions. In this paper, we begin with an overview of this lexicon named JMWEL (Japanese MWE Lexicon). The lexicon contains about 111,000 head entries, written in the form of hira-gana (phonetic character) strings, and their almost 820,000 notational variants, i.e., the mixed strings of kana (phonetic characters) and kanji (ideographic characters) which are common in Japanese written texts.As with simplex words, MWEs are generally categorized into function MWEs and content MWEs. Japanese has various types of function MWEs that play important roles similar to the syntacto-semantic roles of case-marking particles or auxiliary verbs. However, most previous MWE studies in NLP have been limited to particular subcategories of content MWEs, such as phrasal verbs, phrasal adverbs, compound verbs, compound nouns, light verb constructions (LVCs) and verb-object idioms. The present paper is partly based on our earlier work (Shudo et al., 2011), focusing on content MWEs, but has been substantially expanded to include function MWEs. Thus, the JMWEL is the combination of two sublexicons: the JMWEL/F containing function MWEs and the JMWEL/C comprising content MWEs. The combined JMWEL is thus a remarkably comprehensive resource awaited for decades in the field of NLP.The most important features of the JMWEL are:1.A large notational, syntactic, and semantic diversity of contained expressions.A detailed description of the syntactic function, and syntactic structure of each entry expression.An indication of the syntactic flexibility of entry expressions (i.e., the possibility of additional, internal modification of constituent words).An all-in-one architecture with uniform encoding schemas for each MWE.In Section 2, we outline the main features of the present study, first presenting a brief summary of significant previous work on this topic. In Section 3, we propose and describe the criteria for selecting MWEs and introduce a number of classes of multiword expressions. In Section 4, we illustrate some important statistical properties of the JMWEL mainly by comparing the lexicon with a large-scale Japanese N-gram frequency dataset, the LDC2009T08, generated by Google Inc. (Kudo and Kazawa, 2009). In Section 5, we outline the format and content of the JMWEL/F, discussing the information on notational variants, syntactic functions, syntactic structures, and semantic labels. In Section 6, we outline the format and content of the JMWEL/C, discussing the information on notational variants, syntactic functions, morphosyntactic structures, contextual conditions, inflectional variants of state-describing expressions, and the syntactic flexibility of MWEs. The paper ends with concluding remarks in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
