@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Synthesis and perception of breathy, normal, and Lombard speech in the presence of noise

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Synthesis of speech on a wide vocal effort continuum and its perception is studied.Breathy, normal, and Lombard speech are recorded, analyzed, and synthesized.Speech is evaluated in silence, and in moderate and extreme street noise.Intelligibility, quality, and suitability of speech was evaluated.Results show that intelligibility and suitability are comparable to natural speech.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Statistical parametric speech synthesis,Adaptation,Vocal effort,Lombard speech,Breathy speech,Intelligibility,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This papers studies the synthesis of speech over a wide vocal effort continuum and its perception in the presence of noise. Three types of speech are recorded and studied along the continuum: breathy, normal, and Lombard speech. Corresponding synthetic voices are created by training and adapting the statistical parametric speech synthesis system GlottHMM. Natural and synthetic speech along the continuum is assessed in listening tests that evaluate the intelligibility, quality, and suitability of speech in three different realistic multichannel noise conditions: silence, moderate street noise, and extreme street noise. The evaluation results show that the synthesized voices with varying vocal effort are rated similarly to their natural counterparts both in terms of intelligibility and suitability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Humans adapt their vocal communication to the acoustic and auditory environment in order to successfully and efficiently deliver a message to a listener without using unnecessary effort. In environments with high levels of interfering noise, more effort is required in order to increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and thereby the intelligibility of speech. This automatic effect is known as the Lombard effect, and the speech produced in such conditions is called Lombard speech (Lombard, 1911) or speech-in-noise (Langner and Black, 2005). When speaking in silence or in low noise conditions, such an effort is not necessary, and the use of a softer voice is considered more appropriate. Thus, depending on the context, natural speech varies greatly from whispering or soft phonation to shouting. This variation in the use of vocal effort is called the vocal effort continuum.Even though the vocal effort continuum is an integral part of human communication, it is typically not utilized in machine-to-human communication. In order to produce contextually appropriate synthetic speech, the auditory environment and context must be taken into account and speech must be produced at the corresponding point in the vocal effort continuum. The modeling of the vocal effort continuum in speech synthesis not only increases the intelligibility of the system in adverse conditions, but also makes the synthetic voice more natural and more appropriate for the listener (Raitio et al., 2011b). Thus, a message delivered through such a text-to-speech (TTS) system is more likely to be comprehended by the listener.Conventionally, the modeling of the vocal effort continuum has been difficult in TTS due to the limitations of the techniques used. In concatenative speech synthesis (Hunt and Black, 1996; Black and Campbell, 1995), large amount of speech data is required to cover sufficient units along the continuum. However, with statistical parametric speech synthesis techniques (Zen et al., 2009), the construction of such a continuum is relatively easy by using adaptation techniques (Yamagishi et al., 2009). One or a few smaller databases recorded along the continuum can be used to adapt the statistical parametric voice to any point on the continuum.GlottHMM (Raitio et al., 2011c) is a statistical speech synthesis system that parametrizes speech by modeling the functioning of the real human speech production mechanism. Recently, GlottHMM was shown to enable synthesizing rather natural sounding and highly intelligible normal and Lombard speech (Raitio et al., 2011b). In the current study, work on GlottHMM is extended by creating a continuum from low to high vocal effort using three databases along the continuum: breathy, normal, and Lombard speech. The intelligibility and contextual appropriateness are evaluated by synthesizing both female and male speech on the continuum in three realistic multichannel noise conditions: silence, moderate street noise, and extreme street noise. Compared to the authors’ previous work on Lombard speech synthesis (e.g. Raitio et al., 2011b), the present investigation encompasses also the study of breathy speech, thus extending the vocal effort continuum to soft phonation. In addition, a more advanced synthesis technique is utilized, and the scope of the present study is also expanded by including female speech and a more extensive and versatile subjective evaluation.The paper is organized as follows. The background of the study is discussed in Section 2 by addressing how vocal effort is reflected in different speech parameters and by describing previous investigations in the study area. Section 3 gives a detailed description of the method used in this study for creating synthetic voices along the vocal effort continuum. Subjective evaluation of the voices in realistic noise environment and the consequent findings are described in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 discusses the relevance and implications of the results and summarizes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study presented a method to create synthetic voices over a wide vocal effort continuum. The method consists of first recording databases of breathy, normal, and Lombard speech and then using statistical parametric speech synthesis and adaptation methods to create desired synthetic voices. The method enables speech synthesis at any arbitrary point on the continuum, even slightly outside the two end points (breathy or Lombard).Natural and synthetic speech along the continuum was assessed in listening tests that evaluated the intelligibility, quality, and suitability in three different realistic multichannel noise conditions: silence, moderate street noise, and extreme street noise. The results of the evaluation show that increased vocal effort improves the intelligibility of speech both for natural and synthetic voices. Although the synthetic voices have generally slightly higher WERs than natural speech, the reproduction of vocal effort in synthesis was successful. In the case of synthetic male Lombard speech, the WER was even lower than with natural Lombard speech. This result is most likely due to the different voice building method; in male Lombard voice, extrapolation was used to achieve a voice that has enough Lombard characteristics. A larger extrapolation coefficient in adaptation caused the synthetic Lombard voice to have a slightly higher level of vocal effort than the original Lombard voice.The results of the subjective evaluation show that the synthesized voices with varying vocal effort are rated very similarly to their natural counterparts. Especially the suitability ratings of natural and synthetic voices have a very high correlation. Only the quality ratings show a strong separation between the natural and synthetic voices. The Lombard voices are generally more suitable to be heard in the presence of noise compared to conventional voices and they are rated very similar to natural Lombard speech, as was also reported in Raitio et al. (2011b). However, the breathy voice was not considered more appropriate nor more pleasant in silence than normal speech. This result is consistent with the results of Traunmüller and Eriksson (2000). They reported that speakers did not change their vocal effort substantially within the common communication distances in everyday conversations. Thus, breathy voice is probably a more socially dependent speaking style. On the other hand, breathy voice is also related to expression of emotions. These contexts were not intended to be reproduced in the current experiment and thus breathy voice was not rated more appropriate than normal voice. Nevertheless, breathy voice was rated as very suitable in silence.The study also showed that the quality of speech does not seem to suffer significantly from adaptation; all the synthetic voices with different vocal effort levels were rated equal in quality in silence. Also an important outcome of the evaluation was that, in the presence of noise, the degradation of speech quality caused by statistical modeling and vocoding loses its significance, thus justifying the use of such synthetic voices in the presence of noise.