@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the use of voice descriptors for glottal source shape parameter estimation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two adaptation variants of the R waveshape parameter regression are presented.We improve glottal source shape parameter estimation by applying Viterbi smoothing.Additionally, we propose a novel method to steer Viterbi smoothing.Viterbi steering is based on exploiting the covariation of other voice descriptors.We evaluate in detail on the 3 CMU Arctic databases BDL, JMK and SLT.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Glottal source,Voice quality,R,d,shape parameter,LF model,Viterbi smoothing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper summarizes the results of our investigations into estimating the shape of the glottal excitation source from speech signals. We employ the Liljencrants–Fant (LF) model describing the glottal flow and its derivative. The one-dimensional glottal source shape parameter Rddescribes the transition in voice quality from a tense to a breathy voice. The parameter Rdhas been derived from a statistical regression of the R waveshape parameters which parameterize the LF model. First, we introduce a variant of our recently proposed adaptation and range extension of the Rdparameter regression. Secondly, we discuss in detail the aspects of estimating the glottal source shape parameter Rdusing the phase minimization paradigm. Based on the analysis of a large number of speech signals we describe the major conditions that are likely to result in erroneous Rdestimates. Based on these findings we investigate into means to increase the robustness of the Rdparameter estimation. We use Viterbi smoothing to suppress unnatural jumps of the estimated Rdparameter contours within short time segments. Additionally, we propose to steer the Viterbi algorithm by exploiting the covariation of other voice descriptors to improve Viterbi smoothing. The novel Viterbi steering is based on a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) that represents the joint density of the voice descriptors and the Open Quotient (OQ) estimated from corresponding electroglottographic (EGG) signals. A conversion function derived from the mixture model predicts OQ from the voice descriptors. Converted to Rdit defines an additional prior probability to adapt the partial probabilities of the Viterbi algorithm accordingly. Finally, we evaluate the performances of the phase minimization based methods using both variants to adapt and extent the Rdregression on one synthetic test set as well as in combination with Viterbi smoothing and each variant of the novel Viterbi steering on one test set of natural speech. The experimental findings exhibit improvements for both Viterbi approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The production of voiced human speech can be approximately modelled by assuming the glottal source as excitation and the vocal tract as filtering element. The convolution of one glottal flow cycle with an impulse train produces the glottal source waveform. The speech production model is completed by the convolution of the glottal excitation source with the impulse responses of the vocal-tract filter (VTF) as well as the radiation filters at lips and nostrils level. To solve the problem of estimating all components that are used in this model from a recorded speech signal a multitude of approaches have been proposed. However, for the moment none of these algorithms is sufficiently robust to allow for a reliable analysis of natural speech. In the following we will address a number of problems and investigate into means to obtain a physiologically consistent estimate of a glottal pulse shape parameter from synthetic and natural speech signals.Voice qualities with a tense/pressed, modal/normal or relaxed/breathy phonation type are distinguishable by different shapes of the deterministic part of the glottal excitation source. Glottal source shapes can be efficiently described by one-dimensional parameterization techniques like the Normalized Amplitude Quotient (NAQ) (Alku et al., 2002) or the Rdparameter (Fant et al., 1994; Fant, 1995). We use the latter to parameterize the LF model (Fant et al., 1985) describing the glottal volume-velocity flow and its derivative.In our experiments with natural speech signals we observed the importance to cover extreme adducted and abducted phonations. This requires to extend the normal Rdrange [0.3, 2.7] (Fant, 1995) to lower Rdvalues up to Rd=0.1 (extremely tense adducted phonation) and to higher Rdvalues up to Rd=6.0 (extremely relaxed abducted phonation). The upper Rdrange (Fant et al., 1994) for Rd>2.7 is required to describe abducted phonations occuring mainly at phoneme transitions as well as at word and speaking pause boundaries. The Rdrange extension covers more glottal source shapes contained in the analyzed speech signal and augments thus the robustness of the Rdestimation.Unfortunately, the equations defining the Rdregression (Fant et al., 1994; Fant, 1995) do not produce smooth contours of the R waveshape parameters when changing Rdcontinuously between the normal and the upper Rdrange. To coherently cover an extended Rdrange [0.1, 6.0] we use our equations recently proposed in Huber et al. (2012). In this study we discuss more in detail the range adaptation of the Rdparameter regression. Additionally, we introduce a second variant of the adapted and extended Rdregression.Moreover, to avoid local instabilities of the Rdestimator we propose to apply Viterbi smoothing (Forney, 1973) since even with the extended Rdrange the results are often perturbed by implausible jumps. However, each of our Rdestimation methods can, under some conditions, be systematically skewed. In addition, Viterbi smoothing cannot correct possibly skewed or biased Rdcontours in longer time segments. Therefore we propose to steer the Viterbi algorithm by exploiting the covariation of other voice descriptors. The latter are used to train GMMs from which a second Rdestimate is predicted. This defines an additional prior Rdprobability used to steer Viterbi smoothing.To estimate Rdwe use the phase minimization based paradigm established in Degottex et al. (2010), Degottex (2010) and Degottex et al. (2011). It is based on minimizing the mean squared phase errors present in the spectrum when matching synthesized glottal formants against a strictly harmonic representation of voiced speech. The Rdvalue that is used to synthesize the glottal formant resulting in the lowest remaining phase error is selected as estimated Rdvalue per frame. The baseline method called MSPD2I1 in Huber et al. (2012) and three recently in Huber et al. (2012) proposed phase minimization variants called MSPD2I0, MSPD2I2 and MSPD2IX are examined together with the two Rdregression variants on an objective evaluation test set of synthetic speech signals.Additionally, we examine the performance of Viterbi smoothing and the novel Viterbi steering using the four phase minimization methods to estimate Rdon natural speech. The evaluation is similar to Fröhlich et al. (2001), Ó Cinnéide (2012) and Kane and Gobl (2013a). It is based on comparing the OQ estimates derived from the Rdcurves (OQRd) with the OQ estimates derived from an analysis of synchronously to the audio waveforms recorded EGG signals (OQEGG). The objective of this study is to determine the best performing parameterization for Viterbi smoothing and the novel Viterbi steering as well as the most robust phase minimization method.The article is organized as follows. The glottal source shape parameter Rdand the LF model parameterization are detailed in Section 3. The basic model for the human speech production is introduced in Section 3. The phase minimization based methods to estimate the Rdparameter are explained in Section 4. The adaptation and the range extension of the Rdparameter regression are discussed in Section 5. The optimized Rdestimation using Viterbi smoothing and the novel Viterbi steering is explained in Section 6. The evaluation results are presented in Section 7 and 8. The summary and the conclusions about this work are given in Section 9.The R waveshape parameters Ra, Rkand Rgparameterize the LF model (Fant et al., 1985, 1994; Fant, 1995). Rais a relative measure of the return phase duration which is correlated to the spectral tilt of natural human speech. Rkis defined by the ratio of the decay time to the rise time of the glottal pulse and describes its asymmetry. Rgis an inverse measure of the glottal pulse rise time (Fant et al., 2000).The parameterization of Rdis determined by means of a statistical regression on values of the R waveshape parameter set (Fant and Liljencrants, 1994; Fant, 1995) that were observed for voiced natural speech (Gobl, 1988; Karlsson, 1990). It is based on exploiting systematic covariations of the R parameters present in the studied speech corpora. Fant introduced in Fant and Liljencrants (1994) and Fant (1995) equations to compute approximate R parameter values from an Rdvalue, denominated with the subscript p as ‘predicted’ R waveshape parameters Rap, Rkp, and Rgp. We employ the term R*pwaveshape parameter set. The equations how to calculate the parameters Rapand Rkpfrom an estimated Rdvalue for the normal Rdrange [0.3, 2.7] are given in Fant (1995). A definition following the explanations given in Fant (1995) how to compute Rgpfor the normal Rdrange can be found in Gobl (2003) and Degottex (2010). The R waveshape parameter set for the upper Rdrange ]2.7, 5] was proposed by Fant in Fant et al. (1994).Fant proposed in Fant (1997) two possibilities to define the open quotient from the R waveshape parameter set. The reduced form OQidefines the open quotient(1)OQi=teT0=(1+Rkp)2·Rgpat the time instant of the maximum negative excitation teof the glottal flow derivative, normalized by the fundamental period T0. The complete form OQetakes additionally into account the time of the return phrase tato define the open quotient(2)OQe=(te+ta)T0=(1+Rkp)2·Rgp+Rap.The Rdparameter is highly correlated with the time instant tecorresponding to OQi. Of high perceptual importance is the ratio of the peak U0 of the glottal volume-velocity flow and the negative peak Eeof the glottal flow derivative (Fant et al., 1994). It can be interpreted as effective pulse declination time Td=Uo/Eeby projecting the instants of both peaks in time to the time axis (Fant, 1997). The Rdparameter can be expressed as F0-normalized glottal waveshape parameter (Fant, 1995)(3)Rd=U0Ee·F0110=10.11·TdT0.The scaling factor 1/110 corresponds to F0=110Hz as a typical average in male speech (Gobl, 1988; Fant, 1997). The direct ratio in amplitude measure relates U0 and Eeto the Td-related Amplitude Quotient (AQ) in Alku and Vilkman (1996) and the Rd-related Normalized Amplitude Quotient (NAQ) in Alku et al. (2002).The deterministic part of the voice production model used for the analysis consists of an extended source-filter model for stationary speech in the spectral domain(4)S(ω)=GRd(ω)·C(ω)·L(ω)·H(ω,F0,D),with ω being the angular frequency. Eq. (4) defines the deterministic part of the voice production model which is composed of a representation of the following components. The shape parameter Rd(Fant, 1995) parameterizes the Liljencrants–Fant (LF) (Fant et al., 1985) pulse model of the glottal flow (GRd(ω)). The vocal tract transfer function is denoted as C(ω). It is assumed to have a minimum phase filter response. The radiation at lips and nostrils level is given by an approximate representation being L(ω)=jω. The harmonic structure parameterized with the fundamental frequency F0 and the delay between pulse sequence and frame center in terms of the phase delay D of the fundamental sinusoid is represented by H(ω, F0, D).The Rdparameter estimation algorithms based on the objective functions for phase minimization that will be used in this study have been completely described in Degottex (2010), Degottex et al. (2011) and Huber et al. (2012). In this section we will only explain the basic scheme required for the following investigations presented in this paper.The algorithm constructs a sinusoidal model of a speech signal frame. It is transformed into a harmonic model describing a single pitch period with a sampling rate that falls onto a harmonic grid at position 2K+2. The harmonic model is assumed to be noise free for each harmonic k up to K. In the experiments presented in this study we determine the highest harmonic sinusoidal partial K by rounding the ratio 8000Hz to F0 to the nearest integer value. According to Eq. (4) the voice production model can then be simplified into(5)S(k)=GRd(k)·C(k)·L(k)·ejkDk∈[0,1,…,K].We use the procedure described in Stylianou (2001) to construct S(k) from a signal frame by means of finding the parameter set having minimum error. The fundamental frequency F0 is estimated using the approach presented in Yeh and Roebel (2004). The algorithm proceeds by means of testing the minimum phase property of the VTF spectrum that is obtained for a sufficiently compact grid of Rdvalues:(6)CˆRd(k)=SkGRd(k)·jk.The residual will represent for the correct Rdparameter the minimum phase transfer function of the vocal tract filter (Degottex et al., 2011). The accurate value of Rdis estimated on the convolutive residual which is described in detail in Degottex et al. (2011) and Huber et al. (2012). The objective function of each phase minimization algorithm estimates Rdby means of minimizing the deviation of the convolutive residual from a minimum phase transfer function An additional constant factor is introduced as error by the simplification of L(k) into jk which does not affect the results. Please note that if the duration of the impulse response of the VTF is close to or above the period the evaluation of the minimum phase property of the VTF becomes problematic. Ambiguous solutions may arise in these cases which may lead to erroneous Rd(contour) estimates. Therefore, higher fundamental frequencies F0 decrease as reported in Huber et al. (2012) the robustness and the accuracy of the Rdestimation.An arbitrary delay D is introduced into the voice production model of Eqs. (4) and (5). It depends on the delay between the pulse position and the frame center in terms of the phase delay D of the fundamental (Huber et al., 2012). A 2nd order difference operator compensates the dependency on the pulse position but introduces a high-pass filter. Thus, subsequent integrations are required to suppress the influence of the high-pass filter.The denomination Mean Squared Phase Differentiation Integration specifies the acronym MSPDI. The number of differentiation or integration steps are indicated by each subsequent number after D and respectively I. The application of first 2 differentiations and then 0, 1, and respectively 2 integration steps on the phase errors of the convolutive residual is contained in the acronyms of the three phase minimization methods MSPD2I0, MSPD2I1, and MSPD2I2 (Huber et al., 2012). The different error measures of this three method are combined by the method MSPD2IX in form of a weighted sum.Fig. 2 of Fant (1995) depicts the contour of the R waveshape parameters and for OQ for the Rdrange [0.3, 5], using only 10 sampling points. It is the sole figure we could find in the literature illustrating these contours established by Fant for both the normal and the upper Rdrange. However, joining the curves for the normal and the upper Rdrange of the parameters Rkp, Rgpand OQ reveals a discontinuity at the interconnection point Rd=2.7, shown in Fig. 1. The parameter contour of OQ for the upper Rdrange (Fant et al., 1994) does not fit to OQ for the normal Rdrange (Fant, 1995), neither to OQein complete form nor to OQiin reduced form (Fant, 1997).In Huber et al. (2012) we proposed an adaptation of the equations defining the computation of the R*pwaveshape parameter set to establish continuous parameter curves when changing Rdbetween both ranges. Additionally, we extended the Rdrange to [0.01, 6] to cover more extreme tense or breathy voice qualities. This requires to set Rapfor Rd<0.21 to zero to avoid a negative return phase ta. We adapt the Rgpcurves of the normal and the upper Rdrange at the minimum of the convex function of Rgpfor the normal Rdrange at Rd=1.8476. In Huber et al. (2012) we rounded this adaptation point to Rd=1.85. An offset of 9.3552×10−3 has to be added to the Rgpcontour of the upper Rdrange to compensate for a remaining difference. Eqs. (7), (8), (9), and (10) follow our adaptation proposed in Huber et al. (2012), denoted here as variant 1. It requires to add an offset of −4.2753×10−2 toRkp2.70of the upper Rdrange.In this paper we introduce adaptation variant 2 which takes into account that according to Fant et al. (1994)Rkpfor the upper Rdrange depends on Rgp. We adapt Rkpto depend on the upper range equation not at Rd=2.7 as defined in Fant et al. (1994) but already at Rd=1.8476 to be more conform with our introduced Rdregression adaptation of Rgpin Huber et al. (2012). Rkpfor adaptation variant 2 is consequently denominated asRkp1.85. An offset compensation of +4.2753×10−2 adaptsRkp1.85at the upper Rdrange accordingly. The contours of our proposed R*pparameter adaptation for both variants are shown in Fig. 2.Please note that the OQ contour of the reduced form OQiderived from the original Rdregression of Fant (1995, 1997) exhibits for the normal Rdrange a maximum of OQi=0.790 already at Rd=2.42 and a lower value of OQi=0.787 at Rd=2.70. But, OQ should increase over the Rdrange from lower values for tense adducted to higher values for breathy abducted phonations (Henrich et al., 1999; Doval et al., 2006). The decrease of OQifor the Rdrange [2.42, 2.70] introduces ambiguities into pulse parameter estimation algorithms. Our Rdregression adaptation variants suppress these ambiguities by establishing a strictly increasing OQicontour over the whole Rdrange. We find for the reduced OQiform defined in Eq. (1) maximum values of OQi=0.90 at Rd=6.0 for variant 1 and OQi=0.95 for variant 2.Our proposed set of equations with a more exact listing of the offset and border values as reported in Huber et al. (2012) to define the adaptation of the Rdwaveshape parameter regression for the extended Rdrange and both adaptation variants is:(7)Rap=0∀0.01≤Rd<0.21(−1+4.8·Rd)100∀0.21≤Rd≤2.70(32.3/Rd)100∀2.70<Rd≤6.00(8)OQupp=1−1(2.17·Rd)∀1.8476≤Rd≤6.00Variant 1:(9)Rkp2.70=(22.4+11.8·Rd)100∀0.01≤Rd≤2.70(2·Rgp·OQupp)−1.0428∀2.70<Rd≤6.00(10)Rgp=0.25·Rkp2.70((0.11·Rd)/(0.5+1.2·Rkp2.70))−Rap∀0.01≤Rd≤1.84769.3552×10−3+596×10−27.96−2·OQupp∀1.8476<Rd≤6.00Variant 2:(11)Rkp1.85=(22.4+11.8·Rd)100∀0.01≤Rd≤1.8476(2·Rgp·OQupp)−0.9572∀1.8476≤Rd≤6.00(12)Rgp=0.25·Rkp1.85((0.11·Rd)/(0.5+1.2·Rkp1.85))−Rap∀0.01≤Rd≤1.84769.3552×10−3+596×10−27.96−2·OQupp∀1.8476<Rd≤6.00In this paper we denominate the well accepted Viterbi algorithm (Forney, 1973) as standard Viterbi smoothing. We distinct it from our novel approach to steer the Viterbi algorithm which we denominate as Viterbi steering accordingly. Viterbi steering exploits the covariation of voice descriptors and voice quality features and will be introduced in Section 6.2.The Rdparameter estimation operates frame-based by selecting at each analysis step the glottal pulse shape corresponding to the lowest remaining residual phase error. Errors may arise from:•Environmental or aspiration noise.General ambiguities from non-linear phase distortions present in the phase residual (Walker and Murphy, 2007; Ó Cinnéide et al., 2011).Situations where the Rdparameterization of the LF model restricts the synthesized and estimated glottal source shapes to an efficient subspace of the LF model parameter space which does not cover the true glottal source contained in the signal.The fact that the precise minimum phase impulse response of the vocal tract cannot be observed with the real cepstrum used by the phase minimization methods (Degottex, 2010) from signal parts where only few stable harmonic partials are available before being masked by noise. This situation occurs predominantly for higher fundamental frequencies, at phoneme transitions or at word and speaking pause boundaries. Moreover, the stationarity of the vocal-tract filter over the length of the analysis window may not be anymore valid at these situations. The phase minimization paradigm (Degottex et al., 2011) may systematically be mislead in such segments.These random influences can partially be reduced by smoothing over time with the Viterbi algorithm, as long as these problems are present over a relatively short time segment. We define the probabilistic model of standard Viterbi smoothing as follows:Observation probabilityP(O|X)We approximate the speech production model using a grid of Rdvalues. Each of theNRdiRdvalues represents a hidden state Xiof a finite-state Markov process that defines the random process to establish the Viterbi algorithm. The phase error of the convolutive residual determines the log-likelihood of the observation. The probabilistic distribution of the observation is configured so that the minimum error of the residual phase ERd=0 has maximum probability. The emitted observations over time span up the lattice over which the Viterbi algorithm determines the optimal path representing the lowest overall error.Transition probabilityP(Xn|Xn−1)The transition probability is described as a function of the Rdparameter slope ΔRd/Δn, with Δnrepresenting the time difference between two analysis frames such that the transition probability can consistently handle different STFT analysis step sizes. The probabilistic distribution of the transition is modelled as Gaussian with zero mean and varianceσT2.Optimal Viterbi smoothing pathThe sequence of observations is segmented into regions of voiced speech. The voicing decision is based on the presence of frames containing valid glottal closure instants (GCI). We employ the SIGMA algorithm (Thomas and Naylor, 2009) to detect the GCIs. The evaluation of this work is restricted to only consider voiced segments having at least five consecutive voiced frames. The Rdsequences having maximum probability are determined by applying the Viterbi algorithm independently to each voiced segment. The log-likelihood of each sequence is(13)L(p)=∑nlog(P(O|Xp(n))·P(Xp(n)|Xp(n−1))),where n is the discrete time and p is a path through the state space of the process. We insert into Eq. (13) the log probability function ERdof the observation probability P(O|X) and scale its distribution with parameter αa. Respectively we include the probabilistic distribution ΔRd/Δnof the transition probability P(Xn|Xn−1) with its scale parameter γgto find(14)L¯(p)=−∑nαa·ERdn+γg·ΔRdΔn+C.The term C is a constant gathering all the contributions of the constant scaling factors of the distributions. This constant term can be ignored by the Viterbi algorithm. We can factor out the scaling factor γgof the log-likelihood of the transition which leaves the parameter α=αa/γgas control parameter. This defines the probability function that is used to perform Viterbi smoothing on all sequences p:(15)L¯¯(p)=−∑nα·ERdn+ΔRdΔn.The experimental setup of Section 8 and the test of Section 8.2.4 examines which value for α creates the best Viterbi smoothing results without the application of the novel Viterbi steering.The novel steering of the Viterbi algorithm constitutes an extension of standard Viterbi smoothing presented in the preceding Section 6.1. Viterbi smoothing can augment the Rdestimation robustness but it cannot correct a systematic bias present in longer time segments. We observe a possible systematic bias for each Rdestimator predominantly in regions where only few stable harmonic sinusoids are available, e.g. at phoneme transitions, word and speaking pause boundaries or for higher fundamental frequencies. In this chapter we investigate into means to correct a possible systematic bias of the Rdestimation in the mentioned problematic regions.The phase minimization paradigm (Degottex et al., 2011) requires a precise estimation of the minimum phase response of the VTF from the observed partials. This condition may not be given if only few stable harmonic sinusoids are observable. Therefore we examined the covariation of additional voice descriptors in terms of a strong positive or negative correlation with a robust OQ estimate. The latter defines partially the shape of the deterministic part of the glottal excitation source. We use the recordings of the speakers BDL, JMK and SLT of the CMU Arctic speech database (Kominek and Black, 2004) which provides simultaneously recorded speech waveforms and EGG signals. To estimate OQ from the corresponding EGG signals we use the DECOM method (Henrich et al., 2004). We derive the OQEGGcontours from all available phrases of all three speakers for all voiced segments using the voicing decision described in Section 6.1.As a proof-of-concept for the possibility to exploit specific speech signal features for the estimation of the Rdparameter we establish a machine learning approach to aid Viterbi smoothing. By using a statistical model we exploit the information measured from additional voice descriptors that are correlated with OQEGG. The utilized features and the OQEGGoriginate both from the same underlying glottal gestures which reflect the physiological mechanisms of human speech production at the larynx (Laver, 1980; Gobl and Chasaide, 1992). A function to predict a second OQ estimate from the voice descriptor set is derived from the trained statistical model.From an extensive analysis of different voice descriptors and combinations in-between them on the CMU databases we determined several voice descriptors. Each selected feature demonstrated to be highly positively correlated with the OQEGGreference, except the Voiced/Unvoiced Frequency (VUF) boundary (Roebel, 2010; Stylianou, 2001) which shares a negative correlation. All proposed voice descriptors are not influenced by a lower number of stable harmonic sinusoids and are therefore well suited to exploit their covariation with the shape of the glottal excitation source.H1–H2: The amplitude difference in dB of the first two harmonic partials H1 and H2 (H1–H2). According to Henrich et al. (2001) it is a reliable spectral correlate of OQ. H1–H2 proved to contribute to the discrimination between breathy and tense voice qualities in Scherer et al. (2012). We measure the relation directly in the magnitude spectrum and do not apply inverse filtering to measure H1*–H2* from the corresponding glottal source signal as in Fant (1995), Hanson (1995) and Henrich et al. (2001). This avoids possible problems with inverse filtering (Rothenberg, 1972; Alku, 1992; Drugman et al., 2008), while the direct measure of H1 in the magnitude spectrum is according to Keating and Esposito (2006) influenced by the first formant F1. To smooth the direct H1–H2 measure we apply a median filter of order 5.3 MFCC bins: With the sum of the 3rd, 4th and 6th MFCC bin (Ellis, 2005) we seek to model the spectral slope (Scherer et al., 2012) or the spectral tilt (Murphy, 2001) to reflect the amplitude continuation of the spectral envelope which is correlated to a tense, modal or breathy phonation. However, neither a regression on the slope of the spectral peaks as in Scherer et al. (2012) nor the utilization of the spectral tilt measures R14 or R24 as in Murphy (2001) nor other related measurements were able to achieve an overall correlation to the OQEGGreference being as high and robust as the summed combination of the 3rd, 4th and 6th MFCC bin (Ellis, 2005). Apparently, the proposed summation of the three MFCC bins is less influenced by the variation of the vocal tract formants.F0: The fundamental frequency F0 shares according to Fant et al. (1994) systematic dependencies with U0 and Ee, and hence with Rd. U0 has a close relation to the amplitude of the voice fundamental while Eeis the basic determinant of formant amplitudes. In Laver (1968) the laryngeal settings are categorized into phonation types, pitch ranges and loudness ranges. Therefore, the larynx as physiological foundation of the voice not just originates the different voice qualities but serves as well as a determinant of F0 and sound pressure level (SPL) contours. Speakers favour a particular pitch range for each phonation type (Laver, 1968; Childers and Lee, 1991). However, different studies (Laver, 1980; Maddieson and Hess, 1987; Hanson et al., 1990) have shown that the relation between pitch and different phonation types is speaker-dependent. We estimate F0 using the monophonic F0 implementation based on the principles described in Yeh and Roebel (2004).VUF: The Voiced/Unvoiced Frequency (VUF) boundary (Roebel, 2010; Stylianou, 2001) correlates with the voiced/unvoiced energy ratio and the bandwidth of the glottal formant. The VUF is thus related to Eewhich determines the amount of generated sinusoidal energy (Fant, 1995), and the noise energy level which originates from turbulences created at the glottis, for example due to an imperfect glottal closure and a high airflow rate (Childers and Lee, 1991). A tense voice parameterized by low Rdvalues originates a broad excitation spectrum with sinusoidal content present in higher frequency regions, while a relaxed voice parameterized by higher Rdvalues originates only few harmonic sinusoidal partials in lower frequency regions (Fant, 1995). The VUF is estimated by a) detecting sinusoidal peaks (Zivanovic et al., 2004), b) measuring the sinusoid vs. noise energy ratio (SNE) in sub-bands of fixed and constant bandwidth, c) selecting as VUF the highest band for that the SNE is above a given threshold. The measured VUF contour is smoothed using a median filter covering the time of half the length of the analysis window.The establishment of a formula that uses the proposed voice descriptor feature set to predict Rdis very difficult. For example, the empiric formulation of Fant (1997) expresses the relation between the H1*-H2* measure with OQ by an exponential function. It implies a lower limit of −5.73dB for H1*–H2* at OQ=0.3. However, from an informal examination on the CMU Arctic databases we measure H1–H2 and OQEGGvalues below both limits. In Henrich et al. (2001) and Doval et al. (2006) it is shown that the relation between H1*–H2* and OQ is additionally influenced by the asymmetry coefficient amrepresenting the skewness of the glottal pulse. Moreover, recent studies (Kreiman et al., 2012, 2012b; Chen et al., 2013) suggest that the relationship is speaker-dependent, leading to positive and negative correlations, or situations where one parameter remains relatively constant while the other varies considerably.We could not find an analytic formulation expressing the relation of OQ with any of the other voice descriptors in the literature, and as well not for the complete set of the proposed voice descriptors. Thus, we employ a GMM to model the relation of the covariation feature set with the OQEGGreference. A similar approach using Gaussian mixture modelling to predict glottal source signals has already been proposed in Thomas et al. (2009) and Gudnason et al. (2012). Per speaker we train one GMM on the covariation feature combination estimated on each voiced segment of the other two speaker databases and their corresponding OQEGGestimates.We distinct two feature sets:Model 1 refers to the utilization of the voice descriptors H1–H2, VUF and the sum of the 3rd, 4th and 6th MFCC bin.Model 2 additionally includes the fundamental frequency F0.The GMM modelling is based on a modified version of the Voice Conversion system described in Lanchantin and Rodet (2010, 2011). We express the joint probability density p(M, R|λ(Z)) of the feature set M (either model 1 or 2) and the OQEGGreference R, conditioned on the model parameters λ with the weights αq, mean vectorμqZand the covariance matricesΣqZover Q mixture sequences as(16)p(M,R|λ(Z))=∑q=1Qαq·N(M,R;μq(Z),Σq(Z)).Q is set to 6 mixture components for model 1, and to respectively 8 mixture components for model 2. The function(17)F(m)=∑q=1Qpqmm·[μqr+ΣqrmΣqmm−1(m−μqm)]for the prediction of OQGMMfrom a feature set is derived from the trained GMM model, with the conjoint data set of M and R being expressed byZ={zk},zk=[mkTrkT]T.The prediction of OQGMMvalues from each GMM model per speaker defines the additional prior probability Mpriorfor the Viterbi algorithm. It is used to steer the standard Viterbi smoothing approach according to the prediction of OQGMMusing either the feature set for model 1 or model 2.PriorRdprobabilityP(X|M)The OQGMMprediction is transformed into the Rdvalue range (RdGMM). It is modelled as Gaussian with varianceσP2. It defines an additional prior Rdprobability from theRdGMMprediction given the voice descriptor feature set M that is used to steer the Viterbi algorithm. A possibly occurring mean offset between the predictedRdGMMand the estimated Rdof each phase minimization method has to be compensated per voiced segment. The probabilistic modelling Mprioris configured to have maximum probability if the value ofRdGMMand the Rdvalue estimated by our phase minimization methods are congruent to each other. Differences between predicted and estimated Rdlead to lower Mpriorprobabilities.Optimal Viterbi steering pathWe insert the prior Rdprobability into Eq. (13) to find(18)L(p)=∑nlog(P(ORd|Xp(n))·P(Xp(n)|M(n))·P(Xp(n)|Xp(n−1))).In the following we define the scale parameters of the log-likelihood function L of the distribution. Parameter αarepresents the scale parameter of the error functionERdof the observation probabilityORd. The log-likelihood Mpriorof the prior Rdprobability is scaled by parameter βb. Parameter γgscales the distribution of the transition probability P(Xn|Xn−1).(19)L¯(p)=−∑nαa·ERdn+βb·Mpriorn+γg·ΔRdΔn+CAgain, the constant term C can be ignored by the Viterbi algorithm. We factor out the scaling factor γgto define the scaling factors α=αa/γgand β=βb/γgas control parameters of the Viterbi steering approach on all sequences p.(20)L¯¯(p)=−∑nα·ERdn+β·Mpriorn+ΔRdΔnThe evaluation tests for the proposed novel Viterbi steering of Eq. (20) are presented and discussed in Section 8. We examine which values for α and β result in the highest performance to estimate Rdcontours on natural speech using as evaluation data set the three CMU Arctic databases.In this section we examine the performance of phase minimization algorithms to estimate Rdon a synthetic test set similar to Degottex et al. (2011) and Huber et al. (2012). The four Rdestimation methods MSPD2I0, MSPD2I1, MSPD2I2 and MSPD2IX (Huber et al., 2012) are evaluated with respect to their dependency on some characteristics present in speech signals. The influences of the fundamental frequency F0, the number of observed stable harmonic sinusoids N, different configurations of the vocal tract filter, the glottal source noise nσgand the environmental noise nσeare investigated.The estimation of glottal source characteristics depends as reported in Drugman et al. (2008) on the position of the glottal formant Fgto the VTF formants, notably to the first formant F1. To simulate the VTF influence we synthesize 16 synthetic vowels CVTFusing Maeda's digital simulator (Maeda, 1982). Each CVTFis convolved with each glottal formant parameterized by an Rdvalue within the range [0.1, 6] on a grid of step size Rd=0.1. We synthesize at 10 different F0 values within the range [80, 293]Hz. 6 Gaussian noise levels n between [−50, −25]dB are added to the voiced signal. Each noise level is applied to both noise influences nσg[n] and nσe[n].The ratio of VUF boundary to F0 determines how many stable harmonic sinusoids N are observable before being masked by noise. We evaluate the influence of N for the range [3, 8] by restricting the Rdestimation algorithm to observe N partials. Additionally we simulate the position of the window with respect to the period in time on a grid of 4 different delays ϕ* covering the range [−0.5·T, 0.5·T]. One synthetic test per Rdregression variant and phase minimization method consists in total of 1,382,400 single tests (60 Rd· 10 F0 · 6 nσg[n] / nσe[n] · 16 CVTF· 6 N · 4 ϕ· values). The results are presented in a compact manner by adding up the bias and standard deviation of the Rdestimation errors as a function of the examined parameter.Fig. 3illustrates how higher fundamental frequencies F0 lead to a constant increase in the error amount of wrongly estimated Rdglottal source pulse shapes. The Rdregression adaptation variant 2 (depicted for each method in dash-dotted lines) performs in general worse than variant 1 (solid lines). The overall best performing methods over the complete frequency range of 80 to 293Hz are MSPD2IX and MSPD2I2 under the utilization of adaptation variant 1. The method MSPD2IX using the less performant adaptation variant 2 even outperforms the baseline method MSPD2I1 using adaptation variant 1 over the complete F0 range. The latter yields overall similar results as MSPD2I2 using the less good performing adaptation variant 2. The method MSPD2I0 performs in general worst. The Rdestimation results are relatively robust up to frequencies of ∼150–200Hz, above which more severe perturbations of the estimation accuracy are apparent (Drugman et al., 2008; Huber et al., 2012). If the duration of the impulse response of the VTF is close to or above the period the estimation of the VTF minimum phase property is less accurate. This leads to less robust estimations with increasing F0.The same effect of a comparatively lower number of stable harmonic sinusoids N and a less accurate estimation of the minimum phase property of the VTF is introduced with higher noise levels. We simulate these influences by varying N, shown in Fig. 4. For the variation of N depicted in Fig. 4 we set both the glottal source noise nσgand the environmental noise nσeto n=1. This corresponds to the lowest noise level of −50dB used in our synthetic test. With this low noise level the characteristics of natural speech are simulated but the misleading interference of noise is suppressed which is required to properly examine a different number of stable harmonic sinusoids N.Since MSPD2I0 demonstrated to perform worst it is omitted in Fig. 4 to provide a more clear presentation. The best performing methods MSPD2IX and MSPD2I1 indicate most obviously that a lower number of stable harmonic sinusoids N leads to a higher amount of Rdestimation errors. However, each method exhibits the lowest overall cumulated amount of Rdestimation errors at N=7. This is justified by the fact that the harmonic sinusoids of N≥8 may already be covered by noise at level −50dB. Again, the Rdadaptation variant 2 leads to less good Rdestimation results than adaptation variant 1.Fig. 5exemplifies how the objective function of each phase minimization based method is dependent on the phase differences of the LF model parameterized by different Rdvalues over the complete Rdrange. A too high self-similarity of LF models parameterized by an R waveshape parameter set being close in value leaves the estimation method with little differentiation possibilities. Fig. 5 indicates that glottal source shapes in the Rdrange of [0.3, 2] are more dissimilar to each other than the glottal source shapes of the upper Rdrange of ]2.7, 6] or tense phonations parameterized by our proposed Rdrange extension below the lower limit Rd<0.3 of the normal Rdrange.This reflects to a certain extent the observations concluded with the Rdconfusion matrices of Huber et al. (2012): Broader error valleys of each objective function for phase minimization lead to a less robust Rdestimation. The conceptual equivalent to the Rdconfusion matrices is shown by Fig. 7. The Rdestimation error surfaces are spanned up frame-wise over time and reflect the behaviour of each objective function.Finally we conclude that the overall less good Rdestimation performance of Rdadaptation variant 2 results from the fact that it renders higher OQ values which proves for this synthetic test to suffer from a higher error rate. When examining Fig. 5 by visual inspection it is apparent that the phase minimization methods using adaptation variant 2 perform better for lower Rdvalues in the normal Rdrange [0.3, 2.7] and gradually underperform more for higher Rdvalues above Rd>2.7.In this section we evaluate the four phase minimization methods (Huber et al., 2012) on natural speech. Each method has estimated Rdon each voiced segment of all available phrases of the CMU Arctic speech databases (Kominek and Black, 2004) BDL, JMK, and SLT.No reliable ground truth is known to date to evaluate the estimation of glottal source parameters from natural human speech. A measurement of the movement of the glottal folds is given by EGG signals recorded simultaneously to speech signals. It is considered to form the basis of a more robust glottal source parameter estimation compared to estimations based on recorded audio signals of human speech. EGG waveforms are regarded as valid indicator of the vocal fold contact area to measure glottal activity (Baer et al., 1983). The differentiated EGG (DEGG) can be considered as reliable indicator of the time instant of glottal closing (GCI) (Henrich et al., 2004).However, it is not yet validated that the glottal opening and closing events extracted from an EGG signal reflect exactly the time instants of the physiological contact of the vocal folds muscles (Baer et al., 1983; Childers et al., 1986; Orlikoff, 1991; Marasek, 1997). Furthermore, the EGG-based time instants may not exactly match the start and end of the glottal air flow (Fröhlich et al., 2001). Moreover, despite the general acceptance to provide more reliable estimates, the EGG-based measurements can still be inaccurate (Colton and Conture, 1990; Marasek, 1997; Sapienza et al., 1998). For example, a reliable and exact determination of the time instant of glottal opening (GOI) can be more difficult and erroneous (Baken, 1992; Baer et al., 1983) than the estimation of GCIs. The GOI estimation on EGG waveforms can especially be error-prone if strands of mucus bridge the glottis while the opening of the vocal folds (Titze and Talkin, 1979; Childers et al., 1986; Dromey et al., 1992). Other vocal fold vibratory motions than the modal register may lead as well to less robust estimations (Childers et al., 1986). The study of Herbst (2004) illustrates that each analyzed algorithm to estimate OQ from an EGG signal introduces a bias, either by having to choose a certain threshold to measure the short-term peak-to-peak amplitudes of the EGG signal or by having to pick one of possibly several peaks from the DEGG signal appearing while the glottal opening phase (Childers and Lee, 1991).Despite the mentioned problems we choose as test scenario for natural human speech the OQ comparison using EGG and audio recordings because of its relatively easy setup and reasonable reliability in contrast to other methods. We compare the OQ contours derived from each Rdestimate (OQRd) with the OQ contours estimated by the DECOM method (Henrich et al., 2004) on the corresponding EGG signals (OQEGG). The example of Fig. 6shows the curves of the frame-based Rdestimator in light dotted, after Viterbi smoothing in dark solid, the from it derivedOQRdcontour in dashed and the OQEGGreference in dash-dotted lines. We observe as in Childers and Lee (1991) and Herbst (2004) a general non-constant offset between theOQRdand OQEGGcontours due to the mentioned systematic bias of the OQ estimation by the EGG-based technique. We choose the phrase shown in Fig. 6 to exemplify that the EGG measure can be error-prone as the physiologically impossible jumps of OQEGGaround 1.3 and 1.95s illustrate.Fig. 7depicts examples of how Viterbi smoothing suppresses unnatural jumps of each frame-based Rdestimator. The error residuals of the phase error functions of each phase minimization based objective functions generate an error curve per frame. Frames over time span up the illustrated error surfaces. Completely black segments are set as unvoiced. The error lattices of the voiced segments define the observation probability of the the noise-robust Viterbi algorithm. The Viterbi algorithm computes the highest probability which best explains the observation sequence O and which determines the optimal state sequence X per voiced segment. The optimal state sequences X of glottal source shapes Rdof the standard Viterbi smoothing approach are illustrated as dashed gray lines. The initial Rdestimates are illustrated in white colour and reflect the Rdvalue where the frame-based phase error function exhibits the lowest error. Tiny error valleys in black around these initial Rdestimates are very well developed for the methods MSPD2IX and MSPD2I2. MSPD2IX has distinctive error hills which are plotted with a brighter contrast and leaves little confusing side minima to its objective function to minimize the error of the phase error function. MSPD2I2 shares are similarly robust error surface for this natural speech example of speaker BDL. Side minima appear e.g. at ∼0.6s at Rd≈2.0 and Rd≈5.0. Since these side minima are higher than the overall lowest error value, no unnatural jumps occur. The latter are present for MSPD2I2 at ∼2.9s where the initial Rdestimate in white jumps three times from the apparently true Rdcontour and its obvious error valley at Rd≈1.0 to misleading side minima at Rd≈2.5 and Rd≈4.0. The method MSPD2I1 exhibits as well clear valleys which are broader and less distinctive than the ones of MSPD2IX and MSPD2I2. Its occurring side minima are more developed which results in a higher probability to produce physiological impossible jumps of the Rdestimate. MSPD2I1 suffers for example at ∼0.6s from a misleading side minima which got suppressed for MSPD2IX and MSPD2I2. The reason why the method MSPD2I0 performs worst is apparent when examining its error surface shown in Fig. 7. No clear error valleys in black for the underlying glottal excitation source contained in the analyzed speech phrase are established. Its original Rdestimates in white and the smoothed Rdcontours in gray do not follow the true shape of the glottal source.The Pearson product moment correlation coefficient r (Pearson, 1900) normalizes the co-variance ofOQRdand OQEGGby the product of its standard deviations. We use r as correlation metric to examine how well theOQRdderived from each Rdestimate correlates with OQEGG. It is defined in the range [−1, 1] with −1 expressing a perfectly negative correlation, +1 a perfectly positive correlation, and 0 no correlation.We use the root-mean-square error (rmse) as second evaluation metric. To avoid any impact of the bias that is present in the EGG-based OQ estimate we remove the mean between the OQ estimates for each voiced segment. Please note that the calculation of Pearsons product moment correlation coefficient r implies the removal of a possible bias between both evaluated sample distributions. In the following, the Rd adaptation variants 1 and 2 from Section 5 are evaluated for each test scenario.The results for each objective function estimating Rdwithout applying Viterbi smoothing are listed in Tables 1 and 2. The method MSPD2I2 achieves the highest correlation and a smaller error between its estimated and the EGG-based OQ contours. The results of MSPD2IX and MSPD2I1 are slightly worse. MSPD2I0 performs worst by a substantial margin. Please note that the baseline method MSPD2I1 of Degottex et al. (2011) constraint to the normal Rdrange [0.3, 2.7] and without Viterbi smoothing achieves r=0.23. By visual inspection its estimated Rdand OQ curves appear to fluctuate more. However, due to the constraint range the failures are less weighted. The Rdadaptation variant 2 obtains better results for each method than variant 1. Since variant 2 outperforms variant 1 for each test set on natural speech, we will only show Rdadaptation variant 2 in the following.We examined different moving average filter types to evaluate their ability to suppress the local instabilities of each frame-based Rdestimator that are present within short time segments. The best results were achieved by a median filter with order 5, shown in Table 3. It improves the estimated Rdcontours of each phase minimization method only to a marginal extent. In the following we will investigate into means of establishing a more robust correction of the estimated Rdcontours by utilizing different configurations of the Viterbi algorithm.The results of Viterbi smoothing without the utilization of the novel OQGMMprediction-based Viterbi steering are summarized in Table 4. The improvements of applying a dynamic programming algorithm to smooth the estimated glottal source shape curves are apparent when comparing its results with the ones of Tables 1 and 2 (without the application of Viterbi smoothing) and Table 3 (smoothing with a moving average filter). Especially the best performing methods MSPD2IX, MSPD2I2 and MSPD2I1 benefit enormously from Viterbi smoothing while the improvements for the worst method MSPD2IO are limited.The r-correlation maxima and the rmse-error minima are shown per method. The corresponding α-values to scale the observation probability of Viterbi smoothing are given in parentheses. One global maximum for the correlation r and one global minimum for the error rmse exists for each method concerning the Viterbi parameter α. The r-maxima occur for α in the range [0.07, 0.13] and lie with a maximal offset of α=0.10 to the rmse-minima.In the following we will present the results of the novel steering of Viterbi smoothing in the same manner. Each algorithm variant exhibits one global r-maxima and one global rmse-minima concerning the scaling parameters α or respectively β of the Viterbi algorithm, introduced in Section 6. The objective of the following tests is to determine the best overall values a) for the scaling parameters α and β of Viterbi smoothing and steering, and b) for each phase minimization method.We evaluate the GMM-based OQ prediction by means of a 3-fold leave-one-out cross-validation on the training and test sets corresponding to each speaker database. The rmse-error and the r-correlation of each OQGMMprediction model using the feature set of model 1 are shown in Table 5 and respectively the feature set of model 2 in Table 6.Please note that by the straightforward training of a GMM using the OQEGGcontours and the corresponding voice descriptor feature combination of two speakers, the predicted OQGMMcontours for the test set on the third speaker achieves correlations for rtestshown in Tables 5 and 6being close to the performance of the signal processing based Rdestimation methods. The strong potential of the proposed OQ prediction using voice descriptors is indicated by the corresponding results on the training test set rtrainingwhich by far outperform the results discussed in the following tests. However, the remaining principal problem is to overcome the speaker-dependency of the modelling to generalize better over speaker specific characteristics. This could be solved by employing more speaker databases and a more sophisticated handling of the feature combination.The higher prediction accuracies of the training versus the test sets for the speakers JMK and SLT indicate that the utilized feature sets do not generalize optimally on their data sets. However, the OQGMMprediction model 2 for speaker BDL is able to predict more precise OQGMMcontours on the BDL test set than on its own training set of the speakers JMK and SLT. In Section 8.4 we will analyze more in detail the intrinsic characteristics of each speaker data set of the utilized CMU Arctic databases by examining the r-correlation and rmse-error results per speaker.In the following sections we will examine the utilization of the models trained to evaluate the test set errors. This reflects the later application of the proposed novel Viterbi steering to estimate Rdwhere no training data will be available.(a) Viterbi steering,OQGMMprediction model 1The results of the four phase minimization methods using Viterbi smoothing and its auxiliary GMM prediction based Viterbi steering for model 1 of Section 6 are shown in Table 7.For this test we vary the Viterbi scaling parameter α while fixing the Viterbi scale β to a constant value of 1.0. The values in parentheses illustrate the α values of the r-maxima and rmse-minima. A one-way ANOVA comparison (Hill and Lewicki, 2007) with the correlation results of standard Viterbi smoothing presented in the Table 4 validates that the improvements of Viterbi steering using model 1 are statistically significant for method MSPD2I1 at significance level 1% (p-value <0.01) and for method MSPD2I0 at significance level 0.1% (p-value <0.001). No statistically significant improvements could be validated for the methods MSPD2IX and MSPD2I2.A one-way ANOVA analysis of the corresponding optimization of the scale parameter β for Viterbi steering demonstrated that β has no statistically significant influence on each of the evaluated phase minimization variants.(b) Viterbi steering,OQGMMprediction model 2To further augment the robustness of the glottal source shape parameter estimation on natural speech we use as additional voice descriptor the fundamental frequency F0 for the OQGMMmodel 2. A comparison of each rmse-error and each r-correlation value for each speaker between Table 5 (model 1, without F0) and Table 6 (model 2, with F0) shows that the consideration of F0 contributes to the robustness of the GMM estimation model to predict OQGMM. On the one hand, only the correlation on the data test set for speaker JMK deteriorates to a marginal extent from r=0.3500 for model 1 to r=0.3478 for model 2. On the other hand, the correlation on the data test set for speaker BDL augments by employing F0 from r=0.4705 for model 1 to r=0.7285 for model 2 to a significant extent.Again, we fix the scale parameter β to 1.0 and vary the scale parameter α. Table 8illustrates the results of the α-optimization for the Viterbi steering of model 2. We execute the one-way ANOVA analysis between the results of the corresponding test to optimize the scale parameter α of Viterbi steering using model 1 (illustrated in Table 7) with Viterbi steering using model 2 (listed in Table 8). It demonstrates improvements to a statistically significant extent for method MSPD2I2 at significance level 5% (p-value <0.05), for method MSPD2I1 at significance level 1% (p-value <0.01), and for method MSPD2I0 again at significance level 0.1% (p-value <0.001). No statistically significant improvement could be measured for the overall best performing method MSPD2IX when using model 2 compared to using model 1. Please note that the r-correlation improved for MSPD2IX slightly from r=0.5348 (listed in Table 7) to r=0.5437 (listed in Table 8).Fixing the determined α-maxima in terms of the measured r-correlations, depicted in Table 8, to optimize the scale parameter β, whose results are illustrated in Table 9, does not exhibit statistically significant improvements. We show the β-optimization of Table 9 depicting the overall best performance of the OQ comparison test to motivate the following one-way ANOVA analysis. It validates that applying Viterbi steering is statistically significant for all evaluated phase minimization variants. We compare the evaluation distributions of standard Viterbi smoothing (illustrated in Table 4) with the overall best Viterbi steering results, the β-optimization of model 2 (shown in Table 9). The improvements are statistically significant for method MSPD2IX at significance level 5% (p-value <0.05), for method MSPD2I2 at significance level 10% (p-value <0.1), as well as for the methods MSPD2I1 and MSPD2I0 at significance level 0.1% (p-value <0.001).(c) Viterbi steering summaryThe utilization of the novel Viterbi steering approach to augment the robustness of Viterbi smoothing when applied to smooth the contours of the estimated glottal source shape parameters demonstrates improvements to a statistically significant extent when comparing the results with standard Viterbi smoothing a) for both employed GMM models, b) for each of the four Rdestimation methods and c) for both Rdregression adaptation variants. Please note that we did only discuss the results for Rdregression adaptation variants 2 while variant 1 proved to be as well statistically significant.The usage of the OQGMMprediction model 2 outperforms model 1 for each Rdestimator and each Rdregression variant on each evaluation metric (r-correlation and rmse-error). This suggests that the fundamental frequency F0 as the first dimension of prosody (Fant and Liljencrants, 1981) not just correlates with the contours of parameterized glottal excitation source shapes but can be exploited as covariation feature additionally to the other proposed voice descriptors to estimate glottal source parameters. However, this has to be evaluated on a bigger test set employing more speakers to evaluate the speaker-dependency.The Rdregression adaptation variant 2 achieves the overall better results compared to variant 1 on the OQ comparison test. The overall best performing Rdestimation method is MSPD2IX, followed by MSPD2I2, MSPD2I1 and respectively MSPD2I0. It was shown that the worst performing method MSPD2I0 profits the most from the auxiliary steering of the Viterbi algorithm while the best performing method MSPD2IX profits the least from Viterbi steering. On the one hand, this suggests that the OQGMMprediction exploiting the covariation of other voice descriptors is a relatively robust manner to be used for glottal source parameter estimation. On the other hand, this conclusion indicates that MSPD2IX and to some extent the good performing methods MSPD2I2 and MSPD2I1 may already estimate comparatively robust Rdcurves by the utilization of standard Viterbi smoothing without the additional steering. As discussed in Section 8.2 and shown with Fig. 6, the EGG-based technique is not error-free. The employed evaluation metric is therefore limited and prevents the potential to achieve higher correlation and lower error measurements.We examine the results of the following other glottal source estimation algorithms on the same test set of the CMU Arctic databases to provide an objective comparison to our algorithm variants by employing the same evaluation metric. We denominate the method introduced in Kane et al. (2012), Kane and Gobl (2013a) as DyProg-LF. It is based on first estimating GCI locations using a modified version of the SE-DREAMS approach of Drugman et al. (2012b) described in Kane and Gobl (2013a). Then the iterative adaptive inverse filtering method (Alku, 1992) is used to compute the glottal source signals on which error values are calculated. The error criteria are based on measuring the correlation of synthesized LF model pulses parameterized over a grid of Rdvalues and matched to the source signals in the spectral and the time domain. The temporal and spectral errors form a target cost. The continuity of the parameter trajectories over frames forms a transition cost. Both costs are utilized in a dynamic programming algorithm to increase the robustness of the DyProg-LF algorithm to estimate the Rdcontour of the glottal excitation source over time.The second method chosen for comparison is called Strik-LF, proposed in Strik et al. (1993), Strik (1998). For this work the same glottal source signals estimated by the inverse filtering method of the DyProg-LF algorithm were utilized. The method estimates LF model parameters and its amplitude measures directly on glottal source signals in the time domain. A two part optimization procedure improves the LF model parameter estimation. First, the Nelder and Mead simplex optimization algorithm is applied being insensitive to large errors in the initialization. Second, a steepest descent optimization algorithm further refines the LF model fit.As third method we evaluate the power spectrum based method of Ó Cinnéide (2012) called PowRd. To determine Rdit avoids unreliable phase information and high frequency information which can be corrupted by noise. A relative Itakura Saito error criterion determines the filter order and the coefficients of the vocal tract filter as well as the scale parameter Eeof the included LF voice source model. The PowRd method is based on the SIM approach of Fröhlich et al. (2001) and is thus as well robust to phase disturbances and the window position of the analyzed frame with respect to the period in time.For all three methods we measure as well a non-constant offset between the OQ curves estimated from the audio recordings versus the OQ curves derived from the corresponding EGG recordings. It confirms the observation of a possible systematic OQ bias by the EGG-based method discussed in Section 8.1.However, since the author of Kane and Gobl (2013a) provided the OQ estimation results for the methods Strik-LF and DyProg-LF using the method described in Drugman et al. (2012b) to estimate the required GCIs, the GCI time instants and voicing decisions were not completely congruent to our DECOM basis, leading to a slightly different evaluation metric. The Strik-LF and the DyProg-LF method are based on the same estimation of the glottal source signal from inverse filtering. The better performance of the DyProg-LF compared to the Strik-LF method shown in Table 10confirms to a certain extent the conclusions we drew from our results. Dynamic programming immensely improves the results of glottal source shape parameter estimation by suppressing unnatural jumps in short-time segments. On the other hand, parts of the better performance of the DyProg-LF method can be assigned to the conjoint optimization in the time and the spectral domain.The evaluated variant of the PowRd method is frame-based without the utilization of a dynamic programming approach. Its estimation robustness could therefore be augmented by employing as well a smoothing algorithm.The preceding sections of the OQ comparison test illustrated the performance of the employed algorithms generalized over different speakers to estimate Rd. However, it is of vital interest to examine the estimation robustness of each method in dependency to the intrinsic peculiarities of each speaker.Table 11shows the mean μ and standard deviation σ for the fundamental frequency F0 and the OQ derived from the EGG signals, measured on all voiced segments and all phrases for each speaker. The two male speakers BDL and JMK exhibit a comparatively lower mean pitchF0μthan the female speaker SLT. Speaker JMK has the least variance σ2 in his F0 contour while SLT and BDL exhibit larger F0 variations. This observation for BDL corroborates the findings from Drugman et al. (2012). JMK demonstrates the highest mean open quotientOQEGGμwith the lowest variance σ2.From informal listening tests we perceive that BDL has a very clear articulation and speaks with a high vocal effort. BDL has an overall modal phonation but uses quite often creaky voice offsets (Drugman et al., 2012) which may degrade the Rdestimation accuracy due to the non-modal phonation of the creaky voice quality. JMK has a clear articulation but speaks with a weak vocal effort which partially results in a whispered (Obin, 2012) and creaky voice quality (Titze, 1994) with a bit of nasality. SLT under-articulates and speaks with a low vocal effort. She has a rather modal phonation with a bit of nasality. All three speakers talk with a low pulmonic pressure (Catford, 1977). BDL and to a less extent STL exhibit a pressed voice quality. JMK in contrary has a more relaxed voice quality which can lead according to the evaluation of the synthetic test set in Section 7 to a less good glottal source shape parameter estimation performance.In the following sections we will examine the OQ comparison test results per speaker. We will only show the results for each speaker using Rdadaptation variant 2 which demonstrates the better performance throughout the whole OQ comparison test. To restrict the huge amount of test results conducted for this study we only discuss important findings based on Pearsons correlation metric r.The values which will be given in the following sections to each correlation r in parenthesis correspond to the following indices of each algorithmic variant:1Without Viterbi smoothing.Standard Viterbi smoothing.Viterbi steering, model 1, α variation, β fixation.Viterbi steering, model 2, α variation, β fixation.The results of the synthetic test discussed in Section 7 associate higher F0 values as well as higher Rdand OQ values with a lower performance in estimating glottal source shape parameters. Speaker BDL presents among the three evaluated speakers the highest r-correlations, listed in Table 12. He has the lowest mean open quotientOQEGGμand a comparatively low F0. His high vocal effort and clear articulation contribute to the ease of estimating his glottal excitation source shape. The utilization of F0 within the voice descriptor set for prediction model 2 contributes to the Rdestimation robustness for speaker BDL. The other three methods DyProg-LF, Strik-LF, and PowRd achieve as well the best Rdestimation results for speaker BDL, illustrated in Table 13.Speaker JMK poses not before expected problems to estimate the shape of his glottal excitation source. Despite the lowest mean F0 of all speakers his high mean open quotientOQEGGμmeasured and his weak vocal effort perceived lead to less good Rdestimation results. By informal visual inspection of the OQEGGcontours for speaker JMK we realize that the EGG-based OQ reference exhibits as well more physiological impossible movements compared to the other speakers OQEGG.The Viterbi steering of model 2 using F0 demonstrates only slight improvements for all but the worst performing method MSPD2I0, depicted in Table 14. The latter does not benefit from the exploitation of the F0-covariation but from the utilization of Viterbi steering in general.Moreover, the three methods employed for comparison have even greater problems to establish performant Rdestimation results for speaker JMK, shown in Table 15. The PowRd method without the utilization of dynamic programming achieves a similar performance to the DyProg-LF approach using dynamic programming.The Rdestimation results lie for speaker SLT with the proportionally highestF0μin the range measured for speaker JMK.No method could benefit from F0 as voice descriptor for the OQGMMprediction model 2, shown in Table 16. It indicates that the rather large difference inF0μbetween the employed training data set of the male speakers BDL and JMK versus the test data set for the female speaker SLT requires more speaker data with higher pitch to train the prediction model 2 using F0.The DyProg-LF method listed in Table 17benefits from the application of its used dynamic programming approach and achieves nearly a similar performance compared to the phase minimization variants using Viterbi smoothing and steering.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
From the works presented in this study we draw the following conclusions: It has been shown that the exploitation of covariation voice features is able to increase the robustness of the estimation of glottal excitation source parameters describing the voice quality of human speech for the employed data set. The utilization of a machine learning approach to classify voice qualities is able to aid and to possibly outperform the signal processing paradigms known to date to estimate glottal source signals in the future, if implemented in a more sophisticated manner. For example, the voice descriptor F0 for the OQGMMprediction model 2 was utilized without a possible normalization by its meanF0μper speaker. It could especially render for speaker SLT with the highestF0μa better estimation performance for Viterbi steering of model 2. Also, the performance of the novel Viterbi steering approach using the GMM-based Rd-predictor should improve by the utilization of a bigger database covering more speaker characteristics in the trained models. Moreover, additional voice quality features as in Kane and Gobl (2013b), the consideration of an intensity measure like a relative SPL originated form the subglottal pressure (Laver, 1968; Vilkman et al., 1999; Fant and Kruckenberg, 2005) or the Harmonic Richness Factor (HRF) (Childers and Lee, 1991) to reflect a higher sinusoidal signal content related to tense voices and a higher noise signal content related to breathy voices should contribute to the OQGMMprediction robustness. The importance to smooth estimated glottal source parameters over time was validated as in Vincent et al. (2007), Kane et al. (2012) and Kane and Gobl (2013b) by the experimental findings. The proposed steering and the utilization of standard Viterbi smoothing demonstrates improvements to a statistically significant extent. The methods MSPD2I2 and MSPD2IX proposed in our last study (Huber et al., 2012) perform better than their corresponding baseline approach MSPD2I1 established in the preceding works (Degottex et al., 2010, 2011; Degottex, 2010). The estimation of voice qualities with a comparatively higher relaxed phonation and less vocal effort poses more difficulties. The Rdadaptation variant 2 proposed in this study showed to provide a more precise distinction between glottal source shapes for the normal Rdrange. This can be the reason for its better performance on the test set of natural human speech where values of Rdoccur predominantly in the normal Rdrange.