@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A time–frequency analysis approach for condition monitoring of a wind turbine gearbox under varying load conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The effect of time varying loads of wind turbine gearboxes is examined.The study uses both simulated and real wind turbine gearbox data.The Teager Energy Operator is applied as an alternative AM–FM separation method.The mode mixing problem of the EMD is discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Condition monitoring,Wind turbine gearboxes,Time-varying loads,Empirical mode decomposition,Teager–Kaiser energy operator,Hilbert transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper deals with the condition monitoring of wind turbine gearboxes under varying operating conditions. Generally, gearbox systems include nonlinearities so a simplified nonlinear gear model is developed, on which the time–frequency analysis method proposed is first applied for the easiest understanding of the challenges faced. The effect of varying loads is examined in the simulations and later on in real wind turbine gearbox experimental data. The Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) method is used to decompose the vibration signals into meaningful signal components associated with specific frequency bands of the signal. The mode mixing problem of the EMD is examined in the simulation part and the results in that part of the paper suggest that further research might be of interest in condition monitoring terms. For the amplitude–frequency demodulation of the signal components produced, the Hilbert Transform (HT) is used as a standard method. In addition, the Teager–Kaiser energy operator (TKEO), combined with an energy separation algorithm, is a recent alternative method, the performance of which is tested in the paper too. The results show that the TKEO approach is a promising alternative to the HT, since it can improve the estimation of the instantaneous spectral characteristics of the vibration data under certain conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Statistics show that the most frequent damages observed in wind turbine systems are in the electrical control components, the blades, the main bearing and the gearboxes and that the most responsible component for downtime is the gearbox [1]. This means that condition monitoring of wind turbine gearboxes is a necessary practice. Vibration analysis is a commonly used approach for condition monitoring, and is based on the idea that the rotating machinery has a specific vibration signature for their standard condition that changes with the development of damage. Vibration based condition monitoring should be a relatively easy task for gearboxes operating under steady conditions, as offered in laboratory environments. Unfortunately, working wind turbine gearboxes have a vibration signature that is also affected by the environmental conditions (temperature variations, wind turbulence) and time varying loads under which they operate. The load variations of wind turbine gearboxes are far from smooth and are usually nondeterministic, and since vibration signals tend to change with speed and load of the gearbox, varying loads (and/or speeds) might not necessarily generate stationary signals. In this case, false alarms could be created in the signals and damage features might be influenced by the variations. This makes condition monitoring of wind turbine gearboxes a difficult matter, since the signal processing that is required in this case should overcome the problem of nonstationary influences in the signals not related to damage.In general, condition monitoring methods do not differ from other damage detection methods apart from the fact that one knows a priori about the frequency bands related to damage, for the gears, bearings and other components. A review of methods used for damage detection is given in Ref. [2]. In the early studies, some of the conventional techniques used for condition monitoring were the probability distribution characteristics of the vibration such as the skewness and kurtosis [3], the Fourier spectrum and modulation sidebands [4,5] and Cepstrum analysis [6]. These methods have been widely used for condition monitoring and were proved to work well under certain conditions, such as steady loading of the gearboxes. Unfortunately, in the majority of cases, gearbox signals have spectral characteristics that vary with time. This variation with time cannot be obtained using the Fourier transform as this transform simply expands a signal as a linear combination of single frequencies that exist over all time. This drawback was the motivation for greater attention to time–frequency analysis methods such as the Wigner–Ville distribution [7], wavelet analysis [8] and cyclostationary analysis [9]. Wavelet analysis is probably the most popular technique [10], but has the drawback that the basis functions of the decompositions are fixed and do not necessarily match the varying nature of the signals. Relatively recently, the Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) method was also proposed [11]. Since then, attention was placed on applying the EMD in the damage detection field [12,13]. This technique decomposes the signal into a number of meaningful signal components, representing simple oscillatory modes matched to the specific data. This is one of the basic advantages of the EMD when compared to other time–frequency methods. After decomposing the vibration signal, the instantaneous frequency and amplitude of each component can be estimated, most commonly by applying the Hilbert Transform (HT). An alternative approach in order to obtain the instantaneous characteristics of the decomposed vibration signals is to use an energy tracking operator to estimate the energy of the signal, as developed by Teager [14,15] but first introduced by Kaiser [16,17], and then use an energy separation algorithm for the estimation of the amplitude envelope and instantaneous frequency of each signal component produced by the EMD method. This method promises high resolution and low computational power. That is why some primary studies occurred in the literature [18–20] associated with the application of this energy operator in machinery fault diagnosis. Ref. [20] focuses on the application of this operator to the fault diagnosis of wind turbine planetary gearboxes, where the challenge was the planetary gearbox signals׳ spectral complexity under steady load conditions. What the current study aims for is to show how the challenges of load variations of wind turbine gearbox vibration signals can be overcome using a time–frequency approach, in this case the EMD method in combination with the TKEO and an energy separation algorithm. The experimental datasets used in this paper are obtained from a real wind turbine gearbox in operation, as opposed to many other studies. In addition, only few previous studies go beyond the application of new time–frequency methods in condition monitoring and examine the effects of time varying loads in the gearbox vibration signals when trying to do condition monitoring [21–24]. In these references the use of the signal RMS value, or the arithmetic sum of the amplitudes of the spectral gearmesh components as well as the use of the short-time Fourier transform and the Wigner–Ville distribution is applied.It is difficult to state all the advantages and disadvantages of the EMD method and other filter bank methods, such as the short time Fourier Transform (STFT) or the wavelets mainly because of their different theoretical background. It is also reasonable to claim that for different situations different methods might work better than the others. The wavelet transform and the STFT are similar in a mathematical sense, both methods decompose the signal to be analysed by convolving it with a predefined “basis”, e.g. the mother wavelet for the case of the wavelet transform. It might be easier to compare these two methods in that sense, although this is beyond the purpose of the current paper, since it is the EMD method that the authors are currently examining. Considering the case of the wavelet transform the choice of mother wavelets might influence the results of the analysis. Also assumption of stationarity during a time-span of the mother wavelet (or window for the STFT) might inhibit the estimation of the subtle changes in the frequencies. On the contrary, the EMD method is not exactly equivalent on its own to the previously mentioned methods. The procedure of the decomposition, not mathematically proven yet, is based on the adaptation to the geometric characteristics of the signal, without leaving the time-domain. The method decomposes the signal by using information related to the local characteristics for each time-scale of the signal. Being an adaptive method, it represents better the mechanisms hidden in the data, no pre-defined basis function or mother wavelet is needed during the process since the decomposition is completely data-driven. The adaptivity is therefore one major advantage of the method and also in some cases its ability to better estimate subtle changes in the signal, due to the fact that one does not use any kind of window function in the process and does not need to assume stationarity for any time-span of the signal. As for the case of every method of course, the EMD has some limitations too. The most known ones are the end effect and the mode mixing problems that will be described in more detail in the next sections of the paper.The structure of the paper is going to be the following: in Section 2 the gear model used in the simulation part of the work will be thoroughly described, as well as the type of loads and the kind of fault introduced to the model. The purpose of the simulation is basically to test how the time frequency analysis method proposed corresponds to the simulated signals in order to have an initial idea of the kind of damage features one should expect in the real wind turbine data. In addition, the effect of load variation in the signals will be examined in this simulation environment, which is more controlled and easier to understand. In Section 3 the experimental datasets from the wind turbine gearbox vibration data will be presented. The two signal processing methods, the standard Hilbert–Huang Transform, and the alternative approach proposed in the current paper, consisting of combination of the EMD, the TKEO and an energy separation algorithm, will be explained in detail in Section 4. Finally, the results for both the simulation and the experimental data will be discussed in Section 5. Conclusions will be given in Section 6.Many scientific teams have examined the subject of dynamic gear behaviour and various mathematical gear models have been developed in the past. These models can be categorised into linear time-varying and nonlinear time-varying. Linear gear models are arguably too simplified, and for the sake of accuracy nonlinear models should be used. This is because the geometrical characteristics of the gear teeth affect the dynamics of the gear systems. The varying gear tooth contact ratio causes a variation of the gear meshing stiffness. Gear backlash, which is introduced either intentionally at the design stages or caused by wear, makes the equations of motion of gear systems nonlinear. This is the reason why many of the analytical gear models developed served in the study of nonlinearities in gears, parametric friction instabilities, nonlinear frequency response of gears and bifurcation [25–32]. Reviews of gear dynamic models are given in the references [33–35].A generic geared-rotor bearing system consisting of a spur gear pair mounted on flexible shafts, supported by rolling element bearings [27], is shown in Fig. 1a. The governing equations of motion can be given in matrix form as(1)[M¯]{q¯¨(t¯)}+[C¯]{q¯̇(t¯)}+[K¯(t¯)]{f(q¯(t¯))}={F¯(t¯)}where[M¯]is the time-invariant mass matrix,{q¯(t¯)}is the displacement vector,[C¯]is the damping matrix (assumed to be time-invariant),[K¯(t¯)]is the stiffness matrix considered to be periodically time-varying,{f(q¯(t¯))}is a nonlinear displacement vector that includes the radial clearances in bearings and gear backlash and{F¯(t¯)}is the external torque and internal static transmission error excitations.The system of Fig. 1a can be described by the two-degree-of-freedom nonlinear model shown in Fig. 1b, which has been used in previous studies [27,29]. Its validity has also been compared with experimental results [27]. The gear mesh is described by a nonlinear displacement functionB(x¯(t¯))with time-varying stiffnessK¯(t¯)and linear viscous dampingC¯. The bearings and shafts that support the gears are assumed to be rigid. The input torque fluctuation is included but the output torque is considered to be constant:T¯1(t¯)=Tte(t¯)+T¯1var(t¯)andT¯2(t¯)=T¯2m, withT¯2mbeing the mean output torque,Tte(t¯)being related to transmission error excitations andT¯1var(t¯)being the external input torque fluctuation. In this simulationT¯1(t¯)includes a torque produced using the FAST design code [36], and will be discussed in detail in a following section. The main purpose of introducing this input to the model is to add loads similar to those that wind turbine gearboxes experience; previous models of gears have not included such a characteristic.The equations of motion describing the gear model given in the general form are the following, whereϕi(t¯)is the torsional displacement, riis the base radius, and Iiis the mass moment of inertia of the ithgear:(2)I1ϕ1¨(t¯)+r1C¯x¯̇(t¯)+r1B(x¯(t¯))K¯(t¯)=T¯1(t¯)(3)I2ϕ2¨(t¯)−r2C¯x¯̇(t¯)−r2B(x¯(t¯))K¯(t¯)=−T¯2(t¯)The gear meshing frequency is given by(4)Ω¯mesh=n1Ω¯1=n2Ω¯2where n1 and n2 stand for the number of teeth of each gear andΩ¯iis the rotating frequency of the ith gear.The meshing stiffness and the static transmission error are assumed to be periodic functions of time and can be expressed in a Fourier series form:(5)K¯(t¯)=K¯(t¯+2πΩ¯mesh)=K¯m+∑j=1∞K¯jcos(jΩ¯mesht¯+ϕkj)(6)e¯(t¯)=e¯(t¯+2πΩ¯mesh)=∑j=1∞e¯jcos(jΩ¯mesht¯+ϕej)In the above equationsK¯m,K¯jande¯jare the constant Fourier coefficients.The transmission error is the difference between the actual position of the output gear and the position it would occupy if the gear drive were manufactured perfectly. The transmission error in two meshing gears consists mainly of pitch error, profile error and run-out error.The mesh stiffness on the other hand varies due to the transition from single to double and from double to single pairs of teeth in contact.The nonlinear displacement function related to the gear backlash nonlinearity is given by(7)B(x¯(t¯))={x¯(t¯)−bg,x¯(t¯)≥bg0,−bg<x¯(t¯)<bgx¯(t¯)+bg,x¯(t¯)≤−bgwhere 2bgrepresents the total gear backlash. The gear tooth backlash function controls the contact between teeth and allows for the fact that occasionally contact is lost.The difference between the dynamic transmission error and the static transmission error is described as(8)x¯(t¯)=r1ϕ1(t¯)−r2ϕ2(t¯)−e¯(t¯)Eq. (8) helps in describing the original model with a single equation of motion:(9)mcx¯¨(t¯)+C¯x¯̇(t¯)+K¯(t¯)B(x¯(t¯))=F¯m+F¯te(t¯)+F¯var(t¯)where(10)mc=I1I2I1r22+I2r12(11)F¯m=T¯1mr1=T¯2mr2(12)F¯te(t¯)=−mce¯¨(t¯)Now concerning the equations related to the FAST loads input in the model:F¯var(t¯)=r1I2T¯1var(t¯)−r2I1T¯2(t¯)I1r22+I2r12,T¯1var(t¯)=T¯FAST−T¯FASTmean,T¯1m=T¯FASTmean. A specific section later on discusses these loads.The equations of motion of the model can be written in a dimensionless form by letting:x(t¯)=x¯(t¯)bg,wn=K¯mmc,z=C¯2mcK¯m,K(t¯)=K¯(t¯)K¯m,Fte(t¯)=F¯te(t¯)mcbgwn2=−mce¯¨(t¯)mcbgwn2,Fvar(t¯)=F¯var(t¯)mcbgwn2andt=wnt¯. Furthermore, the nondimensional excitation frequency isΩmesh=Ω¯meshwn. Fig. 2a shows the diagram of the gear meshing stiffness (nondimensional values) and Fig. 2b the diagram of the static transmission error (STE), used in the gear model simulations.The nondimensional form of the original equation of motion is(13)x¨(t)+2zẋ(t)+K(t)B(x(t))=Fm+Fte(t)+Fvar(t)where the backlash function can be expressed as(14)B(x(t))={x(t)−1,x(t)≥10,−1<x(t)<1x(t)+1,x(t)≤−1Fig. 3shows the form of backlash function.The model was encoded in MATLAB functions and was solved with the ode45 differential equation solver, with a fixed step of 0.015. The parameters used for the simulation are chosen according to Ref. [27] and are described in Table 1.In the simulations presented in the paper for the case where no varying load is applied to the model, single-sided tooth impact was observed (tooth separation without back collision, backlash region−1<x(t)<1) for 20.6% of the simulation samples. For the case where the simulated varying load was applied, single-sided tooth separation was observed again for 23.5% of the simulation samples. In neither case was double-sided impact observed (backlash regionx(t)<−1). The time varying meshing stiffness, due to the Fourier series form expression chosen to describe it and the non-dimensional values given in Table 1 (k1=0.2, k2=0.1 and k3=0.05), has a ±35% variation around the mean. Due to the stiffness variations, the natural frequency varies also, in the range0.8<wn<1.16,(wn=K¯mmc). The dimensionless meshing frequency is given in Table 1 and is 0.5; so a 0.015 (dimensionless) time step corresponds to a sampling frequency of 67 (dimensionless) and is certainly large enough to prevent aliasing.Changing certain values according to Ref. [27] could help in order to have stronger nonlinear behaviour, but that was not the primary concern of the study.Despite the fact that this is a very simple wind turbine gearbox model, since it consists of only one spur gear stage and it ignores the bearing vibrations, when in reality wind turbine gearboxes usually consist of three gear stages with one or two being planetary stages and the rest, parallel spur gear stages, it is sufficient for the current study. The reason is that the time frequency method that will be used further on has the ability to isolate specific frequency components of the signal. More gear stages in a vibration signal would mean more frequency components at different frequency bands. Damage at a specific gear stage would therefore be “shown” in the vibration signal associated with the meshing frequency and its harmonics of the gear stage examined. What is important in this gear model, and the main purpose of the simulations, is to show how time varying loads, similar to those observed in wind turbines, influence the vibration signals, and how the time–frequency analysis methods proposed help in this case to overcome the challenges produced by these influences.Certain types of gear tooth damage cause a reduction in gear tooth stiffness. These types of damage can be modelled here by reducing the stiffness function periodically, with the period of the rotation of the gear with the damaged tooth. Tooth stiffness is a key parameter in gear dynamics concerning the determination of factors such as dynamic tooth loads and the vibration characteristics of the geared system. The changes due to the tooth damage appear in the vibration spectrum as amplitude and phase modulations [37–40]. This has an effect on the acceleration waveform as well, to be more specific a local increase of the acceleration magnitude can be observed. Briefly, the mechanism is the following: when the defected tooth accepts the load, the crack opens gradually with the increase of load up to the point where the load reaches its maximum level. Then, the load is gradually transferred to nearby teeth and the crack steadily closes. This occurs once per shaft revolution.Concerning the simulation here, a gear fault was introduced into the model by reducing the meshing stiffnessK¯(t¯)to 99.7% of the nominal gear meshing stiffness for 5 degrees of the shaft rotation, periodically, for every rotation of the damaged gear. This was done in previous studies also, see Ref. [23]. Fig. 4shows the reduction in stiffness for a tooth with crack. Fig. 5a and b shows the acceleration diagrams of the simulation for the undamaged and damaged cases, for steady load conditions, respectively. The Fourier spectra of these diagrams are shown in Fig. 6, in log scale. The difference due to damage is subtle at the frequency range 0–2. More apparent differences can be seen at the higher frequencies (3–4).Wind turbines undergo time-varying and transient load conditions, with load changes being far from smooth. To simulate these load conditions a series of wind turbine aerodynamics codes, developed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL, US), is used in this work [36]. FAST is a design code written in FORTRAN that can be used to simulate wind turbine systems under a variety of operating conditions, including conditions related to wind speed variation and turbulence, and generator start-ups and shut-downs. Fig. 7shows the load case examined in this work. Turbulent wind conditions are considered, with a wind speed of 12m/s.The load variation is shown in the time–acceleration plot as an increase in the acceleration amplitude when the sudden load changes occur. Such a load creates a nonstationarity in the acceleration signal. Concerning the values of this input torque simulated in FAST,T¯1var(t¯), they correspond to a different system produced in FAST. For this reason it was important to do a normalisation before inserting the load to the simulated gear model. The equations of this normalisation are described in Section 2.1. The acceleration diagram for the undamaged and damaged cases and varying load conditions is shown in Fig. 8a and b, respectively. The influence of the time-varying load on the acceleration diagrams can be observed since the signals have become evidently less smooth and more nonstationary. Moreover, the effect of damage is harder to see in the acceleration signal, Fig. 8a and b, compared to the previous example. The Fourier spectra of these signals for the damaged and the undamaged cases are also given in Fig. 9. The differences here between the damaged and undamaged cases are not as clear as for the steady load simulation given in Fig. 6. Under these circumstances, it is even harder to detect damage in its early stages using conventional vibration monitoring techniques. The results presented are a very basic comparison of course and cannot represent or prove that every conventional vibration monitoring technique, such as for example the time synchronous averaging, would fail. These figures succeed more in showing that varying operational effects can affect the signals in a way that could inhibit the performance of such techniques that might still work of course for some cases-but not always. That is why a time–frequency approach is proposed in this paper.The experimental measurements have been taken by members of the company EC Grupa, a Polish engineering company that maintains the wind turbine system from which the gearbox vibration datasets were obtained. The experimental gearbox vibration data analysed in this study come from an NEG Micon NM 1000/60 wind turbine in Germany. The gearbox is described by the kinematic scheme shown in Fig. 10.The measurements come from a single accelerometer with sampling frequency 25000Hz.Acceleration signals from this gearbox were obtained at three different dates: 31/10/2009, 11/2/2010 and 4/4/2010. The first dataset was described as the one to be used as a reference. This is sensible because we expect damage to increase. If it transpired that the system was undamaged at the first test, then one would see clear signatures of damage in the later data. If it transpired that damage was already present during the first test, one can still use it as a reference and look for increased signatures of damage. The second dataset was considered to be one describing an early tooth damage of the gearbox and the third one was the dataset of the vibration signal with progressed tooth damage in the gearbox.The kinematic scheme of the gearbox shows that it has two parallel spur gear stages and one planetary gear stage. When a gearbox has two or more mesh stages, signal processing of its vibration signals becomes more challenging because there are multiple shaft speeds and meshing frequencies apart from noise. This means, for the case of gear tooth damage, that one should examine the specific frequencies associated with the meshing frequencies and their harmonics of the specific stages that include the damaged gears. Without analysing the data, one could probably make an initial assumption of the frequency bands that will be affected by damage, based on the fact that the damage was located at the second parallel gear stage, as will be briefly described later on. In this case, one should expect damage features at the highest frequency components (excluding noise) of the signal since the second parallel gear stage includes the fast generator shaft and because generally, it is known that it is in the harmonics of the meshing frequency of the damaged gear pair that damage features occur.Fig. 11a shows the time domain signal of the dataset obtained on 4/4/2010. The gearbox examined has a 28-tooth gear (smaller wheel) that meshes with an 86-tooth gear (bigger wheel) at the parallel gear stage II, which is the one at which damage was observed.The frequency components of the signal, as shown in the acceleration spectrum, Fig. 11b and c, are the following:•15.07, 30.14Hz: relative meshing frequency and second harmonic of the planetary gear,89.535, 179.07Hz: relative meshing frequency and second harmonic of the 1st parallel gear stage,352, 705, 1410, 2115, 2820Hz: relative meshing frequency and harmonics of the 2nd parallel gear stage,Noise.In order to isolate the frequencies of interest when analysing a signal, bandpass filtering is needed. In this way one can exclude parts of the vibration signal not associated with the particular component examined, in this case the gearbox. Also for the case of multistage gearboxes, where the vibration signals are influenced by the meshing frequencies and harmonics of the different stages, the application of filter banks is useful. The EMD method decomposes the time-domain signal into a set of signal components (oscillatory functions) in the time-domain called intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). Each IMF is associated with a frequency band of the signal, so the EMD method is a filter bank method, and can be used for isolating unwanted components of the signals being analysed. By definition, an IMF should satisfy the following conditions [11]: (a) the number of extrema and the number of zero crossings over the entire length of the IMF must be equal or differ at most by one, and (b) at any point, the mean value of the envelope defined by the local maxima and the envelope defined by the local minima is zero. The EMD method is well known now, but the theory is added here for completeness. The EMD decomposition procedure for extracting an IMF is called the sifting process and consists of the following steps:1.The local maxima and the local minima of the signal x(t) are found.All the local maxima of the signal are connected to form the upper envelope u(t), and all the local minima of the envelope are connected to form the lower envelope l(t). This connection is usually made using a cubic spline interpolation scheme.The mean valuem1(t)is defined as(15)m1(t)=l(t)+u(t)2and the first possible componenth1(t)is given by the equation:(16)h1(t)=x(t)−m1(t)The componenth1(t)is accepted as the first component only if it satisfies the conditions to be an IMF. If it is not an IMF, the sifting process is followed untilh1(t)satisfies the conditions to be an IMF. During this processh1(t)is treated as the new dataset, which means that its upper and lower envelopes are formed and the mean value of these envelopes,m11(t), is used to calculate a new componenth11(t)hoping that it satisfies the IMF criteria:(17)h11(t)=x(t)−m11(t)The sifting process is repeated until the componenth1k(t)is accepted as an IMF of the signal x(t) and is denoted by(18)C1(t)=h1k(t)=h1(k−1)(t)−m1k()The first IMF is subtracted from the signalx(t)resulting in the residual signal:(19)r1(t)=x(t)−C1(t)During the sifting process the signalx(t)is decomposed into a finite number N of intrinsic mode functions and as a result N residual signals are obtained. The residual signal is used as the new dataset for subsequent steps in the sifting process. The process ends when the last residual signal,rN(t), is obtained and is a constant or a monotonic function. The original signalx(t)can be exactly reconstructed as the sum:(20)x(t)=∑j=1NCj(t)+rN(t)What will follow is not a theoretical explanation of mode mixing but rather an attempt to show when this phenomenon is encountered and how it is exhibited when implementing the EMD algorithm, using some simulation examples. Since there exists no theoretical explanation of the EMD, it is quite difficult to theoretically explain the mode mixing problem as well, but one can find studies [43] that try to give a more in-depth description of the phenomenon, and propose solutions to it. As a matter of fact the simulations that follow are similar to some of the examples given in [43], but adjusted in order to fit the analysis of the kind of signals that will be encountered later when analysing the gearbox datasets. In that paper, in an attempt to explain the mode mixing problem, data with a fundamental part as a low-frequency sinusoidal wave with unit amplitude were simulated and at the three middle crests of the low-frequency wave, high-frequency intermittent oscillations with an amplitude of 0.1 were added riding on the fundamental. It was shown there that because of the steps followed in the sifting process, the upper envelope resembled neither the upper envelope of the fundamental (which is a flat line at unity) nor the upper one of the intermittent oscillations (which is supposed to be the fundamental outside intermittent areas). Rather, the envelope is a mixture of the envelopes of the fundamental and of the intermittent signals that led to a distorted envelope mean. Consequently, the initial guess of the first IMF is the mixture of both the low-frequency fundamental and the high-frequency intermittent waves.Here, a similar simulation will be shown. The lower frequency fundamental wave will be a sum of sinusoids, described by the equation:(21)xfundamental=0.5t+sin(πt)+sin(2πt)+sin(6πt)while the intermittencies will be Gaussian modulated sinusoidal pulses (Matlab function gauspuls.m). The reason for using such kinds of intermittencies in the simulation is the fact that gear tooth damage and damage in bearings most of the time appear as impulses in the acceleration signals. At first the simulation was performed without adding any noise to the signals. The first steps of the sifting process are shown in Fig. 12a and b, where it is obvious that what was claimed in [43] is true. When intermittencies exist in the simulation, the mean envelope produced is influenced by both the envelopes of the fundamental and of the intermittent signals, indeed.What will be of more interest in the current study though is the number of IMFs produced in the simulations shown, and the frequency content of each IMF. The PSD of the signals of Fig. 12a and b is given in Fig. 13. It is apparent there that the signal contains a lower frequency fundamental, for both simulations. The existence of intermittencies creates some higher frequency components.After having applied the EMD algorithm to the previously described datasets, two IMFs were produced for the first case and six IMFs for the second case. This is shown in Fig. 14. The number of IMFs produced is influenced by the number of runs of the algorithm needed by the sifting process in order to produce a residual signal (constant or monotonic function). Since mode mixing is the reason that, during the first steps of the sifting process, the highest and the lowest frequency parts of the signal are not separated, but carried to the next modes, one could claim that mode mixing could be an additional cause of the production of a higher number of IMFs during the decomposition, which is actually confirmed by the simulation results given in this case.The result of mode mixing is shown in Fig. 15, where the PSD of the first three IMFs is given. It is obvious here that these modes have coinciding frequency bands.This problem seems to be improved when using a “noise assisted data analysis” approach to the EMD, the EEMD, and several studies have focused on the performance of the EMD algorithm in the presence of noise [42,43]. If the decomposition is insensitive to added noise of small amplitude and bears only little changes, the decomposition is generally considered stable and satisfies a condition of physical uniqueness; otherwise, the decomposition is unstable and does not satisfy physical uniqueness. From this point of view, the EMD is considered an unstable technique, since due to mode mixing any perturbation can result in a new set of IMFs as reported by [44].For deterministic signals, or even signals that may contain a reasonable amount of noise, any additional signal components should result in additional IMFs (since the algorithm is supposed to decompose signals into meaningful signal components). If the signal does not contain any noise and has intermittencies then an even higher number of IMFs may be expected. Because noise seems to solve the mode mixing problem, if the signal contains a certain amount of noise, then additional components would result in additional IMFs again, but this time mode mixing might or might not occur, depending on the amount of noise the signal contains and the kind of intermittency. This will be shown in the next simulation.When analysing Gaussian noise with the EMD, it is worth mentioning that as already proved in [42], the EMD method acts as a dyadic filter bank. In that case a specific number of IMFs with overlapping frequency bands will be created. It is generally believed that noise seems to fix the mode-mixing problem.In order to have an idea of how the addition of noise would influence the previous simulation, the same datasets are used again in the next example (Fig. 16a and b), this time after having added Gaussian noise with a signal-to-noise ratio of 25. The number of IMFs produced in this case is six for the first dataset that does not contain the intermittencies and eight for the dataset that contains the intermittencies (Fig. 17). The existence of noise in the datasets has generated a higher number of IMFs, but again for the signal that contained the Gaussian modulated sinusoidal pulses (intermittencies), even more IMFs were produced. So it is obvious from this simulation that the addition of impulses in a signal that contains a little noise will add again additional IMFs when performing the EMD method. The results presented here are by no means a theoretical proof of how the mode mixing problem affects the EMD analysis in general, as already mentioned previously reference [43] has a more theoretically thorough explanation of the mode mixing effect on the EMD method. The simulations presented here rather aim to help the reader understand what could be expected in the results of the analysis in this case. Finally, Fig. 18shows the frequency content of the first three IMFs of the second signal, the one that contains the intermittencies, in order to have a better demonstration of different frequency regions that these three IMFs contain.The HT is a linear integral operator [45]. It can be used to derive the analytic representation of the signal x(t). The analytic representation of a signal facilitates the estimation of the instantaneous amplitude and frequency of a signal. Ifx^(t)is the HT of a signalx(t), it is given by the equation:(22)x^(t)=1π∫−∞+∞x(τ)t−τdτ=x(t)⁎1πtGivenx^(t)one can define the analytic signal, introduced by [46](23)z(t)=x(t)+ix^(t)where i is the imaginary unit. Eq. (23) written in its exponential form gives(24)z(t)=A(t)eiθ(t)whereA(t)is the amplitude envelope of the signal, andθ(t)the instantaneous phase. The amplitude envelope and instantaneous phase can be estimated by the following equations:(25)A(t)=x(t)2+x^(t)2=|z(t)|(26)θ(t)=arctan(x^(t)/x(t))=arg(z(t))and the instantaneous frequency can be calculated by(27)f(t)=12πdθ(t)dtCombining the above with the EMD method, the original signal x(t) can be expressed as(28)x(t)=Re{∑j=1NAj(t)ei∫ωj(t)dt}where j is the number of the IMFs and Ajand ωjthe instantaneous amplitude and instantaneous angular frequency of thejthIMF, respectively. The above equation enables one to represent the instantaneous amplitude and instantaneous frequency of the signal in a three-dimensional plot. This time–frequency representation is designated as the Hilbert spectrum.The FT of Eq. (22) gives(29)X^(ω)=X(ω)(−jsgn(ω))Eq. ((29) shows that the HT can be estimated in a more simple way: by transforming the signal into the frequency domain, and shifting the phase of positive frequency components by−π/2and of negative components by+π/2and then transforming back to the time-domain. So two important properties of the HT are•the HT preserves the domain in which the signal is defined,the HT shifts the phase of the signal by 90°.The HT is estimated in the following analysis using the Matlab functionhilbert.m. The algorithm used in order to compute the HT uses the following steps:•The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the input sequence is calculated storing the result in a vector x.A vector h (Hilbert window) is created. The elements of this vector (h(i)) have the values:○fori=1,(n2)+12 fori=2,3,…(n2)0 fori=(n2)+2,…,nThe element-wise product of x and h is calculated.The inverse FFT of the sequence obtained in the previous steps is calculated and the first n elements of the result are returned.Estimating the instantaneous amplitude after these steps is simple, since it is the amplitude of the complex Hilbert transform. The instantaneous frequency is the time rate of change of the instantaneous phase angle.The Teager–Kaiser energy operator (TKEO) can estimate the instantaneous “energy” of a signal, and it is defined as(30)Ψc[x(t)]=[ẋ(t)]2−x(t)x¨(t)where x(t) is the signal andẋ(t)andx¨(t)are its first and second derivatives respectively. In the discrete time case, the time derivatives in Eq. (30) can be approximated by time differences:(31)Ψd[x(n)]=x(n)2−x(n+1)x(n−1)The TKEO offers excellent time resolution because only three samples are required for the energy computation at each time instant. The operators Ψcand Ψdwere developed by Teager during his work on speech production modelling [14,15] where he described the nonlinearities of speech production and showed a plot of “the energy creating sound”, without giving though the algorithm to calculate this “energy”. Later, Kaiser presented the algorithm developed by Teager in his work [16,17].An alternative approach to that of the Hilbert transform separation algorithm for the estimation of instantaneous envelope A(t) and instantaneous frequency of the signal f(t) was developed in [47]. It uses the TKEO to estimate initially the required energy for generating the signal being analysed and then to separate it into its amplitude and frequency component using an energy separation algorithm.The energy separation algorithm is described by the following equations:(32)f(t)=12πΨ[ẋ(t)]Ψ[x(t)](33)|A(t)|=Ψ[x(t)]Ψ[x(t)]These equations estimate exactly the instantaneous frequency and amplitude envelope of a sinusoidal signal, and the approximation errors for the cases of amplitude modulation (AM), frequency modulation (FM) and AM–FM signals are small [48]. There have been developed several discrete time energy separation algorithms; here Desa-1 is given [47]:(34)arccos(1−Ψd[y(n)]+Ψd[y(n)]4Ψd[x(n)])≈fi(n)(35)Ψd[x(n)]1−(1−Ψd[y(n)]+Ψd[y(n+1)]4Ψd[x(n)])2≈|A(n)|where x(n) is the signal andy(n)=x(n)−x(n−1)is its backward asymmetric difference and if T is the sampling period:(36)Fi=fiTThe frequency estimation part assumes that0<Fi(n)<πwhich means that the algorithm can estimate frequencies up to 1/2 the sampling frequency. This is due to the fact that the sine function and its inverse have a unique correspondence between 0 andπ/2. Since the sine argument isFi/2, it follows that the frequency can be uniquely determined for any Fibetween 0 and π. A simple simulated example in order to show the performance of both the Hilbert Transform and the TKEO/ Desa-1 approach is given here. The instantaneous frequency and amplitude envelope of a chirp signal, Fig. 19, are calculated using both methods. The results, Figs. 20a, b, 21a and b, show that both methods have almost the same resolution with the energy separation method doing a little better.The reason that the results of the HT show a worse end-effects problem is related to a circular convolution issue [49]. This problem could probably be solved if one chose to zero-pad or truncate the data analysed. This could also improve the resolution of the method although it would make the algorithm a little slower. Since the analysis of the experimental data did not show similar problems, as will be shown later, because the variations in the signals were not as dramatic as the variation in the simulated chirp, this problem is not of major importance in the current study.The main problem that occurs during the estimation of the instantaneous characteristics of the signal being analysed, using both methods, is that a differentiation exists in the process. This is the reason why signals with low signal to noise ratio cannot be analysed efficiently, since differentiation amplifies noise. So applying an appropriate filter before the estimation of the instantaneous characteristics, in order to denoise the signal, is important. More particularly, the TKEO can only be applied to monocomponent signals, so a filter bank method should first be applied to the signal analysed in order to extract its monocomponents and analyse them separately with the TKEO/ Desa-1 approach. In this case, the EMD method is the filter bank method applied. In addition, one should pay attention to having signals that are smooth enough for both of the amplitude–frequency separation approaches, since differentiation may produce spikes at the points where the signal is not smooth. For this reason, a cubic spline interpolation in the EMD sifting process is preferred, as opposed to a linear interpolation which would not produce smooth IMFs, and also a smoothing filter should be applied to the IMFs produced before the estimation of their instantaneous characteristics.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
