@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Speaking in noise: How does the Lombard effect improve acoustic contrasts between speech and ambient noise?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate how speakers can improve their segregation from a background noise.Lombard speech is explored in realistic conditions (interactive game, loudspeakers).Speakers maintain a positive SNR in noise and boost their energy around 3kHz.They enhance the modulation of their speech in f0 and intensity.When possible, they specifically adjust f0 and F1 to minima of the noise spectrum.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lombard speech,Noise,Production,Speech audibility,Auditory detection,Segregation,Energetic masking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
What makes speech produced in the presence of noise (Lombard speech) more intelligible than conversational speech produced in quiet conditions? This study investigates the hypothesis that speakers modify their speech in the presence of noise in such a way that acoustic contrasts between their speech and the background noise are enhanced, which would improve speech audibility.Ten French speakers were recorded while playing an interactive game first in quiet condition, then in two types of noisy conditions with different spectral characteristics: a broadband noise (BB) and a cocktail-party noise (CKTL), both played over loudspeakers at 86dB SPL.Similarly to (Lu and Cooke, 2009b), our results suggest no systematic “active” adaptation of the whole speech spectrum or vocal intensity to the spectral characteristics of the ambient noise. Regardless of the type of noise, the gender or the type of speech segment, the primary strategy was to speak louder in noise, with a greater adaptation in BB noise and an emphasis on vowels rather than any type of consonants.Active strategies were evidenced, but were subtle and of second order to the primary strategy of speaking louder: for each gender, fundamental frequency (f0) and first formant frequency (F1) were modified in cocktail-party noise in a way that optimized the release in energetic masking induced by this type of noise. Furthermore, speakers showed two additional modifications as compared to shouted speech, which therefore cannot be interpreted in terms of vocal effort only: they enhanced the modulation of their speech in f0 and vocal intensity and they boosted their speech spectrum specifically around 3kHz, in the region of maximum ear sensitivity associated with the actor's or singer's formant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Noise exposure triggers an adaptation in speech production, commonly referred to as the Lombard effect. When communicating in noisy environments, speakers commonly increase vocal intensity and fundamental frequency (f0) as compared to communicating in quiet environments (Castellanos et al., 1996; Junqua, 1993; Van Summers et al., 1988). Speech produced in noise (also called Lombard speech) is also characterized by a higher first-formant frequency of vowels (F1), boosted energy above 2kHz and increased vowel/consonant (V/C) ratio in both vocal intensity and duration (Boril and Pollak, 2005; Castellanos et al., 1996; Egan, 1972; Junqua, 1993; Kadiri, 1998; Mokbel, 1992; Stanton et al., 1988; Van Summers et al., 1988).Lombard speech has been shown to be more intelligible than conversational speech produced in quiet condition (Dreher and O’Neill, 1957; Lu and Cooke, 2008; Pittman and Wiley, 2001; Van Summers et al., 1988). It remains unclear which speech modifications contribute to this gain in intelligibility and which aspects of intelligibility are improved by this speech adaptation (phoneme recognition, speech audibility, utterance parsing, etc.).In this article, we focus on whether and how speakers may try to improve their audibility in noise, i.e. the detection and perception of speech information by their interlocutor within the background noise. Before envisaging and suggesting some possible strategies, let us first review the current knowledge on the mechanisms and factors that influence speech perception in noise.First, it is known that the audibility of a sound is considerably degraded when it is heard simultaneously with a competing noise or sound stream that contains energy in the same critical frequency bands. The energetic-masking effect increases with increased spectral overlap and decreased signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio between the target sound and the masker (Hornsby and Ricketts, 2001; French and Steinberg, 1947). In the case of speech, multi-talker noise degrades the perception of vowels more than consonants, whereas white Gaussian noise has the opposite effect (Junqua, 1993). Similarly, speech is more degraded by a competing speech produced by a speaker of the same gender (Brungart, 2001).Auditory fusion is another perceptual phenomenon that occurs when two or more sound streams are heard at the same time. The concurrent streams are interpreted as coming from the same source when they present similar acoustic characteristics (such as the average intensity, pitch and timbre, but also in the temporal modulation of these parameters). They are segregated from each other when acoustic contrasts exceed a given threshold (Darwin et al., 2003).Both phenomena of energetic masking and auditory fusion underlie the “cocktail-party effect”, i.e. the difficulty of following a voice and understanding what is said within a multitude of other competing voices (Arons, 1992). Psychoacoustic research showed how the segregation of a target speech from another competing speech is particularly difficult when both voices are similar in spectral content and fundamental frequency (f0) (Assmann and Summerfield, 1990), first-formant frequency (F1) (Darwin et al., 2003), when the target voice is not modulated in f0 (Marin and McAdams, 1991), and when it is compressed in amplitude (Hornsby and Ricketts, 2001).What could speakers then do to improve their speech audibility and segregation in noise?(1)Speakers may try to decrease the amount of energetic masking and enhance acoustic contrasts by increasing the global vocal intensity of their speech, and more specifically the spectral energy in frequency regions where the background noise presents maximum energy (boosting strategies).They may try to shift the spectral energy, or at least important phonetic cues coded in frequency (f0, formants), to spectral bands where the background noise presents minimum energy (bypass strategies).They may try to increase the temporal modulation of their speech in f0 and vocal intensity (modulation strategies).Evidence of boosting strategies was provided by Mokbel (1992) and Junqua et al. (1998). Mokbel (1992) demonstrated that a speaker enhances his speech energy more in the frequency band where noise was concentrated. In a single-talker experiment comparing speech adaptation to broadband noises filtered by different band-pass filters, Junqua et al. (1998) showed that, at constant masker level, the increase of vocal intensity varies with noise spectral tilt. Bypass strategies were observed in recent studies (Lu and Cooke, 2008, 2009a,b) that showed how the center of gravity (CoG) of the speech spectrum increases in frequency when speaking in low-pass noises (multi-babble noise, driving noise or low-pass filtered broadband noise). However, they did not observe such bypass strategies in high-pass filtered noises (Lu and Cooke, 2009a,b), in which the speech CoG and additional spectral cues (f0, F1) were not shifted down but were still shifted to higher frequencies. No study has specifically explored the use of modulation strategies in noise. Nevertheless, enhanced intonation contours and wider f0 ranges in noise have been reported by several authors (Boril and Pollak, 2005; Garnier et al., 2006, 2010; Welby, 2006).In line with these previous studies, this study aims at examining whether speakers adopt boosting, bypass or modulation strategies in noise to adapt to the spectral characteristics of the background noise and enhance acoustic contrasts between their speech and that noise. Two different types of noise frequently encountered in ecological situations were chosen here to test speech adaptation to varying energetic masking: a broadband noise (with equally distributed energy below 10kHz) and a cocktail-party noise (with concentrated energy below 1kHz). Similarly to previous studies, evidence of boosting, bypass or modulation strategies was searched in the global adaptation of speech intensity and spectrum. In addition, more specific and local adaptations were searched (1) in the modification of spectral cues such as f0 and F1, (2) in the temporal modulation of f0 and vocal intensity (3) in the potentially different effects that noise type can have on speech modifications made by both genders and for different types of speech segments.The corpus is similar to the experiments presented in Garnier (2008) and Garnier et al. (2010).Ten native French speakers (five men and five women) aged 20–28 years old took part in the recording. Only one of them had some basic knowledge about the Lombard effect. None reported any speech or hearing difficulties.To account for the effect of communicative interaction on the Lombard effect, speakers were recorded while playing a collaborative game in pairs. The game was inspired by the Map Task game (Brown et al., 1983). Its rules are summarized here, and more details can be found in Garnier et al. (2010). The speakers had to exchange information about 16 items drawn on their map, so as to reconstruct a path that linked the items. The items corresponded to target words comprised of two CV (consonant–vowel) syllables (see Table 1). They were selected to represent most of the French phonemes (all of the vowels except [œ], all the consonants except [ŋ] and none of the semi-vowels [w], [j] and [Ч]). The experimental condition aimed at reproducing as much as possible a realistic situation of face-to-face interaction in noisy conditions. Speakers were seated two meters from and facing each other. They could use audio and visual information from the face only, since hands and head movements were constrained. No carrier sentence was imposed, so as to preserve spontaneity. The speech content could not be predicted so that speakers had to adjust their intelligibility level. An example of utterances produced by the speech partners (translated from French) is given below.11Leader: “The first item is the shark (\Rəkɛ̃/ in French).”Follower: “Well…the shark is associated with the summit (/sɔmmɛ/ in French)”Leader: “with the what ?”Follower: “with the summit !”Follower: “Yes”Leader: “Ah, ok. Hmm…Then I’m going to the pig (/koʃɔ̃/ in French)”As in realistic noisy conditions, speakers were sometimes unsuccessful in their communication and had to repeat or reformulate their utterance. These repetitions were included in the long-term acoustical analysis (long-term average spectrum, distribution of f0 and vocal intensity over the game duration). Only the first occurrence of the target words was considered for the analysis of syllables and segments.Speakers played the game in a sound-treated booth in three sound conditions: (1) quiet, (2) 86dB SPL of broadband noise (BB) and (3) 86dB SPL of non-intelligible cocktail-party noise (CKTL). The two types of noise were selected from the BD_Bruit database (Zeiliger et al., 1994). Their spectral characteristics are given in Fig. 1. In the BB noise, spectral energy is attenuated above 10kHz. The CKTL noise is made from the non-intelligible speech of four males and four females. The spectral energy is concentrated below 800Hz. It presents two maxima around 170 and 500Hz, and a local minimum around 340Hz. Noise files were 3min long. Noise started with a fade-in and was turned off once the two speakers had completed the game after approximately 2–3min.To avoid perturbing the speakers’ self-monitoring feedback and their perception of the background noise, the two noises were played over two loudspeakers (Tannoy System 600) instead of headphones. Loudspeakers were positioned 1.5m from the speakers in each lateral direction and at the level of their ears. Noise levels were calibrated using a 1/2″ pressure microphone (B&K 4165) and an artificial head placed where the speaker would be seated inside the booth.The audio speech signal was recorded with a cardioid headset microphone (Beyerdynamic Opus 54) placed about 5cm in front of the mouth. The signal was pre-amplified (RME Octamic) and sampled at 44.1kHz and 16bits (RME ADI 8 Pro converter and RME DIGI 9652 HDSP sound card). Speech intensity was calibrated prior to the experiment by recording the audio signal of a sustained vowel produced by the speaker, and by measuring the corresponding sound pressure level (SPL) at the microphone with a digital Sound Level Meter.Noise was removed from the speech recordings using a dedicated noise-canceling method (Ternström et al., 2002). Before each noisy condition, 10s of white noise was played into the loudspeakers and recorded at the microphone with the speaker remaining quiet, which enabled the estimation of the impulse response of the loudspeaker-to-microphone channel. For each noisy condition, it was then possible to estimate the entire noise signal that would have been recorded at the microphone if the speaker had remained quiet, and to subtract this estimation, in the time-domain, from the actual noisy recording of speech. The result of this subtraction gave the audio signal of speech produced in noise, with little remaining signal from the surrounding noise. Such a method can be used in laboratory conditions where the noise signal is perfectly known, and where loudspeakers and microphones remain at the same place. However, the position of the speaker in the room also affects the channel estimation. As a consequence, it is necessary to restrain speakers’ movements to maximize the denoising performance and to guarantee the validity of acoustic measurements. When head movements are restrained, the possible bias introduced by the denoising is less than 0.2dB for intensity of voiced segments, 0.7dB for unvoiced ones, 0.13tones for F0, 10Hz for the first formant frequency and 3Hz for the centroid of the speech spectrum (Garnier et al., 2010). In this experiment participants remained still during the 2–3min of noise exposure. In between each speaking condition the participants were allowed to move and relax. The headset microphone was firmly attached to the participant's head to avoid any movement of the face away from the microphone. The map used for the interactive game was placed high enough on a stand so that the speakers could see both the map and their speech partner by moving their eyes but not their head. Writing on the map could be achieved with wrist movements only.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
As in previous studies, we found a significant effect of noise type on the modification of speech intensity but no significant effect on voice spectrum. In this study, this effect of the noise type can be summarized by two main conclusions:(1)The relative energy between 0 and 1kHz was not found to be more enhanced in CKTL noise, neither was the speech CoG more shifted toward high frequencies in CKTL noise.So, contrary to Mokbel (1992) who showed that a speaker enhanced more his speech energy in the frequency band where noise was concentrated, and Junqua et al. (1998) that the increase of vocal intensity varied with noise spectral tilt at constant masker level, our results do not support the existence of such boosting strategies in speakers communicating in low frequency noise. However, our observations are consistent with those of (Lu and Cooke, 2009a,b) who also observed a greater shift of speech CoG toward high frequencies in broadband noises and in high frequency noises rather than in low frequency noises.Noise type was not found to interact with the type of speech segment and with the speaker's gender in the modification of segments’ intensity and duration, syllable intensity and speech CoG:-Regardless of the speaker's gender and the type of segment, a greater increase of these parameters was observed in BB noise compared to CKTL noise, although CKTL noise induces greater energetic masking on speech. This result is in agreement with Egan (1972) and Lu and Cooke (2009b), who observed a greater increase of voice intensity in broadband noise than in noise enhanced in low frequencies or high frequencies. It does not reflect the results of previous studies (Junqua et al., 1998; Ternström et al., 2002; Jung, 2012), in which white noise, speech-shaped noise, music noise or driving noise did not induce any different adaptation in vocal effort. However, these studies compared noise types at similar perceived loudness (in dB A), whereas our own study compared CKTL and BB noises at similar physical levels in dB SPL.Regardless of the noise type, vocal intensity and duration were found to increase significantly more for vowels than for consonants. Sonorant consonants followed the same tendency as unvoiced consonants, despite their spectral similarity to vowels. This observation is consistent with other studies (Castellanos et al., 1996; Junqua, 1993) that also reported the vowel-to-consonant ratio to increase in both intensity and duration in noise for each kind of consonant. However, this greater adaptation of vowels could also result from the small vocabulary size and the weak confusability between the target words of our experiment, which were only distinguishable by their vowels (except the pairs ‘cochon’ (pig) vs. ‘chausson’ (slipper), and ‘navet’ (turnip) vs. ‘vallée’ (valley)).Regardless of the noise type, females raised their CoG more with noise exposure than did males. This partly comes from a notable decrease of the relative energy above 4kHz in males. Again, this observation is in agreement with previous studies (Castellanos et al., 1996; Junqua, 1993) that reported an increase of speech energy between 4 and 5kHz in female Lombard speech, whereas the greatest enhancement of speech energy in males was observed between 2 and 4kHz (Castellanos et al., 1996; Junqua, 1993).As a consequence, our observations do not support the hypothesis that speakers modify their speech intensity and spectrum in noise in a way that specifically compensate for the degree of energetic masking, neither using a boosting nor a bypass strategy. Instead, our results rather support the idea that speakers adapt their level of vocal effort to the perceived loudness of the background noise, greater in broadband noise than in low frequency noises such as the CKTL noise of this study (because of the greater ear-sensitivity in the 2–4kHz frequency band). Thus, regardless of the spectral content of the background noise, the type of speech segment and the speaker's gender, the main strategy to cope with noise appears to consist in increasing vocal intensity to a level that preserves a positive SNR ratio (in dB SPL).This main strategy of increasing vocal effort can very well account for the raised f0, F1 and CoG observed in Lombard speech, as these acoustical modifications commonly accompany the increase of vocal intensity (Titze and Sundberg, 1992; Sundberg and Nordenberg, 2006) and are observed in shouted speech, even in absence of background noise (Rostolland, 1982; Schulman, 1989; Lienard and Di Benedetto, 1999; Traumüller and Erikkson, 2000).Nevertheless, additional modifications that can improve speech audibility in noise have also been observed in this study, while they are not directly related to the increase of vocal intensity.In CKTL noise, speakers of both genders shifted their f0 distribution so that their most frequent f0 or 2f0 value was specifically adjusted in the frequency region where the CKTL noise presented a local minimum in energy. Likewise, we observed an interaction between noise type, vowel type (open vs. closed) and speaker's gender. In CKTL noise, speakers of both genders specifically adjusted the F1 of closed vowels ([i] and [u]) in the frequency region where the CKTL noise had a local minimum in energy. Such an improved contrast in spectrum, f0 and F1 is predicted to release the energetic masking effect of the CKTL noise and to improve the segregation of Lombard speech from another competing speech stream (Culling and Darwin, 1993; Darwin, 1981).Furthermore, a more detailed examination of the spectra of Lombard vowels indicated that the shift of speech CoG toward higher frequencies came not only from the flattening of the spectral slope, as commonly observed when vocal effort is increased, but also from specific higher-formants clustering and amplitude enhancement. This recalls the “singing formant” or the “actor's formant” observed in opera singers who sing over an orchestra, or in stage actors who have to project their voice at distance (Bele, 2006). This boosting strategy enhances energy around 3–4kHz, where the human ear is most sensitive to sound pressure level, and improves voice ‘projection’ and audibility. Such an energy boost of the 1–4kHz region is not observed in the shouted speech of untrained speakers, while it is reported in clear speech (Krause and Braida, 2004). Both artificial flattening of the spectral tilt and artificial enhancement of speech energy above 1.5kHz have proved to be efficient techniques of speech enhancement (Horwitz et al., 2008; Skowronski and Harris, 2006).Lastly, modulation strategies were observed, as greater modulations of f0 and vocal intensity were found in Lombard speech than in speech produced in quiet, both for male and female speakers. These modulation strategies are not directly related to increased vocal effort, as shouted voice demonstrates reduced f0 modulations (Rostolland, 1982). On the contrary, a wider f0 range (Picheny et al., 1986) and an increased low-frequency modulation of the intensity envelope (Krause and Braida, 2004) have also been observed in clear speech, and in speakers who are intrinsically more intelligible than others (Bradlow et al., 1996). Several psychoacoustic studies have shown that vowels degraded by an interfering sound are better detected and recognized when their f0 is modulated (Ishizuka and Aikawa, 2002). Sound stream segregation is also improved by intensity modulation and temporal fluctuations (Ishizuka and Aikawa, 2002). Synthesis of natural f0-contour variations has been shown to improve intelligibility of speech compared to flat contours (Laures and Weismer, 1999). Segmental intelligibility was worsened when applying compression effects that decrease the modulation in intensity (Boike and Souza, 2000; Hornsby and Ricketts, 2001). Consequently, this enhanced modulation of f0 and vocal intensity observed here in Lombard speech are likely to reflect the intention of the speaker to improve his intelligibility.In agreement to Lu and Cooke (2009b), our results suggest that there is no systematic “active” adaptation to the spectral characteristics of the ambient noise. The increase in vocal intensity, the spectral shift, the rise in f0 and F1 appear to be primary and unavoidable features of Lombard speech, regardless of the type of noise and the speaker. The same tendencies have been observed in shouted speech, in the absence of ambient noise (Lienard and Di Benedetto, 1999; Stanton et al., 1988; Titze, 1989), and in Lombard speech with or without interaction (Amazi and Garber, 1982; Garnier et al., 2010). All these modifications may be interpreted as the different facets of one main action, which is to increase voice intensity in noisy conditions.However, when compatible with this primary tendency, there also appear to be subtler and secondary variations of these same parameters in ways that optimize the acoustic contrast with the background noise. For example, the distribution of f0 values is not only shifted to higher frequencies in noise (primary strategy of increasing voice intensity), but it is also widened and specifically adjusted in the frequency area where the CKTL noise has minimum energy (secondary strategies for improving acoustic contrasts).This leads us to support the idea that speech adaptation to noise may broken down into two hierarchical “levels” of strategies. These primary and secondary speech adaptations can be related to different mechanisms underlying the Lombard effect. Thus, primary and unvarying modifications of speech in noise, related to the global increase of vocal effort, may very well be related to the automatic and uncontrollable regulation of voice intensity that leads speakers to raise their voice when they get an attenuated feedback of their own voice (Pick et al., 1989). Furthermore, the Lombard effect also depends on communicative interaction, as vocal intensity and related parameters are more modified in noise for interactive than non-interactive situations (Amazi and Garber, 1982; Garnier et al., 2010). Additional modifications that do not relate directly to vocal intensity are observed in noise for interactive situations only (Garnier et al., 2010). This communicative mechanism that also contributes to the Lombard effect may very well account for the secondary modifications of speech parameters observed in this current study, when they are compatible with the primary ones.Speech modifications examined in this study have applications to the improvement of speech perception when speech is broadcast in noisy environments, such as train stations, car interiors, places with ventilation or multi-talker noise. In background noise of low frequency energy, it may be beneficial to shift speech f0, formants and spectrum toward higher frequencies, as is observed in Lombard speech. Irrespective of the noise type, speech auditory detection and segregation may be improved by enhancing both frequency and amplitude modulation of speech, and boosting speech energy in the 2–4kHz frequency band.It is more difficult to predict the perceptual consequence of conjoint speech modifications, as their effects are not simply additive. Thus, conjoint modifications may either lead to counterproductive outcomes or may have particularly positive consequences for speech auditory detection. For example, auditory detection may be particularly improved when enhancing speech modulation together with shifting the speech spectrum toward the 2–4kHz region, a frequency band where the human ear is most sensitive not only to sound pressure level but also to acoustic contrasts (Jesteadt et al., 1977; Wier et al., 1977).Likewise, speech modifications can have multiple effects on these different aspects of intelligibility (audibility, phoneme recognition, utterance parsing). For instance, the enhanced modulation of speech in f0 and intensity may both improve speech segregation from a background noise and the segmentation of the utterance into lexical units (Garnier et al., 2010; Welby, 2006). On the other hand, raised f0 and F1 may improve speech segregation from a multi-talker noise, but may simultaneously degrade acoustic cues to vowel recognition.These results may also have further applications for injury prevention and therapy in the case of vocal misuse and abuse in noisy working places (preschool teachers, bartenders, factory workers, etc.). Among the different observed modifications, enhancing speech modulation and spectral energy in the 2–4kHz region are communicative techniques that can be taught to people in order to improve their speech audibility in a safer way than simply increasing vocal intensity.