@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
From rule-based to data-driven lexical entrainment models in spoken dialog systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New methods for the integration of lexical entrainment in spoken dialog systems.Rule based method for entrainment implemented in two different systems.Data-driven method for lexical entrainment in SDSs.Tests reveal better performance with entrainment policy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lexical entrainment,Spoken dialog systems,Data-driven model,Rule-based model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents uses a data-driven approach to improve Spoken Dialog System (SDS) performance by automatically finding the most appropriate terms to be used in system prompts. The literature shows that speakers use one another's terms (entrain) when trying to create common ground during a spoken dialog. Those terms are commonly called “primes”, since they influence the interlocutors’ linguistic decision-making. This approach emulates human interaction, with a system built to propose primes to the user and accept the primes that the user proposes. These primes are chosen on the fly during the interaction, based on a set of features that indicate good candidate primes. A good candidate is one that we know is easily recognized by the speech recognizer, and is also a normal word choice given the context. The system is trained to follow the user's choice of prime if system performance is not negatively affected. When system performance is affected, the system proposes a new prime. In our previous work we have shown how we can identify the prime candidates and how the system can select primes using rules. In this paper we go further, presenting a data-driven method to perform the same task. Live tests with this method show that use of on-the-fly entrainment reduces out-of-vocabulary and word error rate, and also increases the number of correctly transferred concepts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of Spoken Dialog Systems (SDSs) in everyday life is getting closer to being a reality. However, errors caused by speech recognition and understanding modules may result in incorrect dialog manager decisions concerning the next action to take and may prevent users from trusting and regularly using SDSs. Recent research, especially in the use of statistical frameworks for dialog management (Williams and Young, 2007; Lee and Eskenazi, 2012), has produced significant and promising improvement in performance. In this paper, a new contribution to the improvement of SDSs is presented: the incorporation of the principle of lexical entrainment (Brennan and Clark, 1996; Garrod and Anderson, 1987) to task-oriented SDSs. It uses the same principle of entrainment that has been observed in human–human dialogs (Brennan and Clark, 1996). Often in human communication one speaker will use the terms of the other speaker (entrain) in an effort to create a common ground and to communicate efficiently. Reitter and colleagues (Reitter et al., 2006) introduced priming as the processing of one speaker influencing the linguistic decisions of the other. Hence, the linguistic structures that will be used to influence the linguistic decisions can also be called primes. The goal of our work is to implement this influencing processing in SDSs in both directions, having a system that automatically entrains to the user whenever the resulting word choice does not have a negative impact on system performance. Otherwise, the system should be able to automatically react to an unsuccessful prime by proposing a new prime with the same meaning. We believe that there are several advantages to the use of this principle for SDSs. The interaction will become more natural, the Word Error Rate (WER) is likely to decrease, and consequently system performance should increase.Our first step towards an SDS performing automated lexical entrainment was described in Lopes et al. (2011). The context was the Noctívago system, an experimental agenda-based SDS in European Portuguese that provides schedule information for night buses in Lisbon. This system was inspired by Lets Go Raux et al. (2005), a live system that gives schedule information for real bus users in the Pittsburgh area since 2005. The choice to cover night buses was made based on the similarity between Lisbons night-bus network and bus frequencies and the Pittsburgh ones. Both systems are telephone-based, use the Olympus open-source architecture for SDSs Bohus et al. (2007), and use Ravenclaw (Bohus and Rudnicky, 2009), an agenda-based dialog manager.After the above-mentioned trial, the next step was the automation of prime selection for both systems. The automated prime selection was implemented in two different versions of both systems. Noctívagos new version used a multi-modal web interface with an agent and a push-to-talk button. This version enabled us to easily recruit new users to test the different configurations. Nevertheless, the amount of data collected was far less than the amount that can be collected with a live system, like Lets Go. A set of entrainment rules was implemented and tested in the two above-mentioned versions of Noctívago and Lets Go, which target the same domain but differ in language, type and number of users, type of dialog manager (Lets Go used the Cornerstone statistical dialog manager (Lee and Eskenazi, 2012)), speech recognizer and synthesizer, and interface. The results showed that entrainment rules had a positive impact on system performance, especially in Lets Go. In this system, the results showed a 10% relative reduction in the number of unsuccessful dialogs and 6% average relative reduction in the total number of turns per session (Lopes et al., 2013).This paper describes the next step, going from the use of entrainment rules to the use a statistical-based model for lexical entrainment. First the model was trained using data collected from earlier studies and tested with off-line data from both Noctívago and Lets Go. Then a statistical-based method for prime selection was implemented in the new version of Noctívago for live tests. In this version, same dialog-state tracking module used in Lets Go replaced the agenda-based dialog manager. We have used this system to compare data-driven prime selection to the previously-developed entrainment rules, random and fixed prime selection.This paper begins with a review of related work in Section 2. Section 3 highlights the differences between the architecture of the systems used. Section 4 describes the lexical entrainment features used in both the rule-based and data driven approaches. Section 5 presents the tests carried out with the rule-based approach for both Noctívago and Let's Go. Section 6 describes the data-driven models for prime selection and results of tests with these models. Section 7 discusses the results and Section 8 presents conclusions and future work directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper described new methods for the integration of lexical entrainment in SDS. The first part of the paper, reports two studies using a Rule Based method for prime selection. This method was implemented and tested in two different systems, Noctívago and Let's Go. The Noctívago tests revealing interesting trends that were later taken into account for the algorithm implemented in Let's Go. The tests with Let's Go showed an improvement in the system performance when using the rules for prime selection.The second part of the paper presents a first data-driven approach to perform lexical entrainment in both directions in an SDS. The experimental tests held with Noctívago revealed a similar performance to the Rule Based method, and both clearly outperformed Random and Fixed prime choice in terms of understanding turns with primes.The application of the data-driven algorithm to other systems working in different domains, the extension of lexical entrainment to more concepts in the dialog and experiments with real users would help us to confirm the results found in this paper.In order to improve the algorithm for prime selection new features and statistical methods should be investigated. Among the new features that could enhance a future Data-Driven model, prosody would be an interesting one to study. A possible solution to improve the statistical model for prime selection would be the integration of lexical entrainment in dialog-state tracking framework. This way, the system could learn the best primes in an unsupervised way.