@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A two-layer structure prediction framework for microscopy cell detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new two-layer structural prediction framework for detecting microscopic image cells, which focuses on the representation issue to propose a model to effectively capture the rich contextual information.We tackle the problem of microscopic image cell detection from structure learning perspective.The second layer takes the output of the first layer as knowledge abstraction and propagation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Microscopy cell detection,Layered models,Structural prediction,Computer vision,Machine learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The task of microscopy cell detection is of great biological and clinical importance. However, existing algorithms for microscopy cell detection usually ignore the large variations of cells and only focus on the shape feature/descriptor design. Here we propose a new two-layer model for cell centre detection by a two-layer structure prediction framework, which is respectively built on classification for the cell centres implicitly using rich appearances and contextual information and explicit structural information for the cells. Experimental results demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed method over competing state-of-the-art methods, providing a viable alternative for microscopy cell detection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the development of bioimage informatics, there has been an increasing focus on the cell detection studies, which come over the problem of the traditional microscopy studies that only a few cells are detected, providing a more powerful statistical tool for experiments and medical diagnosis [1,2]. Studying the amount, types, morphological shape, and configuration of the cells in microscopic images has significant biological and clinical significance in e.g. cancer diagnosis and cancer treatment [3–7]. Performing cell segmentation is mostly based on certain families of morphological descriptors, which can also be viewed as a structural prediction problem. For example, the auto-context algorithm was adopted to perform membrane segmentation with supervised (machine learning) method, see [8]. One could also follow the procedure for object detection as in the recent computer vision literature to perform cell detection by a layout processing step [9]. However, as we will see later in the experiment results, adopting the state-of-the-art vision approaches does not provide satisfactory results in the task of microscopic cell centre detection. Since the Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) [10] model can only detect the structure of cells from one layer, thus may not satisfactorily grasp the full knowledge representation and achieve the requested detection accuracy due to the ignorance of complex information of the cell with much subtle and variable structure. The examples like derivative formulas of the CRFs model, or auto-context, can not achieve the approving performance of the serious demanding for complicated cell detection goal with the ignorance of various size, colour, deformation, and structural dependence more or less. Here, we study the problem from a structured learning perspective and emphasize on the representation issue.Existing approaches for microscopy cell detection consist of the segmentation and detection steps, which are usually based on geodesic active contour, watershed, gradient vector diffusion or Hessian matrix [5–7,11,12]. In many cases, some of the above-mentioned methods are combined for a better performance of microscopic cell detection. One of the typical examples is using the ridge measures for cell shape detection, which is widely applied more or less in the field of image segmentation. Ersoy et al. combined the shape feature of cells with the curve evolution model exploiting the halo effect to perform the human cancer cell image detection, which was based on Hessian matrix and directional derivatives [7]. Yeo developed automated image segmentation and classification for separation of clusters of cell nuclei into individual objects, mixing the adaptive two pass threshold-based segmentation, clustered nuclei using segmentation (including operations of the fill hole, noise removal, distance, adaptive h-minima transform incorporated with edge information and watershed transform) and the supervised process with the labelling ground truth for shape descriptors, emphasizing the accuracy of cell nuclei counts from the supervised process [11]. The evaluation of the performance by Smal et al. for the purpose of quantitative analysis of biological image data gave a detailed comparison utilizing seven unsupervised methods and two supervised methods with the same ground truth given by the experts, effectively emphasizing the high accuracy of the machine learning methods [5].Typically, structured labelling studies the problem of predicting a vector output from an input vector, which is common since structured inputs and outputs are in a wide range of applications. There are many different approaches in which such kind of application with structured labelling has been applied. For example, Markov Random Field (MRF) and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) [10] have been widely used to model the correlations of the structured labels. However, due to the heavy computational burdens in their training and testing (inference) stages, MRF and CRFs are usually limited to capturing a few neighbourhood interactions only, which will thus limit their modelling capabilities. Structural support vector machine (SVM) [13–15] models the correlation in a way similar to the CRFs but tries to specifically maximize the prediction margin. Nevertheless, the high computational demand just makes it firmly rely on the range of contexts.Considering of the limitations of the above approaches, we propose a new two-layer structural prediction framework for detecting microscopic image cells, which focuses on the representation issue to propose a model to effectively capture the rich contextual information. The contribution of the approach includes: (1) we tackle the problem of microscopic image cell detection from structure learning perspective; (2) the second layer takes the output of the first layer as knowledge abstraction and propagation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we cast the problem of cell detection from an angle of structural prediction, and introduce a two-layer model, which can realize knowledge representation and propagation. As we can see, the advantage of our method is evident with effectiveness and efficiency over the state-of-the-art methods.For detecting the cells of irregular shape, there are still some defects in our result and we do not classify cell types into detailed groups such as the T-cell, B-cell or others. We will use multi-class prediction and take more explicit structures into account in the future.