@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quality assessment of 3D-CTVR, MPR and section plane techniques in ossicular chain reconstruction in middle ear cholesteatoma

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Assess the quality of 3D-CTVR, MPR and CT section plane in the fine diagnosis of ossicular chain in middle ear cholesteatoma.CTVR and MPR are more superior to conventional section plane in showing ossicular chain.The use of CTVR and MPR techniques combine with section plane can have profound contributive value in the future clinical work.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cholesteatoma,Ossicular chain,Volume rendered computer tomography,Multi-planar reformation,Section plane,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
AimTo assess the quality of three-dimensional volume rendered computer tomography (3D-CTVR), multi-planar reformation (MPR) and CT section plane in the fine diagnosis of ossicular chain in middle ear cholesteatoma.MethodsSixty patients with middle ear cholesteatoma were selected in this retrospective study. All cases underwent pre-operative CT scan. The respective radiologic reports of the ossicles status via three protocols were then compared to surgical findings.ResultsQuality assessment of these three protocols in the fine diagnosis of fine ossicles buried inside the soft tissue showed that both CTVR and MPR are more superior to conventional section plane, especially CTVR.ConclusionThe uses of CTVR and MPR, in conjunction with conventional section plane, are better able to show where the true and fine ossicular chain in the cholesteatoma mass is. In the final analysis, we believe that the use of CTVR and MPR techniques can have profound contributive value in future clinical work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is widely recognized that the ossicular chain plays an important role in sound conduction. In pre-operative cholesteatoma surgery, understanding the extent of abnormality of the ossicles are essential in the reconstruction of the ossicular chain. The two axial and coronal section planes of conventional HRCT (high resolution CT) are insufficient to allow otologists to clearly determine the degree of ossicle conditions such as the absence or destruction of ossicular chain within the surrounding soft tissues. In recent years, the increasing use of three dimensional volume rendered computer tomography (3D-CTVR) has enabled otologists to view the condition of the ossicular chain inside middle ear cholesteatoma. The employment of CTVR can certainly reveal the distinct 3D ossicle imaging, especially when soft tissues around the ossiculum are removed. Another important method, the multi-planar reconstruction (MPR) technique, can even project multiple section planes of ossicles onto the same plane. Several authors have reported and discussed the advantages and limitations of these two protocols in their literature [1–3]. In our study, both the CTVR and MPR techniques, in conjunction with conventional axial and coronal section plane, were used to show up the fine structures of the ossicular chain. Our results convince us that the combined uses of these techniques will likely become a trend in future clinical work.From February 2010 through March 2012, sixty cases of middle ear cholesteatoma from our department were selected for this study. All cases were approved by the ethics committee of our hospital. These 60 not only have cholesteatoma in their middle ear cavity, but also in the mastoid cavity. All patients had conductive hearing loss (air-bone gap from 15dB to 45dB). Of these 60 cases, 34 were male and 26 female, ranging in age from 16 through 65 (mean age: 42.6). All surgeries for this study were performed by the first author, with notes taken within the 1st to 3rd day after CT scan. Canal wall-up and canal wall-down mastoidectomy were also performed, along with written observations of the ossicle chain during and after each surgery. In all instances, their ossicular chains were embedded inside soft tissues (either cholesteatoma or granulation).The 128-channel multi-detector row CT scanner (Philips Brilliance iCT128) was used. Scanning ranges from the lower margin of the external auditory meatus to the top margin of the petrous bone, with every subject in the supine position. The axial thin slice scanning was set at a collimation of 20mm×0.65mm, with pitch at 0.25mm, horizon (FOV) at 150mm×150mm, matrix at 1024×1024, voltage at 120kV and current at 350mAs. The Y-sharp bone algorithm was used, with reconstruction set at 0.34mm intervals overlap and the result of 128–140 layer image. Voxel dimensions were 0.1465mm for X and Y, and 0.34mm for Z. All data were then transmitted to the EBW4 workstation for reconstruction of three post-processing protocols. These were: (1) the conventional axial and coronal section planes of high resolution CT (HRCT); (2) the imaging of multi-planar reconstruction (MPR); and (3) the three-dimensional reconstructed volume rendered computer tomography (3D-CTVR). The window level for the 3D imaging was set at 500 to −400HU, with window width set at 2000HU.All radiologic reports analyzed by three independent and experienced radiologists concluded that: (1) the standard observation planes of conventional axial and coronal section plane were (a) the plane of epitympanum in the axial section (Fig. 1a); (b) the plane of epitympanum in the coronal section (Fig. 1b); and (c) the plane of vestibular window in the coronal section (Fig. 1c); (2) the standard observation planes of the MPR were (a) along the plane of the long axes of the incus and the reconstructed malleus paralleling the incudal long process (Fig. 2a); and (b) along the plane of anterior and posterior crus of stapes (Fig. 2b); and (3) the reconstructed CTVR imaging located in a designed cube can be magnified and rotated. Otologists are generally familiar with the two standard viewing field of CTVR, namely (1) from the posterior-inferior edge of tympanic membrane to the mesotympanum and epitympanum (Fig. 3a); and (2) from the antrum and epitympanum to the mesotympanum (Fig. 3b).All key segments of the ossicular chain which were analyzed are tabulated in Table 1. This table is a simple, modified version of the classification used by Zhang et al. [1]. During surgery, otologists are generally more concerned with the head of malleus, the handle of malleus, the body of incus, the long limb of incus, and the malleoincudal joint. The reason for this is that when dealing with ossicular chain, otologists must first focus on the connection of stapes and long limb of incus. If the long limb of incus exists, the connection should be divided by cutting the incudostapedial joint in order to protect the inner ear. Since the attic is occupied by the head of malleus and body of incus, to eradicate cholesteatoma, the latter two typically needs to be removed. The handle of malleus plays an important role in supporting the tympanum membrane and the reconstruction of the ossicular chain. At the same time, segments of the ossicular chain such as the lateral process of malleus, the neck of malleus, the short limb of the incus, the lenticular process and incudostapedial joint are given no more consideration. In all our operations, if the crus were either eroded or absent, total ossicular replacement prosthesis (TORP) were implanted, while the anterior and posterior crus were replaced with the superstructure of stapes. Since the CTVR and MPR imaging only shows the structure of the footplates instead of its state (vibration or fixation), and for which we are chiefly concerned, the footplate of stapes were thus ignored. All segment details, including surgical finding comparisons for all three protocols are listed in Table 1. SPSS software was used to complete the chi-square test.The quantitative assessments for the representation of different segments were based on a 3-point scoring system. A segment is scored 2 if were intact, 1 if partial and eroded, and 0 if absent (see Table 1 results).In order to evaluate the sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of these three different protocols, segments with 0 score were considered negative or absent, and segments with score of 1 or 2 were considered positive for intact bone (see Table 2results). We also assessed the ossicular clarity of conventional section plane, MPR and CTVR imaging. From these 60 patients, we selected cases where ossicles were present during surgery. Ossicular clarity was subsequently evaluated based on their imaging results. For example, one case was selected if the malleus existed proved in the operation, then that malleus imaging was classified either as clear, vague or not showing in three different protocols. The same assessment was used for incus and stapes (see Table 3results). In this study, stapes superstructures were used to replace stapes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
