@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fourier-ring descriptor to characterize rare circulating cells from images generated using immunofluorescence microscopy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Data driven feature selection from a circulating tumor cell data set.Features can be used to classify cells with high accuracy.Features characterize differentiating cell structure.Methodology objectively quantifies quality of cell classification.Preliminary step for computer aided diagnostics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We address the problem of subclassification of rare circulating cells using data driven feature selection from images of candidate circulating tumor cells from patients diagnosed with breast, prostate, or lung cancer. We determine a set of low level features which can differentiate among candidate cell types. We have implemented an image representation based on concentric Fourier rings (FRDs) which allow us to exploit size variations and morphological differences among cells while being rotationally invariant. We discuss potential clinical use in the context of treatment monitoring for cancer patients with metastatic disease.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Counts of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been correlated with outcomes in patients with tumors of epithelial origin including breast cancer, colorectal cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and prostate cancer [1–5]. For these reasons, research has grown over the last decade. Clinically useful CTC counts have almost exclusively been generated using CellSearchTM[6], which is an FDA approved enumeration method that relies on sample enrichment prior to analysis. Recent research has shown, however, that enrichment prior to analysis results in lower counts of CTCs and the potential loss of entire classes of disease-derived rare cells [7]. CellSearchTMuses an enrichment method based on epithelial biomarkers. However, it is stated in [8] that “invasive tumor cells tend to loose their epithelial antigens by the epithelial to mesenchymal transition process.” This finding further suggests that methods like CellSearchTMthat enrich based on epithelial biomarkers are unlikely to capture the full population of cells related to tumor progression. Moreover, in [8] they also emphasize that it is known that there can be epithelial cells in blood that do not have their origins in a tumor. These two deficiencies diminish the CTC count accuracy and hence lessens the impact of these methods as diagnostic tools. On the other hand, newer methods that do not enrich prior to analysis have shown the potential to identify a larger and maybe more complete set of candidate cells but require significant computational analysis as well as human verification [7]. In particular, the class of data generated without enrichment provides for the ability to optimize computational methods because of the large amount of data available, over twelve million cells per CTC test. Therefore, there is motivation to improve the level of automation of detection of CTCs on data generated without enrichment. Increasing the automation of detection of CTCs in this setting is the aim of the research presented here.Over the last 20 years there has been a steady increase in the number of research papers published surrounding morphological cell image analysis [9]. It has been asserted that the five most significant roles of morphological cell analysis in medical imaging are malignant cell identification and cancer detection, following morphological changes during a cell cycle, cell classification, changes in morphology due to treatments, and morphometrical studies [9]. These roles are all strongly related to identifying a set of features that allow us to categorize candidate cells into these rules.Cellular features are generally related to the geometry of the cell and properties of the interior of the cell, and carry a high-level of interpretability. A review of shape representations and description techniques for general images can be found in [10]. Geometric features of cells commonly include area, radii, perimeter, circularity, eccentricity, and irregularity [9,11]. Internal features of a cell include the intensity, texture, and regularity of the nucleus. The combination of these geometrical and internal features have been employed in many pathological tasks, especially related to human epithelial cells [12,13]. These features can be extracted from images and also visually inspected by a pathologist. However, due to the subjectivity involved in visual inspection, there has been an increase in the efforts to quantify these features using computers and to employ additional computer methods to support pathologists. A layout of one such image-guided decision support function is described in [14].The set of features described above work well in many pathologist tasks, however interpretable features can have significant drawbacks. A major drawback is the reliance on segmentation. Geometric features are only as accurate as the ability to identify the comprehensive boundary of the cell. There have been several methods proposed for improving the automated segmentation of cell events in blood and tissue [15–17]. A second drawback can be the limitation of these features to differentiate cells. For example, there have not been successful classification methods for differentiating between CTCs in patients of different clinical status using these interpretable features alone. Additional discussion of technical and mathematical challenges of automated screening of epithelial cells can be found in [18]. Features that are generated without concern for interpretability and are mathematical in nature sit in the realm of bioinformatics and are referred to as low-level features. Low-level feature methods have been employed in various cell classification tasks and perform with varying degrees of success. A comparison of different feature types together with varying classifiers is discussed in [19].In this paper, we have identified a set of low-level features that contain strongly differentiating structural information to separate CTC events of interest from white blood cells as well as identify distinct sub populations. Fourier-ring descriptors (FRDs) extract features from cells by combining techniques from bioinformatics and computer vision. Additionally, FRDs contain interpretable information as well as indirectly containing many geometric features.In the following sections we will first present the data acquisition process together with the composition of the data. Then, we will describe methods that we have considered, and highlight some of their challenges. Next, we will present our image representation technique and our classification structure for classifying a cell.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
