@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A pre-operative CT and non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT registration framework for trans-catheter aortic valve implantation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A fully automatic image registration framework for pre-operative CT and non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT.Increasing the rigid-body registration success rate by introducing a more robust initial point.Increasing the deformable registration accuracy by incorporating anatomical and structural information.Efficient implementation that significantly reduces the processing time.Tested on more than 20 data sets, both simulated and real data, the proposed method is statistically significantly better than the state-of-the-art methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image registration,Non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT,Pre-operative CT,TAVI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Contrast-enhanced C-arm CT is routinely used for intra-operative guidance during the trans-catheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI); however, the requirement for contrast agent injection is not preferable, especially for patients with renal insufficiencies. To address this problem, we present a novel framework for fully automatic registration of pre-operative CT and non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT. The proposed framework provides an improved workflow and minimizes the usage of contrast agent in the TAVI procedure. Our framework consists of three steps: coarse rigid-body alignment, anatomical knowledge-based prior deformation field generation, and fine deformable registration. We validated the proposed framework on 20 real patient data sets. Based on the 20 data sets, the mesh-to-mesh errors at the aortic root from different methods are measured. Our proposed method significantly outperforms the other state-of-the-art methods. Specifically, we achieve the registration accuracy at 1.76±0.43mm which is clinically plausible. Quantitative evaluation on real non-contrast enhanced C-arm CT data sets confirms the applicability in the clinical usage. The proposed heart registration method is generic and hence can be easily applied to other cardiac applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Aortic valve disease is the most frequent valvular disease in western countries. According to a population-based study [1], 1.8% of the global population is affected by the disease. Compared to the well established open-chest valve surgery, minimal invasive trans-catheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) is an emerging technique that is especially suitable for non-operable and high-risk surgical candidates with a severe aortic stenosis. Furthermore, it has the potential to replace the open heart surgery for regular risk patients. To support TAVI procedures, a 3D aortic model can be overlaid onto 2D fluoroscopy to provide anatomical details leading to more optimal valve deployment. Since both C-arm CT volume and fluoroscopy images are captured from the same device, the 3D aortic model obtained from the C-arm CT volume can be straightforwardly overlaid to the 2D fluoroscopy images with high accuracy [2]. Despite the reported success of the current workflow, major limitations still exist. To utilize the intra-operative C-arm CT image, a contrast agent must be used to obtain the 3D aortic model. However, contrast agent injection should be minimized as it is potentially harmful, especially to patients with kidney impairments [3]. Moreover, rapid-pacing is often required for an improved image quality of the aorta and there is concern that this may peel off some cardiac calcification into the blood circulation, therefore increasing the risk of strokes for patients. In addition, there is currently no standard protocol for cardiac C-arm CT acquisition. Highly trained physicians hence are necessary, making the workflow less straightforward.Pre-operative CT provides detailed anatomical assessment of the aortic root structures, the course of the descending aorta and the iliofemoral access, complementing the information obtained with echocardiography and angiography. Therefore, screening with multi-detector CT becomes an necessity and it is routinely performed in most large-volume centers for TAVI. Furthermore, recent study shows that high-pitch spiral dual source multi-detector CT can be used to assess the entire aorta and iliac arteries in TAVI candidates with a low volume of contrast agent while preserving the diagnostic image quality [4], however, such study has not carried out for C-arm CT images. Compared to using contrast-enhanced C-arm CT, pre-operative CT provides more accurate definition of cardiovascular anatomy, and the risk associated with the additional contrast agent and requirement for highly trained physicians are avoided. However, pre-operative CT is rarely used during the TAVI procedure. This is mainly because multi-detector CT scanner is not integrated into the angiographic C-arm system, so the coordinate system of the CT image is different from the fluoroscopy images. Hence, it is very difficult to utilize the information obtained from CT to perform reliable 2D/3D registration with fluoroscopy images directly.In this paper, we propose to acquire a native C-arm CT volume around the thorax and then perform 3D/3D image registration between the pre-operative CT and the intra-operative non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT. Thus the 3D aorta model constructed from the pre-operative CT can be used intra-operatively. Due to the fact that the native C-arm CT is not able to visualize nonradiopaque structures, the structures in the heart are hardly visible. Actually the only visible features in the native C-arm CT images are the heart surface, the epicardium, the spine and the thoracic cavity (see Fig. 1(b)–(d)). The poor quality of the native C-arm CT image further increases the registration difficulty. In contrast, there are clear cardiac structures in the CT volume (Fig. 1(a)). As the result of large mismatched areas between the C-arm CT and CT, conventional intensity-based deformable image registration techniques lead to significant errors in the area where the structures appear only in CT images but not in the native C-arm CT images. Pre-operative CT images had been deployed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory as reported in [5]. This study confirms the importance of the fusion of pre-operative CT and non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT images. However, only rigid registration was performed and human intervention was required. Grbić et al. proposed to fuse the aortic root in pre-operative CT and contrast-enhanced C-arm CT volumes using a model-based method [6]. In fact, minimizing the usage of contrast agent is crucial for TAVI patients, and clinically it is not practical to have a contrast-enhanced C-arm CT image for the sole purpose of segmentation/registration, as proposed in [2,6]. Our prior work incorporates the motion correlation with the spine and structural encoded mutual information into the registration framework [7]. But the deformation field inferred from the spine is rigid and not capable of modeling the heart motion. Therefore, the deformation field prior in [7] becomes less effective at locations further away from the spine area, resulting in inaccuracies when the aorta is distant from the spine. To the best of our knowledge, our prior work is the first literature reporting on automatic image registration of CT and non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT for TAVI.Nevertheless, similar multi-modality image registration problems occur in other applications, e.g., the structural appearance in wash in/out phases is largely different in the cardiac perfusion sequences; mismatching structures occur in the pre- and post-tumor resection images. To address this image registration problem, task-specific constraints are usually required. There are mainly three categories to incorporate the task-specific constraints into the registration framework. Firstly, landmark constraints are used to increase the registration accuracy and robustness [8–10]. These methods add a penalty term to constrain the corresponding pairs from moving too far apart, therefore, the accuracy of the correspondence matching is very crucial. The energy function is optimized using the thin-plate splines (TPS) and B-spline models. TPS are based on the bending energy of a thin plate, thus it only represents a relatively coarse deformation. B-spline models usually require numerical solutions at each iteration during the optimization process, which is computationally expensive and therefore may not be applicable intra-operatively. Secondly, biomechanical knowledge can be embedded into the registration framework to better regularize the registration process. In particular, Kyriacou et al. [11] used biomechanical properties to model the brain and tumor while applying deformable image registration to the anatomical atlas. Stefanescu et al. [12] filtered the deformation field using a Gaussian filter with varying standard deviations on different tissue types. Thirdly, incorporating the knowledge of statistical analysis on shape and displacement field variability is another popular approach. Wang and Staib [13] combined a statistical shape model and a physics-based regularization term to solve the atlas-based registration problem. Rueckert et al. [14] and Glocker et al. [15] performed statistical analysis on the displacements of the free form deformation grid. Xue et al. [16] tackled the problem of high dimensional statistical deformation models (SDMs) using wavelet based decompositions. Despite the promising results, training the SDMs suffers from the curse of dimensionality, and how to select the training data to represent the population remains unclear. Our method belongs to the first category, however, the target application is more challenging than the above mentioned ones with a larger area of missing/mismatched structures and poorer image quality. There is also a larger extent of deformation due to the breathing and cardiac motion. Furthermore, the volumes for our target application have very different field of views (FOVs), which may lead to significant errors in the rigid registration process.In this paper, we provide a framework that non-linearly aligns pre-operative CT and intra-operative non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT data. Our contribution is threefold. First, robust heart center detection in both image modalities using recursive searching rays and template matching is employed to boost the robustness of the rigid-body registration process. Second, based on the point sets obtained from spine, heart and lung surfaces, we applied the thin-plate splines parametric model to generate a prior deformation field, incorporating anatomical knowledge to facilitate the deformable registration. Third, structural encoded mutual information (SMI) incorporates the lung segmentation information into the calculation of mutual information. SMI utilizes the common anatomical structures, e.g., lung, heart surface, and epicardium, that exist in both modalities of images to make the registration context-aware. The combination of both high-level (anatomical correlation-regularized deformation field) and low-level (SMI) constraints increases the deformable registration accuracy. Our deformable registration adopts the variational formulations [17], and the gradient for the proposed similarity measure is further derived to efficiently optimize the energy functional.The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our proposed registration framework. Section 3 provides the results of experiments and comparisons with other methods. Section 4 further expands the discussions and addresses the limitation of the current framework. Finally, Section 5 gives a short conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented a general 3D/3D image registration framework to overlay CT image onto non-contrast-enhanced C-arm CT. We proposed a clinically more relevant initialization scheme to significantly improve the success rate of rigid-body registration, thus enabling a fully automatic registration framework. Unlike the existing methods that generate deformation field prior using large amount of training data sets, we make use of the anatomical information from the spine and heart surface, to generate an anatomically meaningful deformation field prior based on a TPS model. In addition, a novel energy function for deformable registration is proposed which combines the strength of SMI and the derived prior deformation field. The proposed framework is validated on 20 sets of clinical TAVI data. We show that the proposed method provides robust rigid-body registration results. Deformable registration further reduces the registration errors. For deformable registration, we compared the proposed method with pure intensity-based MI, directly applying the deformation field prior and our previous method [7]. Due to the lack of intensity information in the heart area, pure intensity-based MI method is prone to registration errors, consequently, implausible deformation field may occur which produces unreasonable registration results. Directly applying the deformation field prior provides robust and reasonable registration results, however, because the deformation field prior is estimated globally, it is not accurate at the edges and the areas with sharp structure, the registration result can be further improved. On the other hand, our proposed deformable registration method combines two soft constraints that jointly constrain the deformable registration process, and lead to a more accurate and anatomical meaningful registration result. We also showed that with incorporating the heart motion, the anatomical knowledge is more complete compared to our previously proposed method [7], and thus a better registration result. Paired t-test has shown that our proposed method is significantly better than the other three methods compared in the paper. Furthermore, we also reported the landmark errors based on measurement of the coronary ostia, the registration error of 2.86±0.77mm confirms the feasibility of our proposed framework on the clinical usage. Overall, our procedure eliminates the need for contrast agent injection while acquiring C-arm CT images. More importantly, the proposed framework can be nicely fit into the TAVI procedure as described in [2], without the need to change the system significantly. The proposed method is of a general form for heart registration and hence not limited to TAVI applications, but can be straightforwardly applied to other applications that require cross-modality registration of the heart. Future work includes clinically validating the framework on a larger number of data sets and applying the resulting 3D aorta model to 2D/3D image registration. We are also working on improving the parallelization of our implementation, and with more advanced CPU, a much faster registration process is expected. Regularization based on biomechanical properties could be further imposed to produce more anatomically plausible deformation field.