@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intravascular ultrasonic–photoacoustic (IVUP) endoscope with 2.2-mm diameter catheter for medical imaging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We successfully accomplished a 2.2-mm diameter IVUP endoscope system.The IVUP endoscope system is practical, portable, and cost-effective.We demonstrated its potential application for mapping the biological dyes.The system can perform simultaneous IVUS and IVPA imaging.The system can provide the 3D volumetric imaging of a turbid sample.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intravascular ultrasound imaging,Intravascular photoacoustic imaging,Imaging endoscope,Indocyanine green,Combined imaging,3D reconstruction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) imaging is extremely important for detection and characterization of high-risk atherosclerotic plaques as well as gastrointestinal diseases. Recently, intravascular photoacoustic (IVPA) imaging has been used to differentiate the composition of biological tissues with high optical contrast and ultrasonic resolution. The combination of these imaging techniques could provide morphological information and molecular screening to characterize abnormal tissues, which would help physicians to ensure vital therapeutic value and prognostic significance for patients before commencing therapy. In this study, integration of a high-frequency IVUS imaging catheter (45MHz, single-element, unfocused, 0.7mm in diameter) with a multi-mode optical fiber (0.6mm in core diameter, 0.22 NA), an integrated intravascular ultrasonic–photoacoustic (IVUP) imaging catheter, was developed to provide spatial and functional information on light distribution in a turbid sample. Simultaneously, IVUS imaging was co-registered to IVPA imaging to construct 3D volumetric sample images. In a phantom study, a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) tissue-mimicking arterial vessel phantom with indocyanine green (ICG) and methylene blue (MB) inclusion was used to demonstrate the feasibility of mapping the biological dyes, which are used in cardiovascular and cancer diagnostics. For the ex vivo study, an excised sample of pig intestine with ICG was utilized to target the biomarkers present in the gastrointestinal tumors or the atherosclerotic plaques with the proposed hybrid technique. The results indicated that IVUP endoscope with the 2.2-mm diameter catheter could be a useful tool for medical imaging.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Photoacoustic imaging (PAI) is based on the optoacoustic effects that result from the formation of acoustic waves due to light absorption in the sample. In this technique, nanosecond laser pulses are typically employed to irradiate biological tissues. Through the conversion of the absorbed light energy into heat, the acoustic waves can be generated within the irradiated volume following the transient thermoelastic expansion of the tissues. These acoustic waves can be identified and collected to reconstruct a photoacoustic image of the spatial distribution of light absorbers from the tissue compositions by using an ultrasound transducer. Therefore, PAI effectively combines the contrast of optical imaging techniques with the penetration depth and the resolution of ultrasound imaging [1–6].Atherosclerosis is one of the major causes of death in cardiovascular diseases and is caused by a plaque building up in the inner lining of a medium or large artery. The identifying characteristics of a high risk plaques consist the presence of a thin fibrous collagen-rich cap, a large lipid-rich pool, increased plaque inflammation due to dense macrophage activity, hemorrhage and calcification caused by a broken vasa vasorum [7,8]. Gradually building up of a plaque or thickening of the luminal wall of the artery causes decreased the flow of oxygen-rich blood to the tissues, vital organs and extremities. However, new studies have discovered that the structure and composition of the atherosclerotic lesion, rather than the degree of luminal narrowing, are presently considered as the most important decisive factors for acute clinical events [7]. Recently, intravascular photoacoustic (IVPA) imaging has demonstrated many advantages in atherosclerotic plaque detection. It is possible to differentiate atherosclerosis based on the structural and functional composition of the plaque by analyzing the multi-wavelength photoacoustic responses of the vessel wall [3,6,9].During the establishment of atherosclerotic plaques, a variety of biomarkers are present [3]. The accurate detection and characterization of certain biomarkers can ensure vital therapeutic value and prognostic significance for patients diagnosed with atherosclerosis at an early stage while it is asymptomatic. Various contrast agents, such as methylene blue (MB) [10] and gold nanoparticles [3,11], can be used in PAI because of their high optical absorption coefficients. In addition, these contrast agents can be conjugated with a number of antibodies to target biomarkers of interest. However, the MB dye can induce not only chemical mastitis but also photodamage under strong illumination [12]. Furthermore, for clinical applications, gold nanoparticles have not yet been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration [12]. Indocyanine green (ICG, C43H47N2O6S2Na, molecular weight 775Da), a cyanine dye with infrared absorbing properties, is approved by the Food and Drug Administration for determining human cardiac output, hepatic function, liver blood flow and ophthalmic angiography [13–17]. ICG can be used as a contrast agent for PAI with its absorption maximum of 785nm in aqueous solutions, and red shifts to 805nm in blood. After injection, ICG is rapidly metabolized in the liver, and then only excreted via the liver and bile ducts. Importantly, ICG can identify certain cellular and molecular objects involved in atherosclerosis. For instance, ICG has the ability to bind both high-density and low-density lipoproteins, relevant to the characteristics of its lipophilic [18]. In fact, ICG could enable in vivo detection of inflamed atheroma, lipid-rich, human macrophages and human atherosclerosis [19–21].In the last few years, several IVPA imaging systems have become available for imaging atherosclerosis [2–5]. For example, in the first-generation IVPA systems, the light was delivered from outside of the samples, which were rotated by a motor, while a IVUS transducer was inserted into the lumen for both photoacoustic and reflected ultrasound detections [2,3]. Such designs seem impractical for in-vivo imaging in humans due to the external laser irradiation and sample rotation. Subsequently, to enable IVPA imaging in reality, a number of different IVPA system designs, which could perform both of photoacoustic excitation and ultrasound detection inside the samples by integrating a multi-mode optical fiber (MOF) and a high-frequency IVUS into a single catheter, were successfully applied to image the aorta of a rabbit in vivo[4,5]. Recently, a combination of a single-mode optical fiber, a high-frequency IVUS transducer and an optical-electric rotary joint was proposed and developed to conduct three-dimensional (3D) volumetric photoacoustic and ultrasound imaging [6]. In general, these techniques seem to be limited in providing the total structure information of the samples due to the scanning mechanism [4,5] or the complicated and costly fabrication process [6]. However, initial experiments using these systems have contributed significantly to physicians’ understanding of high-risk plaques and give a demonstration of the prospective of IVPA for determining various components of atherosclerotic plaques.Here, we present a practical, portable, and cost-effective IVUP endoscope by integrating an IVUS imaging catheter with a custom-made MOF to perform simultaneous IVUS and IVPA imaging in the 3D volumetric of a turbid sample. With a high-frequency transducer, the ultrasound and photoacoustic signals can be resolved with spatial resolutions at the microscopic levels (a few tens of micrometers) [2], as such the resolutions are appropriate for detection of vulnerable plaques [3]. To demonstrate the feasibility of the custom-designed IVUP endoscope, the IVPA and IVUS images of a tissue-mimicking arterial phantom with ICG and MB inclusions are presented to compare the axial and lateral resolutions. In order to improve the ability of the imaging system to discriminate between different compositions based on optical contrast, the co-registered IVPA and IVUS images are shown. The IVUP imaging of an excised pig intestine was also performed to demonstrate the feasibility of the IVUP imaging system in ex vivo clinical applications.Fig. 1illustrates a design for an IVUP endoscope system. The key components of our system are a tunable optical parametric oscillator (OPO) laser system pumped by a Q-switched pulsed Nd:YAG laser source, a single-element high-frequency IVUS transducer, a MOF, data acquisition (DAQ) system, and a mechanical scanning stage. For the IVPA imaging, a 532nm pump source Q-switched pulsed Nd:YAG laser operating at a 10Hz repetition rate (Surelite III, Continuum, San Jose, CA, USA) was used with a 650–1064nm wavelength range and a 3–5ns pulse width using the tunable OPO (Surelite OPO Plus, San Jose, CA, USA). The pumping light was rejected with a 665nm long-pass colored glass filter (CGF) (FGL665S, Thorlabs, Newton, NJ, USA), and the output laser beam was coupled to a MOF (0.22 numerical aperture [NA], 600μm core diameter, BFL48-600, Thorlabs) with a plano-convex lens (PCL) (50mm in focal length, LA1225-B, Thorlabs). The input end of the MOF was fixed to a fiber coupler that could rotate and constantly maintain the MOF at the focus point of the PCL by using two ball bearings. To irradiate the sample that was placed parallel to the imaging catheter, the output end of the MOF was chamfered at an angle of 38 degrees, sealed with a glass cap of 0.9mm in outer diameter and integrated with a 45-MHz IVUS transducer (Revolution® 45MHz catheter, Volcano, San Diego, CA, USA) with element size of approximately 0.5mm to form an IVUP catheter (Fig. 2).Depending on the size of the samples, the ultrasonic and laser beams must be fairly aligned to detect the strongest photoacoustic signals. Therefore, to facilitate the alignment of the ultrasonic and laser beams, the IVUS catheter was divided into two parts: The adjustment part and the guidance part. The first part, which was used to adjust and fix the IVUS transducer and the MOF to obtain the maximum received signals easily during the scanning process, could rotate both the IVUS transducer and the MOF by an angle of up to ±10° (respective to the central axis of the catheter) and adjust them by a distance of ±5mm separately (Fig. 2(a)). The second part had the task of guiding the IVUS transducer and the MOF to the desired scanning positions and protecting the inner surface of the samples from collision with the catheter with a 0.8-mm rounded edge (Fig. 2(b)). The adjustment part was made from ABS (acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, a common thermoplastic polymer) using a 3D printer (the Replicator, Makerbot, Rock Hill, SC, USA). Acrylic glass, a transparent plastic that allows 98% visible light to pass through (with a plate thickness of 3mm), was used to fabricate the guidance part with a tolerance of 3μm by using a CNC machine (High-Z S-400/T, CNC-Step, Geldern, Germany). Fig. 2(c) is a digital photograph of the distal end of the catheter under an optical microscope. The custom-made IVUP catheter had a maximum outer diameter of 2.2mm, making it highly applicable for in vivo clinical investigations in interventional cardiology.The IVUP catheter was connected to a step motor-gearbox combo (rotary stage) to perform a B-mode scan by rotating the IVUP catheter 360 degrees (counter clockwise) with respect to the central axis of the catheter. To prevent both the MOF and the IVUS catheter from twisting each other, a rotation in the opposite direction (clockwise) was applied to obtain the next B-mode scan. To achieve a 3D image, a series of B-mode scans were recorded step-by-step by longitudinally scanning the sample via another step motor (translation stage). The output signals from the IVUS transducer were amplified using an ultrasound pulser/receiver (5900 PR, Olympus, Waltham, MA, USA) before being digitized by a 100-MS/s DAQ card (PXI-5122, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) and finally recorded with an embedded controller (NI PXI-1042Q, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) with two separate data sets based on the rotary direction of the gearbox. A LabVIEW program was developed to control all the processes mentioned above. The acquired data was band-pass filtered using a linear-phase finite impulse response (FIR) digital filter, processed by the Hilbert transform, and then converted to the Cartesian coordinates to display the 2D cross-sectional and 3D volumetric images of the sample with a custom-developed MATLAB® program.To evaluate the custom-built imaging system, a tissue-mimicking vessel phantom composed of 8% polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, 363146 Aldrich, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 0.4% silica powder (S5505 Sigma, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) with ICG and MB inclusions was utilized. PVA was used as the material for the vessel phantoms because of its non-toxic, easy casting, and long-term storage properties, while silica particles (0.2–0.3μm in diameter) were mixed to the PVA solution to imitate the properties of optical and ultrasound scattering of tissues [22]. The fabrication of a 12-mm outer diameter phantom with 1-mm wall thickness, 4-mm lumen diameter, and four compartments is shown in Fig. 3(a). ICG and MB, the biological dyes used in medical diagnostics, were mixed with degassed water at concentrations of 65μM and 10μM, respectively; before being injected alternately into the compartments. The optical absorption coefficient of MB and ICG increases toward the near infrared wavelength range, with local maxima of 677 and 785nm, respectively [23,24]. To conduct the experiment, the IVUP catheter was put in the lumen of the phantom, which was filled with degassed water to remove artifacts during experiments. The IVUP scans were produced by mechanically rotating the catheter. The setup of the imaging system is shown in Fig. 1.IVUP imaging studies also were performed of the ex vivo samples injected with ICG to target the biomarkers present in the atherosclerotic plaques. The purpose of this study was to demonstrate the feasibility of ICG detection by using this system on biological tissue. Moreover, we targeted a working distance of 0–10mm from the outer surface of the catheter in designing the endoscope to noninvasively image gastrointestinal diseases, such as colorectal and Barrett's esophagus cancers, which originate from the epithelial cells lining the lumen of the colon of the gastrointestinal tract [5]. Therefore, a section of the intestine with a thickness of 2mm was extracted from a healthy pig and saved in formalin before conducting the experiment. The PVA vessel phantom with diameter of 12mm was embedded in the lumen of pig intestine to form the tubular sample before injected with a solution of ICG in water. Similar to the phantom studies, the IVUP imaging catheter was placed in the lumen of the phantom, which was positioned in the water tank and rotated by a stepper motor (rotary stage) to perform the IVUS and IVPA imaging simultaneously.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
