@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantitative normal thoracic anatomy at CT

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It points out detailed quantitative anatomic (QA) information currently not existing.We demonstrate the non-linear geometric and geographic relationships among objects.We show the highly non-linear variations of object-specific properties of 11 objects.QA information is useful in creating effective models for the object segmentation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thorax,CT,Quantification,Quantitative radiology,Automatic anatomy recognition,Segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automatic anatomy recognition (AAR) methodologies for a body region require detailed understanding of the morphology, architecture, and geographical layout of the organs within the body region. The aim of this paper was to quantitatively characterize the normal anatomy of the thoracic region for AAR. Contrast-enhanced chest CT images from 41 normal male subjects, each with 11 segmented objects, were considered in this study. The individual objects were quantitatively characterized in terms of their linear size, surface area, volume, shape, CT attenuation properties, inter-object distances, size and shape correlations, size-to-distance correlations, and distance-to-distance correlations. A heat map visualization approach was used for intuitively portraying the associations between parameters. Numerous new observations about object geography and relationships were made. Some objects, such as the pericardial region, vary far less than others in size across subjects. Distance relationships are more consistent when involving an object such as trachea and bronchi than other objects. Considering the inter-object distance, some objects have a more prominent correlation, such as trachea and bronchi, right and left lungs, arterial system, and esophagus. The proposed method provides new, objective, and usable knowledge about anatomy whose utility in building body-wide models toward AAR has been demonstrated in other studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The detection of abnormalities on any imaging examination is made possible by first having a thorough knowledge of the normal anatomy and/or function of an organ system under study (i.e., an understanding of what is considered to be normal), and then by characterizing deviations from this normal. In clinical practice, radiological examinations are typically performed in a descriptive and qualitative manner. Although this approach may be useful to describe pertinent findings and to provide an overview of a patient's status, it is imprecise, subjective, and insensitive to small deviations from normal. Quantifiable information can be extracted from available images to optimize early disease detection, accurate disease characterization, and response assessment in the clinical setting, indicating a potential role for quantitative radiology in clinical practice.Since manual quantitative analysis is labor-intensive and subject to inter-operator variability, computerized automatic anatomy recognition (AAR), which we define as automatic modeling identification, and delineation of all major anatomic objects in a body region, is an essential step towards quantitative radiology (Udupa et al., 2014). Its implementation for radiological images in a body-region- and modality-independent manner is, however, challenging. Many investigations are currently underway toward building AAR methodologies. Two separate approaches—atlas-based (Cabezas et al., 2011; Joshi et al., 2004; Baiker et al., 2010; Jia et al., 2012; Evans et al., 2012) and model-based (Cootes et al., 1995; Chen et al., 2013; Chen and Bagci, 2011; Okada et al., 2008; Zhou and Rajapakse, 2005) are the most prominent among these. Motivated by applications (such as semantic navigation) where the focus is just locating objects or landmarks on them in image volumes and not delineating whole solid organs, a separate group of methods has been emerging (Criminisi et al., 2013; Donner et al., 2013). For all such approaches, it becomes essential to understand what normal anatomy is in a quantitative manner. Studies based on external and anthropometric measurements for the whole body as well as for specific body regions have been conducted (Robinette et al., 2002; Ressler, 1977; Wang et al., 2000; Nagamine and Suzuki, 1964; De Onis and Habicht, 1964). The anthropometry technique has been used to describe a broad set of measures: width, length, circumference, skin fold thickness, and distance among several landmarks. In the thoracic region, external measurements of circumference, anterior-posterior depth, and sternal size have been described in a systematic manner (Ressler, 1977). Yet, at present, assessment of normal internal thoracic anatomy in a comprehensive, quantitative, and three-dimensional manner is lacking.Quantification of anatomy is required at different levels for AAR and quantitative radiology. On the one hand, for AAR, quantification at a more global level, such as through assessment of the overall morphology of individual objects and the inter-relationship among objects is needed. Such quantitative descriptions of a body region can greatly simplify and facilitate the task of automatically identifying and delineating all major objects in the body region by constructing population anatomic models of the objects and their geographic layout (Udupa et al., 2014). For example, Udupa et al. (2014) demonstrated how some of the quantitative anatomic properties, such as distance and size relationships among objects and their variation over a population, can be explicitly encoded in an anatomic hierarchical arrangement of all objects in a body region to handle any type of relationship (even non-linear) that may exist naturally among objects. Similarly, for every object, who its neighbors are and what their image intensity characteristics are constitute anatomic knowledge, which can also be encoded into the hierarchical object model assembly (Udupa et al., 2014). The hierarchical models can then be used to perform AAR. Such models can potentially be assessed to characterize age-related changes as proposed by Well et al. (2007). In the case of dynamic objects, the same type of quantitative entities as a function of time will also be useful. On the other hand, for quantitative radiology, the quantification is needed at a more detailed and local level. For example, individual object properties such as their volume, surface area, and shape characteristics (like boundary smoothness and roughness) have been used in describing disease processes rather than overall geography of objects and their relationships. As one example, we have recently shown (Tong et al., 2015) that, in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSA), the bilateral fat pads (as 3D objects) are situated closer to oropharynx in OSA than in normal subjects. Conventionally, only the size of certain objects, mainly the adenoid and tonsils, have been the focus of study for understanding OSA and its treatment effects. Yet, over 50% of subjects treated with adeno-tonsillectomy continue to suffer from OSA. In this example, object relationship information has generated new knowledge on the potential causes of OSA. Perhaps a new way of treatment ought to be repositioning fat pad rather than removing tonsils and/or adenoid.In the literature, quantification for describing normality is mainly confined to individual objects; quantification of object assemblies has not been studied. Some examples from the literature are as follows. The anatomic variants of vessel branching have been investigated, since such information may be useful for surgical purposes. For different structures, such as the portal vein, hepatic artery, and coronary arteries (Ibukuro et al., 2013; Mariolis-Sapsakos et al., 2012; Dal-Bianco and Levine, 2013; Młynarski et al., 2013; Vucurevic et al., 2013), the different branching patterns have been systematically described. Natsis et al. (2013) studied the morphometry of the foramen magnum and occipital condyles. Measurements such as diameter, length, and width were taken over dry skulls with a digital sliding caliper for a population study. There are other similar studies of the upper cervical spine for quantitatively describing the individual vertebrae (Radcliff et al., 2010; Simsek et al., 2013). In the thoracic region, the airway structure has been quantified by cross-sectional measures such as lumen area and wall thickness (Leader et al., 2008, 2006). An investigation by Sandoz et al. (2013) measured ribcage midline length, lateral and antero-posterior width, surface area, sternum volume, and cartilage to rib ratio. In all these examples, the focus was a single object or a part of an object and not an entire object assembly or body region or describing the geographic layout of an object assembly.A more general and global approach to quantitatively describe the anatomy of a body region suits the spirit of quantitative radiology better for the purposes of AAR. Keeping the goal of AAR in mind, our aim in the current paper is to study normal anatomy quantitatively for individual and whole object assemblies in the thoracic body region. The methodology consists of collecting radiologically normal images from existing patient image databases, delineating all major objects in the body region in these images and creating object 3D surface models, analyzing the gross morphology of objects individually, and analyzing the inter-object relationships.This paper presents new data on certain anatomic properties of and relationships among major objects of the thorax. The main motivation for excavating and understanding these data is automated localization and delineation of these objects in the entire thoracic body region. To the best of our knowledge such data do not exist in the literature at present. We have already demonstrated their use not just in the thoracic body region but also in other body regions and in fact body-wide (Udupa et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016). Particularly, inter object relationships have been found to be highly non-linear and the incorporation of this information in an object hierarchy to localize objects in images automatically have been demonstrated to be a very effective approach (Udupa et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016). Techniques based on registration which rely on smooth deformations cannot handle such non-linear relationships adequately. These findings have significant repercussions in many body-wide applications such as automatic contouring of objects for radiation therapy planning, body-wide disease quantification from PET/CT images, etc.This retrospective study was conducted following approval from the Institutional Review Board at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania along with a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) waiver. The image data utilized in this study were obtained from the radiology picture archiving and communication system. Forty-one 50–60year old male subjects who had undergone thoracic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and whose CT images were considered to be radiologically normal by a board-certified radiologist were selected for the study. The routine chest CT examinations had been performed on 16 or 64 multidetector row CT scanners (Siemens Medical Solutions, Malvern, PA) during a full inspiratory breath hold and during the venous phase of enhancement. Images were acquired 50s after intravenous administration of 100ml of Isovue 370 iodinated contrast material (Bracco Diagnostic Inc., Princeton, NJ) at 2ml/s with a slice collimation of 16×0.75mm or 64×0.6mm, respectively, a kVp of 120, an average effective tube current-time product of 200mAs, with tube current modulation on, and a gantry rotation time of 0.5s. Axial images were reconstructed at a nominal slice thickness of 5mm with an interval of 5mm, a 512×512 matrix, and a B30f reconstruction kernel. Each exam consisted of an average of 60 axial slices covering the entire thorax, with a pixel size of 0.77mm×0.77mm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
