@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An automated approach to the segmentation of HEp-2 cells for the indirect immunofluorescence ANA test

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose automated segmentation of HEp-2 cells in immunofluorescence imaging.We apply the same pipeline to images with different fluorescent pattern and intensity.Our segmentation approach is based on adaptive marker-controlled watershed.We assess the accuracy of our approach on a public dataset.We compare our performance with significant works from literature.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
HEp-2 cell segmentation,Cell pattern analysis,Indirect immunofluorescence,ANA testing,Microscope image processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The automatization of the analysis of Indirect Immunofluorescence (IIF) images is of paramount importance for the diagnosis of autoimmune diseases. This paper proposes a solution to one of the most challenging steps of this process, the segmentation of HEp-2 cells, through an adaptive marker-controlled watershed approach. Our algorithm automatically conforms the marker selection pipeline to the peculiar characteristics of the input image, hence it is able to cope with different fluorescent intensities and staining patterns without any a priori knowledge. Furthermore, it shows a reduced sensitivity to over-segmentation errors and uneven illumination, that are typical issues of IIF imaging.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pattern recognition techniques are at the basis of computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems in a large number of medical applications. Such systems support and facilitate the decision of the physicians, help reducing diagnosis errors and enable massive screening at a moderate cost, with tremendous positive impact on health care quality and economy [1]. This motivates an ever growing interest of the research community in providing solutions to the most challenging medical problems.Recently, the analysis of indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) images has received increasing attention, with special regards to the development of systems for the computer-aided diagnosis of connective tissue diseases (CTDs). CTD refers to a broad category of autoimmune disorders that affect a remarkable percentage of the population, such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis and scleroderma. These autoimmune disorders are usually diagnosed by means of a blood exam called the Antinuclear Antibody (ANA) test. This test leverages on the analysis of IIF images to reveal the presence in the blood serum of antibodies that are responsible for CTDs, typically using HEp-2 (Human epithelial type 2) cells as a substrate for the microscope slides. Different antibodies generate distinct patterns of fluorescence on the HEp-2 cells (see Fig. 1), allowing differential diagnosis.While the ANA test has gained a wide recognition for its diagnostic capabilities and has now become a routine exam, the visual analysis of IIF images remains a very challenging task for the physicians, who need to inspect a massive amount of images. Moreover, several studies confirm that the reliability of the diagnosis is critically affected by the subjectivity and variability of the human evaluation [2,3], thus demanding for the automatization of the diagnostic process.In the last few years, many researchers have applied pattern recognition techniques to this problem, and several automated tools have been proposed to support all the major steps of the IIF analysis procedure, including methods to automatize image acquisition and enhance image quality [4,5], image segmentation techniques [6–10], methods to improve IIF image representation and color conversion [11] as well as classification paradigms applied either to the quantification of the fluorescence intensity [12–14], to the recognition of the mitotic cells [15,16] or to the categorization of the fluorescent patterns [17–22].Among the other tasks, image segmentation is one of the most critical and challenging in a computer-aided diagnosis system applied to IIF images. It is critical, because the accuracy of segmentation of the HEp-2 cells heavily affects the following steps of the analysis, such as the recognition of mitotic cells and the categorization of fluorescent patterns (details in Section 2.1). Besides that, HEp-2 cell segmentation is challenging because IIF images are intrinsically subject to tremendous variability. The major sources of this variability are: (i) the wide range of staining patterns (Fig. 1) and intensity levels (Fig. 2) that characterize the cells, (ii) the presence of mitotic cells (i.e. cells undergoing division, Fig. 3), and (iii) the possible generation of artifacts due to uneven illumination and photo-bleaching effect. This is a very difficult problem that is far from being solved.In this work, we propose a fully-automated segmentation of HEp-2 cells in IIF images, without any a priori knowledge of their fluorescence intensity or staining pattern. Our method is designed as a multi-step pipeline. Both the segmentation approach and its parameters are adapted to the identified characteristics of the input image. As such, our pipeline is able to segment HEp-2 cells (including mitotic ones) with different intensity levels and with six different fluorescent patterns (see Fig. 1). Furthermore, we assessed the accuracy of our proposed technique on a publicly available dataset of IIF images, which allows a direct comparison with the most significant works in this area.This paper is organized as follows. After a short overview of the medical context (Section 2.1) and of the most relevant literature on IIF segmentation (Section 2.2), we characterize the image dataset (Section 3), we describe our proposed technique (Section 4) and the parameters’ set-up (Section 5) and we discuss our experimental results (Section 6). Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper and presents future works.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
