@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Geometrical modeling of complete dental shapes by using panoramic X-ray, digital mouth data and anatomical templates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents a general approach to geometrical modeling of complete tooth shapes.The method integrates tooth templates, panoramic radiographs and digital crown models.The radiographic process is virtually replicated on crown geometries by DRT projection.The virtual PAN image is then used to integrate radiographic data and crown models.Complete tooth reconstructions are thus obtained by minimally invasive imaging modalities.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the field of orthodontic planning, the creation of a complete digital dental model to simulate and predict treatments is of utmost importance. Nowadays, orthodontists use panoramic radiographs (PAN) and dental crown representations obtained by optical scanning. However, these data do not contain any 3D information regarding tooth root geometries. A reliable orthodontic treatment should instead take into account entire geometrical models of dental shapes in order to better predict tooth movements.This paper presents a methodology to create complete 3D patient dental anatomies by combining digital mouth models and panoramic radiographs. The modeling process is based on using crown surfaces, reconstructed by optical scanning, and root geometries, obtained by adapting anatomical CAD templates over patient specific information extracted from radiographic data. The radiographic process is virtually replicated on crown digital geometries through the Discrete Radon Transform (DRT). The resulting virtual PAN image is used to integrate the actual radiographic data and the digital mouth model. This procedure provides the root references on the 3D digital crown models, which guide a shape adjustment of the dental CAD templates. The entire geometrical models are finally created by merging dental crowns, captured by optical scanning, and root geometries, obtained from the CAD templates.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, computer-aided design (CAD) plays a crucial role in several medical applications including customized prosthesis design, virtual treatment planning and computer-guided surgery. Generally, a CAD-based biomedical tool requires three-dimensional modeling of anatomical shapes, which are used for downstream clinical simulations [1]. The development of imaging technologies and reverse engineering methods has given a great support to the widespread use of digital human models for diagnosis and treatment planning.For a long time, dentistry has demonstrated a great interest in using CAD tools for clinical practice, with reference to implant design, prosthetic rehabilitation and bite correction. Within dentistry, orthodontics is a clinical specialty dealing with the study and the treatment of irregular bites (malocclusions) in order to provide better functionalities and appearances. The most common methodologies for non-surgical orthodontic treatments are based on the use of fixed or removable appliances [2,3] to correct tooth positions. In clinical practice, the conventional approach to orthodontic diagnoses and treatment planning relies on the use of plaster models of patients’ mouths, which are manually analyzed and modified in order to plan corrective interventions. However, these procedures require labor intensive and time consuming efforts, which are restricted to highly experienced technicians.Recent progresses in three-dimensional surface scanning devices have allowed the development of computer-based tools dedicated to complete planning processes. Orthodontic treatments greatly benefit from the use of CAD methodologies to produce customized tight-fitting appliances. In this context, the accurate reconstruction of individual tooth shapes obtained from digital 3D dental models represents a crucial issue for planning customized treatment processes. Optical scanners are used to digitize patients’ mouths thus providing geometric representations of tooth crowns. However, a correct orthodontic treatment should also take into account tooth roots in terms of position, shape and volume. In particular, position and volume of dental roots may cause dehiscence, gingival recession, as well as root and bone resorption when teeth undergo movements during therapy. Different recording technologies may be used to produce medical images of internal anatomical parts, such as X-ray radiography and computed tomography. 2-D panoramic radiographs (PAN) are considered routine diagnostic supports in dentistry, though the output data are limited to bi-dimensional information. The use of cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) provides 3D tooth shapes, which include root geometries. However, the use of CBCT still represents a matter of discussion in dentistry, since the radiations are higher than those emitted by a standard radiographic process.The present paper is aimed at modeling 3-D shapes of complete teeth by using panoramic X-ray data and digital mouth models. In particular, the proposed methodology adapts general CAD tooth templates over individual patient's anatomies by correlating optical digitalization of dental mouth models with panoramic radiographs. The radiographic capturing process is replicated onto crown geometries, obtained by segmenting the digital mouth model, through the discrete radon transform (DRT). A virtual PAN image is created and used to integrate the patient's radiographic data on the digitized crown models, thus providing root references over dental anatomies. The root references guide a shape adapting of dental CAD templates. The final dental models are obtained by merging the accurate crown data, captured by the optical scanning, and the root geometries, approximated from the adapted CAD template shapes.The effectiveness of the developed methodology has been evaluated by comparing the reconstructed tooth shapes with those obtained by processing CBCT scans, which have been used as ground truth.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the field of orthodontics, most of the treatments are planned by only considering crown data, ignoring root geometries. However, the complete information on tooth shapes, including both coronal and root anatomies, would be a valuable support to enhance treatment planning and to provide more realistic simulations. Moreover, one of the main challenges relies on the accurate determination of these geometries by exposing patients to the minimum radiation dose. In this context, the present paper outlines a methodology to infer 3D shape of tooth roots by combining the patient digital plaster cast with a panoramic radiograph. The method investigates the feasibility of adapting general dental CAD templates over real tooth anatomies by exploiting geometrical information contained within panoramic images and digital plaster casts. The proposed modeling approach allows a generalized formulation of the problem since assumptions about the imaging device used for radiographic data capturing are not required.Clearly, the adapting process of general CAD templates is not able to guarantee the exact match of the reconstructed root shapes and positions with the real patient dental anatomy, and the accuracy of the obtainable results is strictly dependent on the wideness of the available CAD templates library. However, even a rough estimate of the complete dental model with its inertia allows tooth gradual movement to be dynamically simulated, thus enhancing the accuracy of tooth corrections. The developed tooth modeling approach enables both crown and root contacts to be monitored, thus ensuring a comprehensive planning.The approach involves some variables, which could suggest the direction of future studies. In particular, key issues are represented by the optimization of both the projection curve γ and the projection angle θ, whose values determine the orientation of root tip constraint lines. These topics certainly require further research activities taking also into account, for example, additional information extracted by supplementary lateral radiographs.