@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
In vivo MRI based prostate cancer localization with random forests and auto-context model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an automatic detection method to localize prostate cancer in MRI.We localize prostate cancer in peripheral zone (PZ) as well as in central gland (CG) and transition zone (TZ).The random forest is employed to effectively integrate features from multi-source images.Experimental results show that our method can accurately localize the cancerous sections.The results of our proposed method are better than that of other four conventional methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Prostate cancer,MRI segmentation,Random forests,Auto-context model,Cancer localization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Prostate cancer is one of the major causes of cancer death for men. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is being increasingly used as an important modality to localize prostate cancer. Therefore, localizing prostate cancer in MRI with automated detection methods has become an active area of research. Many methods have been proposed for this task. However, most of previous methods focused on identifying cancer only in the peripheral zone (PZ), or classifying suspicious cancer ROIs into benign tissue and cancer tissue. Few works have been done on developing a fully automatic method for cancer localization in the entire prostate region, including central gland (CG) and transition zone (TZ). In this paper, we propose a novel learning-based multi-source integration framework to directly localize prostate cancer regions from in vivo MRI. We employ random forests to effectively integrate features from multi-source images together for cancer localization. Here, multi-source images include initially the multi-parametric MRIs (i.e., T2, DWI, and dADC) and later also the iteratively-estimated and refined tissue probability map of prostate cancer. Experimental results on 26 real patient data show that our method can accurately localize cancerous sections. The higher section-based evaluation (SBE), combined with the ROC analysis result of individual patients, shows that the proposed method is promising for in vivo MRI based prostate cancer localization, which can be used for guiding prostate biopsy, targeting the tumor in focal therapy planning, triage and follow-up of patients with active surveillance, as well as the decision making in treatment selection. The common ROC analysis with the AUC value of 0.832 and also the ROI-based ROC analysis with the AUC value of 0.883 both illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed non-skin cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death among U.S. men [1]. Current clinical practice for the diagnosis of prostate cancer is often based on a transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) biopsy, after the patient shows an elevated serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) level. A large screening trial using PSA and TRUS has shown that it is possible to reduce prostate cancer mortality by 20–30% [2]. However, these studies have also shown that PSA testing in combination with TRUS biopsies has a relatively low specificity. Additionally, cancer is often under-graded in TRUS biopsies [3]. These problems lead to over-diagnosis and overtreatment of patients for prostate cancer [4]. Alternatively, multi-parametric high-contrast magnetic resonance (MR) imaging provides a powerful and noninvasive imaging tool for detecting suspicious cancerous tissues [5], as shown in Fig. 1, which includes T2, diffusion-weighted (DW) imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) MR images. Since ADC MR image is calculated from DWI and related to the b-value, in our experiments, only one type of ADC MR image – dADC (the regular ADC map) – is used.Nowadays, MRI is often used as a second line modality after repeating negative TRUS biopsies. One of the reasons why MRI has not yet progressed to the first line modality for prostate cancer diagnosis is mainly the need of high-level expertise of radiologist to read prostate MRI. Such expertise is not widely available [6,7]. Besides, the MRI-based diagnosis suffers from large observer variability due to the difficulty of the task [7]. Additionally, due to the large number of 3D images, reading prostate MRI data is quite time-consuming and labor-intensive.Automated computer-aided detection and diagnosis (CAD) of prostate cancer could help reduce the above problems and open the door to prostate cancer screening using multi-parametric MRIs. In the recent decade, computer-aided detection and diagnosis of prostate cancer is becoming an active field of research and many methods have been proposed [6,8–16]. However, there are still some limitations for the previous works:(1)Prostate consists of several main regions, namely peripheral zone (PZ), central gland (CG), and transition zone (TZ). In MR images, cancer in the PZ has richer textural information than that in the CG [17], which makes the computer-aided detection relatively easy in the PZ. Therefore, early researches of MRI-based prostate cancer detection mainly focused on identification of cancer only in the PZ, instead of the entire prostate region. For example, Chan et al. [10] were the first to implement the prostate cancer detection method by using multi-parametric MRIs. In their paper, they used the SVM classifier to identify prostate cancer in the PZ by combining information from three different MRI techniques: T2-weighted (T2W), T2-mapping, and line scan diffusion imaging (LSDI). Niaf et al. [8,14] and Vos et al. [9] proposed machine-learning methods for suspicious region of interest (ROI) classification in the PZ. In addition, many techniques have also been developed in the imaging field to facilitate image-guided prostate cancer detection in the PZ. For example, Langer et al. [15] developed a multi-parametric model suitable for prospectively identifying prostate cancer in the PZ by using MRI. However, many studies have demonstrated that prostate cancer is not limited to the PZ, but also appears in the CG [11,12,16] and TZ [18,19]. But, identifying TZ tumor is a difficult task [20] since the TZ is the site of origin of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), which can have a heterogeneous appearance [21,22].In the literature, prostate cancer is usually detected via a two-stage CAD system. In the first stage, the suspicious cancer ROIs are manually delineated by radiologist. In the second stage, those suspicious ROIs are classified into benign and cancer tissues by using textual information within those ROIs. Most of these two-stage CAD systems are semi-automatic, as the suspicious cancer ROIs often have to be delineated manually by radiologist, which is labor-intensive, time-consuming, and subject to manual errors. For example, Niaf et al. [8,14] proposed a CAD system, aimed to separate cancer ROIs from benign ROIs by using supervised learning methods. In their methods, suspicious cancer ROIs were manually delineated by two persons, i.e., one histopathologist and one researcher, by using histological sections as gold standard. Compared with these two-stage methods, our proposed method directly localizes cancer regions voxel-by-voxel, similar to the detection systems proposed by Tiwari et al. [23] and Sparks and Madabhushi [24], thus is able to detect much smaller cancer regions. This aspect is important to guide prostate biopsy, as well as precisely target the tumor in focal therapy planning. Besides, our method is fully automatic and also computationally efficient.There are still a few works that classify the whole prostate region into benign or malignant tissues, especially in the early diagnosis of prostate cancer. Firjani et al. [13] used DWI and a KNN-based classifier to classify the prostate into benign or malignant regions based on three appearance features extracted from the registered ADC images with different b-values. With their methods, prostate with malignant or benign cancer could be discriminated, but the identified cancer regions were too coarse to guide prostate biopsy. In other words, such method only focused on determining whether cancer exists in the prostate, which cannot be adopted for guiding prostate biopsy that needs more accurate cancer localization.Litjens et al. [25] proposed an automated zone-specific CAD pipeline for prostate cancer detection. They mainly used an atlas-based method to segment the prostate into PZ and TZ. Then, they detected cancer from each zone. Recently, they [6] again proposed a novel and fully automatic CAD system to detect prostate cancer. Similar to the method in [25], in the first stage of their method, for detecting the candidate regions, they used a multi-atlas-based prostate segmentation, three different voxel classifiers (by integrating various features such as intensity, pharmacokinetic, texture, blobness and anatomical features from multi-parametric MRIs), as well as local maxima detection. Then, in the second stage, the statistics (of voxel-wise features), local contrast, symmetry, and shape features were extracted as candidate representations and further input to a classifier for both cancer ROI identification and segmentation. Finally, with lesion-based FROC and patient-based ROC analysis, their system showed a reasonable performance in prostate cancer detection.Inspired by these existing methods, T2, DWI, and ADC map are used in our work for prostate cancer localization. As demonstrated in the literature, by combining any two of three multi-parametric MRIs, prostate cancer regions can be more effectively discriminated from non-cancerous regions. For instance, Miao et al. [26] found that the performance of DW imaging in prostate cancer detection was significantly better than that of T2W imaging. Shimofusa et al. [27] compared the prostate cancer detection ability of T2W imaging without or with DW imaging. Morgan et al. [28] compared the performance of prostate cancer detection by using T2W alone, and also jointly using T2W and DWI or ADC map. In their works, by analyzing the statistical results, they concluded that, compared with the cases of using T2W without or with ADC map, using T2W with DWI had the superiority in cancer detection. All these methods were based on medical statistical analysis, and their results reported in the papers demonstrated that multi-parametric MRIs provided better information about cancerous and normal regions in the prostate, when compared to the methods using a single MRI modality. This was similarly verified by Ozer et al. [29].To deal with the aforementioned limitations of previous works, in this paper, we propose a novel learning-based multi-source integration framework, similar to the method proposed by Montillo [30], for accurate localization of prostate cancer within the entire prostate. Specifically, in our method, we first employ random forests [31] to train a classifier based on the training subjects with multi-parametric MRIs (T2, DWI, and dADC, as shown in Fig. 1). The trained classifier provides an initial cancer probability map for each training subject. Then, inspired by auto-context model [32,33], the estimated tissue probability map is further used as additional source of information to train the next classifier, which integrates the high-level context features (from the estimated cancer probability map) with the appearance features (from multi-parametric MRIs) for refining cancer classification. By iteratively training the classifiers based on the updated cancer probability map (and the multi-parametric MRIs), we can finally obtain a sequence of classifiers. Similarly, in the application stage, given a target subject, the learned classifiers are sequentially applied to iteratively refine the estimation of cancer probability map by combining the multi-parametric MRI information with the previously-estimated cancer probability map. We have validated our proposed method on 26 patient subjects, with promising performance.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A detailed description of source images and our proposed method are introduced in Section 2. Experimental design, results and analysis are then presented in Section 3, followed by the Discussions and Conclusion sections.In our work, all patients underwent prostatectomy and pre-operative multi-parametric endorectal MR imaging, including all sequences of T2W and DW MR imaging in the axial direction with Philips MR scanners (Achieva; Philips Healthcare, Eindhoven, the Netherlands, a 3T imager) between March 2008 and March 2010, and have not been previously treated before (such as with radiation or hormone). ADC values were calculated from DW MR images by using a linear least squares [34] fitting to the logarithmic form of a mono-exponential DW signal model, as follows:(1)lnS0Sb=b⋅ADCwhere S0 and Sbare the DW MR signal intensities with diffusion weighting of 0 and b, respectively [35–37]. Here, we use one kind of ADC image – dADC image – as a source image for cancer localization as shown in Fig. 1. Multi-parametric MRI data (T2, DWI and dADC) from 26 patients are included in this study. Among 26 subjects, there are totally 42 tumors, including 29 PZ tumors, 7 CG tumors and 6 TZ tumors.All MR images were acquired with an endorectal coil (Medrad; Bayer Healthcare, Warrendale, PA) and a phased-array surface coil with the aforementioned Philips MR scanners. Immediately before MR imaging, 1mg of glucagon (Glucagon; Lilly, Indianapolis, Ind) was injected intramuscularly to decrease peristalsis of the rectum. The data acquisition parameters [38] are shown in Table 1.The reference standard of prostate cancer foci in the MR images was established through a systematic consensus-seeking correlative review of histological findings and MR images by a genitourinary pathologist (with 8 years of experience in genitourinary pathology) and a radiologist (with 9 years of experience in prostate MR imaging). The pathologist sliced each prostate and identified all distinct tumor foci larger than approximately 5mm in diameter, and then the radiologist manually outlined the corresponding ROIs of the tumor foci on the MR images according to the tumor regions on the histological slices by the pathologist. Totally, 1–3 cancer delineations on MR images of each subject were cooperatively done manually by radiologist and the pathologist. Note that these cancer ROIs were mostly outlined on T2 images, and some were outlined on DW images.We resampled all images into the size of 512×512 with the resolution of 0.3125mm×0.3125mm×3mm. For the alignment, since the dADC image was generated from DWI, we need only to align DWI and dADC images to T2 image for each subject. Through our experiments, we found that the results of registration affected the final voxel level classification, e.g., better registration leads to better cancer region localization. We also found that the linear registration method can meet requirements in our work due to no large deformation occurring among multi-parametric MR images of each subject. Here, we use the FMRIB's linear image registration tool (FLIRT) [39] to implement this procedure. However, since the contrast of the prostate and other tissues in DWI and dADC is not high enough while the boundary of bladder is obvious, we first align T2 image to DWI along with the bladder masks, and then align DWI to T2 image with the prostate masks. Histogram matching [40] was also performed on each type of MRI across different subjects.In our method, we formulate the localization of prostate cancer as a two-class classification problem. To solve such a classification problem, we proposed a novel learning-based multi-source integration framework by employing random forests [31] and auto-context model [32,33]. For simplicity, let Nsubbe the total number of the training subjects and letI={IT2i,IDWIi,IdADCi,i=1,…,Nsub}be a set of multi-parametric MRIs. As a supervised learning method, our method consists of both training and testing stages. The flowchart of training stage is shown in Fig. 2. In the training stage, we will train a sequence of classification forests, each with the input of multi-source images/maps. In the first iteration, the classification forest takes only the multi-parametric MRIsIas input, and uses the image appearance features extracted from different multi-parametric MRIs for voxel-wise classification. By applying the trained forest in the first iteration, each ith training subject will produce tissue probability maps for prostate cancerIPCiand non-prostate cancerInPCi, respectively, as shown in the second column of Fig. 2. In the later iterations, as inspired by the auto-context model [32,33], the tissue probability mapsI¯={IPCi,InPCi,i=1,…,Nsub}obtained from the previous iteration will act as additional source information for training. Specifically, the high-level context features are extracted from the tissue probability maps to assist the classification, along with appearance features from the multi-parametric MRIs. Since context features are informative about the nearby tissue structures for each voxel, they encode the spatial constraints into the classification, thus improving the quality of the estimated tissue probability maps, as also demonstrated in Fig. 2. Then, the tissue probability maps are iteratively updated and fed into the next training iteration. Finally, a sequence of learned classifiers will be obtained.Similarly, in the testing stage, given a target subject with multi-parametric MRIs, we can obtain the initial tissue probability map by applying the trained classifier in the first iteration using only the multi-parametric MRIs. In the later iterations, along with multi-parametric MRIs, the tissue probability maps resulted from the previous iteration are also fed into the next classifier for refinement. Fig. 3(a)–(c) shows examples by applying a sequence of the learned classifiers for cancer localization in the PZ, CG, and TZ, respectively. As we can see from Fig. 3, the cancer probability maps are updated with iterations and become more and more accurate. In the following, we will detail on how to train the classifiers via random forests.Random forest [31] is an ensemble learning method for classification or regression. As a machine learning method, random forest has been successfully applied in many fields, such as bioinformatics, computer vision, and medical image analysis [41,42].In our work, we employ random forest to implement cancer localization for a given testing voxel x, based on its high-dimensional feature representation f(x,I), whereIis a set of multi-parametric MR images as we define in the above. When the random forest is implemented, at each iteration, totally T decision trees, indexed by t∈[1, T], are used as classification trees. In the training stage, in the first iteration, each tree t learns a weak class predictor pt(c|f(x,I)) using features extracted from a set of multi-parametric MR imagesI, where c is the label of cancer or non-cancer. When the training stage starts, according to the feature representation, the training samples are assigned to the left and right child nodes at each parent node through recursive splitting. At each node, to obtain the optimal split for maximizing the information gain [43], a number of random splits on different combinations of features and thresholds are considered. The tree keeps growing until it reaches the constraint conditions. For example, it reaches a specified depth (d), or the criterion that no tree leaf node should contain less than a certain number of training samples (smin). Finally, we associate each leaf node (l) with the empirical distributionptl(c|f(x,I))over the two classes by the proportions of the labels of all training samples which reach that leaf node.In the testing stage, by applying the learned split functions, each testing voxel x is independently tested. When the testing sample arrives at a leaf node lxin each trained tree t, the empirical distribution of that leaf node is used to determine the class probability of the testing sample x, i.e.,pt(c|f(x,I))=ptlx(c|f(x,I)). Finally, we can obtain the class probability for the testing sample x by computing the mean of the class probabilities from all individual trees, i.e.,p(c|x)=1T∑t=1Tpt(c|f(x,I)). In our work, what we should solve is a two-class classification problem. Therefore, in the trained random forest, for each ith training subject at the first iteration, only cancer and non-cancer probability maps(I¯i={IPCi,InPCi,i=1,…,N})are generated, as shown in the second column of Fig. 2.Random forest can deal with a large number of features efficiently. In other words, for random forest, in our study, any kind of features from multi-parametric MRI and tissue probability maps can be extracted and used for classification, such as the histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) features [44], local binary pattern (LBP) features [45], Gabor features [46], and any kind of gradient features [47]. In fact, in our implementation, considering the efficiency, we use the random Haar-like features [48] for both appearance features and context features. Note that the Haar-like features have been used widely in many studies of pattern recognition or machine learning [49–51]. Specifically, for each voxel x, its Haar-like features are computed as the local mean intensity of any randomly displaced cubical region R1 or the mean intensity difference over any two randomly displaced, asymmetric cubical regions (R1 and R2) within the image patch R[52]:(2)f(x,I)=1|R1|∑u∈R1I(u)−b1|R2|∑v∈R2I(v),b∈{0,1}where R is the patch centered at voxel x, I is any kind of source image, and the parameter b∈{0, 1} indicates whether one or two cubical regions are used (as shown in Fig. 4, for b=0 and b=1). In the image patch R, its intensities are normalized to the unit ℓ2 norm [53,54]. In theory, for each voxel we can determine an infinite number of such features.In this section, the proposed method will be extensively evaluated on 26 subjects using leave-one-out cross-validation. Results of the proposed method are compared with the manual ground-truth segmentations, as well as other conventional methods.In the following, we mainly employ the section-based evaluation (SBE) [55], sensitivity, specificity, and Dice ratio, to measure the performances of different methods.Section-based evaluation (SBE) is defined as a ratio of the number of the sections that automatic method localizes correctly to the number of the total sections that the prostate is divided into:(3)SBE=∑ns=1L{label(As),label(Bs)}n(4)L{X,Y}=1,ifX=Y0,ifX≠Ywhere label(·) in Eq. (3) represents that the section is cancer or non-cancer; Asand Bsare the localization results of the section s through automatic method and expert, respectively; and n is the number of the total sections that the prostate is divided into.The SBE is an effective method widely used for evaluating the performance of the prostate cancer section localization. Generally, in the clinical setting, when a patient is diagnosed as a suspicious prostate cancer sufferer with a high PSA level or an abnormal screening DRE, a biopsy is frequently suggested [56]. Often, when doing a biopsy, the prostate is divided into sections based on the number of biopsy points to use, followed by shooting a needle in each section to extract the respective tissue sample. A popular way is to divide prostate into 6 sections (for 6 point biopsy) [57]: right base, left base, right mid, left mid, right apex, and left apex. Alternatively, some doctors will choose 12 sections by further dividing each of these 6 sections into medial and lateral parts. This method is very popular in prostate cancer diagnosis in clinic, and it is also the standard of the prostate biopsy, as shown in the schematic diagram at the top of Fig. 5. However, 6- or 12-sections partition does not consider the shape of prostate. We take a typical slice of the mid part of the prostate as an example in Fig. 6. The 1st row and 2nd row show the division results on a MRI slice with 6-section division and 12-section division, respectively. It can be seen that the 6- or 12-section division will generate too large section for a biopsy needle, which may result in more shots to different points in each section for accurate extraction of cancer tissue. To reduce the number of the locations for biopsy in each section while still keeping the accuracy of cancerous section localization, we divide the prostate into sections by considering the size of each prostate part (base, mid-gland and apex). In general, as shown in the bottom of Fig. 5, the base and mid parts of the prostate are divided into 9 sections, while the apex is divided into 4 sections. For a typical prostate slice mentioned above, the division result is shown in the 3rd row of Fig. 6. It can be observed that, by dividing the prostate into these fine sections, we can more accurately localize cancer sections, compared with the conventional 6- and 12-section partition strategies.We employ two important statistical measures: sensitivity and specificity. Here, besides the standard voxel-wise definitions of sensitivity and specificity, we also reformulate the sensitivity and specificity based on the divided prostate sections:(5)sensitivity=TCSTCS+FNS(6)specificity=TNSTNS+FCSwhere TCS is the number of true localized cancerous sections, FNS is the number of cancerous sections localized as normal sections, TNS is the number of true localized normal sections, and FCS is the number of normal sections localized as cancerous sections.Dice ratio [58] measures the overlap between our localized cancer region and the ground-truth cancer region. The Dice ratio is formulated as:(7)Dice ratio=2|Ipre∩Igrd||Ipre|+|Igrd|where Ipreis our predicted cancer region and Igrdis the ground-truth cancer region.In the random forest training, the number of classification trees is 20; the maximum tree depth is 50; the number of randomized Haar-like features is 10,000 for both image appearance and context features; and the minimum sample number for each leaf node is 8. These parameters are determined via cross-validation. Specifically, we first study the impact of the number of trees, T, on cancer section localization, as shown in Fig. 7(a). We set the maximal tree depth as 50 and the minimal number of leaf nodes as 8 according to previous work [59]. In Fig. 7(a), the SBE increases from 0.66 (T=2) to 0.87 (T=15), the standard deviation decreases from 0.030 (T=2) to 0.013 (T=15), and the cancer localization performance tends to be stable when T≥20. Therefore, to produce reasonable and accurate results, we set T=20 in our work. Fig. 7(b) shows the impact of the maximum tree depth. We find that the SBE gradually increases as the depth varying from 5 to 20 and then becomes stable as the depth reaches over 40. Fig. 7(c) shows the impact of the minimum sample number for each leaf node. The performance becomes stable when the minimum sample number is less than 8, while the performance starts decreasing when the minimum sample number is larger than 10. The possible reason is that the samples with cancer label and the samples with non-cancer label fall into the same leaf node because of setting too large value for the minimum sample number in each leaf node, which results in fuzzy classification. As for the number of iterations, we find that the satisfactory performance can be achieved in 3 or 4 iterations, and, after that, the performance becomes stable. In this paper, we conservatively set the iteration number as 10, to obtain both effectiveness and accuracy for our proposed method.In our work, we choose the random Haar-like features for the appearance features and context features. To demonstrate the advantage of random Haar-like features, we make comparisons with other four types of features: HOG features [44], LBP features [45], Gabor features [46] and gradient features [47]. As shown in Table 2, we can find that the sensitivity with random Haar-like feature is a little bit lower than that with LBP feature, and also the specificity with random Haar-like feature is lower than that with HOG feature. However, the overall performance with random Haar-like feature is much better than the respective performances with other four types of features.In the proposed method, the context features play an important role. They can improve the accuracy of localization iteratively. Fig. 8and Table 3show the SBEs of our sections division on 26 patient subjects by sequentially applying the learned classifiers based on the multi-parametric MR images. It can be seen that the SBEs are improved with the iterations and also become stable after a few iterations. Specially, in the second iteration, the SBEs are improved greatly due to the integration of the previously estimated tissue probability maps for guiding the classification. These results demonstrate the importance of using context features for cancer localization.The sensitivity and specificity of our cancer section localization with iterations are also shown in Table 3. It can be seen that there is a decrease, followed by an increase of both sensitivity and specificity with the increasing number of iterations. The main reason is that, in the first iteration, when no cancer probability maps are available, most of the localized cancer regions are larger than the ground truth, i.e., by the example shown in the second column of Fig. 2 and the example shown in Fig. 3(b); thus the sensitivity is higher and specificity is lower. With the increase of iterations, the localized cancer regions shrink and the final localized cancer regions become smaller than the ground truth, resulting in the decrease of sensitivity while increase of specificity. We can also find that the specificity is improved from 81.3% to 84.1% in the second iteration.From Table 3, it can be seen that the section-based sensitivity and specificity, respectively, achieve the relative high values, i.e., 91.5% and 85.1%, with a few iterations. This means that almost no any cancer section is localized as non-cancer section and also most of the non-cancer sections are correctly localized. To verify the accuracy of cancer region localization with our method for potentially guiding biopsy, two typical prostate slices are taken as examples. For the first example shown in Fig. 9(a), our method can accurately localize cancer regions. For another example shown in Fig. 9(b), it can be seen that our method can not only localize the true cancer region but also provide another suspicious cancer region; both of these localized cancer regions are suspicious, which need to be tested by biopsy needle. However, compared with the traditional biopsy, in the second example, the number of sections to place the biopsy needle is the same, but the accuracy of localizing cancer sections is largely improved because of adoption of fine section division. Therefore, the proposed method with our section division method is very useful to guide prostate biopsy, which can reach a considerable performance gain by reducing the number of suspicious cancer sections as well as guaranteeing the accuracy of cancer section localization.In the past decade, many studies have shown the improvement of cancer diagnosis or detection accuracy with combination of different types of MRI. For example, Wang et al. [60] and Kim et al. [61] validated that the single modality MRI, T2 or ADC map can be used for cancer detection. But the information from the single modality MRI is not rich enough to better differentiate cancer region from normal tissue. To illustrate the superior performance of cancer detection using multi-parametric MRI, we compared the performances using different combinations of image modalities as shown in Fig. 10. The SBE by combining all T2, DWI and dADC is 87.1%, which is better than the results obtained by any of other six combination cases (T2: 76.8%; DWI: 80.4%; dADC: 83.2%; T2+dADC: 86.8%; T2+DWI: 80.6%; DWI+dADC: 86.5%). By comparing the results only with single modality MRI, we can see that the performance of using dADC in prostate cancer localization is better than that of using either T2 or DWI, demonstrating that ADC map can provide more useful information for prostate cancer localization. Since ADC map is computed from DWI, these results also provide the evidence as concluded in [27–29]: DWI has outperformance over other existing MRI in prostate cancer localization and detection.Due to the unavailability of codes and dataset, we cannot perform a fair comparison with other state-of-the-art prostate cancer localization methods. Therefore, in this section, we compared our method with other classification-based methods on the same dataset. More specifically, we compare the proposed method with four popular classification methods: (1) Naïve Bayes classifier [62], (2) Support Vector Machine (SVM) [63], (3) SVM with radial basis function (RBF) kernel (SVM+RBF) [64], and (4) AdaBoost [65], as detected below. In these methods, to achieve the best performance, we extract not only the Haar-like features, but also the HOG features [44], LBP features [45], Gabor features [46] and gradient features [47].•Naïve Bayes classifier technique is based on the so-called Bayesian theorem, and is particularly well-suited when the dimensionality of the inputs is high. Despite its simplicity, Naïve Bayes classifier can often outperform more sophisticated classification methods. In the training stage, using a set of training samples, the method estimates the parameters of a probability distribution (i.e., Gaussian distribution), by assuming that features are conditionally independent given the class. In other words, all model parameters (i.e., class priors and feature probability distributions) can be approximated with the relative frequencies from the training samples. In the testing stage, for any unseen test sample, this method computes the posterior probability of that sample belonging to each class, and then classifies the test sample according to the largest posterior probability.Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a supervised learning model associated with learning algorithms that analyze data and recognize patterns, which can be used for classification and regression. It is often used for solving two-class classification problem. Given a set of training samples, each belonging to one of the two categories, an SVM training algorithm builds a model, i.e., generating two optimal hyperplanes to separate the input samples into two categories and also preventing the samples from falling into the maximum margin (i.e., the gap between the hyperplanes). For the parameter setting, we choose the linear function and RBF as two candidate kernel functions and set both cost functions as 1, and the parameter gamma in RBF kernel is set as 1/k, where k is the number of training samples. Then, the learning model is generated by training the input training samples. Before training and testing, for each sample, 500 discriminant features among all features are selected using feature selection method (such as Fisher Score [66]). In the application stage, the generated model is used for cancer prediction in the testing image.AdaBoost has been a mature and popular machine learning method for classification for decades. When training the input samples, it generates a series of weak learners by updating the weight on each training sample. At each iteration, a weak learner is selected and assigned with a coefficient such that the sum of training error of the boosting classifiers is minimized. These weak learners finally converge to a strong learner. We set the maximum number of iterations as 200 in the weak learner refining process to build a strong classifier. Finally, the generated classifier is used in the testing stage and then the tissue probability map is obtained.Fig. 11shows the comparison results using the four methods on the multi-parametric MR images of the same patient as shown in Fig. 6. The results of Naïve Bayes, SVM, SVM+RBF, AdaBoost and our proposed method are shown in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th rows, respectively, and further indicated by the orange, brown, cyan, green and blue contours. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd columns represent the localization results with T2, DWI and dADC images, respectively. It can be observed that the result of proposed method is much better than other four methods, and is very similar to the ground truth. In the localization maps of other three methods except SVM+RBF, the localized cancer regions are noisy, which could result in more non-cancer regions localized as the suspicious cancer regions for guiding needle placement. In contrast, from the 5th row, we can see that, by using the proposed method, the localized cancer region is clear. On the other hand, for the result with SVM+RBF, although the localized cancer region is also clear, it is much smaller than the ground truth, and is also not as good as the result obtained by our proposed method.For quantitative evaluation, the SBE, sensitivity and specificity on 26 subjects are shown in Table 4, which further illustrates the outperformance of the proposed method over other four methods. Specifically, the average SBE (87.1%), sensitivity (91.5%) and specificity (85.1%) of the proposed method are much higher than those by any of other four methods: (1) SBE 68.5%, sensitivity 73.7% and specificity 65.9% by Naïve Bayes; (2) SBE 71.4%, sensitivity 72.6% and specificity 71.0% by SVM; (3) SBE 79.9%, sensitivity 66.1% and specificity 83.8% by SVM+RBF; (4) SBE 68.0%, sensitivity 94.6%, and specificity 60.5% by AdaBoost. It can be seen that the SBE and specificity by our proposed method are significantly higher than those by Naïve Bayes, SVM, SVM+RBF and AdaBoost method. The sensitivity by the proposed method is slightly smaller than that by AdaBoost, but still much better than that by Naïve Bayes, SVM and SVM+RBF, respectively. All these results again demonstrate the performance of our proposed method than other four conventional methods.To better validate the proposed method, we further employ the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis method [67]. We use two kinds of ROC analysis methods. One is the common ROC analysis method [67,68] and the other is the ROI-based ROC analysis method [69].The ROC curve is used to analyze the performance of a classifier system in many research fields, such as medicine, radiology, biometrics, machine learning and data mining [67]. The common ROC curve is built by analyzing the results from each testing subject. It illustrates the relationship between the true positive rate and the false positive rate at various threshold settings. On the other hand, the ROI-based ROC analysis was proposed by Obuchowski et al. [69]. They used it to detect and locate breast cancers. They partitioned the images into several ROIs. Every reader assigned a confidence score to each ROI. Finally, they used the ROI-based ROC analysis to access the reader's ability of detecting and locating the abnormalities. In our work, we also use the ROI-based ROC analysis to evaluate the performance of our method. We divide the images into sections as shown in the bottom of Fig. 5. We choose the maximum value from the probabilities of all voxels in a section as the confidence score of each section, which results in localization of all suspicious cancer sections as well as fully convinced non-cancer ones, thus ensuring both accuracy and precision of cancer-section localization. We also calculate the area under the ROC curve (AUC) which can evaluate a classifier system quantitatively.Fig. 12(a) shows common ROC curves, and Fig. 12(b) shows ROI-based ROC curves. The blue curve illustrates the ROC of our proposed method. As we can see from Fig. 12(a), along with the AUC value (0.832), our proposed method produces slightly better than that obtained by Naïve Bayes method, but much better than other three methods. These results indicate that our method can localize cancer voxels very well. Furthermore, as we can see from Fig. 12(b), along with the area under the ROI-based ROC curve (0.883), our proposed method has obvious superiority over other four methods.In addition, to evaluate the effectiveness of our method on individual patients, we apply two different ROC analysis methods to the localization results with five different methods on 26 patients. Fig. 13(a) shows the AUC values on 26 patients by the proposed method, Naïve Bayes, SVM, SVM+RBF, and AdaBoost methods. Most of the AUC values by our method are over 0.7, with the highest as 1.0, which indicates that our method works well in cancer voxel localization for the same individual patient. From Fig. 13(b), we can observe that most of the AUC values under the ROI-based ROC curves by our proposed method are over 0.8, which are better than those achieved by Naïve Bayes, SVM, SVM+RBF and AdaBoost methods on 26 patients. These results further validate the effectiveness of our proposed method in cancer section localization.To evaluate the performance of our method for the cancer localization in different zones, we calculate the mean Dice ratios in PZ, CG and TZ, respectively. The average Dice ratios are shown in Table 5. It can be observed that our method achieves higher average Dice ratios 62.0% in PZ, 56.7% in CG and 78.0% in TZ than other four methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
