@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Image fusion of Ultrasound Computer Tomography volumes with X-ray mammograms using a biomechanical model based 2D/3D registration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Investigation of patient-specific biomechanical modeling of the breast based on sound speed volume.Model-based 2D/3D registration using a breast compression simulation.Image fusion of X-ray mammograms with quantitative tissue properties.Method for analysis of diagnostic value of Ultrasound Computer Tomography.Evaluation with software phantoms and nine in-vivo datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image fusion,Image registration,Ultrasound Computer Tomography,X-Ray mammography,Breast imaging,Multimodal diagnosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ultrasound Computer Tomography (USCT) is a promising breast imaging modality under development. Comparison to a standard method like mammography is essential for further development. Due to significant differences in image dimensionality and compression state of the breast, correlating USCT images and X-ray mammograms is challenging. In this paper we present a 2D/3D registration method to improve the spatial correspondence and allow direct comparison of the images. It is based on biomechanical modeling of the breast and simulation of the mammographic compression. We investigate the effect of including patient-specific material parameters estimated automatically from USCT images. The method was systematically evaluated using numerical phantoms and in-vivo data. The average registration accuracy using the automated registration was 11.9mm. Based on the registered images a method for analysis of the diagnostic value of the USCT images was developed and initially applied to analyze sound speed and attenuation images based on X-ray mammograms as ground truth. Combining sound speed and attenuation allows differentiating lesions from surrounding tissue. Overlaying this information on mammograms, combines quantitative and morphological information for multimodal diagnosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer is still one of the most common cancer among women in both the developed and developing countries [1]. Early detection of cancer before a metastatic spread is key to survival [2]. Besides palpation, the method of choice for early breast cancer diagnosis is medical imaging. Currently X-ray mammography is the standard technology used in screening. It provides high resolution projection images of the breast and is broadly available. However, mammography frequently provides poor contrast for tumors located in glandular tissue as both tissues have similar density, limiting the sensitivity in dense breasts [3].To overcome the drawbacks of X-ray mammography, innovative imaging methods are being developed. Ultrasound Computer Tomography (USCT) is one such promising breast imaging modality, which aims at providing reproducible high resolution 3D images of the undeformed breast without exposing any ionizing radiation to the patient [4]. First systems acquiring multiple 2D slices are being tested in clinical studies [5,6] while a full 3D system is currently undergoing first in-vivo trials [7]. The image acquisition is based on up to several thousand ultrasound transducers, which surround the breast in a water bath. USCT allows simultaneous acquisition of reflection and transmission signals from which three types of images are reconstructed: reflection images, attenuation images and sound speed images. Reflection images reveal changes in the echotexture resulting in the qualitative imaging of tissue surfaces. Attenuation and sound speed images are expected to provide a quantitative tissue characterization [8].Since USCT is still in development, comparison of the images with the screening method X-ray mammography is of high interest. X-ray mammography images the patient in upright position with the breast compressed between parallel plates to enhance the contrast of the 2D projection image. USCT acquires an image of the patient while lying in prone position with the breast hanging freely into the water bath. Due to the differences in dimensionality and compression state of the breast, the correlation of both imaging methods is challenging. An image registration of both modalities, which overcomes these differences, is therefore likely to improve the correlation of both images. It may assist radiologists in learning to read USCT images as they can be compared to a well known standard method. The registration furthermore allows for an evaluation of the diagnostic value of USCT images, e.g. of quantitative sound speed and attenuation images using X-ray mammograms as ground truth. Finally it makes it possible to combine both imaging methods in a single image for multimodal assessment, either for evaluation or possibly for diagnosis in future.In this work we developed a registration method based on patient specific biomechanical models of the breast. The method originates from an automated registration for X-ray mammograms and MRI volumes [9]. In preliminary work [10–12] it was successfully applied to in-vivo USCT datasets. In contrast to the previously used breast modeling using constant breast stiffness value for the entire breast model, USCT makes it possible to estimate patient-specific breast stiffness distributions automatically. Compression simulations ignoring the patient-specific tissue distribution result in a homogeneous deformation of the breast and may not reflect stiffness differences in the breast, e.g. of a hard tumor compared to surrounding fatty tissue. In this paper we investigate the effect of including an estimation of the spatial distribution of tissue stiffness properties from USCT images on the compression simulation of the breast. A structured analysis of the effect is carried out with numerical phantoms before the biomechanical modeling is evaluated with in-vivo data. Furthermore the aim of this paper is to summarize and conclude on the proposed overall registration method. Building on the registration method we present a method for analysis of the diagnostic value of USCT images. Additionally an image fusion technique is presented which combines the quantitative USCT imaging with the morphology of X-ray mammograms at a glance for visual evaluation of the USCT imaging capabilities. Results with in-vivo data are illustrated.2D/3D registrations of X-ray mammograms with 3D volume datasets of the female breast were until now mainly carried out for MRI datasets. Methods include a 2D registration of projected MRI images [13,14], 3D affine transformations [15], using idealized ellipsoidal models of the breast in combination with Finite Element compression simulations [16] and using biomechanical models of the breast [17–22]. None of these methods has been applied to other modalities than MRI. Partly lesion correspondence is used to determine transformation parameters which limits clinical applicability. To the best of our knowledge, the presented approach is the first which was applied to multiple modalities, and especially the first which was applied for the registration of X-ray mammograms with USCT volumes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
