@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Landmark constrained registration of high-genus surfaces applied to vestibular system morphometry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Landmark constrained diffeomorphic registration of high-genus surfaces is proposed.Registration algorithm is based on quasi-conformal theories.Shape analysis models are proposed using the registration.Proposed models are tested on 27 vestibular system (VS) surfaces.Shape differences in the posterior canal between normal and AIS group are found.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surface registration,Landmark,High-genus surface,Vestibular system,Universal covering space,Beltrami coefficients,Homotopic loops,Minimal surfaces,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The analysis of the vestibular system (VS) is an important research topic in medical image analysis. VS is a sensory structure in the inner ear for the perception of spatial orientation. It is believed several diseases, such as the Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS), are due to the impairment of the VS function. The morphology of the VS is thus of great research significance. A major challenge is that the VS is a genus-3 surface. The high-genus topology of the VS poses great challenges to find accurate pointwise correspondences between the surfaces and whereby perform accurate shape analysis. In this paper, we present a method to obtain the landmark constrained diffeomorphic registration between the VS surfaces based on the quasi-conformal theory. Given a set of corresponding landmarks on the VS surfaces, a diffeomorphism between the VS surfaces that matches the features consistently can be obtained. The basic idea is to iteratively search for an admissible Beltrami coefficient, which is associated to our desired landmark matching registration. With the obtained surface registrations, vertex-wise morphometric analysis can be carried out. Two types of geometric features are used for shape comparison. One is the collection of homotopic loops on each canals of the VS, which can be used to measure the local thickness of the canals. From the homotopic loops, centerlines can be extracted. By examining the deviations of the centerlines from the best fit planes, bendings of the canals can be detected. The second geometric feature is the minimal surface enclosed by the homotopic loop. From the minimal surfaces of each homotopic loops, cross-sectional area of the canals can be evaluated. To study the local shape difference more comprehensively, a complete shape index, which is defined using the Beltrami coefficients and surface curvatures, is used. We test proposed registration method on 15 VS of normal control subjects and 12 VS of patients suffering from AIS. Experimental results show the efficacy and accuracy of the proposed algorithm to compute the VS surface registration. Shape analysis has also been carried out using the proposed geometric features and shape index, which reveals shape differences in the posterior canal between normal and diseased AIS groups.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Surface-based morphometry has become one of the most ubiquitous shape analysis techniques in medical image analysis. For example, in human brain mapping, the morphometry of brain cortical surfaces has been extensively studied to detect shape changes during disease progression or healthy aging. The hippocampal surface morphometry has also been an active research field to study the Alzheimer's disease.In order to compare two anatomical surfaces, finding accurate point-wise correspondences between them is of utmost importance. Such a process is called surface registration. Surface registrations between simply-connected open or closed surfaces have been extensively studied and various algorithms have been developed. However, registration between high-genus surfaces is comparatively less studied. The high-genus topology of the surfaces makes the registration procedure much more challenging. One typical example of high-genus anatomical structures is called the vestibular system (VS) (see Fig. 1). The VS is a genus-3 structure situated in the inner ear, which is a sensory structure responsible for detecting head movements and sending postural signals to the brain. The morphometry of VS plays an important role in the analysis of various diseases such as the Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) disease. The AIS is a 3D spinal deformity which affects about 4% schoolchildren worldwide. The etiology of AIS is still unclear but believed to be a multi-factorial disease. One popular hypothesis was suggested to be the structural changes in the VS that induce the disturbed balance perception, and further cause the spinal deformity. The morphometry of the VS becomes important to understand the disease.Our goal in this paper is develop an effective algorithm to obtain accurate registrations between VS surfaces so that systematic shape analysis can be performed. In medical imaging, landmark-based surface registration may sometimes be advantageous, since expert knowledge of feature correspondences can be incorporated into the registration model. Although various landmark-based registration models have been recently proposed, most of them focus on computing landmark matching registrations for simply-connected surfaces. For higher genus surfaces, they are often cut into several simply-connected patches. Landmark-based registration is then obtained by registering every corresponding simply-connected patches. The drawback is that consistent boundary cuts must be accurately delineated, which is usually difficult. In this work, we propose an effective algorithm to obtain the landmark constrained diffeomorphic (1-1 and onto) registration between the VS surfaces, which is independent of the boundary cuts. Given a set of corresponding landmarks on the VS surfaces, a diffeomorphism between the VS surfaces that matches features consistently can be obtained.To simplify the registration problem, the VS surfaces are firstly parameterized conformally into the hyperbolic diskℍinℝ2, which is endowed with the hyperbolic metric. An iterative scheme is then used to search for a landmark-matching diffeomorphism. It is done by iteratively search for an admissible Beltrami coefficient, which is associated to our desired landmark-aligned diffeomorphism. Using the proposed method, accurate point-wise correspondences between the VS surfaces that match corresponding features can be efficiently obtained within 30s.Once the surfaces have been registered, vertex-wise morphometric analysis can be carried out. Various corresponding geometric features can also be extracted on the VS, which can be used for the shape comparison. In this paper, we extract two kinds of geometric features on the VS surfaces. One is the homotopic loops on each canals of the VS. A set of geodesic homotopic loops is firstly extracted on the mean VS surface. With the registration, corresponding homotopic loops on every VS surfaces can be extracted. These homotopic loops can be used to study the local geometry and thickness at each position of the VS surface. From the homotopic loops, the centerlines can be extracted, which are curves passing through the centroids of homotopic loops. By examining the deviations of the centerlines from the best fit plane, bendings of the canals can be detected. The second geometric feature is the minimal surfaces enclosed by the homotopic loops. With these minimal surfaces, cross-sectional area at each position of the canals can be evaluated. To study the local geometric difference in details, a complete shape energy, which is defined using the Beltrami coefficients and surface curvatures, is also applied.We have evaluated the proposed registration algorithm on 15 VS of normal control subjects and 12 VS of AIS patients. Results demonstrate the efficiency and accuracy of the proposed method to compute the VS surface registration. Shape analysis has also been carried out using the proposed shape features and shape energy, which reveals shape differences in the posterior semi-circular canal between the normal control and diseased subjects.In short, the contributions of this work are two-folded. Firstly, we propose a method to compute the landmark constrained diffeomorphic registration between the high-genus surfaces, which is independent of the boundary cuts. Given any two corresponding sets of landmarks, we can obtain a smooth and bijective map between the high-genus surfaces aligning the landmarks consistently. Secondly, we propose several shape analysis models to study the geometric differences between corresponding VS surfaces.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
