@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Uncertainty analysis of quantitative imaging features extracted from contrast-enhanced CT in lung tumors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Quantitative imaging features had little dependency on the time after contrast injection.Most quantitative imaging features were reproducible between scanning sessions several days apart.Some texture features changed gradually after contrast injection but eventually became stable.Imaging noise had little impact on texture features.Compact prognostic features could be derived from calculated redundant features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeTo assess the uncertainty of quantitative imaging features extracted from contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans of lung cancer patients in terms of the dependency on the time after contrast injection and the feature reproducibility between scans.MethodsEight patients underwent contrast-enhanced CT scans of lung tumors on two sessions 2–7 days apart. Each session included 6 CT scans of the same anatomy taken every 15s, starting 50s after contrast injection. Image features based on intensity histogram, co-occurrence matrix, neighborhood gray-tone difference matrix, run-length matrix, and geometric shape were extracted from the tumor for each scan. Spearman's correlation was used to examine the dependency of features on the time after contrast injection, with values over 0.50 considered time-dependent. Concordance correlation coefficients were calculated to examine the reproducibility of each feature between times of scans after contrast injection and between scanning sessions, with values greater than 0.90 considered reproducible.ResultsThe features were found to have little dependency on the time between the contrast injection and the CT scan. Most features were reproducible between times of scans after contrast injection and between scanning sessions. Some features were more reproducible when they were extracted from a CT scan performed at a longer time after contrast injection.ConclusionThe quantitative imaging features tested here are mostly reproducible and show little dependency on the time after contrast injection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, there has been a trend of developing quantitative imaging features or texture features to characterize tumors for the purposes of diagnosis, disease classification, and treatment outcome prediction [1–8]. This kind of research is also known as “Radiomics,” a high-throughput extraction of quantitative imaging features from medical images to create mineable databases for prognostic analysis [9,10]. In Radiomics research, a large number of studies have focused on the texture features extracted from computed tomography (CT) images to predict the treatment outcomes of non-small cell lung cancer [1–3,11]. These studies were based mostly on non-contrast diagnostic or pretreatment radiotherapy planning CT images. In diagnostic radiology, however, a large proportion of CT images are contrast-enhanced and texture features for these images have not yet been widely investigated. For example, perfusion CT imaging, one of the contrast-enhanced CT imaging protocols, has potential clinical oncology applications including assessments of treatment response, treatment stratification, and prognostication [12–15]. In the anticipation that quantitative imaging features will add prognostic value to contrast-enhanced CT, it is important to assess the uncertainty inherent to features extracted from these images [1,16–18]. Specifically, the variability of texture features due to image acquisition parameters and the reproducibility of texture features across different scans should be investigated before these features are used for prognostic or predictive models. To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have performed such uncertainty analyses for contrast-enhanced CT texture features.In this study, we examined two important sources of uncertainty in CT texture features extracted from contrast CT studies. The first source of uncertainty is the potential dependency of texture features on the time between contrast injection and the CT scan; this amount of time could vary depending on the institution or the specifics of the examination. We developed a generic approach for the dependency check between texture features and time. The second source of uncertainty is the reproducibility of texture features across different scans. Reproducibility analysis helped to identify test–retest stable features for future prognostic analysis. Additionally, we examined the redundancy of the texture features, which could help build an optimized predictive model using compact prognostic features derived from the calculated redundant features.We retrospectively obtained patient data that had been collected under a perfusion CT protocol approved by the institutional review board. Eight patients undergoing perfusion CT scans on two sessions, 2–7 days apart, were enrolled into this study. These patients are metastatic lung cancer patients treated with either chemoradiation or radiation therapy. Each of the patients had a single target that was larger than 2.5cm when measured in the longest diameter. The target was a well demarcated contrast-enhancing solid mass. During our selection, we excluded patients who had cardiac and vascular pulsation artifacts in the target lesion and whose target lesion had been biopsied within 4 weeks or received radiation within 3 months prior to the perfusion CT scans.The perfusion CT scans were obtained with the patient in the supine position on a 16-MDCT scanner (Light Speed, GE Healthcare) using a scanning protocol described in [12]. Each perfusion CT session comprised two phases: the “cine” scans and the “delayed” scans. The image data used for this study came from the “delayed” scans, which comprised six helical scans of the same anatomy at regular intervals. Each helical scan was obtained during an expiration breath-hold of approximately 7s with 10cm of craniocaudal coverage centered on the target lesion. The following parameters were used for each of the helical scans: tube voltage of 120kVp, tube current of 90mA, slice spacing of 3mm, and field of view from 34 to 42cm. The first helical scan started about 50s after injection of 70mL of a nonionic contrast agent at a rate of 7mL/s, and the five subsequent helical scans were obtained every 15s. Identical technical parameters were used for each patient in their two scanning sessions.A total of 12 3D helical CT scans were acquired for each patient, with 6 scans per session. For each patient, the lung tumor was manually delineated on the first scan of each session and propagated to each subsequent scan using deformable image registration [19]. The auto-propagated tumor contours were visually inspected and edited to correct any propagation errors.We calculated a variety of quantitative imaging features based on the delineated tumor for each 3D CT scan. As suggested by the previous studies [1,2,4], before the feature calculation, we applied lower and upper thresholds of −150 and 200 Hounsfield units to the tumor volume to exclude possible lung tissue, air, or bone to define the final tumor volume. A total of 122 features were extracted from the windowed tumor volume (Table 1). These features were organized into five categories according to the feature calculation method: intensity histogram (IHIST) [1,20], co-occurrence matrix (COM) [21], neighborhood gray-tone difference matrix (NGTDM) [22], run length matrix (RLM) [23], and geometric shape [24,25].The IHIST features were calculated on the basis of intensity values or the histogram created from those values in the tumor volume. 256 bins were used for all features using a histogram for calculation. For the three local features of IHIST, a 9×9×9 neighborhood region was used for the local entropy calculation and a 5×5×5 neighborhood region was used for the local standard deviation and local range calculations. The maximum values of each calculation were used as the feature values. The IHIST features are related to the statistics of the intensity values of the tumor and may vary with the appearance of tumor. The COM, NGTDM, and RLM features were calculated from each slice of the tumor volume. These features are related to the spatial patterns of the tumor appearance. The COM keeps track of spatial relationships between intensity values. We calculated 4 directions (0°, 45°, 90°, and 135°) and 3 different offsets (1, 3, and 5) for each COM feature, and 256 levels were used in the COM calculation. The NGTDM is a one column matrix which tracks the average difference between voxels and their neighboring voxels. A 3×3 neighborhood region was used for the NGTDM calculations. The RLM keeps track of the frequencies of runs of different lengths for different intensities. We calculated two directions (horizontal and vertical) for each RLM feature. The geometric shape describes the geometric tumor characteristics based on the surface or shape of the tumor volume. Features in this category are related to the tumor size and the ways of how the tumor spreads out.All feature calculations including pre-processing were performed using the Imaging Biomarker Explorer (IBEX) software [26]. IBEX is open-source software specifically designed for common quantitative imaging analysis tasks and is able to process multimodality image data for texture feature analysis including CT (contrast or non-contrast), CBCT, PET, and MR images. IBEX includes a variety of pre-processing algorithms such as thresholding and varied image smoothing filters. In addition, it enables user-specific feature algorithm development and predictive model design and promotes consistent data sharing between institutions. This software is freely available at http://bit.ly/IBEX_MDAnderson.We evaluated the time dependency of the features by examining the Spearman's correlation between the feature and the time after contrast injection. Spearman's correlation assesses how well the relationship between two variables can be described by a monotonic function [27]. For each feature in each scanning session, the Spearman's correlation between a vector of feature values calculated at 6 time points and a vector of the time after contrast injection in seconds, i.e. (50, 65, 80, 95, 110, 125), was computed for each patient, resulting in 16 correlation coefficients for each feature. Separately for each session, data from the 8 patients were pulled together and a Spearman's correlation was calculated to characterize each feature. Features with a coefficient greater than 0.5 were considered dependent on the time.Concordance correlation coefficients (CCCs) [28] were used to quantify the reproducibility of a feature. As suggested by previous studies [18,29], we defined reproducible features as those with a CCC≥0.9. We examined two types of reproducibility for the calculated features, time-dependent stability and inter-session stability, as shown in Fig. 1. We first examined the time-dependent stability. For each feature, the feature values obtained at the first scan for all patients in both scanning sessions constituted a vector. The CCCs were computed between this vector and that of each of the five subsequent scans. The average of these five CCCs was used to define the time-dependent stability for each feature. Next, we examined the inter-session stability. For each feature, the CCCs were calculated for each of the six helical scans in both scanning sessions. The CCCs at each time point and the average CCCs for all six scans were compared between the two scanning sessions.We used principal component analysis (PCA) [30] to evaluate the redundancy of the calculated features. PCA is a statistical procedure using an orthogonal transformation to convert possibly correlated features into linearly uncorrelated variables called principal components (PCs). If the features are redundant, a few PCs of large variance can be used to represent all of the features. These meaningful PCs compose a set of compact prognostic features that can be used for predictive models. The PCA was performed using a 122×96 matrix with each row representing a feature variable and each column representing an observation, i.e. one CT scan in one session for one patient. We analyzed the percentage of the total variance explained by each PC to identify a set of compact features. To exclude the case that a few features had much large variance, this process was repeated on the standardized feature values.For the same group of features, we applied an edge-preserving smoothing (EPS) filter [31] to the tumor volume before the feature calculation. The EPS is capable of preserving useful edge information while reducing the imaging noise (Fig. 2). Features calculated with EPS preprocess were compared with those calculated without smoothing in the aforementioned analyses to evaluate the impact of imaging noise to features.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
