@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Change in aneurysmal flow pulsatility after flow diverter treatment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Intra-aneurismal flow can largely change within the cardiac cycle.FD-induced flow reduction varies considerably during the cardiac cycle as well.FD treatment significantly increased the flow pulsatility in the aneurysm.The time variation can explain variability in treatment outcome.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intracranial aneurysms,Flow diverter,Velocity,WSS,Time dependency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Motivation: Treatment of intracranial aneurysms with flow diverters (FDs) has recently become an attractive alternative. Although considerable effort has been devoted to understand their effects on the time-averaged or peak systolic flow field, no previous study has analyzed the variability of FD-induced flow reduction along the cardiac cycle.Methods: Fourteen saccular aneurysms, candidates for FD treatment because of their morphology, located on the internal carotid artery were virtually treated with FDs and pre- and post-treatment blood flow was simulated with CFD techniques. Common hemodynamic variables were recorded at each time step of the cardiac cycle and differences between the untreated and treated models were assessed.Results: Flow pulsatility, expressed by the pulsatility index (PI) of the velocity, significantly increased (36.0%; range: 14.6–88.3%) after FD treatment. Peak systole velocity reduction was significantly smaller (30.5%; range: 19.6–51.0%) than time-averaged velocity reduction (43.0%; range: 29.1–69.8%). No changes were observed in the aneurysmal pressure.Conclusions: FD-induced flow reduction varies considerably during the cardiac cycle. FD treatment significantly increased the flow pulsatility in the aneurysm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Flow diverters (FDs) have in recent years become an attractive alternative to treat cerebral aneurysms [1,2]. These endovascular devices are low-porosity stents, placed in the parent artery to divert blood flow away from the aneurysm. The flow reduction is aimed at promoting thrombosis inside the aneurysm and effectively excluding it from blood circulation. In particular, wide-necked, fusiform and giant aneurysms are well-suited for this treatment option [3].Hemodynamic changes after FD treatment have been extensively studied using computational fluid dynamics (CFD), both for idealized [4–6] and anatomically realistic vascular geometries [7–10,1,12–14]. Many studies have focused on quantifying flow reduction as a measure of treatment performance and evaluating its dependency on stent design and configuration [4,5,8], aneurysm morphology [5,10,6] and inflow rate boundary conditions [14]. Others have replicated specific treatments to investigate associations between treatment outcome and hemodynamics [7,9,1,12,13]. Primarily, the performance of FDs has been evaluated by considering the time-averaged or peak systolic flow field, but as the performance may vary during the cardiac cycle [15], analyzing changes in the aneurysmal flow dynamics could provide relevant additional information.Although animal experiments, CFD studies and clinical series have already shown impressive effectiveness of this technology, the effects on local hemodynamics are yet not fully understood [16,17,7]. Besides complete aneurysm occlusions in the majority of the cases, longer term persisting patency and delayed aneurysm ruptures have also been reported after FD treatment. Since the advent of the technology, different studies have been developed to model these devices and to provide a better understanding of their effect on hemodynamics. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of FDs on the flow pulsatility inside the aneurysm during the cardiac cycle, by considering that the hydraulic resistance of the flow diverter depends on the Reynolds number, which is defined as the ratio of inertial forces to viscous forces.Fourteen vascular models of the internal carotid artery (ICA) harboring saccular aneurysms were included in this study (Fig. 1). All images were acquired at the Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genéve, Switzerland. All patients consented their pseudonymised data to be shared with the scientific community for the purpose of cerebrovascular research according to the @neurIST protocol, information sheets and consent forms [18]. All aneurysm were located at the internal carotid artery to reduce the hemodynamic variability due to different vascular morphology [19]. Anatomical models, represented by triangular surface meshes, were constructed by segmenting three-dimensional rotational angiography (3DRA) images using a geodesic active regions approach [20] and manually performing mesh cleaning, hole filling and smoothing operations [21]. Images were acquired with an IntegrisTMAllura System (Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands). Voxel sizes in the reconstructed 3D images were 0.208 × 0.208 × 0.208mm.The 14 cases used in this study were selected by three clinicians as being most appropriate for endovascular FD treatment. Their criteria for selecting the treatment was (1) the aneurysm was suboptimal for treatment with coils because of its morphology and/or neck width and (2) the absence of branching arteries (typically ophtalmic artery or the anterior choroidal artery) nearby the aneurysm that could be occluded by the device.The Fast Virtual Stenting (FVS) method was used [22] for the virtual placement of FDs in the vascular models. The stent struts and their connectivity were defined over a subset of points of a 2-simplex mesh with a size of 4 × 4, which was repeated 24 times circumferentially (resulting in 48 wires, 24 rotating right and 24 rotating left). The number of longitudinal repetitions varied between models depending on the used FD length, ensuring full coverage of the aneurysm neck and one extra diameter on each side of the aneurysm. For more details on the FVS method we refer the reader to [22]. The diameter of the stent wires was 60microns. Portions of the stent laying on the vessel wall were removed to reduce computational time, following previous studies [23]. The FD models used were generic and did not mimic the device of any particular manufacturer intentionally, as there is variability between their designs (wire thickness, brading angulation, etc.) and the aim of this study is to remain generic. The mean±SD porosity of the FD across the neck among all cases was 75.20±2.66, ranging from 70.40% and 80.85%. In Fig. 2are presented the resulting FD geometries used for the CFD models for 6 selected cases.Volumetric meshes were generated using ICEM CFD software package, Version 11.0 (ANSYS, Canonsburg, Pennsylvania). Meshes were composed of unstructured tetrahedral in the lumen and 6-node prism elements near the vessel wall. Smaller tetrahedral elements were used to resolve the stent struts. To ensure CFD simulations independent from mesh element size, in particular around the FDs, a mesh independency analysis was carried out. The convergence criterion of mesh independence was that wall shear stress (WSS) and intra-aneurysmal velocity had to be within 2.5% from the finest tested mesh. Convergence was reached with an element size around the stent strut of 0.016mm, 3 prism layers with a total size of 0.3mm defined everywhere but in the region of the FDs and a global tetrahedral element size of 0.3mm. The total number of mesh elements ranged from 0.4 to 3.4 million elements for the untreated cases and from 2.6 to 15.2million elements for the treated ones.Unsteady CFD simulations for both treated and untreated geometrical models were performed with CFX, Version 11.0 (ANSYS), which uses a finite volume approach to solve the Navier–Stokes equations. Blood was modeled as an incompressible Newtonian fluid (density density=1066kg/m3 and viscosity=0.0035Pas. A Newtonian fluid was used since viscosity changes can be neglected inside the aneurysm and artery [24]. The vessel wall was assumed to be rigid with a no-slip boundary condition. A flow rate waveform was imposed at the inlet and pressure waveforms at the outlets, all derived from a 1D mathematical model of the systemic arterial tree. A straight extension was added to the vascular model inlet and a flat velocity profile was imposed at the inlet of the extension. The combination of the extension and the considered vascular region causes the effects of the imposed velocity profile to vanish at the location of the aneurysm. The shape and average flow rate of the flow rate waveforms were the same ensuring equivalent conditions in all cases. Cardiac cycles of 0.8s were discretized in time steps of 0.005s. Previous studies showed that this is sufficient to provide time discretization independent solutions [25]. To remove the effect of initial transients, three complete cardiac cycles were computed and data from the last one was stored and analyzed.Four hemodynamic variables were analyzed, namely: (1) spatial average of intra-aneurysmal velocity magnitude (velsa), (2) spatial average of wall shear stress on the aneurysm wall (wsssa), (3) spatial average of intra-aneurysmal pressure (pressuresa), and (4) range of intra-aneurysmal pressure (pressurerng), which was defined as the difference between the maximum and minimum intra-aneurysmal pressure. Variable values were recorded at each time step of the cardiac cycle. These variables were chosen for their role in aneurysm occlusion and their relation to aneurysm flow velocity [26,27,7,10].For part of the analysis, we highlighted changes in the shape and amplitude of the variables’ time curves, and removed information about the absolute reduction, by normalizing variable x by its time-averaged, or mean, value:(1)xnormalized=x/mean(x).To assess changes in the aneurysmal flow dynamics, the pulsatility index (PI) was computed for velsa using Eq. (2). PI measures the amplitude of velsa along the cardiac cycle with respect to the mean velsa. In other words, if PI>1, the amplitude of velsa is larger than the mean value, and viceversa. PI is a simple measure to characterize the transient behavior of velsa and is defined as:(2)PI=(max(velsa)−min(velsa))/mean(velsa).FD-induced reductions in variable x were expressed relative to the untreated condition:(3)xreduction=(xuntreated−xtreated)/xuntreated.The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to test the significance of differences between the untreated and treated models. Differences were considered statistically significant for p<0.001.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The performance of FDs strongly varies during the cardiac cycle, with lower relative flow reductions at peak systole than on average. As a result, FD treatment significantly increases the flow pulsatility in an aneurysm. Although flow is reduced throughout the cardiac cycle, flow rate changes during the cardiac cycle should be taken into account and the reduction at peak systole should be considered as lower limit.