@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predictive sparse modeling of fMRI data for improved classification, regression, and visualization using the k-support norm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Application of k-support norm regularization to fMRI analysis.Experimental validation in cocaine addiction tasks.Classification and regression experiments, including challenging cross-subject tasks.Our results support the generalizability of the I-RISA model of cocaine addiction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FMRI,Sparsity,Regularization,k-Support norm,Cocaine addiction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We explore various sparse regularization techniques for analyzing fMRI data, such as the ℓ1 norm (often called LASSO in the context of a squared loss function), elastic net, and the recently introduced k-support norm. Employing sparsity regularization allows us to handle the curse of dimensionality, a problem commonly found in fMRI analysis. In this work we consider sparse regularization in both the regression and classification settings. We perform experiments on fMRI scans from cocaine-addicted as well as healthy control subjects. We show that in many cases, use of the k-support norm leads to better predictive performance, solution stability, and interpretability as compared to other standard approaches. We additionally analyze the advantages of using the absolute loss function versus the standard squared loss which leads to significantly better predictive performance for the regularization methods tested in almost all cases. Our results support the use of the k-support norm for fMRI analysis and on the clinical side, the generalizability of the I-RISA model of cocaine addiction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a widely used modality, within the field of neuroimaging, that measures brain activity by detecting associated changes in blood oxygenation. One of the goals of fMRI data analysis is to detect correlations between brain activation and a task the subject performs during the scan.The main challenges in statistical fMRI data analysis [1–4] are (i) the curse of dimensionality, (ii) a small number of samples, due to the high cost of fMRI acquisition, and (iii) high levels of noise, such as system noise and random neural activity.A general approach for analyzing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data is based on pattern recognition and statistical learning. By predicting some cognitive variables related to brain activation maps, this approach aims at decoding brain activity. This approach takes into account the multivariate information between voxels and is a way to assess how precisely some cognitive information is encoded by the activity of neural populations within the whole brain. However, this approach relies on a prediction function that is plagued by the curse of dimensionality, since there are generally far more features (voxels) than samples. To address this problem, different methods have been proposed, such as, among others, univariate feature selection and regularization techniques [5].Sparsity regularizers are key statistical methods for improving predictive performance in the event that the number of observations is substantially smaller than the dimensionality of the data while the underlying signal is known to be sparse. This is the case in fMRI analysis where brain activity is known to occur in only a subset of regions for a given task. In this paper we compare the most frequently applied sparsity regularizer developed in the statistics literature, LASSO [6] and its extension the elastic net [7], with the k-support norm [8], a recently introduced method which tends to retain correlated variables while simultaneously enforcing sparsity.The k-support norm has an intrinsic parameter, k∈{1, …, d}, where d is the dimensionality of the data, that controls the degree of sparsity. When used with squared loss, k-support regularization specializes to the LASSO when k=1 and ridge regression when k=d. The k-support norm has previously been used in [8] for classification. We first evaluate the k-support norm in an fMRI volume classification setting in which we predict a binary task, based on an fMRI volume. We then extend this analysis to a regression problem, predicting a task-variable based on the fMRI volume.We focus on comparing LASSO and elastic net with the k-support norm in order to establish the latter regularizer's superiority in analyzing fMRI data in the context of a classification task. We then consider a regression setting and use two loss functions, namely the squared error and the absolute error functions. The advantage of the absolute error loss is that it is more robust, in that it penalizes outliers less than the squared loss, while still retaining convexity, which guarantees finding the global optimum. In this setting we compare ℓ1 regularization with the k-support norm and demonstrate marked improvement. We compare the methods not only in their predictive accuracy but also in the interpretability and stability of their results which are critical in fMRI data analysis.This article is based on [9,10] and extends the presentation of k-support norm regularization of fMRI data into a single unified framework. Although we consider a specific neuroscience application of validating a model of human drug addiction, this approach is more generally applicable and can be used in many other neuroscience studies involving interpretation of fMRI data.The primary neuroscientific motivation for most of our experiments in this article is the exploration of human drug addiction. Basic studies have led to a theoretical model of human drug addiction, characterized by Impaired Response Inhibition (RI) and Salience Attribution (SA) (hence, I-RISA) [11]. According to the model, the skew in SA is predictive of impaired RI, together contributing to excessive drug use and relapse, core clinical symptoms of cocaine addiction. We use the fMRI data from a SA task (drug Stroop) in order to predict behavioral data in a RI task (color-word Stroop) collected at a different time, hence providing further evidence to support the I-RISA model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we have investigated the applicability of sparsity regularizers in fMRI analyses. We have shown that the k-support norm can give better predictive performance than the LASSO and elastic net, while having favorable mathematical and computational properties. Furthermore, the brain regions implicated in addiction by the k-support norm coincide with previous results on addiction, indicating that the k-support norm is additionally useful for generating sparse, but correlated, regions suitable for interpretation in a medical-research setting.