@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effective staging of fibrosis by the selected texture features of liver: Which one is better, CT or MR imaging?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We select effective texture features and image parameters for classifying fibrosis degree.We compare different performance on three modalities by accuracy rate.From all 15 texture features, optimal number ranges from 4 to 7 in all modalities.MR images have an advantage over CT images.Texture analysis is most effective during equilibrium phase than in other phased images.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeTexture patterns of hepatic fibrosis are one of the important biomarkers to diagnose and classify chronic liver disease from initial to end stage on computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) images. Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) of liver cirrhosis using texture features has become popular in recent research advances. To date, however, properly selecting effective texture features and image parameters is still mostly undetermined and not well-defined. In this study, different types of datasets acquired from CT and MR images are investigated to select the optimal parameters and features for the proper classification of fibrosis.MethodsA total of 149 patients were scanned by multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) and 218 patients were scanned using 1.5T and 3T superconducting MR scanners for an abdominal examination. All cases were verified by needle biopsies as the gold standard of our experiment, ranging from 0 (no fibrosis) to 5 (cirrhosis). For each case, at least four sequenced phase images are acquired by CT or MR scanners: pre-contrast, arterial, portal venous and equilibrium phase. For both imaging modalities, 15 texture features calculated from gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) are extracted within an ROI in liver as one set of input vectors. Each combination of these input subsets is checked by using support vector machine (SVM) with leave-one-case-out method to differentiate fibrosis into two groups: non-cirrhosis or cirrhosis. In addition, 10 ROIs in the liver are manually selected in a disperse manner by experienced radiologist from each sequenced image and each of the 15 features are averaged across the 10 ROIs for each case to reduce the validation time. The number of input items is selected from the various combinations of 15 features, from which the accuracy rate (AR) is calculated by counting the percentage of correct answers on each combination of features aggregated to determine a liver stage score and then compared to the gold standard.ResultsAccording to the accuracy rate (AR) calculated from each combination, the optimal number of texture features to classify liver fibrosis degree ranges from 4 to 7, no matter which modality was utilized. The overall performance calculated by the average sum of maximum AR value of all 15 features is 66.83% in CT images, while 68.14%, and 71.98% in MR images, respectively; among the 15 texture features, mean gray value and entropy are the most commonly used features in all 3 imaging datasets. The correlation feature has the lowest AR value and was removed as an effective feature in all datasets. AR value tends to increase with the injection of contrast agency, and both CT and MR images reach the highest AR performance during the equilibrium phase.ConclusionsComparing the accuracy of classification with two imaging modalities, the MR images have an advantage over CT images with regards to AR performance of the 15 selected texture features, while 3T MRI is better than 1.5T MRI to classify liver fibrosis. Finally, the texture analysis is more effective during equilibrium phase than in any of the other phased images.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Patients suffering from chronic liver diseases are at a severe risk from complications such as hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and liver failure [1]. In the diagnosis and therapeutic assessment of cirrhosis of the liver and chronic hepatitis, it is necessary to stage the degree of hepatic fibrosis as an important indicator of cirrhosis as well as a critical predictive factor for the occurrence of HCC [2], which is one of the most common malignancies in patients that are affected by these diseases [3]. Fibrosis is caused by excessive deposition of extracellular matrix owing to histological and molecular reshuffling of various components such as collagens, glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and other macromolecules within the extracellular matrix. These features, common to almost all patients with chronic liver disease, lead to the changes in the hepatic morphology, texture pattern, and degree of liver stiffness. Accurate assessment of hepatic fibrosis is crucial for the determination of the appropriate treatment because fibrosis is potentially a reversible process in the early stages.Liver biopsy, which is used for histological scoring and is still used as a reference test for fibrosis staging, is considered the gold-standard method for the assessment of the degree of fibrosis. However, liver biopsy is an invasive procedure with possible side effects such as pain in 30–40% of the cases, pneumothorax (3‰) or even death (2/10,000) [4,5]. To decrease the need for painful biopsies, non-invasive methods using MR and ultrasound imaging have been proposed to obtain images of the liver. With the development of high-speed imaging devices, highly precise medical imaging services are now widely available. Recently, radiological assessments of hepatic fibrosis by magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) [6–8], gadolinium- or superparamagnetic iron oxide-enhanced MR imaging [9,10], diffusion-weighted MR imaging [11], and real-time ultrasonographic elastography [12] have been reported, and their feasibility, usefulness, and limitations have been shown. Wang et al. [13] have reported on real-time elastography with a new quantitative technology for diffusing histological lesions as a new and promising sonography-based non-invasive method for assessing liver fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B. These new imaging technologies have greatly impacted the traditional diagnostic methods. However, the interpretation of the numerous diseases from different types of medical images is not an easy task, especially for inexperienced residents or general radiologists. In the last decade, different types of computer-aided detection/diagnosis (CAD) systems have been developed to ease the workload of radiologists. There are several promising reports on the CAD of liver fibrosis on MRI, which have been obtained by analyzing morphology changes [14,15] and the texture pattern of fibrosis [16] through images.Texture patterns of hepatic fibrosis are one of the important features to diagnose the chronic liver disease from initial to end stage on computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) images. However, quantification and classification of hepatic fibrosis with only texture patterns in liver is an extremely difficult task for both the radiologist and computer, resulting in a low accuracy rate of diagnosis. However, subtle differences of tiny structures of fibrosis within a small size of ROI provide the computer with an advantage to the reader as compared with the clinical interpretation using other image features such as shape, volume, surface irregularity, etc. Some work has been developed utilizing intelligent algorithms to stage the fibrosis by feeding the features calculated from 1st and 2nd order texture matrixes into a classifier, and stating their promising results on different kinds of datasets. Gobert et al. [17] reported the use of six features extracted from texture features and two statistical measures as input to an ANN classifier with genetic algorithm, resulting in 73% correct classification rate for the characterization of cirrhotic and non-cirrhotic in MRI images. Li et al. [18] found that integrating the texture features into shape features with ANN classification of cirrhosis may improve the overall performance of cirrhosis detection. However, these studies used samples of a normal and a cirrhotic case and the selected features were based on experience. Other improved classification methods state their effective findings of parameters [19], but did not provide a “real true” selection of features that should be recommended to doctors as their investigation always works on individual sequenced images or modality. In addition, the optimal number and effectiveness of input vectors have not been addressed or identified. These may be due to the limitation of case numbers and large time consumption needed to optimize each combination of features. Although some efficient training methods were proposed to reduce the time in training and testing procedures, their effects are difficult to compare and evaluate as there was no evaluation against the gold standard until now.China has a high incidence rate of hepatic cancer along the coastal areas, especially in Fushui county of the Guangxi autonomous region, where high liver cancer incidence rate of 56.45/100,000 in average has been reported and for male 91.11/100,000 and female 21.80/100,000, respectively [20]. Therefore, collecting a large amount of fibrotic cases is feasible in our local hospitals. Several hundred patients with different grade distribution of fibrosis were scanned in at least four different sequenced phases using various CT and MRI modalities. In order to find out the “real true” features that impact the classification of texture patterns of hepatic fibrosis utilized in computer-aided diagnosis, we chose the most accurate validation method of leave-one-case-out to check each combination of features. Considering that 215−1 different combinations are obtained in a single phased image, the iteration is large and time consuming which would estimate the overall time length to perform the experiment at over 3 years. The accuracy rates outputted from different modalities, sequenced phased images and texture features could not only tell us the “true” of optimal set of fibrotic texture patterns guiding the radiologists to analyze fibrosis efficiently from numerous medical images, but also help to clarify how many and what kind of texture features should be utilized for CAD [21].This study is focused on the effective selection of texture features for fibrosis classification. We utilized 15 texture features calculated from all of the CT datasets with slice thickness from 0.625mm to 5mm, and over four different sequenced CT or MR phased images are investigated. Each combination of features is evaluated using support-vector-machine (SVM) with leave-one-case-out method to select the optimal feature subsets according to their performance. In this paper, Section 2 describes the acquirement of experimental datasets by CT and MR modalities with their imaging protocols. Section 3 describes the methods of the ROI selection, feature extraction and optimization by SVM and leave-one-case-out approach. In Section 4, classification results from the different imaging modalities are demonstrated and discussed. The accuracy rate of each combination of feature subsets is compared to find out the most informative features as well as the optimal number of texture features from the experimental results. The paper concludes in Section 6 with further discussion of the proposed approach and future works.To evaluate and compare the contribution of texture features derived from CT and MR images towards the diagnosis of liver fibrosis, a total of 367 patients with or without hepatic fibrosis are scanned by 3 different modalities from two different hospitals, including 149 cases from CT and 218 cases from MR.A total of 149 patients were scanned by CT (GE Lightspeed VCT) from June 2009 to March 2012 at the Department of Radiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University (Hospital no.1). The data set consists of 36 normal cases, 39 mild fibrosis cases, 38 severe fibrosis cases and 36 typical cirrhosis cases. The imaging protocol is as follows: quad-phase scans are made at 120kV tube voltage, 250mA tube current; the image size is 512×512pixel. The arterial, portal venous and equilibrium phases are acquired at 25, 60, and 120s after contrast injection, respectively. The injection speed is 3.0ml/s, concentration is 320mg/ml, dosage is 85–90ml. For each case, five different CT datasets with different slice thickness are acquired with interval of 0.625m, 1.25mm, 2.5mm, 3.75mm and 5mm, respectively. For a case with one thickness, there are four sequenced phase images: pre-contrast, arterial, portal venous and equilibrium phase. Therefore, a total of 20 sequence/series types were acquired in one CT case. All cases have been verified by needle biopsies as the gold standard of our experiment. Surgical specimens were retrospectively examined by a pathologist who was blinded to patient histories and radiology and surgery reports. The patients’ fibrosis stages are evaluated in accordance with the Chinese Viral Hepatitis Prevention and Treatment Plan (VHPTA) [22], ranging from 0 (no fibrosis) to 5 (cirrhosis). In this paper, the entire dataset is divided into two groups: non-cirrhosis (containing normal cases S0 and mild liver fibrosis cases S1, S2); and cirrhosis (containing severe liver fibrosis cases S3, S4 and typical cirrhosis cases S5), as illustrated in Table 1.From February 2011 to March 2012, a total of 173 patients had an abdominal examination performed using a 3-T superconducting MR scanner (Intera Achieva Quasar Dual; Philips Medical Systems, Netherlands) with a six-channel torso array coil at Hospital no. 1. The imaging protocols used include TR/TE, 2.3/82ms in plan scanning phase; 7mm slice thickness and 1mm inter-slice gap; interpolated imaging matrix, 512×512; slice thickness; 4mm and 2mm inter-slice gap. In dynamic contrast scanning phase: 7mm slice thickness and 1mm inter-slice gap; contrast injection, Gd-DTPA; the dosage, 0.2mmol/kg; injection speed, 2–3ml/s. Since contrast injection after 16s, 50–60s and 2–3min arterial, portal and equilibrium scanning are performed, respectively. Among the datasets, there are 18 patients without liver disease history and hepatic dysfunction, and the fibrosis stage of other patients is confirmed by the result of the liver biopsy procedure.An additional 45 MR cases were acquired from the No.1 People's Hospital of Nanning (Hospital No. 2) in China using a 1.5T (Signa Horizon, GE Healthcare) MR scanner and were included in our experiment. The gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images (150/1.6; matrix, 512×512; flip angle, 90°; signal acquisition, 1; slices, 18 per 26-second acquisition time) sequences are with section thickness 8mm with a 2mm intersection. Table 1 gives the detailed distribution of the 3 datasets. This study was approved by the institutional review board at both hospitals and informed consent was obtained from all patients.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
