@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated contrast medium monitoring system for computed tomography – Intra-institutional audit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We evaluated a RIS-PACS-connected system for contrast medium (CM) monitoring.CM injection parameters for 8609 CT studies were systematically retrieved.Data related to patient, CT study and technical issues were also recorded.The system has the potential to improve CT protocol optimization and harmonization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer applications,Contrast agents,Contrast dose,RIS/PACS,Audit and standards,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study was to analyze the usage and the data recorded by a RIS-PACS-connected contrast medium (CM) monitoring system (Certegra®, Bayer Healthcare, Leverkusen, Germany) over 19 months of CT activity. The system used was connected to two dual syringe power injectors (each associated with a 16-row and a high definition 64-row multidetector CT scanner, respectively), allowing to manage contrast medium injection parameters and to send and retrieve CT study-related information via RIS/PACS for any scheduled contrast-enhanced CT examination. The system can handle up to 64 variables and can be accessed via touchscreen by CT operators as well as via a web interface by registered users with three different hierarchy levels. Data related to CM injection parameters (i.e. iodine concentration, volume and flow rate of CM, iodine delivery rate and iodine dose, CM injection pressure, and volume and flow rate of saline), patient weight and height, and type of CT study over a testing period spanning from 1 June 2013 to 10 January 2015 were retrieved from the system. Technical alerts occurred for each injection event (such as system disarm due to technical failure, disarm due to operator's stop, incomplete filling of patient data fields, or excessively high injection pressure), as well as interoperability issues related to data sending and receiving to/from the RIS/PACS were also recorded. During the testing period, the CM monitoring system generated a total of 8609 reports, of which 7629 relative to successful injection events (88.6%). 331 alerts were generated, of which 40 resulted in injection interruption and 291 in CM flow rate limitation due to excessively high injection pressure (>325psi). Average CM volume and flow rate were 93.73±17.58mL and 3.53±0.89mL/s, and contrast injection pressure ranged between 5 and 167psi. A statistically significant correlation was found between iodine concentration and peak IDR (rs=0.2744, p<0.0001), as well as between iodine concentration and iodine dose (rs=0.3862, p<0.0001) for all CT studies. Automated contrast management systems can provide a full report of contrast use with the possibility to systematically compare different contrast injection protocols, minimize errors, and optimize organ-specific contrast enhancement for any given patient and clinical application. This can be useful to improve and harmonize the quality and consistency of contrast CT procedures within the same radiological department and across the hospital, as well as to monitor potential adverse events and overall costs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Iodinated contrast media (CM) are the most widely consumed drugs by hospitals in imaging procedures around the world. As other pharmaceutical products, iodinated CM are not completely devoid of risk and may therefore be associated with adverse reactions, which can be classified as non-renal and renal [1]. Non-renal adverse reactions (incidence 0.5–1% [2–4]) are CM dose-independent and can be classified as acute (occurring within 1h of CM administration), late (occurring 1h to 1 week after CM administration) and very late (occurring more than 1 week after CM administration) [1]. On the other hand, renal adverse reactions are commonly referred to as contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) (average incidence of 5% [5–9]), also called contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI), defined as an increase in absolute values of 0.5mg/dL or an increase of 25% in serum creatinine levels from baseline within 72h of exposure to intravascular CM that is not attributable to other causes [10,11]. CIN is associated with several patient- and procedure-related risk factors, including impaired renal function and cardiovascular diseases, large doses of CM, and multiple CM administrations within a few days [1].From a healthcare management standpoint, the steady increase of computed tomography (CT) studies has been paralleled by a higher average usage of iodinated contrast material [2], raising cost effectiveness and ethical issues related to patient care. Moreover, the ability of newer CT scanners to cover larger body volumes within seconds (which is key especially for CT angiography applications, requiring accurate timing between the CT acquisition and CM enhancement peak) has highlighted the need for optimization of CM injection protocols in terms of iodine delivery rate, volume, and overall iodine dose [12].For such reasons the development of software tools for CM monitoring in daily practice has gained primary importance, yet automated contrast injectors have long been disconnected from RIS-PACS networks, making it impossible to systematically track contrast injection data unless manually recorded and retrieved outside the RIS-PACS. To this purpose, dedicated platforms for CM monitoring have recently become available that integrate data from power injectors with RIS-PACS and other information systems.The aim of this study was to raise operators’ awareness on the optimization of CM usage through intra-institutional auditing of injection protocols. In this setting, CM data were systematically recorded using a CM monitoring system connected to our RIS-PACS infrastructure over 15 months of CT activity, and injection parameters related to different protocols were compared in an attempt to minimize errors, as well as to improve and harmonize injection protocols through dedicated training.The CM monitoring system used in this study was a commercial contrast monitoring device (Certegra®, Bayer Healthcare, Leverkusen, Germany) connected to two dual syringe power injectors (Medrad Stellant®, Bayer Healthcare, Leverkusen, Germany), each associated with a 16-row (Aquilion 16, Toshiba Medical Systems, Tochigi, Japan) and a high definition 64-row multidetector CT scanner (CT750 HD, General Electric, Milwaukee, WI), respectively.Each power injector is connected to a dedicated workstation on which the Certegra® system is installed. This platform allows managing injection-related parameters through the injector according to a specific CT protocol, as well as sending and retrieving CT study-related information via RIS-PACS (Fig. 1) [13].The CM monitoring system software is composed of multiple modules, each dedicated to collecting data related to a specific step of contrast injection. Each module is described in the following subsections.The following two main tasks are performed by the Certegra® Informatics Platform Application Entity (AE):•collect and match patient and study information with injection data (automatically and/or manually).generate a DICOM (Digital Imaging and COMmunication in Medicine) secondary capture image containing a visual report of injection data to be archived into the PACS.Patient and study context information can be obtained in different ways depending on the flavor of Certegra® Informatics Platform product installation available [14]. In our implementation (Patient Worklist Based Matching), the Certegra® Informatics Platform sends a C-FIND message to the RIS to obtain the scheduled procedure worklist from the Scheduler using the Modality Worklist Information Model. The list of patient schedules is shown to the user on a touchscreen interface (Fig. 2) [14]. The user can select a CT study from the Modality Patient Working List (MPWL) displayed on the touchscreen interface, including several non-modifiable fields related to patient demographics (such as patient name, ID, gender, date of birth, accession number as well as study description, study ID, and study date), which are all required to perform the procedure. As a second step, the operator can enter additional, optional information through the touchscreen interface related to the CT study (e.g. technologist ID, injection site, catheter gauge, and free-text notes) and the contrast agent used (type and iodine concentration). Further so-called “auxiliary” information (such as contrast medium lot, vial volume, and expiration date) can be filled in through the touchscreen or a web interface before or after injection. Additional patient-related details relevant to tailoring contrast injection to every single patient and diagnostic query can be entered, such as patient weight and height (Fig. 3).The final step of injection planning consists in the selection of contrast injection parameters (i.e. volume and flow rate of contrast and saline flush, as well as injection delay), with the possibility to select the most suitable protocol for the patient under examination. To this latter purpose, it is possible to select a predefined injection protocol out of a maximum of 256.Once the CT procedure has been completed, the CM monitoring system can retrieve from the injector the scheduled as well as the effective CM injection parameters, which may differ from the former in case transient events have occurred (e.g. flow rate limitation due to excessively high injection pressure). Therefore, effective volume and flow rate of delivered CM and saline flush, peak flow rate and peak injection pressure, and potential transient events (such as flow limitation or interruption) are recorded. Certegra® sends a Q/R C-FIND message to the CT modality for study matching and obtains Study Context information (Fig. 2).The software can handle up to 64 variables, of which 16 related to the MPWL and 48 to the injector (Fig. 4). All parameters are physically stored in the workstations connected to each single injector having performed the procedure. Since the system only relies on local storage per single injector, systematic backup of injection data is performed to minimize the risk of information loss. Backup data can also be encrypted and stored on a separate hard drive as a further safety measure.Upon completion of the procedure, the system sends the PACS a C-STORE message to obtain data matching (Fig. 2). If this latter is successful, a visual single-page report with the most relevant injection-related information is generated and archived onto the PACS as a DICOM secondary capture (Fig. 5).The system allows to visually display CM injection parameters and to perform a descriptive data analysis through a web interface.Web services are only reachable via local network with a personalized account, and logged-in users can access the database stored on local IT platforms connected to each single injector with the possibility to query/retrieve and statistically analyze contrast injection data sorted by:•Patient: Patient ID, Patient Name, and/or Patient Date of BirthCT examination date: start and end date (for a given time range)Study: Accession Number, Study ID, and/or Study UIDContrast medium: users can specify Contrast Brand, Concentration, Lot Number, Vial Volume, and/or Expiration DateInjection: Technologist ID, Injection Site, Protocol Name, Catheter Gauge, Total Iodine Delivered, and/or Atypical Events.Access to the CM monitoring software is managed by 3 hierarchy levels for registered users, defined as follows:•Level 1 (Viewer): this user can access all information related to the procedures and has the privilege to generate and export data records, but cannot add nor edit dataLevel 2, Manager: this user has the same rights as the Viewer, and can also add or edit some system dataLevel 3, Facility IT: this is the highest rank user and has the right to manage all information stored in the data base, supervise other users’ privileges, set up the system and fix potential issues. However, this user has no access to Protected Health Information (PHI), including patient information such as name, ID, gender and date of birth.CT examinations were divided into three main categories, including chest-abdomen-pelvis CT, coronary CT angiography, and non-coronary CT angiography studies. For each category, CT acquisition parameters are summarized in Table 1.Data related to CM injection parameters (i.e. iodine concentration, volume and flow rate of CM, iodine delivery rate [IDR] and iodine dose, CM injection pressure, and volume and flow rate of saline), patient morphometry (i.e. weight and height), and type of CT study over a testing period spanning from 1 June 2013 to 10 January 2015 were retrieved from the CM monitoring system. Technical alerts occurred for each injection event (such as system disarm due to technical failure, disarm due to operator's stop, incomplete filling of patient data fields, or excessively high injection pressure), as well as interoperability issues related to data sending and receiving to/from the RIS/PACS were also recorded.Continuous variables (including volume and flow rate of CM, IDR and iodine dose, CM injection pressure, and volume and flow rate of saline) were expressed as mean±standard deviation. CM injection pressure values were expressed in terms of pounds per square inch (psi), as displayed on the system interface. The correlation between iodine concentration, peak IDR, and iodine dose for all CT studies was calculated using the Spearman rank test. A p-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analysis was carried out using software (GraphPad Prism v. 5, www.graphpad.com).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
