@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
3D surgical planning in patients affected by lipodystrophy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Use of 3D surface scanning for surgical planning (no radiation required).Easy-to-use application for surgical planning of facial lipodystrophy.Providing of a facial natural surface to guide surgeons in their interventions.Computation of the volume to be injected during facial surgery interventions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
AIDS,Lipodystrophy,Software tool,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Lipodystrophy is a pathological condition characterized by the focal or general absence of adipose tissue. Surgeons reset the patient's surface contours using injectable materials to recreate a normal physical appearance. However, due to difficulties in preoperative planning and intraoperative assessment, about 15% of the surgical procedures involved are reinterventions to improve volume or symmetry. This increases the need for an available, efficient tool capable of providing the surgeon with a good estimation of the volumes to be injected before the intervention proper begins. This work describes a virtual reality-based application for the surgical planning of facial lipodystrophy correction (FLIC). The tool uses points selected interactively by the surgeon to compute a curve that delimits the surface area to be operated on. It then automatically computes an estimated natural reconstructed surface and the quantity of volume that needs to be implanted during the intervention. Experiments have been carried out in which the filling volumes estimated using FLIC and ZBrush software were compared with the real volumes injected by the surgeon. ICCs higher than 0.97 indicate that there were no significant differences between the respective measurements, thus validating the tool proposed in this paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
HIV or AIDS is a disease that has spread in recent years. Thanks to advances in medication control, it is now considered a chronic illness rather than a fatal disease. The introduction of antiretroviral therapies (ART) has significantly reduced mortality and infection rates in patients affected by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Anti-retroviral drugs have reduced the viral load to undetectable levels, allowing patients to lead normal lives. However, one of the side effects of AIDS treatment is the marked lipodystrophy [1,2] it can cause in several parts of the body.Lipodystrophy – the loss and/or accumulation of fat in specific areas of the body – is a major concern among HIV patients because of the discomfort and stigmatization produced by the physical changes it induces [1,2].One of the biggest concerns for patients affected by facial lipoatrophy (FLA) is the effect and visibility the pathology has in their faces. Facial contours are very complex and vary greatly from one individual to another. It is therefore particularly difficult to monitor volume changes over long periods in the FLA population, economic and non-invasive techniques being required to measure facial changes. The imaging technique of three dimensional (3D) surface scanning offers opportunities for the objective analysis of human facial features and for monitoring FLA evolution [3], with the added advantage that no radiation is required to generate a 3D model of the patient.Therapeutic measures to limit or correct side effects associated with FLA include:1Replacement of the pharmaceuticals used in FLA treatment by others less related to these effects (if the patient's condition allows such a substitution) and,Surgical techniques using polyacrylamide synthetic implants and autologous fat grafting (facial lipofilling) to correct facial lipoatrophy (FLA).People with moderate or severe lipodystrophy in Andalusia (Spain) have been receiving reconstructive facial surgery since 2003 through the Andalusian Health System. However, this type of surgery is relatively new and reliable evidence is still lacking with regard to such important aspects as safety, tolerability and effectiveness in the medium and long term. One reason for this is the difficulty of quantizing the degree of improvement and persistence over time with existing diagnostic methods. There are two main problems in this type of surgery. On the one hand, surgeons do not have models of the patients’ faces as they were when healthy (free of lipodystrophy), and this makes it difficult to know how much volume is required in the facial area to give the face a natural appearance. On the other hand, to avoid having to perform follow-up operations later, surgeons would like to have an accurate idea of the liquid volume that needs to be injected prior to the intervention. For example, due to difficulties involved in preoperative planning and intraoperative assessment, at least in our series of approximately 275 consecutive procedures for correcting facial lipoatrophy with polyalkylamide synthetic facial implants, about 15% of the operations were reinterventions to improve either volume or symmetry.This work presents a novel virtual reality-based software application for assisting surgeons during the planning of facial surgery. The tool gives the estimated facial volume that needs to be injected in the patient to correct the effects of FLA, thereby reducing the number of reinterventions stemming from problems with the initial treatment and/or patient dissatisfaction with the results. The current state of the art in surgical planning tools does not provide a tool that effectively helps surgeons during the planning of surgical interventions in patients with facial lipodystrophy. Admittedly, much work has been done in the field of surgical planning [4,5] and many studies addressing facial surgical planning in particular can be found in fields like maxillo-facial surgical planning [6] and Orthognathic Surgery [7]. In these works, 3D bone and soft-tissue models are usually obtained by applying marching cubes to the CT data available. Each coordinate on the bone surface has its own unique projection on the soft-tissue mesh. When a point on the bone surface is changed, the corresponding soft tissue coordinate is changed accordingly. This makes it possible to simulate soft tissue movement caused by bone movement. However, all these works rely on the use of CT imaging, which implies radiating the patient each time a new intervention is necessary. Moreover, the techniques described in these works are intended mainly for bone interventions and not just for soft tissue surgery. In our work, we use a cost-effective, economic, non-invasive 3D surface scanning and imaging technique, which makes it possible to monitor FLA evolution [3] over long periods of time, generating a 3D model of the patients without having to resort to any radiation. The surgical interventions are simulated directly on the patient's surface and not on bone structures.Some other authors have focused on developing simulator tools using finite-element modeling to create real-time virtual environments for skin surgery. In [8], a deformable soft-tissue model for skin that responds in real time to user manipulation was implemented and used to perform tensile stress tests on human skin samples. In Sifakis et al. [9], a real-time virtual surgical environment was implemented to enable the surgeon to practice cutting and manipulating tissue. The main drawback of these simulators is that they do not operate on real patient models and focus almost exclusively on obtaining accurate models of skin tissue rather than providing a fast method to help surgeons plan interventions.Many other works propose software applications which freely modify specific parts of the body (face, breasts, ears, neck, etc.) [10–13]. These works do not consider real skin models but are intended to provide an approximate idea of what the patient would look like after surgery. Most of the programs are essentially photograph editors, intended only as a means of communication between patient and surgeon. Obviously, the results they produce have to be approved by the specialist who is going to perform the surgery.In the work presented here, the body region subject to intervention is not freely modified by the user. The user (the surgeon) merely selects a number of points around the area to be operated on, and a new surface is then computed in order to give the patient's face a natural appearance, ideally similar to what it looked like before the illness.The tool was validated using 3D images obtained by scanning the facial surface of several patients affected by HIV- and ART-associated facial lipodystrophy. It has a very manageable interactive graphical interface. The tool is described in greater detail in the next section. The third section describes some of the material employed and presents some experimental results. Finally, the last section contains a discussion of the results obtained and some conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
