@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated compromised right lung segmentation method using a robust atlas-based active volume model with sparse shape composition prior in CT

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed the robust shape atlas built upon the output of SSC.The 3D AVM with SSC prior is applied on compromised lung segmentation.Our proposed method can achieve better segmentation accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image segmentation,Lung cancer,Compromised lung segmentation,Sparse shape composition,Atlas-based active volume model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To resolve challenges in image segmentation in oncologic patients with severely compromised lung, we propose an automated right lung segmentation framework that uses a robust, atlas-based active volume model with a sparse shape composition prior. The robust atlas is achieved by combining the atlas with the output of sparse shape composition. Thoracic computed tomography images (n=38) from patients with lung tumors were collected. The right lung in each scan was manually segmented to build a reference training dataset against which the performance of the automated segmentation method was assessed. The quantitative results of this proposed segmentation method with sparse shape composition achieved mean Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) of (0.72, 0.81) with 95% CI, mean accuracy (ACC) of (0.97, 0.98) with 95% CI, and mean relative error (RE) of (0.46, 0.74) with 95% CI. Both qualitative and quantitative comparisons suggest that this proposed method can achieve better segmentation accuracy with less variance than other atlas-based segmentation methods in the compromised lung segmentation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lung cancer remains one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths in the United States [1]. The prognosis of patients with lung cancer has improved over recent years, in part as a result of a range of significant improvements in imaging and computer technology as well as technical advances in radiation therapy planning and delivery, including techniques such as image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) [2].One continuing challenge in IGRT planning is segmentation of lungs in thoracic computed tomography (CT) images. Difficulties associated with segmentation can be classified into three broad categories [3]. The first involves the presence of specific diseases, such as lung cancer, pneumonia and interstitial lung disease. The pathologies associated with these specific diseases, particularly as they affect the chest wall or mediastinum, show no obvious differences in Hounsfield units (HUs) on CT. The result can be the exclusion of a large portion of lung from the treatment planning volume and/or the segmentation of the lung into isolated parts (Fig. 1). The second category is anatomical variability, such as the excision of one side of the lungs because of existence of lung cancer. The third category is the external factors, such as the improper field-of-view, improper patient position or orientation information in the DICOM header, metal artifacts, or damaged CT datasets. The presence of specific lung diseases mentioned above is the primary issue in computerized lung segmentation. The segmentation failures caused by anatomy variety and external factors are relatively infrequent but unavoidable in practice.A large number of lung segmentation methods have been already developed in the non-compromised lungs, where the obvious differences in HU between the lung and the chest wall, mediastinum and liver form the basis for the majority of the lung segmentation schemes. Lung segmentation methods for compromised lung volumes with severe pathological lungs have not been fully addressed [4,5].Segmentation of compromised lung is complex and challenging. First, pathological structures, such as large lung tumors, and normal adjacent organs, such as the chest wall, mediastinum, and the liver, do not show obvious differences in the distribution of Hounsfield units (HU) numbers, causing the majority of lung segmentation schemes to fail. Second, the original ground truth used for training data in lung segmentation comes from actual lung cancer patients, including those with right or left lung cancer, right- or left-side mediastinum cancer, etc. The original ground truth derived from patients with right lung cancer and those with right-side mediastinum cancer with compromised right lung may not contain the whole right lung volume. To address the first challenge, shape priors are helpful, because they can assist in differentiating and separating pathological structures from normal adjacent organs. To address the second challenge, the original ground truth from the compromised right lung can be viewed as a shape instance derived from image appearance cues with gross errors. Robust shape models that handle gross errors can be helpful, because they can detect, reject, or remove the influence of gross errors.Here we proposed an automated and robust segmentation framework which uses robust atlas-based active volume model (AVM) with sparse shape composition (SSC) prior. Sparsity has been widely employed for medical image analysis tasks, such as segmentation, registration and reconstruction [6–16]. The main contribution the work on which we report here is threefold: (1) To address the challenge of the original ground truth for the compromised right lung, we generate the robust shape atlas with the refined ground truth from the output of SSC. We assumed the original ground truth from the compromised right lung can be viewed as a shape instance derived from image appearance cues with gross errors and also these gross errors are sparse in spatial space. The SSC explicitly models gross errors, so that erroneous information from the compromised right lung can be effectively detected and removed and the original ground truth can be refined. (2) To address the challenge to separate the pathological structures from attached and/or adjacent organs with the similar Hounsfield units (HU), a 3D AVM with SSC prior was employed. The SSC model makes no assumption about the parametric distributions of right lung shapes while preserving local details of right lung shapes. As a result, AVM with SSC prior is patient-specific and sufficiently accurate to model the complex variations of right lung shapes. (3) The novel segmentation framework was successfully demonstrated in clinic applications in compromised right lung segmentation. The framework is sufficiently robust to deal with complex cases of right lung cancer in the clinical environments.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant work on lung segmentation methods which include the thresholding based methods, edge model based methods and deformable model based methods. Section 3 presents the framework of an automated and robust segmentation framework which uses robust atlas-based AVM with SSC prior for compromised right lung in thoracic CT. Section 4 shows training and testing datasets, the results on the testing dataset and discussions. Section 5 presents the conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
