@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fractal texture analysis of the healing process after bone loss

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyzed the healing process after bone loss.Group of 25 patients (17 females and 8 males) were evaluated.We used five methods for calculating fractal dimension in the region of interest.Fractal dimension decreases during the healing process after bone loss.The methods of calculating fractal dimension give different results but consistent.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Radiological assessment of treatment effectiveness of guided bone regeneration (GBR) method in postresectal and postcystal bone loss cases, observed for one year. Group of 25 patients (17 females and 8 males) who underwent root resection with cystectomy were evaluated. The following combination therapy of intraosseous deficits was used, consisting of bone augmentation with xenogenic material together with covering regenerative membranes and tight wound closure. The bone regeneration process was estimated, comparing the images taken on the day of the surgery and 12 months later, by means of Kodak RVG 6100 digital radiography set. The interpretation of the radiovisiographic image depends on the evaluation ability of the eye looking at it, which leaves a large margin of uncertainty. So, several texture analysis techniques were developed and used sequentially on the radiographic image. For each method, the results were the mean from the 25 images. These methods compute the fractal dimension (D), each one having its own theoretic basis. We used five techniques for calculating fractal dimension: power spectral density method, triangular prism surface area method, blanket method, intensity difference scaling method and variogram analysis.Our study showed a decrease of fractal dimension during the healing process after bone loss. We also found evidence that various methods of calculating fractal dimension give different results.During the healing process after bone loss, the surfaces of radiographic images became smooth. The result obtained show that our findings may be of great importance for diagnostic purpose.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healing time of extensive bone deficits in jaws arising after cyst removal and left empty, is prolonged. Very often bone loss areas do not heal completely leading to volume deficit of the alveolar process and subsequent cosmetic defect especially in anterior parts of the oral cavity [1,2]. The filling of postresectal and postcystal areas with connective tissue instead of bone, may result in pain symptoms as well as difficult radiological differential diagnosis of connective tissue scars with chronic periapical granulation tissue and even with root cyst [3–6]. Many treatment methods are used aiming at filling the osseous cavity with properly woven bone tissue. They are all defined as Guided Bone Regeneration (GBR) [7,8]. Definitely, the bone itself is the best regenerating intraosseous loss zones material to be considered [9]. However, it is connected with obtaining sufficient amount of material through making a new wound in the donor place and another bone loss in the jaws. Therefore, alternative solutions are being searched for, basing mainly on xenogenic or alloplastic bone replacing materials, regenerative membranes as well as morphogenic proteins and polypeptide growth factors [10–13].Regeneration is a key process in healing of bone deficits. Bone loss areas of the diameter greater than 5mm rarely undergo idiopathic restoration. Therefore, the augmentation procedure allows a proper remodeling of a bone structure. The visual assessment of a bone roughness alone is a subjective test. Interpretation of the bone regeneration range after xenogenic material application on the other hand, demonstrates substantial increase in bone density. The results may show proper bone remodeling or the lack of total material integration. That is why there is still need to search for alternative methods of radiographic interpretation of the treatment results.Recent studies have demonstrated that the texture images provide sufficient data for the analysis of bone structures. Texture measures use statistical [14–16] or structural approaches [17–19]. Fractal methods are considered appropriate for quantifying changes in bone structures, with the ever popular fractal dimension used as descriptor of texture roughness. Fractals, introduced by Mandelbrot [20], are sets of mathematical functions which characterize the geometrical structures of complex, irregular and self-similar systems at multiple scales. Mandelbrot and Van Ness [21] drew attention to the fact that the surfaces occurring in nature should be recognized as the result of random walk. Shaping them, we modeled using fractional Brownian movements.Mandelbrot described fractal as an object whose Hausdorff-Besicovitch dimension or the fractal dimension D is greater than its topological dimension. The fractal objects are characterized by [22]: large degree of heterogeneity, self-similarity, and lack of a well-defined scale. Hausdorff definition is a mathematical foundation of various methods of the fractal dimension estimating. Thus according to various algorithms there are various kinds of fractal dimension For all the methods, the relationship between selected parameters is governed by a power-law [23]:M(ε)=const⋅εf(D)where: M(ε) are the results of measurements, exponent f(D) a simple function of the fractal dimension D, ɛ is a scale. There is a direct relationship between the exponent and the value of the fractal dimension. So we look at a particular object or phenomenon at different scales. We can calculate D in many ways because Hausdorf-Besicovitch's definition is too complicated for practical estimation, but it helps to create many other definitions and algorithms. These methods compute the fractal dimension, each one having its own theoretic basis. The applied algorithms are different, but they all follow the same basis summarized by the three steps:1.measuring the quantities of the object using different step size,plotting log-log and fitting using a least-squares regression line through the data points,estimating D as the slope of the regression line.These algorithms include three main group measurements: box counting, fractional Brownian motion and perimeter area. To detect texture changes, these methods are applied locally (in small regions centered on the sub-images) (Fig. 1).The aim of the present study was to estimate fractal dimension on radiovisiographic images using different algorithms: power spectral density method [24], triangular prism surface area method [25], blanket method [26], intensity difference scaling method [27] and variogram analysis [28], and comparing them to determine the physical roughness.Treatment results of 25 patients (17 females, 8 males) aged from 18 to 53 (av. 35.6y) with initial diagnosis of root cysts, from Department of Oral Surgery Medical University of Bialystok, were analyzed. Patients generally healthy, in a condition not affecting bone healing process, were qualified for the research. All surgical interventions were conducted under local anesthesia. Bone deficits after all procedures were filled with Bio-Oss xenogenic material and covered with BioGide (Biomateriale Geistlich) resorbable membrane. Bio-Oss is a natural specimen derived from decalcified bovine bone. It is produced on the basis of animal limbs coming from selected farms only. It is characterized by high biocompatibility. Its similarities to human bone may be observed in morphology, crystals structure, chemical composition and internal surface. The Bio-Oss material's porosity is 60% and is equal to human's. Crystals of the specimen are of 0.25–1mm size.The radiological assessment was performed directly after surgical treatment and 12 months following the intervention (Fig. 2). Each and every surgical procedure needs a control check-up and estimation of the treatment effectiveness. In a year time after intervention in case of an asymptomatic postsurgical period, radiographic evaluation of periapical region has to be made. A total remodeling of empty inraosseous spaces takes place in first 6–12 months. On the control image, size of the bone loss, bone trabeculae filling the hole, marrow cavities, compact bone surrounding shortened tooth root in case of apical resection, have to be assessed. Therefore, 12 month long observation period seems to be the optimal time. However, the exception of earlier control examination is necessary in case of inflammation of surgical area that stands for a healing complication. Set of Kodak RVG 6100 with effective resolution over 14pl/mm, together with collimator narrowing the radiation beam in a 90 degrees angle technique and constant exposure time of 0.08s were used. The image was saved as graphic files MPG, archived and analyzed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
