@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design and development of an ethnically-diverse imaging informatics-based eFolder system for multiple sclerosis patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A comprehensive web-based ePR system has been developed for MS patients.System integrates patients’ clinical and imaging data and displays on a web browser.System includes MS lesion quantified data in brain MRI, results in DICOM-SR.System aims to provide longitudinal tracking, data mining, and data analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeMRI has been used to identify multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions in brain and spinal cord visually. Integrating patient information into an electronic patient record system has become key for modern patient care in medicine in recent years. Clinically, it is also necessary to track patients’ progress in longitudinal studies, in order to provide comprehensive understanding of disease progression and response to treatment. As the amount of required data increases, there exists a need for an efficient systematic solution to store and analyze MS patient data, disease profiles, and disease tracking for both clinical and research purposes.MethodAn imaging informatics based system, called MS eFolder, has been developed as an integrated patient record system for data storage and analysis of MS patients. The eFolder system, with a DICOM-based database, includes a module for lesion contouring by radiologists, a MS lesion quantification tool to quantify MS lesion volume in 3D, brain parenchyma fraction analysis, and provide quantitative analysis and tracking of volume changes in longitudinal studies. Patient data, including MR images, have been collected retrospectively at University of Southern California Medical Center (USC) and Los Angeles County Hospital (LAC). The MS eFolder utilizes web-based components, such as browser-based graphical user interface (GUI) and web-based database. The eFolder database stores patient clinical data (demographics, MS disease history, family history, etc.), MR imaging-related data found in DICOM headers, and lesion quantification results. Lesion quantification results are derived from radiologists’ contours on brain MRI studies and quantified into 3-dimensional volumes and locations. Quantified results of white matter lesions are integrated into a structured report based on DICOM-SR protocol and templates. The user interface displays patient clinical information, original MR images, and viewing structured reports of quantified results. The GUI also includes a data mining tool to handle unique search queries for MS. System workflow and dataflow steps has been designed based on the IHE post-processing workflow profile, including workflow process tracking, MS lesion contouring and quantification of MR images at a post-processing workstation, and storage of quantitative results as DICOM-SR in DICOM-based storage system. The web-based GUI is designed to display zero-footprint DICOM web-accessible data objects (WADO) and the SR objects.SummaryThe MS eFolder system has been designed and developed as an integrated data storage and mining solution in both clinical and research environments, while providing unique features, such as quantitative lesion analysis and disease tracking over a longitudinal study. A comprehensive image and clinical data integrated database provided by MS eFolder provides a platform for treatment assessment, outcomes analysis and decision-support. The proposed system serves as a platform for future quantitative analysis derived automatically from CAD algorithms that can also be integrated within the system for individual disease tracking and future MS-related research. Ultimately the eFolder provides a decision-support infrastructure that can eventually be used as add-on value to the overall electronic medical record.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disease in which the patient's central nervous system (CNS) degenerates and causes inflammation and brain and spinal atrophy [1,2]. The scarred tissues leftover from the autoimmune attacks are lesions, or plaques, in the white matter [3]. As the disease progresses, the effect on a patient's life can be devastating. Disability can continue to progress until an effective treatment regimen is developed for an individual patient to slow disease progression. Direct medical costs and associated assistive and rehabilitative expenditures can quickly reach into tens of thousands of dollars per year.There is currently no cure for MS because of the irreversible axonal injuries and the complex nature as to what triggers the autoimmune attacks [3,4]. MS manifests itself differently amongst different ethnicities [5,6], such as differing prevalent symptoms, disabilities, MS lesion locations, and response to treatments. The purpose of an MRI scan is to visually locate lesions in the central nervous system. MS lesions appear hypo- or iso-intense in a T1-weighted scan and hyper-intense in a T2-weighted and FLAIR (fluid attenuated inverse recovery) scans. Location and morphology of lesions are also used to identify lesions caused by multiple sclerosis [7,8]. Fig. 1shows the three aforementioned axial slices of a patient's brain with multiple sclerosis.MS disease progression can be monitored by subsequent MR scans for changes in lesion characteristics in longitudinal studies. In general, following initial diagnosis, disease activity is assessed by the number of relapses per year (relapse rate), accumulation of disability as measured by the expanded disability status scale (EDSS) [9] and changes in MRI lesion characteristics. The progression of the disease is variable, and requires routine follow-up imaging studies to document disease exacerbation, improvement, or stability of the characteristic MS lesions.There are a few challenges that exist in the current status for the diagnosis and treatment of multiple sclerosis in both clinical and research settings. MS is a complicated disease that manifests itself differently for different individuals as well as different ethnicities. Therefore, MS disease management and treatment become complex and highly individualized. A more detailed study of specific clinical markers at the time of presentation and during the disease course is required to ascertain and define the distinct features of MS.Currently, MS lesion quantification requires a manual approach to lesion measurement on MRI [9]. It is time-consuming to quantify lesion load (total lesion volume in a study), and volumetric calculations with current techniques only yielding, at most, a rough estimate. The task of tracking MS lesion changes becomes even more difficult if several MR longitudinal studies of the same patient (follow-up studies) require quantitative comparison, which is currently not utilized in clinical diagnosis. In addition, it has been shown that MS diagnosis, lesion detection and lesion load calculation suffer from inter- and intra-observer variability [10].In order to build a complete system to aid in multiple sclerosis diagnosis, treatment, and research, we have designed and developed an ethnically-diverse imaging informatics-based system, called MS eFolder, designed specifically for MS clinical care and research. The MS eFolder provides a database solution for storing patients’ clinical information, an effective way for accessing patients’ MR images and associated data, and also provides a lesion quantification tool. By integrating these components compliant to the DICOM standard in the clinical environment, the eFolder system is able to provide a data repository for treatment planning, correlate MR lesion quantification data with clinical manifestations more effectively, and provide a data mining tool for research purposes. In the future this system can serve as the decision-support component in an overall EMR for treatment of MS patients. The concept of eFolder is derived from electronic patient records (ePR). ePR is a digital, comprehensive patient database that stores patients’ demographic information, medical history, and any information that may be needed and included in ePR's designs. For example, an ePR developed for surgery [11] may contain a subset of patients that have a particular back pain related disease, for example, patients undergoing spinal discectomy.The MS eFolder is developed to aid in diagnosis, disease tracking, treatment, and research of MS. After examining the needs of clinicians and for research purposes, the system has three main software components:1.A DICOM-based patient record database: The database needs to store the patients’ various information, such as their demographic information, medical history, MS history, and any survey results that are gathered by researchers and clinicians. The system also needs to link to medical images (in this case, patients’ brain and spinal MRI) to aid in diagnosis and disease tracking. MR images and DICOM-SR objects are stored in the eFolder's image repository component, which will be explained in detail in the next section.Image processing module: In order to quantify 3-dimensional white matter lesion volumes and brain matter volumes, an image processing module is included in the MS eFolder system. The module allows users to manually identify and contour lesions in the brain MRI. Another algorithm is able to segment gray matter, white matter, and cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF). A voxel-based algorithm is able to cluster those contours and segmentations and quantify volumetric data. Its advantages include a standardized quantification process, allowing MS lesion tracking in longitudinal studies, and offering a quantifiable results for clinical trials and research. The module is integrated with the database, thus the results are stored and patient data can be queried via lesion characteristics. While the module currently utilizes manual contours to create MS lesion segmentation for volumetric calculations, we can replace the manual contouring component with an automatic or semi-automatic computer-aided detection (CAD) algorithm. The eFolder system's modular design allow the components to be replaced with minimal disruption of system services.A web-based graphical user interface (GUI): A GUI is needed for patient data viewing, input, management, and data querying. It is web-based such that the system can be accessed via Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and Internet connections. The GUI needs to be comprehensive such that all patient data, including diagnostic MR images and quantification results, are all available for viewing. The interface has the potential to be a powerful tool in data mining for researchers and data gathering for both clinical and research purposes.The last step of MS eFolder system design is to integrate all of the components of eFolder together and fit into a real-life clinical workflow. IHE (Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise) provides a design of how to include a post-processing step inside a typical clinical workflow [12]. The MS eFolder system workflow is modeled after this IHE workflow profile to ensure successful DICOM-based integration when the system is available for clinical use.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we present the design and development a comprehensive imaging-informatics based eFolder system for multiple sclerosis. It combines the concept of electronic patient record along with disease-centric database design, MR images, and an automated lesion quantification tool for an easier, more efficient system for longitudinal disease tracking, decision support, data mining, and data repository for both MS clinical and research environments. The eFolder system is capable of aiding the comparison studies between Hispanic-American and Caucasian MS patients via integrating MRI and clinical findings. The system is DICOM-complaint, while being completely web-based to allow remote access and telemedicine. MS lesions are identified and contoured by expert neuroradiologists, and a lesion quantification system has been developed in MATLAB. Quantification results have been converted into DICOM-SR for DICOM-compliant long-term storage. System workflow, based on IHE, has been developed and tested in a laboratory environment. Imaging data and patient disease data have been collected, while a graphical user interface has been developed to bring ease of access and user-friendliness to the MS eFolder. While complete integration is ongoing and several improvements are being refined, the eFolder concept aims to improve on MS diagnosis, tracking, and research. The eFolder will bring a novel and comprehensive approach to observe longitudinal MS lesion changes in MR, and deciding treatment plans that best suit the MS patient's profile.