@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parametric mapping and quantitative analysis of the human calvarium

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Density and thickness vary widely over the surface of individual skulls and also over a population of skulls.The spatial distribution of thickness and density appears to form a unique pattern for each skull.Of the three skull layers the diploë has the highest effect on overall thickness and density.Parametric mapping of the anatomical measurements provides insight to the uniqueness of individual skulls.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human calvaria,Computed tomography,Density,Thickness,Parametric maps,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we report how thickness and density vary over the calvarium region of a collection of human skulls. Most previous reports involved a limited number of skulls, with a limited number of measurement sites per skull, so data in the literature are sparse. We collected computer tomography (CT) scans of 51 ex vivo human calvaria, and analyzed these in silico using over 2000 measurement sites per skull. Thickness and density were calculated at these sites, for the three skull layers separately and combined, and were mapped parametrically onto the skull surfaces to examine the spatial variations per skull. These were found to be highly variable, and unique descriptors of the individual skulls. Of the three skull layers, the thickness of the inner cortical layer was found to be the most variable, while the least variable was the outer cortical density.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The human cranium has been studied from many perspectives, ranging from forensics [1–3] fracture mechanics [4], developmental anatomy [5,6] to acoustics [7–10] and radiology [11]. Now, the emerging field of transcranial focused ultrasound (TcFUS) [12] brings a new set of reasons to examine the material properties of the human skull. TcFUS employs large hemispherical multi-element arrays [13,14], designed to transmit acoustic energy over a distributed cranial surface. With appropriate phase aberration correction techniques such as described in [11], this produces a highly contained intracranial focus while minimizing the effects of skull heating. For this reason it is important to characterize how the skull anatomy varies over a wider area than is necessary for small-footprint diagnostic ultrasound transducers. While these diagnostic transducers typically transmit through the temporal bone ‘window’, the TcFUS transducer transmits over much of the calvarium, comprised of the parietal, frontal and occipital bones. Modern high-resolution CT scanners can provide much insight into the properties of the calvarium, such as thickness and density, over the entirety of this region and in a continuous fashion. CT images may then be reconstructed and measured in a virtual 3D coordinate space. The number of points used, and their location on the calvarium may be dictated by a particular application. In the case of TcFUS this may associated with the number of transmitting elements in the hemispheric array, their spatial coordinates and the location of the intracranial focus. While the region of the skull studied in this manner is pertinent to that application, this is not the entirety of the anatomy available for measurement. To expand the region of measurement we generalized the hemispherical arrangement of points surrounding the calvarium so that the radius and point-count could be user-defined. This study reports on our work to establish a database of CT images for a large number of human calvaria, along with anatomical measurements of thickness and density. These parameters can be mapped parametrically onto the skull surface to gain insight as to how they vary, both intra- and inter-individually. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to include a large number of calvaria along with a high number of measurement points per skull. While our own motivation for this project was to better understand the effects of skull anatomy on the acoustic field produced by a TcFUS device, a milestone for this is the characterization of the skull anatomical variability, which is the subject of this paper.Human cadaver skull specimens were used in this study. We used 51 calvaria, obtained from the UCSD Medical School Division of Anatomy, along with vital statistic data pertaining to donor gender, age and date of death, primary and contributing causes of death. The calvaria had been stored in a dry state, cleaned but without tissue fixation other than the initial embalming of the donated body. Prior to making measurements, these dessicated specimens were rehydrated in degassed water. Of the 51 calvaria studied, demographic and vital statistic information was available for 40 specimens. Of these, 26 were females ranging in age from 53 to 97 years at time of death, and 14 were males between 60 and 85 years at time of death.The specimens were attached to acrylic stereotactic fixtures, for positioning within the CT scanner, and also to provide fiducial markers for coordinate transformation between the TcFUS and CT coordinate spaces. Prior to CT scanning, the skull specimen was placed in an acrylic vacuum chamber. The chamber with was then filled with deionized water, sealed, and placed under house vacuum (−300mmHg) for a typical duration of three days to ensure complete skull degassing. Shorter degassing times have been reported using greater negative vacuum pressures [15].After degassing, the chamber with skull was placed in the bore of the CT scanner (Discovery CT750 HD, GE Medical Systems, Waukesha, WI, USA) and scanned to create a set of transverse images. The CT image pixelation was 512×512, covering 320mm×320mm for pixel dimensions of 0.625mm. The slice thickness was 0.625mm, resulting in 0.625mm cubic voxels. Each scan was done in helical mode, 120kVP, with a boneplus reconstruction kernel (part of the GE software, which enhances bone edges and details).The CT images were downloaded from the central PACS in DICOM format and imported into a local DICOM viewer (OsiriX, OsiriX Foundation, Geneva, Switzerland). In the viewer, the fiducial markers in the acrylic frame were located and their CT coordinates recorded. The DICOM images were read into MATLAB (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) to create 3D matrix of CT values, along with the voxel coordinates. All the CT datasets were aligned to the coordinate system of the TcFUS using the fiducials. The position of the calvarium in the acrylic frame and TcFUS coordinates is illustrated in Fig. 1a. For visualization purposes, all material other than bone could be thresholded away, shown in Fig. 1b.A routine was then used to create the hemispherical arrangement of equispaced points around the calvarium. This hemisphere followed the convention of the TcFUS array with the bottom of the bowl located at the origin of the coordinate system. We chose to create a hemisphere of radius 180mm and 2000 points, which placed the center of the hemisphere at (0,0,180) mm in TcFUS coordinates. This hemisphere and the calvarium were approximately concentric in the TcFUS reconstruction space. The points were then projected onto the outer surface of the calvarium by creating line segments extending from the hemisphere to the center point. These points are illustrated in Fig. 1c. The outer surface of the calvarium was easily identified, having a CT value much higher than the surrounding material (acrylic or water). The spatial coordinates of these points on the calvarium surface were then recorded. For each of these points, two neighboring points are found for a total of three points. These points form a small triangle, and the normal vector was found by vector cross-product. These normal vectors in turn were projected through the calvarium and CT values were interpolated onto them in increments of 0.25mm (MATLAB interp3 function with linear interpolation). These values were then used to measure the skull thickness and radiological density at each of the 2000 sites. The CT values used for interpolation and measurement were analyzed without thresholding to prevent low-density regions in the skulls being set to zero and introducing an error to the density measurements.Most regions of the calvarium consist of three distinct layers: the inner and outer cortical layers and the trabecular layer, or diploë, between the cortical layers. The diploë is absent near the sutures, which tend to be primarily cortical bone. However the majority of the measurement profiles allowed for the measurement of the three component layers. An algorithm was developed to identify the density maxima of both the inner and outer cortical layers and the intervening lower density values of the diploë. The outer boundaries of the cortical layers were defined as the points where the density values were equal to or greater than half of the associated cortical maximum, consistent with published recommendations [16–18]. The inner cortical boundaries were defined as the points where the density values were half of the difference between the cortical maximum and diploë minimum. The density profile across the diploë may be quite irregular, with several minima. The minimum closest to the respective cortical maximum was used to determine the cortical–diploë boundaries. The thickness of the cortical layers was the distance between the outer and inner boundary points, and density was the associated maximum value. The diploë was defined as the values between the inner boundary points of the two cortical layers. Diploë thickness was the distance between these two points, and diploë density was the average of the values between these points.Fig. 2illustrates a typical measurement profile. From left to right the measurement line passes through the interior surface of the skull, the interior cortical layer, the diploë, the exterior cortical layer and onwards. Overall skull thickness and density were calculated using these profiles, as were the same parameters for the three skull layers.The time required to make all thickness and density measurements at these 2000 sites was about 10min per skull, using an iMac computer with a 3.4GHz Intel Core i7 processor and 8GB RAM. We also evaluated whether using a higher number of measurement sites would make a difference in calculations of mean thickness and density. Using one skull, we compared the results of using 2000 measurement sites vs. 5000 measurement sites. The time required using 5000 sites scaled proportionally, i.e. 25min. With 2000 points the mean skull thickness was 7.291mm and the mean density was 1109.9HU. Using 5000 points the mean thickness was 7.316mm and the mean density was 1110.6HU. Thickness and density differed by 0.34% and 0.06% respectively. These differences were considered to be sufficiently small as to justify using the lower number of measurement sites and associated shorter processing time.The measurements obtained from the density profiles could be mapped parametrically onto the skull surfaces in order to appreciate the spatial distributions. This is demonstrated in Fig. 3, which are parametric maps of skull thickness and average density, with voxels expanded to aid visualization. In Fig. 4, the three skull layers for the same skull are examined separately: from left to right the inner cortical layer, the more porous diploë, and the outer cortical layer. Parametric maps of this nature were made for all 51 calvaria included in this study.We developed a routine that allowed us to select a point on a parametric map, and that returned an average of the thickness and density within a 5mm radius of the selected point. We examined each of the parametric maps for the 51 calvaria, and characterized them regarding such features as bilateral symmetry and regions for thickness and density maxima and minima.Comparisons of thickness and density between male and female subgroups. This was done by inspection of the means and standard deviations listed in Table 1. If one group's mean was within a standard deviation of the other, then the difference between groups was taken to be statistically insignificant. Correlation coefficients were computed using the Matlab function corrcoeff, when comparing skull physical parameters to gender and/or age at death.Thickness and density variability was quantified using the coefficient of variation (CV), i.e. the standard deviation divided by the mean. Variability was considered in terms of spatial distribution over each calvarium (intra-individual, or local CV), and also over the population of calvaria (inter-individual, or global CV). The local CV was calculated from the collection of measurement vectors for each skull. The global CVs were calculated from the collection of means for all skulls. In this case the standard deviations pertained to the inter-individual variation of the mean, rather than the variations of the intra-individual measurement vectors.Errors introduced by the measurement technique were minimized by following a standardized procedure for making CT scans and also for the localization of the fiducials in the CT images. Prior to each scan the specimen chamber was aligned on the scanning platform using the laser alignment feature of the instrument. A scanning protocol was written and loaded for each session so that all CT settings remained the same for each scan. The fiducial locations in the CT images were identified by the same person throughout the study, using the same image magnification. In order to assess the effect of fiducial localization error, this process was repeated for one of the skulls a total of five separate times. Mean and standard deviations for thickness and density were calculated and the coefficient of variation was used to quantify the error. For the thickness measurement the CV was 9.14×10−4, and for density the CV was 3.61×10−4, which was judged to be negligibly small.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have shown that density and thickness vary widely over the surface of individual skulls and also over a population of skulls. The spatial distribution of thickness and density appears to form a unique pattern for each skull. Of the three skull layers the diploë has the highest effect on overall thickness and density. The outer cortical layer had the highest average density, and had the least varying spatial distribution of the skull layers. There was no evident correlation between average thickness and density for the skulls inter-individually. Intra-individually there is a statistically significant spatial correlation between thickness and density for most skulls (84% in this study). Parametric mapping of the anatomical measurements provides insight to the uniqueness of individual skulls.There are no conflicts of interest for any of the authors of this manuscript.