@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Right ventricular segmentation in cardiac MRI with moving mesh correspondences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a semi-automatic segmentation method for right ventricular segmentation.The method removes the need for a time-consuming, manually built training set.The method does not make prior assumptions as to the intensity distributions or shape.The method is flexible for congenital heart disease where the RV undergoes high variations in shape.Evaluations over a RV challenge data and HLHS patient data show the robustness of the method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Right ventricular function,Segmentation,Moving mesh,Grid generation,Magnetic resonance imaging,Ejection fraction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study investigates automatic propagation of the right ventricle (RV) endocardial and epicardial boundaries in 4D (3D+time) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequences. Based on a moving mesh (or grid generation) framework, the proposed algorithm detects the endocardium and epicardium within each cardiac phase via point-to-point correspondences. The proposed method has the following advantages over prior RV segmentation works: (1) it removes the need for a time-consuming, manually built training set; (2) it does not make prior assumptions as to the intensity distributions or shape; (3) it provides a sequence of corresponding points over time, a comprehensive input that can be very useful in cardiac applications other than segmentation, e.g., regional wall motion analysis; and (4) it is more flexible for congenital heart disease where the RV undergoes high variations in shape. Furthermore, the proposed method allows comprehensive RV volumetric analysis over the complete cardiac cycle as well as automatic detections of end-systolic and end-diastolic phases because it provides a segmentation for each time step. Evaluated quantitatively over the 48-subject data set of the MICCAI 2012 RV segmentation challenge, the proposed method yielded an average Dice score of 0.84±0.11 for the epicardium and 0.79±0.17 for the endocardium. Further, quantitative evaluations of the proposed approach in comparisons to manual contours over 23 infant hypoplastic left heart syndrome patients yielded a Dice score of 0.82±0.14, which demonstrates the robustness of the algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Right ventricular (RV) failure can have numerous aetiologies, which include pulmonary hypertension, cardiomyopathy, myocardial infarction, congenital heart disease, and sepsis [1]. Although clinically evidenced with several studies [2,3], the importance of RV analysis was overlooked in the last decade. Andersen et al. [2] showed that up to 50% of all regional infarcts are RV related. Cor pulmonale, the enlargement of the RV due to pulmonary hypertension, is the third most common cause of cardiac dysfunction in patients over the age of 50 [3]. RV analysis is much more complicated than LV analysis, and its clinical assessments are more labour-intensive. Both ventricles are composed of multiple layers that form a 3D network of fibres. However, the shape of the RV is more complex. It generally appears triangular when viewed longitudinally and crescent-shaped when observed from the short-axis view, whereas the LV is ellipsoidal. RV shortening is larger longitudinally than radially [4], and the RV has a wall much thinner than the LV as it ejects blood against approximately 25% of the LV after-load [5].Early detection and analysis of the RV dysfunction are helpful in identifying RV dysfunction prior to progression of RV failure. For instance, untreated pulmonary arterial hypertension may evolve rapidly and, therefore, can lead to RV failure and death, with a median survival time of less than 3 years after the diagnosis [6]. The current state-of-the-art solutions in imaging provide an excellent tool for detecting abnormalities in RV function. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is considered as the current gold standard for non-invasive anatomical and functional assessment of the RV; it allows detailed RV evaluation [1]. Cardiac MRI is used to evaluate the right ventricle in a number of congenital heart conditions [7] and in pulmonary artery hypertension [8]. MRI has several important advantages over echocardiography. These include excellent image quality, lack of geometric assumptions, no endocardial dropout, and no foreshortening of the apex. Clinical measurements such as the RV ejection fraction (RVEF) and volumes have important diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic implications for patients with acquired heart disease, particularly those who need cardiac function follow-up [9,10]. For quantitative functional analysis, and to obtain clinical measurements such as volume or RVEF, it is essential to delineate the RV. Manual delineation of the RV boundaries in all magnetic resonance (MR) images11Typically, the number of images per subject is equal to 200.is tedious and time-consuming. Therefore, it is a common clinical practice to delineate the RV boundaries only in end diastolic and end systolic phases. Automating the process has bestirred a significant research attention recently, and has been the subject of a Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) 2012 RV Segmentation Challenge (RVSC) [11–19].Due to its complex morphology and function, RV segmentation in 3D+time is acknowledged more challenging than LV segmentation [4,20]. Most of the research efforts in the last decade focused on the LV [21–27]. RV segmentation remains an unsolved problem, with difficulties arising from the thin and ill-defined borders of the RV, its crescent-shaped structure and its complex deformations over time. Another problem associated with RV border detection is the presence of adjacent epicardial fat, which blurs the anterior margins of the RV [4]. Furthermore, RV segmentation methods need to consider the intensity similarities between different connected cardiac regions. For instance, the papillary muscles and heart wall have approximately the same intensity profiles. Therefore, standard segmentation methods based solely on intensity information cannot yield accurate results. To overcome these difficulties, most of the existing methods use either atlas-based techniques [11,15,18,28–30] or prior geometric properties [12,17,31–33], e.g., the shape of the RV is learned a priori from a finite training set. The main drawbacks of shape or atlas based approaches are (1) the requirement for large, manually segmented training sets; and (2) the high dependence of the results on the specific choice of a training set, which can lead to biases towards a particular cardiac pathology or towards the properties of normal subjects, e.g., the mean RV shape within the training data. The shape of the RV and its position relative to the LV may vary significantly from one subject to another (Refer to Fig. 1for a typical RV and the RV of a hypoplastic left heart syndrome patient (HLHS)). HLHS is a congenital heart malformation, where the structures of the left side of the heart are underdeveloped or too small. The initial surgical palliation causes the RV to pump blood to the entire body and the lungs. Assessing the RV in MRI prior to further surgery is important but is difficult in the case of patients that are young infants. Methods that rely on the spatial correspondences between the LV and RV may not be accurate for diseased hearts because such correspondences may vary significantly. For example, the method in [34] assumes that the RV is to the left of, and generally above, the LV. This assumption may not be true for HLHS patients such as the one depicted in Fig. 1(b), where the LV is very small and the RV occupies a position different than usual.The shape of the RV might be considerably different at end-systole in comparison to end-diastole. Therefore, in general, shape-based approaches have difficulty in capturing the RV at end-systole. The results published by the recent RVSC at the MICCAI 2012 conference confirm this. These results show that most of the existing methods have the highest segmentation error at end-systole [11–15,17,18]. The best reported Dice Metric (DM) values among the seven participants were 0.72 and 0.77 for endocardium and epicardium, respectively. Due to its smaller size, inaccuracies in the segmentation of the RV at end-systole affect the value of clinical measurements such as the RVEF.To tackle the problem of 4D (3D+time) data sets, we propose a semi-automatic approach based on a moving mesh (or grid generation) framework. Given a user-provided segmentation of a single frame in a cardiac sequence, the proposed method segments both endocardial and epicardial borders of the RV via point-to-point correspondences (Refer to Fig. 3). The proposed method allows comprehensive RV volumetric analysis over the complete cardiac cycle as well as automatic detections of end-systolic and end-diastolic phases because it provides segmentation for each time step.Our method is related to propagation/registration frameworks, which have been used previously for tracking the left ventricular boundaries. An example is the work in [35,36], which optimises a sum of energy terms consisting of a squared L2 norm and a Sobolev smoothing term. Based on the concept of equivalent volume elements of a compact Riemannian manifold [37] and yielding a unique solution by solving an div-curl system, the proposed moving mesh approach is fundamentally different from [35,36]: The proposed moving mesh prevents mesh folding, i.e., grid lines of the same grid family will not cross each other, an essential attribute in tracking cardiac tissues from a sequence of images. Furthermore, it allows setting explicitly the minimum and maximum values for the compressibility of the mesh, which can be used to imitate cardiac tissue deformation, thereby yielding a better point correspondence mapping.A preliminary conference version of this work appeared in IEEE EMBC 2013 [38]. This journal version expands on [38] with:(1)A wider experimental investigation that includes more patient data and statistical validations. Additional experimental evaluations include: (a) 16 new subjects bringing the total adult subjects to 48; and (b) 23 infant HLHS patients.A much broader, more informative/rigorous discussion of the subject. This includes an algorithmic description of the moving mesh generation and a more detailed discussion on the challenges in segmenting the RV under abnormal conditions such as HLHS.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the moving mesh framework used in the study. Experimental evaluations over RVSC and HLHS data sets as well as comparisons of the proposed method with other recent methods on RVSC data sets are described in Section 3. Section 4 provides a discussion and the limitations of the proposed study. Finally, conclusions are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
