@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic spinal canal detection in lumbar MR images in the sagittal view using dynamic programming

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Introduction to CAD framework for characterizing/diagnosing lumbar spine pathology.Proposing dynamic programming-based spinal canal boundary detection algorithm.Performance of the algorithm is quantitatively evaluated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Boundary extraction,Lumbar spine,Magnetic resonance imaging,Computer-aided diagnosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As there is an increasing need for the computer-aided effective management of pathology in lumbar spine, we have developed a computer-aided diagnosis and characterization framework using lumbar spine MRI that provides radiologists a second opinion. In this paper, we propose a left spinal canal boundary extraction method, based on dynamic programming in lumbar spine MRI. Our method fuses the absolute intensity difference of T1-weighted and T2-weighted sagittal images and the inverted gradient of the difference image into a dynamic programming scheme and works in a fully automatic fashion. The boundaries generated by our method are compared against reference boundaries in terms of the Euclidean distance and the Chebyshev distance. The experimental results from 85 clinical data show that our methods find the boundary with a mean Euclidean distance of 3mm, achieving a speedup factor of 167 compared with manual landmark extraction. The proposed method successfully extracts landmarks automatically and fits well with our framework for computer-aided diagnosis in lumbar spine.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There has been a concern about a shortage of diagnostic radiologists [1] and it was reported that the insufficiency was eased by delaying retirement of radiologists or working longer hours [2]. On the other hand, the workload of radiologists has continuously increased. According to the American College of Radiology Survey of Radiologists, workload has grown by 7% in terms of procedures and 10% in terms of physician work relative value units from 2002–2003 to 2006–2007 [3]. As a solution to reduce radiologists’ workload, there have been several efforts to increase the productivity of radiologists while securing an accurate diagnosis. To this end, we have developed a computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) framework, LumbarDiagnostics, for computer-aided characterization and diagnosis of lumbar spine pathology using multi-protocol magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in a reliable and rapid manner, allowing to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of examining procedures of lumbar pathology.MRI becomes a primary diagnostic tool as it has several unique advantages over other imaging modalities. Differently from computed tomography (CT), single photon emission computed tomography, and positron emission tomography, MRI operates at radio-frequency range. Thus, it does not involve hazardous radiation. Second, the content of MR images contains much richer information compared to other modalities. Especially, it depicts excellent soft tissue contrast. In addition, volume renderings from MRI data can be created for a thorough investigation of diseases, while CT is limited to axial slices and images in other planes are reconstructed by postprocessing.CAD has become one of the major research topics in medical imaging and diagnostic radiology. CAD has continuously evolved as a supportive tool in clinical environments [4,5]. In the past decades, a lot of CAD research and developments have been conducted for detection and classification of various lesions utilizing several imaging modalities for radiologists to use the output from computers as a second opinion in making their final decisions. Although the performance of computers is not as exact as that of physicians, CAD still plays complementary roles in diagnostic decision-making processes. Recent clinical studies indicate that CAD enhances the number of breast cancer detection by about 10% which is comparable to double reading by two radiologists [4].The spinal cord is a vital communication link between the brain and the body that relays information between them. It also forms the elongated, cylindrical part of the central nervous system. As in Fig. 1(a), it is 40–45cm long and 1–2cm in diameter on average. In a sagittal view, the spinal cord extends from the brain to vertebrae L1 or L2. The majority of dural sacs that encase the spinal cord terminate around the level S2 with a range from S1 to S3. Both the spinal cord and the dural sac are housed within the spinal canal. In our CAD framework, the spinal canal is used as a landmark to locate a region of interest (ROI) and to localize neighboring vertebrae and intervertebral discs since it gives constantly a sharp contrast between the canal and across the set of sagittal images. In other words, the exact spinal canal segmentation in an automated manner is one of the crucial prerequisites for localization and characterization of bordering organs.In our previous work [6], we confirmed that the absolute pixel intensity difference between a T1-weighted sagittal image and its corresponding T2-weighted sagittal image gives an excellent outline of the spinal canal boundary as T1-weighted images and T2-weighted images are co-registered by technicians as in Fig. 1(b)–(d). Different from the previous method [6] that finds the left or the right boundary or somewhere between the two at random depending on the characteristics of an image, the proposed algorithm more accurately finds the left boundary of the spinal canal that connects the spinal cord, vertebrae, and intervertebral discs in sagittal plane. That is, while the previous method roughly finds the boundary that resides within the spinal canal, the proposed method in this paper finds exactly the left boundary between the spinal canal and the vertebral column that can be used as a landmark region. When compared with the right boundary, the left boundary can be used as a clue to diagnose the degree how much vertebra is slipped, so the accurate delineation of it is crucial. Based on the intensity difference of each pixel in two co-registered planes, in this paper we propose a method to extract a landmark region, i.e., the left spinal canal boundary for computer-aided diagnosis in lumbar spine by applying dynamic programming to the inverted gradient of the pixel intensity difference of the image. In other words, dynamic programming traces the boundary of the left spinal canal without interruption albeit disc herniation or spinal stenosis blocks the canal in the sagittal plane. In the dynamic programming procedure, the inverted magnitude of the difference image gradient is used as the cost function. The optimal solution of the cost function is found by backtracking, resulting in the desired boundary. This approach runs faster than our previous one that used interpolation to connect the spinal canal pieces into the one [7]. In our framework, this automated spinal canal detection in an accurate, fast manner is a prerequisite for localizing neighboring vertebrae and intervertebral discs, for background removal, and for feature generation that will be used in the task of pathology diagnosis in lumbar spine as stated earlier.Recently, some advanced techniques and developments have been reported in computerized spine analysis including vertebra detection and segmentation and spinal canal detection from MRI. Chevrefils et al. [8] developed a watershed-based technique for segmenting intervertebral discs and spinal canal from MRI. A qualitative analysis of the results was compared favorably with other fast and unsupervised techniques including Canny and Marr–Hildreth edge detectors. They claimed that the method was robust to handle variability of shapes and topologies characterizing MRI images of scoliotic patients. Huang et al. [9] developed a fully automatic vertebra detection and segmentation system consisting of three stages: Adaboost-based vertebra detection, detection refinement via robust curve fitting, and vertebra segmentation by an iterative normalized cut algorithm. They claimed that the proposed system achieved nearly 98% vertebra detection rate and 96% segmentation accuracy. Horsfield et al. [10] proposed a semi-automatic method for segmentation of the spinal cord in MRI. The method utilized an active surface model that was generated based on the approximated cord centerline marked by a human. It was applied to assessing the multiple sclerosis and was evaluated in terms of the intra-observer reproducibilities. Lootus et al. [11] presented a histogram of oriented gradients (HOG)-based algorithm to automatically localize vertebrae in lumbar spine MRI scans. It was based on Deformable Part Model (DPM) object detector and inference using dynamic programming on chain and claimed to be simple, accurate and efficient. The method was evaluated quantitatively and they claimed that the method could cope with pathologies such as scoliosis, joined vertebrae, deformed vertebrae and discs, and imaging artifacts. Suzani et al. [12] proposed a semi-automatic method for segmenting vertebral bodies in multi-slice MR images. Adding a statistical model to the existing multi-vertebrae shape+pose model to accommodate, it was applied to volumetric MR images. They claimed that it is fast and can accommodate largest inter-slice gaps. Their segmentation results were quantitatively evaluated against the manual segmentation. That is, they claimed that the proposed method can segment the lumbar vertebral bodies in MRI with a mean error of 3mm.In addition, boundary tracking and extraction has been studied by many researchers using diverse modalities. Geiger et al. [14] provided methods to detect, track and match deformable contours based on dynamic programming that can be applied to a wide variety of shapes. The algorithm with the boundary tracking techniques had been comprehensively tested on MRI cardiac data. Kirbas and Quek [15] gave a literature survey of vessel extraction techniques and algorithms based on several modalities. They classified vessel extraction techniques and algorithms into the following main classes: (i) pattern recognition techniques, (ii) model-based approaches, (iii) tracking-based approaches, (iv) artificial intelligence-based approaches, (v) neural network-based approaches, and (vi) tube-like object detection approaches. Lam and Yan [16] proposed a technique by which the user-defined initial curve moves towards the object data by combining a level set method and an affine transform method. They claimed that the method could handle corrupted data effectively by noise having sets of spurious points. Qian et al. [17] presented an accurate cardiac boundary tracking framework for 2D tagged MRI. This method integrated the boundary appearance, the shape constraints and the dynamic model naturally in a boosting and nonparametric tracking framework. The method required a training step. Sargin et al. [18] proposed a constrained optimization method to extract curvilinear structures from live cell fluorescence images. They argued that the method worked well in noisy images, showing its robustness to frequent intersections, intensity variations along the curve. Garibotto and Garibotto [19] described a method for computer-assisted contour tracking and following method by local profile matching using MR images. The contour tracking was performed with adaptive control of the local direction along with a continuous update of the gradient profile model. They insisted that this semi-automatic tracking model was very promising to allow accurate and fast processing of multiple images. Socher et al. [20] presented a hierarchical learning based vessel detection and segmentation method that was driven by data. They argued that this method was automatic, fast and robust against noise often observed in low quality X-ray images. Their boundary detection and segmentation task was formulated as a hierarchical learning problems over three levels: border points, cross-segments and vessel pieces, corresponding to the vessel's position, width and length. Bhole et al. [7] presented a method to detect lumbar vertebrae and disc structure from MR images. By combining information from T1-weighted sagittal, T2-weighted sagittal, and T2-weighted axial MR images, they automatically detected the boundary of spinal column and vertebral columns, achieving 98.8% accuracy.The above algorithms do not work automatically, are not compared with manually extracted boundaries or require a training phase. Thus, the advantages of the proposed framework using our novel framework are as summarized as follows: (i) it works fully automatic requires no human intervention, (ii) it does not require a training phase, and (iii) the tracked boundaries are quantitatively evaluated.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, our CAD framework and the left boundary detection method are presented. In Section 3, experimental results and discussion will be given. Finally Section 4 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
