@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Standard and fenestrated endograft sizing in EVAR planning: Description and validation of a semi-automated 3D software

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Advanced EVAR vascular analysis, allowing automation, robustness and customization.Advanced multimodal visualization technology allowing better planning procedures.Three modes of operation for standard and fenestrated endografts, and a free mode.Ability to handle complex, fenestrated endograft cases.Validation by comparing the agreement with an existing commercial solution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computerized Tomography Angiography,Abdominal aortic aneurysm,Endovascular aneurysm repair,Image segmentation,Image quantification,Vascular image analysis,Surgical planning,Software,Endograft,Stent,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a pathological dilation of the abdominal aorta that may lead to a rupture with fatal consequences. Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is a minimally invasive surgical procedure consisting of the deployment and fixation of a stent–graft that isolates the damaged vessel wall from blood circulation. The technique requires adequate endovascular device sizing, which may be performed by vascular analysis and quantification on Computerized Tomography Angiography (CTA) scans. This paper presents a novel 3D CTA image-based software for AAA inspection and EVAR sizing, eVida Vascular, which allows fast and accurate 3D endograft sizing for standard and fenestrated endografts. We provide a description of the system and its innovations, including the underlying vascular image analysis and visualization technology, functional modules and user interaction. Furthermore, an experimental validation of the tool is described, assessing the degree of agreement with a commercial, clinically validated software, when comparing measurements obtained for standard endograft sizing in a group of 14 patients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a pathological condition consisting of an abnormal dilation of the abdominal aorta, exceeding more than 50% its normal diameter [8]. Aneurysms tend to grow, and eventually may rupture, with a high mortality rate. Elective surgery is usually performed when the diameter exceeds 5.5cm [16]. The traditional surgical approach based on an open repair, has been steadily substituted by the endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR), a minimally invasive technique involving the deployment and fixation of a stent graft that excludes the damaged wall from circulation.EVAR requires pre-procedural planning consisting of image-based patient anatomy assessment for endograft selection and sizing. Relevant measurements are obtained from high resolution Computerized Tomography Angiography (CTA) scans of the abdominal area, using specific vascular image analysis modules or applications [1,12]. Furthermore, it has been recently demonstrated [23] that developing 3D surgical planning technology may have an impact on the intervention outcome, due to a more accurate endograft sizing and intervention planning.As surgical practice and device design evolve, more complicated cases are being treated endovascularly, requiring increasingly complex pre-surgical analysis, and custom stent–graft designs. In the case of AAAs, these sometimes require the provision of fenestrations (windows) for subsidiary arteries, specifically when the aneurysm extends proximally covering the infrarenal space, and preventing fixation. Due to the specificity and complexity of the analysis, innovative computational tools supporting the design of fenestrations and custom-made endografts are required. However, there is not enough clinical evidence on how these cases should be addressed [4,3,14]. Current commercial solutions for EVAR planning range from general workstations with advanced planar or curved reformattings around a centerline to specific tools for the aorta. The need to reduce costs has recently led to a strong competition to provide vascular surgeons with fast, robust, accurate and intuitive endograft sizing tools coping with all the raised issues. A few softwares have started to provide solutions for planning complex fenestrated endografts.In this paper, we present a 3D EVAR endograft sizing tool, named eVida Vascular, first introduced in Ref. [19], which includes advanced visualization and analysis tools for managing standard as well as complex cases, including the provision of fenestrations (windows) in the endograft fabric, while providing a trade-off between automation, speed, robustness, usability, intuitiveness, and flexibility requirements. A novel semi-automatic and robust vascular analysis procedure was developed for this application, based on a prior single-click segmentation of the aortic tree, centerline extraction, including subsidiary arteries, and vessel graph analysis. The method is complemented with the ability to segment missing branches to deal with low contrast scans or severe artifacts. This vascular analysis provides the input for an intuitive visualization interface, combining 3D renderings of the aortic tree and centerlines, supporting 2D views, planar reformattings and visual cues in different synchronized layouts. It features three operation modes or workflows providing fast and accurate sizing of endografts with automatic length and diameter estimation, namely the standard AAA endograft sizing mode, the fenestrated endograft sizing mode, and a free interaction mode allowing further freedom to the surgeon in taking measurements along the aorta centerline and branches. The fenestrated module allows the interactive definition of fenestrations through symbolic stents and endograft, better representing the deployment situation in cases with large aortic neck curvatures. Such combination of features is not present in other softwares.We provide a description of the eVida Vascular application, explaining the vascular image analysis and visualization, as well as the different modes of operation. In addition, we report a validation comparing results of eVida Vascular with those of a commercial radiology 3D workstation with an AAA sizing module, used routinely in our clinical setting, in order to establish the degree of agreement in diameter and length quantification between both tools.The outline of the article is as follows. Section 2 presents some important background facts, including clinical facts about AAA and EVAR, image analysis technologies for EVAR planning, and existing commercial solutions. Section 3 describes a set of pre-requisites or requirements for the development of a 3D tool for endograft sizing. Section 4 describes the vascular image analysis technology developed for eVida Vascular. Section 5 details the functional modules and interface of eVida Vascular. Section 6 presents the experiments performed for validation and the results obtained. The advantages and performance of the tool are discussed in Section 7, and finally, Section 8 presents the conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have developed a novel 3D EVAR planning tool, eVida Vascular, based on advanced vascular analysis and visualization of the aortic tree. A rapid workflow is provided by a combination of automatic image analysis tools with an interactive and easy-to-follow step-by-step interface. By using complementary and intuitive 2D and 3D vascular visualization and interaction tools, it provides the necessary feedback to the clinicians of the current planning, reducing the degree of uncertainty of the design. The user is provided with the ability of modifying the automatic calculations at any moment, providing additional control in the design.The system is able to provide a fast, intuitive and accurate measurement of design parameters (diameters and lengths) for most standard endograft devices. It also provides the ability to manage complex cases such as those requiring the provision of fenestrated endografts, a feature not present in the majority of EVAR planning softwares. Planning of such fenestrated endografts is performed in a novel manner, with the help of a set of symbolic endograft and stents. Further freedom in the design is obtained through a free workflow mode, allowing to perform diameter and length quantification without any predefined sequence.A validation of the tool establishing the degree of agreement with a commercial solution for standard endograft sizing has been performed. Results indicate that the tool is valid for clinical practice, showing an adequate degree of agreement between the measurements obtained by both tools, and leading to the same endograft designs, taking into account the measurement tolerance in design parameters (diameters and lengths) used to select one or another model.Future work includes the endograft placement simulation with curved and deformable virtual stent-graft devices, and the extension of the system for planning thoracic (TAA), thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysms (TAAA) and aortic dissections (TAD). We plan to perform a long-term clinical study in order to assess the improvements in the outcomes of interventions using this type of advanced planning, especially for fenestrated endografts where there is a lack of clinical evidence. This would validate the hypothesis that many of the negative outcomes of current EVAR practice may be due to an inadequate planning and sizing, and that the technique may be further improved by the routine use of tools such as the one proposed in this work.The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.