@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Applying latent semantic analysis to large-scale medical image databases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed LSA approach overcomes the complexity barriers of SVD.Early data fusion with LSA outperforms late fusion methods.LSA combines effectively visual and textual information with an integrated approach.The proposed “bypass” solution to SVD makes it attractive for large scale medical image databases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
SVD,LSA,CBIR,Feature selection,Data fusion,Text retrieval,Image retrieval,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) although has been used successfully in text retrieval when applied to CBIR induces scalability issues with large image collections. The method so far has been used with small collections due to the high cost of storage and computational time for solving the SVD problem for a large and dense feature matrix. Here we present an effective and efficient approach of applying LSA skipping the SVD solution of the feature matrix and overcoming in this way the deficiencies of the method with large scale datasets. Early and late fusion techniques are tested and their performance is calculated. The study demonstrates that early fusion of several composite descriptors with visual words increase retrieval effectiveness. It also combines well in a late fusion for mixed (textual and visual) ad hoc and modality classification. The results reported are comparable to state of the art algorithms without including additional knowledge from the medical domain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the recent years, there is a continuous increase in digital medical imaging and the development of methods and tools for acquiring, archiving and communicating all forms of medical information. Moreover, images from many diagnostic modalities, such as Radiology, Visible light photography, Microscopy, etc., are actively used to support clinical decisions, medical research and education. The management of those very large heterogeneous collections is a challenging task. As a consequence, this has led to creating systems for storage retrieval management and distribution of medical images known as PACS (Picture Archiving and Communications Systems) [1]. However, according to [2], the users of PAC systems seem to consider the image manipulation, retrieval and comparison an important missing feature.Meanwhile, immense amounts of medical image data are continuously produced during the daily clinical practice and research, especially from CT, MRI and PET modalities. It is evident that CBIR techniques must be able to process data of this scale efficiently.Although text retrieval methods seem to provide acceptable results, it is evident from [3], that performance in image retrieval is still very far from being effective for several reasons: computational cost, scalability and performance. The use of textual information although is an effective way for describing semantic content, when used in image retrieval there is an additional overhead of manually annotating every image in the database. Images in the medical domain, however, are always associated with a short text (the radiologist report). Thus we are seeking for methods that fuse efficiently several low level visual features together with textual information to improve retrieval results. However, depending on the current context, such short descriptions of the images could be noisy due to the language ambiguity, such as polysemy and synonymy.Latent semantic analysis [4] is a mathematical technique for extracting hidden relations of contextual usages of words in documents. Over the years, LSA has been used successfully in text retrieval with many applications [5], and seems to be an effective method to remove redundant information and noise from data. Although the computational complexity is high for large collections it is not prohibitive, mainly due to the sparsity of the textual data.However, this is not the case in image retrieval, where images are represented with vectors in a compact and dense form. To our knowledge, the method has so far been used only with small size collections due to the high complexity of the approach. This article presents an effective and efficient approach of applying LSA by skipping the SVD analysis of the feature matrix. We show that our approach provides a much faster, stable and scalable solution. Also we show experimentally that our method fuses well several low level visual features together with textual information.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief overview of previous relevant work and Section 3 describes our approach of applying LSA for retrieval in large-scale image collections. Section 4 describes the methods for representing images and the retrieval models used in conjunction with LSA. The following Section 5 provides a brief description of the datasets used for our experiments.Section 6 demonstrates the effects of applying LSA to retrieval and classification. For the evaluation a wide range of experiments were applied using local and global descriptors in combination with state of the art methods, like Bag of Visual Words models (BoVW) based on SIFT and SURF features and Bag of Colors models (BoC) similar with the works in [6,7].Finally, in Sections 7 and 8, results are presented from fusion of several different low-level visual descriptors separately an in combination with textual information. For comparison both late and early fusion methods were tested.From all our experiments it is evident that LSA is superior to direct matching the image vectors and very fast in both, off-line pre-processing of the data and on-line at query evaluation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
