@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fractional anisotropy asymmetry and the side of seizure origin for partial onset-temporal lobe epilepsy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fractional anisotropy asymmetry (FAA) relates to the side of seizure origin for partial onset temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE).FAA quantifies the asymmetry of white matter (WM) diffusivity of region pairs between the left and right hemispheres.FAA values for superior, middle, and inferior temporal WM are significantly different between the left and right TLE patients.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI),Temporal lobe epilepsy,Tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS),Fractional anisotropy asymmetry (FAA),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a fractional anisotropy asymmetry (FAA) method to detect the asymmetry of white matter (WM) integrity and its correlation with the side of seizure origin for partial onset temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) using diffusion tensor image (DTI). In this study, FAA analysis is applied to 30 patients of partial TLE (15 left, 15 right) and 14 matched normal controls. Specifically, after registering all the images with the JHU-DTI-MNI template the average FA value of each FA skeleton section is calculated using the tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) method. Then, FAA is calculated to quantify the WM diffusivity asymmetry of the corresponding region-pairs between the left and right hemispheres. Using FAA the regional asymmetry contributing significantly to the group differences of controls and left/right TLE, as well as the left and right TLE, is identified. As a comparison, the ROI-based average FA values for WM and corresponding FAAs are also calculated. TBSS-based analysis reflects the average of local maximal FA values along the white matter skeleton sections, and ROI-based analysis shows the average of WM FA values within each anatomical region. The FAA statistical results indicated that the FA values of anatomical region-pairs are asymmetric in the ipsilateral hemisphere with seizure origin against the contralateral hemisphere. Particularly, FAA values within the temporal lobe (superior, middle, and inferior temporal WM) are significantly different between the left and right TLE patients, consistently found from both analysis methods. The study suggests that FAA values can be potentially used to identify the seizures of origin of TLE and to help understand the relationship between fiber tracts with the side of seizure origin of TLE.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common form of focal epilepsy and is characterized by recurrent unprovoked seizures originated from the medial or lateral temporal lobe [1,2]. For many TLE patients, anterior temporal lobectomy (ATL), the complete removal of the anterior portion of the temporal lobe of the brain, provides the possibility of seizure-free or nearly seizure-free treatment and reduces patients’ dependency on anti-epileptic drugs [3,4]. Although electroencephalography (EEG) is the gold standard for identifying the location of seizure foci during the surgical work-up of patients with intractable TLE, with the rapid development of neuroimaging technology, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been and is increasingly used routinely to improve the diagnostic certainty, to better determine suitable surgical candidates, and to accurately identify the epileptogenic zone for ATL [5].Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is a popular non-invasive MRI modality to investigate the integrity of neural fibers of human brain and has been widely used both in clinic and research to assess the development, degeneration or dysfunction of neural fibers in many neuropathological diseases [6,7]. Recent studies using DTI have revealed bilateral defects in white matter (WM) of TLE patients [5,8], i.e., decreased fractional anisotropy (FA) and increased mean diffusivity in the temporal lobe and the extra-temporal lobe tract [8,9]. The results also showed more severe WM defects in the ipsilateral hemisphere with seizure origin as compared to the contralateral hemisphere [10]. These studies suggest that obvious asymmetry of WM deficit exists in TLE patients. However, there is still no effective measurement to quantitatively determine the degree of such WM asymmetry in TLE patients. In the literature, the asymmetry of major WM tracts has been reported in multiple publications [11–13], and it is interesting to identify the difference of asymmetry between normal controls and TLE patients, and between left and right TLE patients. In order to determine the specific anatomical regions, within which the most WM defects occur for TLE, in this paper, we propose an automatic FA asymmetry (FAA) analysis method aiming at quantifying the WM diffusivity asymmetry of each corresponding region-pair between the left and right hemispheres, as well as investigating its relationship with the side of seizure origin of partial TLE patients.In the literature, voxel-based morphometry (VBM) [14] and tract-based diffusivity statistical analysis [15] are the two popularly used methods in DTI studies to localize WM/brain changes associated with specific pathological conditions. However, due to anatomical variability among individuals, accurate alignment of DTI data and automatic fiber bundle labeling are still challenging for whole brain DTI analysis [15,16]. The tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) method overcomes this obstacle by incorporating the strength of both voxel-based and tract-based analysis [17–19]. It first applies a carefully tuned nonlinear registration and then projects the FA values onto an alignment-invariant tract representation, called FA skeleton. The key idea is that even if there exist registration errors the FA skeleton generally found close to the centerline of major WM tracts is stable, so as to the projected FA values. Therefore TBSS improves the sensitivity, objectivity and interpretability of analysis of multi-subject DTI studies.In this work, after applying image registration, we use TBSS to calculate the white matter skeleton and the projected FA values along the skeleton of each subject. Then, we superimpose the anatomical regions defined by the JHU-DTI-MNI atlas onto the FA skeleton to define FA skeleton section for each anatomical region. The average FA value of each region is calculated based on the FA skeleton sections for each subject. FA describes how the water diffuses in white matter fibers and is widely used as a marker for tract integrity. Therefore, the average FA value of each region can reflects the WM integrity within each anatomical region. In addition to calculate TBSS-based regional FA values, which reflect the average of local maximal FA values along the skeleton, we also calculate the average WM FA values within in region, referred to as ROI-based FA analysis. The latter reflects average FA values without the local projection onto the skeleton. We put the results of both TBSS-based and ROI-based analyses side-by-side for comparison.To calculate the FA asymmetry of corresponding regions between the left and right hemispheres, an automatic FAA analysis method is proposed in this paper. FAA of a region-pair reflects the difference of WM integrity between the two hemispheres in a percentage level and tells us whether the FA of the region-pair is symmetric of asymmetric. Because FAA is calculated within each subject, it is not affected by the inter-subject variability and can be potentially used for detecting the WM abnormalities to localize the regions of defects for TLE patients.In the experiments, TBSS-based and ROI-based FAA analyses are applied to the datasets collected from 30 patients with partial TLE and 14 age-matched normal controls. Then, FAA values of all the white matter regions are calculated followed by statistical analysis by comparing three groups: left TLE vs. control, right TLE vs. control, and right TLE vs. right TLE. The results indicate that left TLE can be consistently distinguished from controls using both analyses, and there exist strong correlation between FAA and the side of seizure origin: FAA values within temporal lobe (including superior, middle, and inferior temporal WM) and PreCuWM are significantly different between the left and right TLE patients using both methods. The results showed that although WM defects appear in both hemispheres for TLE, more severe artifacts are found on the ipsilateral hemisphere of seizure origin in contrast to that of the contralateral hemisphere, particularly in the temporal lobe regions.Thirty patients with partial TLE (15 left, age: 43.5±18.9 and 15 right, age: 38.9±13.4) and 14 age-matched normal controls were used in the study. EEG was performed to locate the seizure foci for each patient before the MRI scanning, and the side of seizures original (left or right temporal lobe) had been confirmed by joint diagnosis among neurologists, neurosurgeon, and neuropsychologists. For the MRI scans a 3-Telsa GE system was used for DTI data collection, and the parameters were set as follows: TR=8000ms, TE=80ms, b=1000s/mm2, and image matrix size is 256×256×35. The control dataset used for comparison purpose was obtained from the Susumu Mori group at Johns Hopkins, which includes the results of 14 healthy subjects (age: 40.2±6.8). The controls were scanned with the DTI data collection parameters set as: TR=7880ms, TE=80ms, b=700s/mm2, matrix size 256×256×50. More detailed information can be found from the following website: https://www.mristudio.org. There was no significant age difference in our study, neither between the left TLE and the right TLE groups (p=0.45), nor between the control group and the TLE groups (p=0.53 for control vs. left TLE and p=0.74 for control vs. right TLE).The three major steps for our proposed FAA method are shown in Fig. 1. In the first step, the local fast marching (FM)-based simultaneous deformable registration algorithm [16] is used to register all the DTI data collected from the TLE patients and the normal controls to the JHU-DTI-MNI template space [20]. Then, after warping all the FA maps onto the template space with the resultant deformable fields, TBSS is employed to generate the WM skeleton from the average deformed FA image. In step 2, using TBSS, the FA values along the FA skeleton are calculated for each subject. Then, superimposing the atlas on the FA skeleton, corresponding FA skeleton sections are defined, and the average FA value of each skeleton section is calculated. The FAA value on each corresponding left-right WM section pair is calculated to quantify the WM integrity differences of the anatomical regions between two hemispheres of each subject. Finally, in step 3, statistical analysis is carried out to compare FAA values between control and left TLE, control and right TLE, as well as left and right TLE. The regions with significant differences indicate those significantly contribute to the group differences.In addition to use the registration [16], one of the key step used in the paper is TBSS. Due to the alignment inaccuracy and anatomical variability among subjects, quantitative comparison of FA values within each fiber bundle or region of interest (ROI) may result in less sensitivities and higher false-positive errors. The TBSS method attempts to solve this problem by combining the strengths of both voxel-based methods and bundle-based methods, which generates relatively stable quantitative measures than other analysis methods. The idea behind TBSS is to extract the FA skeleton from the average FA image after registration. Because such FA skeleton is located along the centerline of each WM bundle, it will be still inside the WM bundle of each subject unless the registration errors are too large. Therefore, according to TBSS, by projecting the FA values along the short perpendicular lines of the skeleton and obtaining the maximal FA value along each line, the FA values defined on the FA skeleton of each subject are less affected by the registration errors. Of course, registration algorithm with high accuracy is still preferred because it helps overlap the FA skeleton robustly on each subject.In this work, the TBSS is modified to use the high dimension deformable registration algorithm to do the DTI image registration [16]. The procedure for calculating the TBSS features is summarized as follows:(1)Apply DTI registration to deform all the subjects onto the JHU-DTI-MNI template space. Calculate the mean FA map from all the warped FA images and apply a thinning procedure to get the skeletonized mean FA image. The skeleton is masked with a preset threshold so that it is constrained on the major fiber bundles and does not cover the regions with low mean FA or high inter-subject FA variability. Except to using the DTI registration [16], this step is the same as the TBSS algorithm [19]. It is worth noting that using simulated DTI images with similar image resolution, we evaluated the accuracy of the registration algorithm, and the average registration error was 3.3mm for ten simulated images.For each warped FA image, by searching perpendicularly within a small range of each skeleton point, the maximal FA values are projected onto the skeleton so each skeleton voxel is now assigned an FA value. Then, the FA skeleton is overlaid with the JHU-DTI-MNI atlas and is divided into different sections according to the anatomical regions. Finally, the FA feature of each section or each region is defined as the average FA value of the corresponding skeleton section.Specifically, for subject s, the average FA value of each WM skeleton section l is calculated as:(1)A¯(l,s)=1N(l,s)∑v∈lA(v,s),where A(v,s) represents the FA value of voxel v along skeleton section l in subject s, andA¯(l,s)is the average FA value of skeleton section l in subject s. N(l,s) is the number of points for skeleton section l. Each skeleton section l actually represents one anatomical region. Because the cortical labels of the brain are symmetric, given that region lleft and region lright are the corresponding region pairs, the FAA value for a given region pair can be calculated as:(2)FAA(lleft,lright,s)=A¯(lleft,s)−A¯(lright,s)2(A¯(lright,s)+A¯(lleft,s)).The FAA values reflect the asymmetry of each pair of anatomical regions. For example, negative FAA value indicates leftward asymmetry or FA value in the left side region is smaller than that on the right side; and positive FAA value indicates rightward asymmetry of defect.After calculating the average FA value on the WM skeleton within each anatomical region for each subject, as well as the FA asymmetry for each subject, we can perform statistical tests onA¯and FAA values and compare the group differences among normal controls, left TLE, and right TLE. The goal is to quantitatively analyze FAA changes associated with the side of seizure origin of patients with TLE.In addition to the proposed TBSS-based FAA analysis, we also performed the ROI-based method side-by-side. The ROI-based FAA analysis uses the similar steps, but no TBSS is used. Specifically, after image registration, we overlay the atlas on the registered images and calculate the average white matter FA values (>0.25) for each region, and similarly the FAA value of each region-pair is calculated using Eq. (2). Notice that the difference between the two methods is that TBSS-based method reflects the average of locally projected maximal FA values along the skeleton, while ROI-based analysis seeks the overall average of FA values within each region. One would expect that regions consistently pinpointed from both methods may be more robust to reflect the significant changes within the groups under comparison.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
