@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-scale textural feature extraction and particle swarm optimization based model selection for false positive reduction in mammography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Different multiscale textural descriptors are used to characterize breast tissue.Particle swarm optimization is used for selecting features and SVM parameters.Model selection fitness function incorporates performance and dimensionality reduction.The proposed methods are evaluated using both mini-MIAS and DDSM databases.Our results reveal the efficacy of PSO model selection for solving FPR problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
False positive reduction,Mammography,Multi-scale texture analysis,Model selection,Particle swarm optimization,Support vector machines,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The high number of false positives and the resulting number of avoidable breast biopsies are the major problems faced by current mammography Computer Aided Detection (CAD) systems. False positive reduction is not only a requirement for mass but also for calcification CAD systems which are currently deployed for clinical use. This paper tackles two problems related to reducing the number of false positives in the detection of all lesions and masses, respectively. Firstly, textural patterns of breast tissue have been analyzed using several multi-scale textural descriptors based on wavelet and gray level co-occurrence matrix. The second problem addressed in this paper is the parameter selection and performance optimization. For this, we adopt a model selection procedure based on Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) for selecting the most discriminative textural features and for strengthening the generalization capacity of the supervised learning stage based on a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier. For evaluating the proposed methods, two sets of suspicious mammogram regions have been used. The first one, obtained from Digital Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM), contains 1494 regions (1000 normal and 494 abnormal samples). The second set of suspicious regions was obtained from database of Mammographic Image Analysis Society (mini-MIAS) and contains 315 (207 normal and 108 abnormal) samples. Results from both datasets demonstrate the efficiency of using PSO based model selection for optimizing both classifier hyper-parameters and parameters, respectively. Furthermore, the obtained results indicate the promising performance of the proposed textural features and more specifically, those based on co-occurrence matrix of wavelet image representation technique.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to statistics provided by the World Health Organization (WHO) breast cancer was responsible for 458,000 deaths in 2008 worldwide and is a leading cause of women death around the world. Since the effective prevention of breast cancer occurrence is still impossible, the detection and diagnosis of the disease at its early stage is a significant step towards an increased breast cancer survival rate. Mammography, an X-ray based breast imaging modality, is currently the most effective tool for breast cancer screening. However, mammogram interpretation, even done by expert radiologists, is a difficult and error prone task due to the low contrast of the images and the subtle signs of breast cancer early stage. Such a misinterpretation of mammograms not only results in a low positive prediction value of mammography, which in turn leads to many unnecessary invasive biopsies and high recall rates [1], but also causes many life-threatening false negatives.A double reading or second mammogram interpretation of the same data by another radiologist has shown a significant increase of cancer detection reducing the number of undiscovered lesions [2,3]. However, such a double reading procedure is not always feasible, since it has to be done by an expert radiologists. An alternative to a human double reading is the Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) technology, which is intended to provide radiologists with a second opinion by warning them about unnoticed breast abnormalities and by assisting in characterizing the malignancy of detected lesions. Several studies have shown that CAD technology has the potential to significantly improve the early detection of breast cancers [3]. Gromet et al. [4] reported that combining a CAD system with a single reading by radiologists has improved the detection sensitivity of breast cancer by 10% with small increase of the recall rate.Due to the fact that the detection of breast masses, which resemble normal breast parenchyma, is more challenging than the detection of microcalcifications, some of the CAD systems have been clinically approved and are currently used for calcifications detection but not for masses. However, even for calcifications, the main drawback of existing CAD technology is the high number of false positives [3]. A false positive of mammogram interpretation occurs, when a normal breast region is marked suspicious and consequently an increase of unnecessary breast biopsies is encountered. Such a low detection specificity (or high false positives rate) is mostly the reason behind the argument concerning the role of CAD technology.Rather than developing new mass detection algorithms which produce satisfactory cancer detection results, several studies [5–12], have recently devoted efforts to develop False Positive Reduction (FPR) methods that aim to improve the specificity of mass detection and the efficacy of CAD technology, and its potential as a mammography double reading stage. Generally, a FPR algorithm can be seen as post-processing or complementary stage, which is intended to reduce the false positive results produced by a predecessor computer aided detection system. Similar to most CAD systems, FPR algorithms solve the pattern recognition problem of discriminating a suspicious mammogram region as normal breast parenchyma or breast region with a benign or malignant lesion in three steps: feature extraction, dimensionality reduction by feature selection, and binary classification based on supervised learning. Methods and datasets used for implementing previous FPR systems are the key factors behind the achieved performance levels. A brief review of recent literature on FPR algorithms and methods used for implementation is given subsequently.Angelini et al. [5] reduced false positive results of mass detection using a wavelet based image representation and SVM classifier with polynomial kernel. In this study, wavelet coefficients from discrete and over-complete (without the decimation step) wavelets based on Haar filters were used. Evaluating both pixel based and wavelet based approaches on 5000 mammograms (1000 regions depicting masses and 4000 representing normal breast tissue) they demonstrated the advantage of using pixel based representation over wavelet based method. Rashed et al. [6] used wavelet based image analysis of mammograms with a fraction of wavelet coefficients (the biggest coefficients) as a feature vector to classify different types of breast abnormalities including speculated lesions. Oliver et al. [7] used 2D Principal Component Analysis (2DPCA) image representation and combined decision tree and k-nearest neighbour classifier. Varela et al. [9] discriminated mammographic regions depicting true masses from normal regions using a combination of shape and texture features, and Back-Propagation Neural Network (BPNN) classifier. Local Binary Patterns (LBP) of gray-level image and SVMs with a polynomial kernel were used to improve the specificity of mass detection in [8]. Ramos et al. [10] evaluated and compared the performance of a small number of Haralick descriptors computed from co-occurrence matrices of gray level, wavelet, and ridgelet image representations. For the feature selection task they incorporated Genetic Algorithm (GA) and, in the ROIs classification stage, they suggested the random forest method. Hussain et al. [11] presented a FPR algorithm using texture features acquired through Multi-Scale Weber Law Descriptor (MSWLD) and SVM classifier. The obtained results proved better performance of MSWLD approach compared to LBP based technique used by Lladó et al. [8]. Recently, Braz et al. [12] used biologically inspired diversity indices as texture descriptors to discriminate mass from none-mass regions.Although the low positive predictive value is a common problem for CAD systems supporting different breast lesions, existing FPR algorithms have focused on improving the specificity of mass detection only. However, even for this, existing algorithms require further improvements. Particularly, the feature extraction and parameter selection methods used for solving the FPR problem need several important steps to be done to achieve the desired performance. Some studies [5,6] used wavelet coefficients or a fraction of the coefficients as descriptors, or computed a few descriptors with one wavelet basis function to generate the multi-scale image analysis [10]. However, wavelet based feature extraction has not been well examined with respect to the techniques used for computing multi-scale textural descriptors and for the wavelet basis functions to produce multiresolution analysis.In this paper, breast tissue is characterized using different multi-scale textural features based on first and second order statistics of gray level and wavelet image representations. More specifically, First Orders Statistics of Wavelet Coefficients (FOSWC) based on energy and entropy features, co-occurrence (or Haralick) descriptors of both image gray levels, and wavelet coefficients are introduced. Although the application of wavelet theory and co-occurrence matrices for texture analysis of mammograms is not new, this paper represents a substantial improvement of the existing studies [5,6]. That is, this work examines more wavelet functions for generating multiresolution image representation, evaluates different global descriptors [13–15] obtained from different scales rather than directly using wavelet coefficients as features [5] or even use a single wavelet function, and assesses a few Haralick descriptors [10]. Moreover, this work presents and appraises new multi-scale Gray-Level Co-occurrence Matrices (GLCM) descriptors by combining different pixel distances.Good generalization capacity, low classification errors on different classes and low data over-fitting are required for an efficient FPR algorithm. Hence, proper methods for performing pattern classification, feature selection and classifier performance optimization need to be adopted. For accomplishing the classification stage along with the feature selection and classifier parameters tuning, PSO-SVM is an efficient alternative [16]. Further performance improvement and design flexibility can be achieved by extending PSO based parameter tuning to a full model selection process [17]. Another key and important contribution of this paper is the application of PSO based model selection to solve FPR problem. The proposed model selection improves the performance by optimizing the feature extraction process, accomplishing feature selection, and by choosing optimal hyper-parameters and parameters for the SVM classifier. Although there are several methods for accomplishing parameter selection, the ease of implementation and simplicity of PSO based heuristic search make it more attractive than GA, grid, and exhaustive search techniques [18,17]. The PSO algorithm, introduced by Eberhart and Kennedy in 1995, is a biologically and population-based heuristic search approach, where a group of individuals located in the parameter space of an objective function searches for the optimal solution. Since the introduction of the PSO algorithm several refinements [40,41] and applications [17,19,42–44] have been proposed. An ensemble particle swarm model selection was applied for the determination of leukaemia type using morphology of the bone marrow. Dheeba et al. [43] employed a PSO algorithm to optimize a neural network classifier that, subsequently, is used for textural-based detection of mammographic microcalcification. Guarniz et al. [44] proposed the modification of the wavelet analysis by applying PSO method to optimize the wavelet filter basis function and number of decomposition levels applied to an EEG signal. Adam et al. [45] also used PSO for accomplishing feature and classifier parameter selection stages associated with the EEG signals peak detection problem. To the best of our knowledge, PSO model selection has not been applied before for optimizing the performance of FPR algorithms in general and mass FPR in particular. It should be noted that PSO-SVM approach in [19] was used for optimizing the diagnosis of calcifications rather than for detection or false positive reduction. The last distinction from the existing literature is that this paper proposes solutions to false positive reduction problem associated with the detection of all breast abnormalities (masses and calcification) as well as mass detection.The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows: Section 2 presents the theoretical background of methods used in this paper. Section 3 provides the details of proposed texture feature extraction and model selection techniques. Results and Conclusions are discussed in Sections 4 and 5, respectively.Image texture is described as the systematic local variation of pixels intensities [20]. In addition to applying image texture analysis to produce image features for pattern recognition, it can be also used to group image pixel into predefined regions. Such clustering or grouping can be further used for image segmentation. In literature, several metrics have been developed and applied to texture analysis of medical images [15,21]. Texture descriptors are derived from: (1) first order statistic of pixel intensity, (2) subband and multi-scale image representation using wavelet transforms, (3) Laws measures of textures, and (4) second order histogram or statistics of pixel intensities using GLCMs. In the following subsections, necessary details of texture descriptors derived from wavelet image decomposition and GLCM are provided.A multiresolutional ability of wavelet transform has led to many successful applications in the digital image processing area. An efficient implementation of multi-scale analysis of 2D Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) of digital images is based on Mallat algorithm [22]. It decomposes a digital image into a complete set of scales (one approximate and several detail subbands) by means of high-pass and low-pass signal filtering based on separable one dimensional filter banks followed by a down sampling operation. From the wavelet transform theory, a set of time series f(t) can be represented by the sum [23](1)f(t)=∑kcJ0(k)2J02ϕ(2J0t−k)+∑k∑j=1J0dj(k)2j2ψ(2jt−k),where ϕ(t) and ψ(t) are scaling and wavelet function, respectively, forming an orthogonal basis of the signal space. Given the basis, a signal f(t) can be represented by a set of scaling coefficients{cJ0(k)}and wavelet coefficients{dj(k)}1J0, where k is the time shift factor.According to Mallats algorithm [22] both coefficient sets can be calculated by cascade Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filtering with a low-pass filter derived from the scaling function and a high-pass filter derived from the wavelet one. Assuming a N-level decomposition of a two-dimensional image I, the DWT can be defined for each dimension separately. Therefore, the image is decomposed into a pyramidal structure with one approximate (A) and a set of detail components Di, i=1, …, 3:(2)I=AN+∑j=1N∑i=13Di.In terms of wavelet function properties like orthonormal, compact support, and the number of vanishing moments several wavelet families have been introduced in literature [24,25]. A simple but useful approach to produce textural features from wavelet representation is computing a set of multi-scale global descriptors based on the first order statistic measures such as energy and entropy descriptors [14].Haralick textural features [26], derived from GLCM, are common descriptors for image texture analysis and recognition. This approach is based on characterizing the second order histogram of image gray level values.A GLCM of an image with L gray level values is a two-dimensional directional matrix that models the second order statistics of the image intensity by measuring the probability of occurrence of two gray level values (i, j), 1<i, j<L apart by a predefined distance d and direction θ. For a digital image of the size N×M pixels, the distance d separating two gray levels can take any value between 0 and L−1. In accordance to the discrete nature of digital images only four directions θ∈{0°, 45°, 90°, 135°} are allowed. For a certain distance d, a group of four directional GLCMs of size L×L is obtained. Using the method introduced by Haralick et al. [26], up to 14 texture measures can be derived from each co-occurrence matrix. Moreover, multi-scale second order statistics [15,27] can be obtained by constructing co-occurrence matrices from each image subbands of wavelet coefficients.SVM is a learning technique based on the structural risk minimization principle able to solve two-group classification problems [28]. It permits an optimal hyperplane data separation. Let be a set of training samples X∈x1, x2, …, xland their labels Y∈y1, y2, …, ylsuch that yi∈{−1, 1}. The training data is linearly separable, if exists a vector w and scalar b fulfils the inequalities:(3)wTxi+b≥1,ifyi=1,wTxi+b≤−1,ifyi=−1.The vector w and scalar b are called weight vector and bias or threshold, respectively. The separating hyperplane is then given by(4)wTxi+b=0,and vectors xifor which yi(wTx+b)=1 are referred to as support vectors. The hyperplane parameters are computed by solving the quadratic programming problemmin:∥w∥22, with following constraints: yi(wTx+b)≥1; ∀i∈{1, …, l}.The method brings also an efficient solution for N-dimensional non-linear separable data, which are transformed into an N dimensional features space, where the linear classification is possible. The transformation is performed by replacing scalar product of the two transformed vectors (u, v) using kernel function K(u, v) [29].PSO is a population based heuristic search approach inspired by the social behaviour of flocks of birds and schools of fish [30]. A group of individuals (particles) represents the problem candidate solutions, which are located in the parameter space of an objective function searching for the optimal solution. The fitness of an individual particle (or a candidate solution) is the value of the objective function computed for that particle. Similar to other evolutionary computation techniques, including GAs, PSO also optimizes the fitness of its particles using the experience and fitness so far achieved by the population. However, PSO uses a velocity operator rather than the cross-over and mutation to control and update location and search direction of individual particles.During the PSO optimization process, records of the best fitness (or personal fitness) values achieved so far by each particle, which are denoted as pBest, and the best fitness value obtained by the entire population, referred to gBest are maintained. The locations of both the best personal fitnessxkipBestachieved by kth particle and global fitnessxigBestare used to compute ith dimension velocity (i=1, 2, …, D) and the new position of kth particle as follows(5)vki(t+1)=wvki(t)+c1r1(xki(t)−xkipBest)+c2r2(xki(t)−xigBest),where D is the dimensionality of the kth particle,wis the inertia weight of the movement intended to provide a compromise of the personal and global exploration [18], r1 and r2 are random numbers between [0,1], and c1 and c2 are non-negative constants representing the personal and social learning rates. To control the search speed, the ith velocityvki(t)is constrained by the user to be in the range[vmin,vmax].Using the velocity computed in (5), the location of each particle i, i=1, 2, …, D is updated as(6)xki(t+1)=xki(t)+vki(t+1).Extracting suitable features is one of the most important steps in the classification task. There exist different feature extraction methods described in literature [6,9,14,15], which are considered in mammography data analysis. In this work, both the first and second order statistics of wavelet coefficients as well as GLCM features and their combinations are used. Several studies [10,13,14] used Daubachies wavelet family to accomplish statistical texture analysis of digital mammograms.In our approach four wavelet filters, namely, Db1 (Haar), Db3, Sym8, and Sym20 from Daubechies and Symlets wavelets families are used. Each image region representing an abnormal or normal class is analyzed using three-level DWT transform producing a multi-scale representation of 10 wavelet image subbands. From each subband with the size of M×N coefficients, a set of two FOSWC descriptors, namely, the normalized energy E and entropy S are obtained as [14]:(7)E=∑i∑j|xij|2M×N,(8)S=−∑i∑j|xij|2∑i∑j|xij|2log2|xij|2∑i∑j|xij|2log2(M×N),where xijis a wavelet coefficients within a subband image.Applying this textural feature extraction process to each image region produces a set of 20 FOSWC descriptors. Computing energy and entropy descriptors from the multi-scale image representation, produced by the DWT, only characterizes the first order histogram of wavelet coefficients. Unlike energy and entropy features, GLCM texture features characterize the second order histogram of image values. The application of GLCM features to accomplish FPR in mammography is not new [10]. However, rather than using only a few GLCM descriptors that model the anisotropic properties of mammographic patterns, this work explores and computes more GLCM descriptors and combines the four directional values of each descriptor into one summary textural feature [14]. Besides using common GLCM features [14,15,26] we also propose a new multi-scale textural descriptor, obtained by concatenating GLCM textural features from different distances d, d∈{1, 3, 6, 9}.To avoid producing sparse co-occurrence matrices and maintain a manageable computational complexity, the maximum number of gray levels is limited to 256 (or 8-bit pixel depth). After constructing a four-directional GLCM matrices from the image region, 14 GLCM textural descriptors are computed from each directional matrix. For accomplishing FPR task, a set of 14 Haralick descriptors are incorporated: entropy, energy, contrast, homogeneity, variance, sum average, difference variance, difference entropy, sum variance, correlation, sum entropy, normalized inverse difference, information measure of correlation I, and information measure of correlation II. Furthermore, GLCM textural descriptors used for classification, computed as the mean, standard deviation, and the range of the four values of each descriptor calculated from GLCMs corresponds to four directions. Using this step, a set of 42 GLCM texture features are extracted from each image region. This process was also used to generate GLCM features corresponding to different distances d, d∈{1, 3, 6, 9}.To accomplish texture analysis of mammographic images in a more efficient way the combination of multi-scale properties of wavelet transform and the Haralik approach for modelling second order statistics is used. Instead of constructing a co-occurrence matrix from image (or gray level) values, in this study, a computation of the co-occurrence matrices from wavelet coefficients of different image subbands, produced by dyadic wavelet decomposition, is performed. Then, the Haralic approach is applied to analyze the second order statistic of wavelet coefficients in each image subbands and to compute the 14 textural features. Multi-scale textural descriptors that are produced using this methodology are called Second Order Statistics of Wavelet Coefficients (SOSWC). From the 10 image subbands of the three-level multi-scale image analysis, a set of 140 SOSWC texture features is computed and used to represent each mammographic region.FPR algorithms are mainly intended to achieve a minimum or at least a balanced classification error level when classifying specious mammogram areas into normal (true negative) and abnormal (true positive) regions. Hence, a full model selection [17] can be an efficient solution for accomplishing the false positive reduction task and for improving the detection performance in mammography. A full model selection [17] is basically a framework that can simultaneously search and optimize the selection of data preprocessing techniques, feature extraction and selection method, classification algorithm, as well as hyper-parameters and control parameters of the classifiers. Furthermore, model selection can also be used to denote an optimization task that involves classifier parameter optimization and feature selection [16,17,19,31,32]. The process of model selection involves: creating a search pool or a set of potential feature extraction, feature ranking and selection, supervised learning techniques and a method for tuning the candidate solutions to achieve the desired result, and a criterion for evaluating the fitness of each solution. Using an exhaustive parameter search for selecting the best model is impractical and computationally expensive. Fortunately, population based heuristic suitable for handling such a model selection task. The proven performance of the PSO, the simplicity of the PSO search process as well as the ease of the PSO implementation with small number of variables to be adjusted during initialization and search process, make PSO technique more favourable for implementing model selection than GAs and other evolutionary algorithms [17,18]. The PSO algorithm accomplishes an optimization task without mutation and cross over operations, which are essential steps of GAs [18].For this work, a model selection based on the PSO shown in Fig. 1, is adopted for optimizing the performance of a texture based FPR algorithm. Fig. 1 demonstrates that the fitness of each candidate learning model is estimated using a K-fold cross-validation procedure, which through k-times of training and testing steps enables testing the candidate solution on the entire data available for cross-validation purpose. In the coming subsections, details of the model selection criterion are explained.With the use of the PSO search algorithm for accomplishing the model selection, each PSO particle represents a candidate solution for the model selection task and it is characterized by its location in the parameter space. The location of each candidate solution or PSO particle is represented by a D-dimensional vector x=[x1, x2, …, xD]T. During the search process some constraints or parameter space limitation may apply to some of the coordinates. They depend on the pre-assigned selection task (feature selection or parameter optimization for classification) for various coordinates. In this work, a continuous version of the PSO algorithm is used. It means, that most components of the parameter space and, thus, particle coordinates are real numbers.For this study, the model selection search pool contains different feature extraction techniques and SVM classification approaches including linear and nonlinear methods. Depending on the selected classification method it includes different hyper-parameters and parameters search spaces.The selected feature extraction method also determines dimensionality of search space to be used for the feature selection process. Based on this model selection problem and parameter search pool, each PSO particle, which is a candidate solution to model selection problem, is structured as follows:(9)x=[xFE,xSVM,xPara1,…,xPara4,xF1,…,xFN]T,where xFEis the first coordinate assigned for selecting the feature extraction method, xSVMis the second coordinate responsible for classifier selection by choosing among four SVM classifiers (one linear and three nonlinear or kernel based), xPara1 is used for SVM classifier parameters and particularly the SVM regularization constant applicable for both linear and nonlinear SVMs. The kernel control parameters are xPara2, xPara3, xPara4. The remaining N coordinates are used for classifier hyper-parameter selection and more specifically for feature selection.Using particle presentation in (9), each candidate solution has a dimensionality of D=6+Nmaxwith Nmaxrepresenting the maximum size of the possible input feature spaces. In each iteration of the PSO based model selection, the solution represented by each particle is evaluated by computing its fitness value (10).An efficient FPR algorithm must avoid producing a perfect false positive rate at the expense of an inadequate false negative level. Besides providing the best balanced classification error level (compromise between the false positive and false negative rates), the optimized models need to achieve the desired performance while maintaining low dimensionality of the feature space. According to these objectives, we have proposed a model selection optimization measure as in (10). The FitnessCVof candidate solutions is estimated using a k-fold cross-validation procedure:(10)FitnessCV=max(FPF,FNF)+βexp(n−1)2N2−1,where FPF and FNF represent false positive and false negative fractions, which measure the classification error from both negative and positive classes, respectively. Next, n is the number of features selected by the candidate model, N represents the dimensionality of the original feature space, and β is a normalization constant.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper addresses two problems related to FPR in mammography. The first one is focused on developing and evaluating different multi-scale textural feature sets. We also proposed and evaluated new multi-scale textural descriptors, called MDGLCM, which are obtained by concatenating GLCM features vectors corresponding to four pixel distances. The second problem, investigated in this paper, was finding the best learning model that concurrently achieves the best balance of FNF and FPF levels and reduces the dimensionality of the input feature space. Consequently, PSO model selection was employed to search for the best textural features and for selecting the optimal hyper-parameters, and parameters of an SVM classifier. Using DDSM and MIAS mammogram databases, which contain mammogram images of different pixel resolutions and bit depths, results demonstrate that the proposed PSO based model selection is a versatile tool for solving FPR problem adequately. Results also reveal the efficacy of the proposed textural features in general and those computed using co-occurrence matrices of wavelet image representation to improve the detection of all breast abnormalities as well as masses.