@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic state of water molecular displacement of the brain during the cardiac cycle in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We evaluated the changes in displacement during cardiac cycle using q-space analysis.The changes in displacement were significantly higher in iNPH than in other groups.Brain parenchymal water was easily displaced beyond intrinsic displacement in iNPH.Change in displacement in cardiac cycle was influenced by compliance and loading.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging,Diffusion weighted imaging,Idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus,q-space,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The predictive accuracy of iNPH diagnoses could be increased using a combination of supplemental tests for iNPH. To evaluate the dynamic state of water displacement during the cardiac cycle in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH), we determined the change in water displacement using q-space analysis of diffusion magnetic resonance image. ECG-triggered single-shot diffusion echo planar imaging was used. Water displacement was obtained from the displacement probability profile calculated by Fourier transform of the signal decay fitted as a function of the reciprocal spatial vector q. Then maximum minus minimum displacement (delta-displacement), of all cardiac phase images was calculated. We assessed the delta-displacement in white matter in patients with iNPH and atrophic ventricular dilation (atrophic VD), and in healthy volunteers (control group). Delta-displacement in iNPH was significantly higher than those in the atrophic VD and control. This shows that water molecules of the white matter in iNPH are easily fluctuated by volume loading of the cranium during the cardiac cycle, due to the decrease in intracranial compliance. There was no significant correlation between delta-displacement and displacement. The delta-displacement and the displacement do not necessarily yield the same kind of information. Delta-displacement demonstrated to obtain biophysical information about fluctuation. This analysis may be helpful in the understanding physiology and pathological condition in iNPH and the assisting in the diagnosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) has been characterized as a chronic communicating hydrocephalus in elderly patients with the clinical triad gait disturbance, dementia, and incontinence [1–3]. The clinical symptoms of both secondary and idiopathic NPH (iNPH) can be reversed by the removal of the accumulated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [3]. Secondary NPH can result in subarachnoid hemorrhage, trauma, and stroke. Although numerous investigations have attempted to clarify the underlying mechanism of and to diagnose iNPH, its exact causes remain poorly understood. The CSF tap test is one of the major supplemental tests for the diagnosis of iNPH; this test has a high positive predictive value of successful shunting, but is not sufficient to diagnose iNPH because of its low sensitivity in predicting surgical outcomes [4]. Other supplemental tests are used to diagnose iNPH, including external lumbar CSF drainage, the lumber infusion test, intracranial pressure monitoring, the aqueductal CSF stroke volume, and intracranial compliance measurements using a phase-contrast cine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [5–11]. However, several problems remain in terms of the iNPH diagnostic criteria and the selection of appropriate patients for shunt surgery [13]. Marmarou et al. suggested that the predictive accuracy of iNPH diagnoses could be increased using a combination of supplemental tests for iNPH besides conventional X-ray computed tomography and MRI [3].In contrast, Alperin et al. developed a hemodynamic-independent analysis to evaluate the mechanical coupling of vascular pulsations to spinal CSF, i.e., intracranial compliance analysis [12]. Arterial flow into the cranium induces venous CSF movement and spinal cord displacement during the cardiac cycle. Subsequently, the intracranial volume loading during the cardiac cycle is derived from the differences between the cranial inflow and outflow at each time point during the cardiac cycle. The intracranial compliance expresses the ability to buffer the rising intracranial pressure with an increase in intracranial volume loading. Miyati et al. reported that in iNPH, the intracranial compliance was low [11].In a previous study, the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) changes during the cardiac cycle (delta-ADC) were observed to synchronize with the volume loading [14]. This change in ADC during the cardiac cycle explained that the water molecules in intracranial tissues were moved by the systolic volume loading force. Moreover, in iNPH, the delta-ADC of the cerebral white matter increased in association with the decrease in intracranial compliance [15]. However, compared with ADC (mm2/s), a more appropriate dimension for analyzing the change in water diffusion is displacement (μm). The diffusion distance of water molecules was acquired by q-space imaging [16]. This measurement enabled researchers to noninvasively provide information about intracranial tissue geometry [17]. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the dynamic changes in regional water molecule displacement in the brain during the cardiac cycle (delta-displacement) in iNPH, using q-space analysis. These findings may improve our understanding of the physiology and pathological conditions of iNPH and help to diagnose in iNPH as a supplemental tool.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we evaluated changes in displacement during the cardiac cycle. This was the first study to evaluate fluctuations during the cardiac cycle using q-space analysis. A delta-displacement analysis demonstrated the collection of new biophysical information about water fluctuation during the cardiac cycle. This analysis may facilitate an understanding of the physiology and pathological conditions associated with iNPH and could assist with the diagnosis of iNPH.None of the authors have any conflicts of interest associated with this study.