@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new classifier fusion method based on historical and on-line classification reliability for recognizing common CT imaging signs of lung diseases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
CISLs play important roles in the diagnosis of lung diseases.We fuse the classifiers in a weighted-sum form for recognizing CISLs.The weights are based on the confusion matrix and classification confidence values.The weights reflect the historical and on-line reliability of decision-making of classifiers.Our method is robust to classifiers and features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical image classification,Classifier fusion,Lung CT images,Common CT imaging signs of lung diseases (CISL),Confusion matrix,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Common CT imaging signs of lung diseases (CISL) play important roles in the diagnosis of lung diseases. This paper proposes a new method of multiple classifier fusion to recognize the CISLs, which is based on the confusion matrices of the classifiers and the classification confidence values outputted by the classifiers. The confusion matrix reflects the historical reliability of decision-making of a classifier, while the difference between the classification confidence values reflects the on-line reliability of its decision-making. The two factors are merged to determine the weights of the classifiers’ classification confidence values. Then the classifiers are fused in a weighted-sum form to make the final decision. We apply the proposed classifier fusion method to combine five types of classifiers for CISL recognition, including support vector machine (SVM), back-propagation neural network (BPNN), Naïve Bayes (NB), k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) and decision tree (DT). In the experiments on lung CT images, our method not only brought stable improvements of recognition performance, compared with single classifiers, but also outperformed two well-known methods of classifier fusion, AdaBoost and Bagging. These results show that the proposed method is effective and promising.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
CT technology developed quickly from the conventional single-slice acquisitions to volume acquisition with multi-slice, hence, it contains more and more image information and can highlight the density difference between the normal and diseased lungs [1]. However, it is time-consuming for radiologists to identify a large number of abnormal lesions from the CT images. Therefore, the problem of recognizing lesions in lung CT images automatically for aiding radiologists in the diagnosis of lung diseases has received extensive attention in recent years.Various types of single classifiers have been used in the past years for lung CT image recognition, including k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) [2–6], neural networks (NN) [5–10], Bayes [6,11,12], rule-based schemes [13], decision trees (DT) [6,11], linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [14] and support vector machine (SVM) [2,5,6,14]. Although much progress has been made, a single classifier is still difficult to achieve satisfactory performance in the practical applications. Plentiful studies have shown that the fusion of multiple classifiers is a feasible solution to bring the better classification results since diversity of classifiers usually compensates for errors of any single classifier.In this paper, we propose a novel weighted-sum method of classifier fusion for recognizing common CT imaging signs of lung diseases (CISLs). Different from other weighted-sum counterparts, we consider both HIStorical reliability and ON-line reliability of each single classifier. The resultant method is accordingly called HISON for short. The historical reliability is reflected by the confusion matrix established in the training procedure and the on-line reliability is reflected by the difference between the classification confidence values computed in the test procedure. The two information above are employed to determine the weight of each single classifier. Then the classifiers are combined in the weighted linear sum form to make the final classification decisions. We apply the proposed HISON classifier fusion method to combine the five widely used classifiers, including support vector machine (SVM), back-propagation neural network (BPNN), Naïve Bayes (NB), k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) and decision tree (DT), for recognizing CISLs contained in the regions of interests (ROIs) in lung CT images. The resultant method was tested in the instances collected from the Cancer Institute and Hospital at Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. The CISLs mean the well-known categories of CT imaging signs of lung diseases that frequently appear in patients’ lung CT images and play important roles in the diagnosis of lung diseases. Nine categories of CISLs are considered in this paper, including grand grass opacity (GGO), lobulation, cavity & vacuolous (CV), spiculation, pleural indentation (PI), obstructive pneumonia (OP), calcification, air bronchogram (AB), and bronchial mucus plugs (BMP). We illustrate them in Fig. 1. Notice that this paper is expanded and updated from a preliminary study of ours [15]. More comprehensive investigation of related work and more in-depth theoretical analysis are provided. Furthermore, much more experiments have been designed and conducted to prove the effectiveness, the efficiency and the robustness of the proposed method.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the common related work on classifier fusion in the medical imaging community. Section 3 presents our classifier fusion method. Section 4 describes our CISL recognition algorithm. The experimental results are reported in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a new weighted-sum method of multiple classifier fusion, called HISON, has been proposed for recognizing common CT imaging signs of lung diseases (CISLs). Our method is based on the confusion matrices of the classifiers and the classification confidence values outputted by the classifiers. Our work demonstrates that it is reasonable to fuse classifiers by considering not only the historical reliability but also the on-line reliability of the classifiers. Through considering these two types of reliability together, the weights computed for the classifiers making correct classification tend to be bigger than those for the classifiers making error prediction.We apply the proposed HISON method to fuse five different classifiers, including support vector machine (SVM), Naïve Bayes (NB), back-propagation neural network (BPNN), k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) and decision tree (DT), for recognizing nine categories of common CT imaging signs of lung diseases (CISLs). In order to evaluate the resultant method, we conducted the 5-fold cross validation experiments on 511 Region of Interests in lung CT images and achieved the average sensitivity of 70.40%, the average specificity of 96.84% and the classification accuracy rate of 76.79%. These results are better than not only the single classifiers but also the two well-known methods of classifier fusion, Bagging and AdaBoost. From the perspective of sensitivity and specificity, compared with the best results from single classifiers, our method brought increase rates of 3.20% and 0.44%, respectively; compared with the Bagging and the Adaboost, the increase rates are 10.90% and 0.09%, 6.07% and 0.24%, respectively. From the perspective of classification accuracy rate, the increase rates brought by our method are 6.05%, 1.56% and 1.55% compared with the best result from single classifiers, the Bagging, and the AdaBoost, respectively. Our method brought not only better classification performance, but also the satisfactory computation efficiency. Our learning time is 29.46s and the recognition time for one sample is 0.00455. It proves that our method is a real-time classification method. We further show that the method is robust to not only classifiers but also features.As mentioned in the experiments, a reason behind some unsatisfactory results from our method is that the ranges of classification confidences of classifiers are not uniform. In the next work, we want to investigate the normalization of classification confidences of classifiers for further improving the fusion effectiveness.