@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Alzheimer's disease diagnosis on structural MR images using circular harmonic functions descriptors on hippocampus and posterior cingulate cortex

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The combination of hippocampus and PCC atrophy captured by CHF features gives a good indicator to AD diagnostics.The method is less time consuming.The proposed method is fully automatic and do not require the intervention of an expert.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Alzheimer's disease,Bag-of-Visual-Words,Circular harmonic functions,Local features,PCA,Support vector machines,Hippocampus,Posterior cingulate cortex,Visual similarity,CBVIR,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, several pattern recognition methods have been proposed to automatically discriminate between patients with and without Alzheimer's disease using different imaging modalities: sMRI, fMRI, PET and SPECT. Classical approaches in visual information retrieval have been successfully used for analysis of structural MRI brain images. In this paper, we use the visual indexing framework and pattern recognition analysis based on structural MRI data to discriminate three classes of subjects: normal controls (NC), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). The approach uses the circular harmonic functions (CHFs) to extract local features from the most involved areas in the disease: hippocampus and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) in each slice in all three brain projections. The features are quantized using the Bag-of-Visual-Words approach to build one signature by brain (subject). This yields a transformation of a full 3D image of brain ROIs into a 1D signature, a histogram of quantized features. To reduce the dimensionality of the signature, we use the PCA technique. Support vector machines classifiers are then applied to classify groups. The experiments were conducted on a subset of ADNI dataset and applied to the “Bordeaux-3City” dataset. The results showed that our approach achieves respectively for ADNI dataset and “Bordeaux-3City” dataset; for AD vs NC classification, an accuracy of 83.77% and 78%, a specificity of 88.2% and 80.4% and a sensitivity of 79.09% and 74.7%. For NC vs MCI classification we achieved for the ADNI datasets an accuracy of 69.45%, a specificity of 74.8% and a sensitivity of 62.52%. For the most challenging classification task (AD vs MCI), we reached an accuracy of 62.07%, a specificity of 75.15% and a sensitivity of 49.02%. The use of PCC visual features description improves classification results by more than 5% compared to the use of hippocampus features only. Our approach is automatic, less time-consuming and does not require the intervention of the clinician during the disease diagnosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive, neurodegenerative disease characterized by severe deterioration in cognitive function, especially by memory loss. Nowadays, it represents a major public health problem. An early diagnosis of AD will allow patients to benefit from new treatments that may slow down neurodegeneration.Actually, neuroimaging appears as a useful tool in dementia diagnosis, and whether evaluation of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data alone has value for early detection of AD remains an important question. In particular, structural MRI is an integral part of the clinical assessment to detect and to follow the evolution of brain atrophy. With this aim, several methods and techniques for images analysis have been proposed to quantify morphological characteristics of human brain. Whole brain morphometric methods were proposed to compare relevant anatomical brain structures by assuming one-to-one correspondence between subjects: voxel-based morphometry (VBM) [4,55] is an automatic volumetric method for studying the differences in local concentration of gray and white matter. Tensor based morphometry (TBM) [52] was proposed to identify local structural changes from the gradients of deformations fields. Object based morphometry (OBM) [38] was introduced for shape analysis of anatomical structures. Nevertheless, due to the variability of subjects, features-based methods have become popular thanks to their statistical redundancy and selectivity of salient image areas. Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) [37] has recently demonstrated to be promising in features based morphometry [54]. Furthermore, there is a growing interest to region of interest (ROI)-based methods which focus on extracting features from a brain region known to be involved in the disease. Indeed, ROI's manual segmentation performed by an expert or performed by a specific software are the most accurate in brain atrophy measurements. However, they are challenging and have some major drawbacks. In fact, they are time-consuming and can present poor results in a boundary detection of brain regions. Moreover, atlas-based parcellisation can be used as a standard and automated method for automatically labelling ROIs on MR brain images. However, the latter reveals less inter-subject variability and then is not able to represent atrophy information.Numerous structural analysis involved hippocampus ROI as the most efficient hallmark of AD. In research studies that analyze hippocampus morphology structure, many surface-based shape description approaches have been proposed. In [27,25], shape information in the form of spherical harmonics (SPHARM) has been used as a feature for the support vector machines (SVM) classification. In [46], statistical shape models (SSMs) which capture a morphological variation on surface regions, have been used to improve the discrimination between AD and normal controls (NC). However, automatic description of the structural local features remains challenging. Indeed, the overall volumetric analysis or the global shape description of the hippocampus does not describe the local change of structure.Moreover, fusion of measurements from many different regions or biomarkers can potentially build patterns of high discriminative power and improve diagnostic decisions. In addition to hippocampal atrophy, PCC hypometabolism has been considered as a hallmark of early stage of AD. Indeed, many studies have shown PCC hypometabolism in incipient AD [10,41,28] associated with PCC atrophy [9,31,11,32,24,47]. Here, the question which arises whether atrophy of both the hippocampus and the PCC could be a more efficient criterion in Alzheimer's disease diagnosis than hippocampus atrophy alone.In terms of clinical diagnosis, structural MRI provides visual information regarding the brain ROI atrophy, which results from the cell neurodegeneration process. In that respect, content-based visual information retrieval (CBVIR) has become an attractive technique for computer-aided diagnosis [19,21,5,33,42,53,40,54,51]. Actually, CBVIR consists in retrieving the most visually similar images based on the characteristics of their visual content. It has been recently explored for research in medical diagnostics of Alzheimer's disease [2,26,57,36,29,23]. In this area, the approaches used are fundamentally features-based. Here, features are the characteristic vectors computed on small areas-patches in images according to a chosen prior model. These patches can be selected around the so-called characteristic points in image that exhibit signal singularities, or on the contrary, they can be chosen arbitrarily in an image space. Hence, features-based MR image comparison techniques are being established. The specific nature of MRI vs general purpose image databases requires in-depth studies of specific features which have to be designed to explain visible and invisible abnormalities in a diagnostics process. Attempts to follow the CBVIR approach with features-based similarity were made for subject discrimination and showed performances that argue for pursuit of features-based approaches [2,1,39,18,57].Despite the reported success of SIFT features [54,44], on the basis of our successful previous experience [39,7] we resort to circular harmonic functions (CHFs). Actually, they give interesting approximations of blurred and noisy signals in MRIs. CHFs were first introduced in the pattern recognition domain [50]. CHF descriptors have several advantages over other descriptors particularly for MRI. Indeed, they do not contain a histogram-based part as it is the case for SIFT, SURF and other descriptors. They are invariant to luminance and changes in a local patch and due to their polynomial nature they capture the smooth variations of image signal. According to [50,49], these descriptors in some cases are superior to SIFT. Furthermore, computing the CHF descriptors on densely sampled patches in brain brings the statistical variety necessary for overcoming the problem of inter-subject instability of signal singularities. An important issue here lies in the representation of extracted features for comparison purpose. One of the most popular models in CBVIR is the Bag-of-Visual-Words (BoVW) [16,48]. This model represents a whole image or a ROI as a histogram of occurrence of quantized visual features, which are called “visual words”. The histogram received the name of “visual signature” of an image/ROI. Some works in MRI classification for diagnostics of AD evaluate the suitability of the BoVW approach. In [18], the authors use SIFT features extracted from the whole subjects brain to classify brains with and without AD. Successful results with BoVW approach are also reported in [44]. The two last mentioned works use an SVM to classify signatures obtained by BoVW representation on the open-access dataset OASIS. However, [18,44,54] have not addressed the MCI case which has become important in studies of AD. In order to perform individual diagnosis, pattern classification methods have been proposed. Besides, the most popular pattern classification approaches used for AD diagnostics are support vector machines (SVM) [22,38,60,12,61,34,17,20,58,35]. To increase classification performance, some works typically use techniques to reduce the dimensionality of neuroimaging data and to select the most discriminative features before applying SVM. Principal component analysis (PCA) [30] is often used for this type of application [12]. We opted for PCA as well, as the visual signatures can be sparse and of a high dimensionality. In terms of prior information, classification can be improved by focusing on local visual features extraction from ROIs known to be involved in AD. Thus, in this work we hypothesize that hippocampal and PCC structures are more efficient than hippocampus alone to detect insidious case of AD.We design a pattern recognition approach in the paradigm of CBVIR to help early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease from structural MRI. The idea consists in refuting the hypothesis that morphological atrophies appear at the same voxel location for all subjects. Indeed, we characterize brain abnormalities in terms of intra-ROI local patterns using consistent neuroanatomical features for the disease. Therefore, every brain scan is represented by one global signature using the Bag-of-Words (BoW) approach. The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows: (1) we extract distinctive local pattern of AD-related atrophy using an atlas based approach without the need of a tedious segmentation. (2) We represent signal variations inside the ROI anatomy by a set of local features. Here, we employ a multiresolution approach based on the circular harmonic functions (CHFs), which is suitable for extracting the most relevant image features. Extracted features are leveraged to distinguish normal from abnormal local ROI tissue. (3) We apply an early fusion of visual signatures from two selected characteristic regions, Hpc and PCC to improve discrimination power. We apply this approach not only to discriminate between AD and NC, but to recognize the more challenging class of subjects (MCI) as well. (4) For classification purposes, the well-studied and efficient tool SVM is used, and for dimensionality reduction of description space, principle component analysis is applied. We applied the method on a subset from the ADNI dataset and then on a small group of a French subset of AD subjects, “Bordeaux-3City” dataset. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we detail materials and methods. In Section 3, we present experiments and results. Discussion is given in Section 4 and finally, Section 5 concludes this work and outlines its further perspectives.Different data with different number of subjects and variable MMSE values were used in the literature. A recent work [17] compares 10 classification methods applied to 509 baseline structural MRIs from the ADNI database. Hence, we selected, from the ADNI database, the same data as those used in this work. The data contain 137 AD patients, 162 normal control and 210 subjects with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Although the images are not exactly the same we selected the same subjects number by group with closed ages and MMSE values from the ADNI database. More detailed information about MRI acquisition procedures is available on the ADNI website.22http://adni.loni.ucla.edu/.The ADNI was launched in 2003 by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), private pharmaceutical companies and non-profit organizations, as a 60 million, 5-year public-private partnership. The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early Alzheimer's disease (AD). Determination of sensitive and specific markers of very early AD progression is intended to aid researchers and clinicians to develop new treatments and monitor their effectiveness, as well as lessen the time and the cost of clinical trials. Images are standard 1.5T screening baseline T1 weighted obtained using the volumetric 3D MPRAGE protocol. Then, we applied our method to a real cohort called “Bordeaux-3City”. This database contains 37 structural MRI (16 AD and 21 NC), in order to evaluate how our method would perform in clinical practice, when a little data are available and prior knowledge about the progression of the disease are limited. MRI examination was performed using a 3Tesla Achieva system (Philips Medical Systems, Netherlands) equipped with an eight-channel SENSE head coil. Anatomical high resolution MRI volumes were acquired in transverse plan using a 3D MPRAGE T1-weighted sequence (TR/TE 8.2/3.5ms, flip angle 7, matrix size 256×256, FOV 256mm, yielding 180 slices of 1mm). The study was approved by the institutional human ethics review board and all individuals in the sample provided written informed consent to participate. Tables 1 and 2present a summary of the demographic characteristics of the selected subjects (including the number, age, gender and mini mental state examination (MMSE) of the subjects).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
