@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
X-ray physics- and bone composition-based estimation of thickness characteristics from clinical mandibular radiographs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Normalized mandibular thickness distributions are derived from clinical panoramic radiographs.X-ray physics is combined with cortical and trabecular porosity values.Methods are intensity loss quantification and attenuation averaging in composites.Thickness distribution appears asymmetric with respect to the face's symmetry axis.Molar regions are identified as thicker than those close to incisor.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Attenuation,Radiological analysis,Grey value distribution,Mandibular bone,Mathematical modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In dentistry, clinical radiographs (also called X-ray images) reflect the intensity loss of an X-ray when being transmitted through the mandibular objects, and this loss is quantified in terms of grey values. While such images are standardly used for pathology detection by the experienced dentist, we here present a new method for getting more quantitative information out of such 2D radiographs, “extending” them into the third dimension. This “extension” requires consistent combination of X-ray physics (namely, X-ray intensity loss quantification along paths orthogonal to the panoramic clinical image and X-ray attenuation averaging for composite materials) with anatomically known upper and lower limits of vascular porosities in cortical and trabecular bone compartments. Correspondingly computed ranges of overall organ thicknesses are extremely narrow, suggesting adequate estimation of thickness characteristics from 2D radiographic panoramas used clinically, while predicted cortical and trabecular thickness ranges vary by ±8.47% and ±16.13%, respectively. The proposed method also identifies variations between thicknesses at similar anatomical locations left and right of the face's symmetry axis, and molar regions turn out to be thicker than those close to incisors. This paves the way to more detailed diagnostic activities, e.g. in combination with Finite Element simulations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clinical treatment in dentistry often starts with a 2D radiograph of the mandible, obtained by a technique based on X-radiation, also referred to as X-ray imaging [1]. Such images reflect the loss of X-ray intensity when transmitting the mandibular objects, and this loss is quantified in terms of grey values which are proportional to the decadic logarithm of the initial-over-transmitted intensity ratio. By naked eye, X-ray images allow for detection of major irregularities, such as carious tooth decay [2], or severely damaged areas in the mandible; the latter may occur in certain types of cancer [3]. As a complement to this standard use of such images, we here aim at retrieving from these 2D images information concerning the third dimension.For this purpose, a new method is developed, based on the average rule of X-ray attenuation coefficients [4–6], which states that the attenuation coefficient related to a three-dimensional (3D) voxel in a 3D object is equal to the volume average of the attenuation coefficients of the material constituents found within this voxel. It allows for translation of attenuation coefficients assigned to milimeter-sized bone voxels, into voxel-specific vascular porosities. Integration of attenuation coefficients over the organ thickness delivers the aforementioned intensity losses – and this allows us to “back-analyze” from 2D radiographs, based on physiologically typical vascular porosities, upper and lower bounds for the pixel-specific thickness of the organ, as well as of the thicknesses of its cortical shells and trabecular core. This is described in detail in the sequel of this paper: after introducing mathematical relations for attenuation averaging (see Section 2.1), the two types of bone found in the human mandible, namely cortical bone with low vascular porosity and trabecular bone with high vascular porosity, are introduced (see Section 2.2), and the attenuation behavior of X-rays transmitted through composite materials (here solid bone matrix with embedded vascular pores) is elaborated (see Section 2.3). The collected and derived mathematical relations allow for quantification of the proportionality between pixel-specific grey values and X-ray intensity losses, and this gives access to the thicknesses of the mandible, be it in the purely cortical compartment at its bottom, or in the mixed cortical/trabecular, sandwich-type compartment further above (see Sections 2.4 and 2.5). The model is then numerically evaluated, demonstrating how 2D images can be extended into the thickness direction (see Section 3.1). Additionally, the model is validated through comparing benchmark dimensions of the analytically created with the corresponding dimensions extracted from CT imaging (see Sections 2.6 and 3.2). After a comprehensive discussion of the results (see Section 4), the paper is rounded off by presentation of final conclusions and potential directions of future developments (see Section 5).As materials, we use 2D X-ray images, composed of small quadratic units called pixels, defining the resolution of the images, see Fig. 1(a). Each pixel is characterized by a grey value χ, measured on an 8-bit scale from 0 to 255. These pixel-specific grey values are proportional to the optical density ρopt[7,8],(1)χ(x)=P×ρopt(x)=P×log10I0(x)I(x),where x=x2D=xex+yeydenotes the position of the considered pixel in the 2D X-ray image (each pixel is related to just one constant grey value), and exand eyare the mutually orthogonal unit vectors in x- and y-direction, respectively, see Fig. 1(a). Furthermore, in Eq. (1), I0 is the initial radiation intensity of the X-ray (before transmitting the object of interest), I is the X-ray radiation intensity after transmission of the mandible, andPis a proportionality constant. The pixel-specific intensity loss of an X-ray transmitting the mandible along the pixel-specific object thickness d(x) amounts to [9–11](2)ΔI(x)=I0(x)−I(x)=I0(x)1−exp−∫d(x)μ(x,s)ds,where μ is the X-ray attenuation coefficient, which depends on the spatial location within the scanned object, quantified by means of the aforementioned position vector x, as well as by a new coordinate s, directed orthogonal to the x–y plane. Eqs. (1) and (2) imply that the grey values χ(x) are proportional to ∫d(x)μ(s, x)ds,(3)χ(x)=P×∫d(x)μ(x,s)ds.Across the mandibular thickness, i.e. orthogonal to the plane of an X-ray image as shown in Fig. 1(a), two types of composition, being relevant for two different regions in the image, are distinguished [13–15]:•“Purely cortical” regions made up of cortical bone only (labelled by “cort” in the following): the so-called substantia compacta constitutes the compact outer layer of bone, also referred to as cortical bone. In the grey value representation of Fig. 1(a), the region of purely cortical bone is discernable as light grey-colored area (high grey values) at the lower boundary of the mandible.“Mixed cortical/trabecular” regions (labelled “mix” in the following), made up of two cortical layers, adjacent to a central trabecular core: the spongiosa is a sponge-like assembled system of slim bone platelets, enclosed by a shell of cortical bone. The bone platelets are denoted as trabeculae, thus spongious bone is also referred to as trabecular bone. In Fig. 1(a), the region of mixed cortical/trabecular bone is located above the region of purely cortical bone, and discernable as dark grey-colored area (low grey values).Specification of Eq. (3) for the purely cortical region reads as(4)χcort(x)=Pμcort(x)dcort(x),with dcort(x) as the thickness of the purely cortical region, and with μcort(x) as the average attenuation coefficient of cortical bone along the thickness dcort(x), defined as [16](5)μcort(x)=1dcort(x)∫dcort(x)μ(x,s)ds.Specification of Eq. (3) for the mixed cortical/trabecular region reads as(6)χmix(x)=Pμmix(x)dmix(x),with dmix(x) as the thickness of the mixed cortical/trabecular region and with μmix(x) as the average attenuation coefficient of mixed cortical/trabecular bone along thickness dmix(x), with this average now reading as(7)μmix(x)=1dmix(x)×μcort,exmix(x)dcort,exmix(x)+μtrabmix(x)dtrabmix(x)+μcort,inmix(x)dcort,inmix(x).Eq. (7) is based on the attenuation averages over the three sublayers making up mixed cortical/trabecular bone, compare Fig. 1(b), namely the average attenuation coefficient of the exterior (buccal) cortical layer,μcort,exmix(x), the average attenuation coefficient of the core trabecular layer,μtrabmix(x), and the average attenuation coefficient of the interior (lingual) cortical layer,μcort,inmix(x); which are defined as(8)μcort,exmix(x)=1dcort,exmix(x)∫dcort,exmix(x)μ(x,s)ds,(9)μtrabmix(x)=1dtrabmix(x)∫dtrabmix(x)μ(x,s)ds,and(10)μcort,inmix(x)=1dcort,inmix(x)∫dcort,inmix(x)μ(x,s)ds,withdcort,exmix(x),dtrabmix(x), anddcort,inmix(x)as the thicknesses of the exterior cortical layer, of the core trabecular layer, and of the interior cortical layer,dmix(x)=dcort,exmix(x)+dtrabmix(x)+dcort,inmix(x).If X-rays are transmitted through a composite material with constituents having characteristic lengths which are much smaller than that of the image pixels, the composite attenuation coefficient μ can be expressed in terms of the attenuation coefficients of the single constituents μi, according to [4–6,9](11)μ=∑iNcμρiρi*=∑iNcμρiρifi=∑iNcμifi,where ρiis the mass density of constituent i, (μ/ρ) is its mass attenuation coefficient,ρi*is its apparent mass density, fiis its volume fraction; and Ncis the total number of constituents, i=1, …, Nc. In other words, Eq. (11) expresses that the composite attenuation coefficient is the volume average of the constituents’ attenuation coefficients.Cortical and trabecular bone are such composite materials, built up by the constituents “(extravascular) solid bone matrix” (in the following labelled by suffix “BM”) and “vascular pore space” (in the following labelled by suffix “H2O”, indicating that the X-ray attenuation behavior of the pore fluid is close to that of water). Within a representative volume element of macroscopic bone material, the solid bone matrix occupies the volume fraction fBM=(1−ϕ), and the vascular pore space occupies the volume fractionfH2O=ϕ; ϕ being called vascular porosity [5]. Accordingly, application of the averaging rule given by Eq. (11) to cortical or trabecular bone yields(12)μ(x,s)=ϕ(x,s)μH2O+1−ϕ(x,s)μBM.Insertion of Eq. (12) into Eq. (5) results in(13)μcort(x)=ϕcort(x)μH2O+1−ϕcort(x)μBM,with(14)ϕcort(x)=1dcort(x)∫dcort(x)ϕ(x,s)dsas the average cortical porosity found along the organ thickness at pixel position x, falling into the region of “purely cortical bone”.Likewise, consideration of Eq. (12) allows us to rewrite the attenuation coefficients introduced in Eqs. (8)–(10), namely in the format(15)μcort,exmix(x)=ϕcort,exmix(x)μH2O+1−ϕcort,exmix(x)μBM,(16)μtrabmix(x)=ϕtrabmix(x)μH2O+1−ϕtrabmix(x)μBM,and(17)μcort,inmix(x)=ϕcort,inmix(x)μH2O+1−ϕcort,inmix(x)μBM.Furthermore, the average porosities of the exterior cortical shell,ϕcort,exmix(x), of the trabecular core,ϕtrabmix(x), and of the interior cortical shell,ϕcort,inmix(x), read as(18)ϕcort,exmix(x)=1dcort,exmix(x)∫dcort,exmix(x)ϕ(x,s)ds,(19)ϕtrabmix(x)=1dtrabmix(x)∫dtrabmix(x)ϕ(x,s)ds,and(20)ϕcort,inmix(x)=1dcort,inmix(x)∫dcort,inmix(x)ϕ(x,s)ds,wheredcort,exmix(x)is the thickness of the exterior cortical shell,dtrabmix(x)is the thickness of the central trabecular core, anddcort,inmixis the thickness of the interior cortical shell.The right-hand sides of Eqs. (13) and (15)–(17) each contain the attenuation coefficients of water,μH2O, and of the extravascular bone matrix, μBM. The numerical value ofμH2Ois directly accessible from the photon cross section database provided by the United States National Institute of Standards and Technology [17]. Considering that X-ray imaging occurs at a photon energy of 10keV, the attenuation coefficient of water amounts toμH2O=5.33cm−1. For quantification of μBM, we again employ the average rule given by Eq. (11), but now at the level of the bone matrix (BM), distinguishing three material constituents: hydroxyapatite, organic matter, and fluid filling the nanopores located between the two aforementioned bone matrix constituents. This results in(21)μBM=μH2OfH2O+μHAfHA+μorgforg,where the attenuation coefficients μHA=142cm−1 and μorg=5.71cm−1 at a photon energy of 10keV are again retrieved from the NIST database, with the chemical formulae of hydroxyapatite and collagen as input. In Eq. (21),fH2O, fHA, and forg denote the volume fractions of the nanopores filled by fluid, hydroxyapatite, and organic matter within the bone matrix, fulfilling standardly thatfH2O+fHA+forg=1. Interestingly, these volume fractions depend in a bilinear fashion on each other, and on the extracellular bone matrix density. A corresponding “universal” composition rule, valid across numerous different organs, species, and ages, was evidenced by Vuong and Hellmich [18], based on careful evaluation of different chemical and weighing protocols realized over a time span of more than 80 years [19–29]. Considering an extracellular mass density of ρec=1.92g/cm3, as measured by Schwartz-Dabney and Dechow [30] for cortical mandibular bone, the aforementioned composition rules yield the bone matrix constituent volume fractions asfH2O=0.26, fHA=0.39, and forg=0.35. Insertion of these values into Eq. (21) gives the X-ray attenuation coefficient of the extracellular mandibular bone matrix as μBM=58.77cm−1.Combining Eqs. (1)–(21) with additional information on the vascular porosities found in mandibular bone, will allow us to derive thickness profiles from planar images as the one of Fig. 1. More precisely, we will be able to determine upper and lower bounds of such profiles, being related to minimum and maximum values of the cortical and trabecular porosities,ϕcortmin,ϕcortmax,ϕtrabmin, andϕtrabmax. In cortical mandibular bone, Kingsmill et al. [31] have shown, by means of backscattered electron imaging, that the minimum and maximum porosities amount to(22)ϕcortmin=0.03andϕcortmax=0.11.On the other hand, Renders et al. [32] provide, based on micro-computer tomographs, minimum and maximum porosities of trabecular mandibular bone,(23)ϕtrabmin=0.726andϕtrabmax=0.874.Next, we consider the cortical porosity values to be relevant for a chosen subset of the purely cortical region of a given mandibular radiograph, as the one shown in Fig. 1. Namely, we will choose the pixels along a vertical cross section between two adjacent teeth. Therefore, we adopt the following numbering convention for cross sections lying all between two adjacent teeth: the cross section between the two central incisors is labeled by “0”, and the following cross sections are labelled by increasing integers, combined with letters “L” and “R” indicating positions left and right of the “0” position, see Fig. 2. All of these cross sections are characterized by total lengths lS, S=0, R1, L1, R2, L2, …, and the sublength related to the purely cortical region is denoted as lS,cort. All pixels along cross section S can be located through variable xS, S=0, R1, L1, R2, L2, …, measured from the bottom of the organ upwards, see Fig. 2. The average grey values of the purely cortical portion of cross section S follows as(24)χ¯S,cort=1lS,cort∫lS,cortχcort(x)dx.Keeping in mind this convention, we label the landmark cross section to be chosen as S=LM for the moment (results concerning specific choices will be given in Section 3), and we assign to it optionally the extreme values of the cortical porosity as as space-invariant properties,ϕcort(x)=ϕcortext∈ϕcortmin,ϕcortmax, compare Eq. (22). Then the average grey value according to Eq. (24) with S=LM can be expressed by aforementioned porosities, through insertion of Eq. (4) into Eq. (24), while considering Eq. (13),(25)χ¯LM,cort=1lLM,cort∫lLM,cortPμcort(x)dcort(x)dx=Pμcortext1lLM,cort∫lLM,cortdcort(x)dx=Pμcortextd¯LM,cort=PϕcortextμH2O+1−ϕcortextμBMd¯LM,cort,whered¯LM,cortdenotes the average thickness of the purely cortical region along the chosen landmark cross section. Rearrangement of Eq. (25) yields the following equation for the “calibration” of the proportionality constant:(26)P=χ¯LM,cortϕcortextμH2O+1−ϕcortextμBMd¯LM,cort.The consequences of choosing different cross sections as landmark cross sections are discussed in Section 4.1. Furthermore, as long asd¯LM,cortis not known from other sources, it remains as a formally unknown variable in the analysis. Under this condition, all results on thicknesses derived in the following can be determined up to the value ofd¯LM,cort; i.e. our method delivers thickness characteristics along cross sections, normalized with respect tod¯LM,cort.Insertion of Eq. (26) into Eq. (4) allows us to derive an equation for the thickness of purely cortical bone, reading as(27)dcort(x)=χcort(x)χ¯LM,cortd¯LM,cort.The pixel-specific mandible thickness following from Eq. (27) typically increases with increasing location variable x, measured from the bottom of the mandible, as indicated in Fig. 2; see Section 3 for actual results.For determination of the compartment thicknesses in mixed cortical/trabecular bone, we define thatϕcort,exmix(x)≈ϕcort,inmix(x)=ϕcortmix(x)anddcort,exmix(x)≈dcort,inmix(x)=dcortmix(x). Then, the thicknesses of the mixed cortical/trabecular bone compartments follow as(28)dtrabmix(x)=TFtrab(x)dmix(x)and(29)dcortmix(x)=121−TFtrab(x)dmix(x)=TFcort(x)dmix(x),with the trabecular thickness fraction TFtrab(x) defined asTFtrab(x)=dtrabmix(x)/dmix(x), and the cortical thickness fraction TFcort(x) defined asTFcort(x)=dcortmix(x)/dmix(x). Combining Eqs. (6), (7), and (15)–(17), while considering Eq. (26),ϕtrabmix(x)=ϕtrabext∈ϕtrabmin,ϕtrabmax, as well as Eqs. (28) and (29), allows us to derive an equation for the total thickness of mixed cortical/trabecular bone, reading as(30)dmix(x)=χmix(x)d¯LM,cortχ¯LM,cort1−TFtrab(((ϕtrabext−ϕcortext)(μBM−μH2O))/(ϕcortextμH2O+(1−ϕcortext)μBM)).The thicknesses of the individual compartments follow from insertion of dmix(x), according to Eq. (30), into Eqs. (28) and (29).However, pixel-specific numerical evaluation of Eq. (30) is not straightforward, since the trabecular thickness fraction TFtrab is neither known a priori, nor constant along the location variable x, compare Fig. 2. Its determination requires additional “topological rules”, which are implemented while progressing along the pixels constituting cross sections S, S=L5, L2, R2, R5, with increasing location variable xS. These rules read, in increasing hierarchical order (i.e. the latter potentially overruling the former), as follows:(i)When progressing along location variable xS, thickness changes are neither encountered at the interfaces between the purely cortical region and the mixed cortical/trabecular regions (this interface is indicated by value xS,int of the location variable, see Fig. 2), nor within the mixed cortical/trabecular regions themselves; corresponding evaluation of Eq. (27) for xS=xS,int, and equating the result to Eq. (30), yields an expression for the trabecular thickness fraction TFtrab,(31)TFtrab(xS)=1−χmix(xS)d¯LM,cortχ¯LM,cortdmix(xS)×ϕcortextμH2O+(1−ϕcortext)μBM(ϕtrabext−ϕcortext)(μBM−μH2O).At the bottom of the mixed cortical/trabecular region, the trabecular core widens, see Fig. 1(b); hence dTFtrab/dx>0, with TFtrab being computed from Eq. (31). Once the location xS,wide, where the trabecular widening stops, dTFtrab/dx(xS=xS,wide)≤0, has been reached, Fig. 1(b) strongly suggests that the trabecular thickness is never smaller than the sum of the thicknesses of the interior and exterior cortical shells; hence(32)∀xS≥xS,wide:dtrabmix≥dcort,exmix+dcort,inmix→αtrab≥0.5.Wherever the trabecular thickness fraction computed according to Eq. (31) violates Eq. (32), TFtrab is set equal to 0.5, and Eq. (31) is solved for the trabecular porosity ϕtrab(xS),(33)ϕtrab(xS)=ϕcortext+1−χmix(xS)d¯LM,cortχ¯LM,cortdmix(xS)×ϕcortextμH2O+(1−ϕcortext)μBM0.5(μBM−μH2O),which obviously narrows, for specific locations xS, the range of potential values for the trabecular porosity, as compared to Eq. (23). Importantly, Eq. (32) applies only after completion of the trabecular widening, i.e. for xS≥xS,wide, compare the condition left of the colon in Eq. (32). Thus, the model can account for situations where, within the widening region, the trabecular core may be well thinner than the cortical shells surrounding it. This becomes also apparent from the case studies presented in Section 3.1.If the trabecular porosity computed according to Eq. (33) lies outside the porosity range reported by Renders et al. [32], given by Eq. (23), the thickness constance across the mixed cortical/trabecular regions needs to be abandoned. Accordingly, ϕtrab(xS) is set equal to the closest extreme value (typically toϕtrabmin), and based on TFtrab=0.5, Eq. (30) gives access to the sought organ stiffness. The latter, while further increasing xS, is not allowed to decrease, see item (i).The values of TFtrab according to rules (i)–(iii), in particular following Eqs. (31) and (32), together with Eqs. (28)–(30), allow for determination of the cortical and trabecular thicknesses of the mixed (cortical/trabecular) regions. Furthermore, deriving Eqs. (27)–(33) as functions ofd¯LM,cort, instead of inserting the numerical value ofd¯LM,cort, keeps the mathematical framework as general as possible, valid for X-ray images aquired from different mandibles. For the sake of clarity, Fig. 3shows the here introduced X-ray image analysis modality, eventually allowing for 2D-to-3D extension of such images, in form of a corresponding flowchart.For the purpose of validation of the herein proposed modality of X-ray image interpretation, we consider additional patient data. In particular, both CT data and X-ray images were collected from three patients each, hereafter called patients P-1, P-2, and P-3. Thus, two sources for the distributions of cortical and trabecular thickness across the mandible are available:(i)Applying the image analysis method presented in this paper to a specific cross section, e.g. to the cross section next to the left lateral incisior, see Fig. 4(c), provides the computed distribution of cortical and trabcular thicknesses along this cross section.The CT data provides the corresponding “real” thicknesses straightforwardly, through placing appropriate cross sections by means of suitable image processing software (here, OsiriX v.5.8.2 was used), see Fig. 4(a) and (b). In more detail, the voxels of the used CT data sets were typically oriented along the superior–inferior anatomical axis, so that cross sections orthogonal to this anatomical axis can be easily chosen. Such a cross section is labelled “A-A” in Fig. 4(a) and (b), and it allows for accessing, within the 3D CT data sets, the cross sections indicated in the 2D radiograph of Fig. 2. This is shown exemplarily by means of cross section L2, see Fig. 4(b)–(d). The latter allows for identification of the mandible thicknessesdcortmixanddtrabmix, as well the height of purely cortical bone, hcort.Since the 2D-to-3D extension method delivers normalized thicknesses, we consider for validation the thickness fractions TFcort and TFcort, compare Eqs. (28) and (29). Furthermore, in order to simplify the validation procedure, we do not consider the whole thickness distributions, but only the thicknesses after completion of trabecular widening, at xS=xS,wide. The agreement between computed thickness fractions, TFcort and TFcort, and CT-derived thickness fractions, denoted asTFcortCTandTFcortCT, for a specific cross section stemming from a specific patient is quantified through the relative error E,(34)Ecort/trab=TFcort/trab−TFcort/trabCTTFcort/trabCT,with index cort/trab indicating that the relative error has to be calculated for both the cortical and the trabecular thickness fractions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The method presented in this paper allows for transforming the spatially heterogeneous attenuation behavior across human mandibular bone acquired by X-ray imaging and quantified in terms of the attenuation-indicative grey values, to corresponding thicknesses of the cortical and trabecular mandibular compartments. These thicknesses are further governed by the vascular porosities expected in cortical and trabecular bone. The aforementioned transformation, being the first of its kind, is based on the laws for X-ray intensity loss when traveling through a solid medium, by the X-ray attenuation averaging rule for composite materials, and on anatomically reasonable “corridors” of vascular porosities in cortical and trabecular bone. This newly derived 3D geometry appears itself as an interesting and useful information to the dentist, additional to the information accessible from standard panoramic views as shown in Fig. 1(a). For instance, the presented approach may serve as decision-support tool as for instigation of more detailed, three-dimensional imaging measures, e.g. computed tomography.Moreover, the 2D-to-3D extension developed herein may be particularly useful for deriving 3D structural mechanics models based on the Finite Element method (FEM). While the FEM has been introduced in dentomaxillofacial research for quite some time [36–40], generation of the required 3D models standardly requires CT data. As an alternative, so-called atlas-based models have been developed [41]. These methods use statistical information collected for the anatomy of interest, such as the mandible, to infer from 2D X-ray images the corresponding 3D shape. The method proposed here could be employed to include additional information regarding the segmentation of cortical and trabecular bone. Additionally, the porosity distributions gained from our method may be fed into micromechanics-based material property identification [42], which has greatly improved the reliability of the aformentioned Finite Element models [5]. Accordingly, retrieval of thickness and porosity information as described in Section 2.5, for each and every cross section throughout the organ, in combination with the porosity-to-stiffness conversion described in [5], promises a new route for computational mechanics technology entering the daily practice in dentistry, delivering information on stress states which, in turn, indicate regions of potential atrophy [43]. At a later state of even more sophisticated mathematical modeling, such regions may be quantified through a combined systems biology-micromechanics approach [44].