@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The quantitative assessment of the pre- and postoperative craniosynostosis using the methods of image analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method for brain segmentation from CT scans in the craniosynostosis.We propose algorithms for determination of indices used for craniosynostosis assessment.We propose new planar and volumetric indices dedicated to assessment of the disease.The proposed indices can be used to distinguishing between types of the craniosynostosis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain segmentation,Image analysis,Computer aided diagnosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper considers the problem of the CT based quantitative assessment of the craniosynostosis before and after the surgery. First, fast and efficient brain segmentation approach is proposed. The algorithm is robust to discontinuity of skull. As a result it can be applied both in pre- and post-operative cases. Additionally, image processing and analysis algorithms are proposed for describing the disease based on CT scans. The proposed algorithms automate determination of the standard linear indices used for assessment of the craniosynostosis (i.e. cephalic index CI and head circumference HC) and allow for planar and volumetric analysis which so far have not been reported. Results of applying the introduced methods to sample craniosynostotic cases before and after the surgery are presented and discussed. The results show that the proposed brain segmentation algorithm is characterized by high accuracy when applied both in the pre- and postoperative craniosynostosis, while the introduced planar and volumetric indices for the disease description may be helpful to distinguish between the types of the disease.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Craniosynostosis is a common condition which affects infants. The disease is caused by the premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures which changes the growth pattern of the skull [1,2]. Skull shape deformations and the resulting increased intracranial brain pressure may in turn cause a noticeable disorder in the neuropsychological development of a child.The fusion of sutures in the craniosynostosis is usually confirmed by the fast, low-dose computed tomography (CT) imaging. A CT scan is also used to plan the corrective surgery (which is the only way of the disease treatment). However, although the rapid development of CT imaging devices is constantly observed, the preoperative assessment of craniosynostosis is still mainly qualitative and bases on the visual analysis of the consecutive slices. The supporting quantitative analysis is based on manual measurements of the characteristic dimensions of the skull. These are performed on the most representative CT slice. Hence, the existing methods are subjective as may depend on personal skills and experience. These two factors may affect both—the selection of the slice and the selection of characteristic dimensions. As a result, repeatability of the measurements may be limited. Another limitation of the manual measurements is that it considers only a small piece of information contained in the representative slice but ignores the significant information contained within a whole scan. Using the existing tools and methods dedicated to assessment of the craniosynostosis, the physicians are not able to take advantage of volumetric information contained within a scan. Visual and manual methods are not sufficient to analyze or measure planar and volumetric indices that could provide additional and useful information about the disease.It should be also noticed that the existing methods for assessment of craniosynostosis are dedicated mainly to the preoperative cases. Since they are based on the analysis of skull dimensions, they cannot be used in the postoperative cases, where significant parts of skull are missing due to the corrective surgery.The computer-aided diagnosis of brain diseases benefits over traditional methods by the ability to perform automatic and reliable measurements. Therefore, this paper proposes a set of image processing and analysis algorithms dedicated to the assessment of the pre- and postoperative craniosynostosis based on CT scans by means of linear, planar and volumetric measures.The following part of this paper is organized as follows. First, basic information about the craniosynostosis types, diagnosis and treatment methods is given in Section 2. This is followed in Section 3 by the description of various problems, which need to be solved during segmentation of brain in the pre- and postoperative craniosynostosis. The related works in the field of brain segmentation and image based assessment of the craniosynostosis are reviewed in Section 4. Section 5 describes the introduced algorithms and methods dedicated to linear, planar and volumetric description of the disease. Results provided by the proposed approaches are presented and discussed in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.Craniosynostosis manifests itself as a serious malformation of a skull. It is caused by a premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures. If two or more sutures fuse, the growth of a skull in fusion direction is stopped, but the compensatory growth in other directions is observed. Most commonly, the following types of craniosynostosis can be observed [1]:•scaphocephaly (long head) when the head is disproportionately long and narrow;trigonocephaly (triangular head) when the head has triangular shaped forehead;plagiocephaly (flat head) when there is a flat spot on the back or one side of the head.The examples of skull shapes in the regarded types of craniosynostosis and the corresponding sample CT slices are shown in Fig. 1.The only way of craniosynostosis treatment is the cranial vault remodeling, i.e. the corrective surgery which restores the normal spatial relationship between the skull and the contained neural and vascular structures and re-orientates the deviated growth vectors of the skull base and vault [3]. The corrective surgery always removes the deformed fragments of skull. A sample skull before and after surgery is shown in Fig. 2.Although the craniosynostosis is quite a common disease (it appears about 1 in 2500 individuals [4,5]) there are only two parameters used for the preoperative assessment of the disease. These are cephalic index (CI) and head circumference (HC) [6]. Cephalic index is a ratio of the maximum length and the maximum width of a head (see Fig. 3a). Head circumference is a measurement taken around the largest part of the head, above the eyebrows, above the ears and the most back part of head (see Fig. 3b).However, usage of these indices is limited. Neither HC nor CI can be used to unambiguously distinguish between different types of craniosynostosis. It is possible for example to distinguish scaphocephaly from other types based on the cephalic index, but this index for trigonocephaly and plagiocephaly exhibits similar values.Additionally, because the above mentioned indices are based on the skull, they cannot be directly used in the postoperative cases, where skull is discontinuous and its significant parts are missing. The measurement of head circumference requires physical contact with a patient, what after the surgery can be very difficult. The determination of CI is most commonly performed manually by the specialist and as a result may be inaccurate, unrepeatable and subjective. Additionally, linear measurements consider only information contained in the most representative slices what limits the accuracy of the assessment, as volumetric information contained within CT scan is ignored.Therefore, there is a need to develop image processing and analysis algorithms which will automate assessment of the craniosynostosis. These methods could be used to unambiguously distinguish between different types of the skull malformation in the preoperative craniosystosis and should allow to monitor the overall progress of the treatment in the postoperative cases. These also should consider not only linear measurements, but planar and volumetric information contained within a CT scans as well.The research described in this paper is a step towards introducing such algorithms into everyday clinical routine. To make them available both in the pre- and postoperative cases it is proposed to perform analysis based on brain, which shape and size closely fits skull shape. This is in fact in accordance with the clinical practice, as in the case of missing skull, physicians perform quantitative assessment of the disease based on the borders of brain.However, it should be also remembered that during extraction (segmentation) of brain from CT images many problems are encountered. These are outlined in the next section.The crucial step for both: brain volume assessment and brain shape analysis is segmentation of the brain region from an input 3D dataset. In the case of CT head scans of infants, segmentation of the brain is a challenging task. The connected regions of brain, eyes and nasal sinus are represented by similar intensities and most image segmentation approaches join them into one region, which cannot be simply and unambiguously divided into the corresponding sub-regions. An additional problem is caused by the spinal cord tissues. These are also represented by intensities similar to those assigned to brain what causes significant leakages during brain segmentation.This problem is depicted in Figs. 4 and 5. In particular, Fig. 4 shows sample CT brain slices at the level of eyes and nose (Fig. 4a) and spinal cord (Fig. 4b). For each case the original slice and the result of image segmentation is given. The corresponding image segmentation result is visualized in 3D in Fig. 5, where the brain region (shown in blue) is compared to a skull (shown in red).In the case of the postoperative craniosynostosis the problem of brain segmentation from CT scans is even more challenging due to missing pieces of the skull, which were removed during the corrective surgery. The discontinuities in bone make most existing image segmentation algorithms leak outside the skull into the skin region. This problem is depicted in 2D and 3D in Fig. 6a and b, respectively.The over-segmentation caused by the abovementioned factors falsely increases brain size and thus its volume. It also deteriorates the real brain shape. All these factors influence further diagnosis of the disease. Therefore, in the considered problem, the brain segmentation algorithm should be robust to a skull discontinuity.Additional issue which should be addressed during brain segmentation is proposing a standard for cutting off a brain from the spinal cord. There is no common level at the spinal cord in which CT brain scans begin. Therefore, performing brain segmentation without regard of this fact may result in including various amounts of the spinal cord into the brain region (see Fig. 7). These in turn will increase brain volume and shape in unrepeatable way. Therefore, providing the standardized way of the cut-off level determination is required to ensure comparable and repeatable assessment of the brain volumes based on binary images after segmentation. To the best of our knowledge, this issue has not been discussed so far.Having in mind the abovementioned, this paper proposes a fast and efficient brain segmentation algorithm. The method is dedicated to CT brain scans in the pre- and postoperative craniosynostosis. The brain region after segmentation may next be used for accurate quantitative assessment of the disease independently to skull discontinuity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a set of universal image processing and analysis methods for an automatic assessment of craniosynostosis was proposed. These include effective and accurate brain segmentation algorithm from CT datasets, algorithms for determining the existing indices used in assessment of the disease and proposals of new methods based on planar and volumetric analysis of a brain.The introduced brain segmentation algorithm is able to effectively estimate the correct shape of the brain, even in the case of discontinuous skull. The tests performed on sample CT datasets have revealed that the method avoids significant leakages into skin or spinal cord regions and omits different artifacts that cause problems for further analysis (i.e. nose, eyes and ears). The quantitative assessment of the method accuracy have revealed that no less than 90% of the brain region after segmentation corresponds with the referential segmentations. Additionally, although the introduced algorithm was dedicated to both the pre- and postoperative craniosynostosic cases, it can be universally applied for different types of brain pathologies.The introduced algorithms for numerical assessment of the craniosynostosis are automatic and do not require user interaction. As a result, the measurement of all the regarded indices is objective. In opposite to the existing methods for assessment of craniosynostosis, the proposed algorithms are not influenced by a ‘human factor’, as they do not require manual selection of skull landmarks, characteristic dimensions, the most representative slice etc. Additionally, they are resistant to skull discontinuity, what makes them available both in the pre- and postoperative cases. What's most, the introduced methods do not require a physical contact with a child and may be used for assessing and monitoring the craniosynostosis based on the historical CT scans, acquired in different moments at different sites. Having in mind the abovementioned advantages, the described research can be regarded a step forward through introducing the automatic assessment of the craniosynostosis into the everyday clinical routine. The introduced methods will surely support the objective assessment and diagnosis of the craniosynostosis.The attention should be also paid to planar and volumetric indices for assessment of craniosynostosis introduced in this paper, namely: the planar cephalic index (PCI) and the surface area to volume ratio (SVR). These include information contained within a whole CT volume (not only in the most representative slice, like in the case of the traditional methods). Such methods have not been so far used for assessment of craniosynostosis. However, based on results presented in the paper it can be seen that these indices exhibit relation with types of the disease. Therefore our future work will consider tests on a wide scope of datasets to confirm the applicability of these indices in classification of the craniosynostosis type. If the usefulness is confirmed the introduced approaches may become a new standard in the diagnosis of the disease.The authors have no conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.