@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Detection of temporal lobe epilepsy using support vector machines in multi-parametric quantitative MR imaging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Measuring regional asymmetry is fundamental for optimal classification results.DTI derived measures seem to be more informative than T2 maps for classification of TLE patients.Best classification accuracy for left TLE was 100% and for right TLE was 88.9%.Most of the discriminative features belong to the temporal lobes.The right TLE group is difficult to distinguish from controls. Possible factors are pathology heterogeneity and a limited sample size.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MRI,DESPOT,DTI,FA,MD,Quantitative imaging,Feature selection,MRMR,ANOVA,Support vector machines,Machine learning,SVM,ROI,PCA,TLE,Epilepsy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The detection of MRI abnormalities that can be associated to seizures in the study of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is a challenging task. In many cases, patients with a record of epileptic activity do not present any discernible MRI findings. In this domain, we propose a method that combines quantitative relaxometry and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) with support vector machines (SVM) aiming to improve TLE detection. The main contribution of this work is two-fold: on one hand, the feature selection process, principal component analysis (PCA) transformations of the feature space, and SVM parameterization are analyzed as factors constituting a classification model and influencing its quality. On the other hand, several of these classification models are studied to determine the optimal strategy for the identification of TLE patients using data collected from multi-parametric quantitative MRI.A total of 17 TLE patients and 19 control volunteers were analyzed. Four images were considered for each subject (T1 map, T2 map, fractional anisotropy, and mean diffusivity) generating 936 regions of interest per subject, then 8 different classification models were studied, each one comprised by a distinct set of factors. Subjects were correctly classified with an accuracy of 88.9%. Further analysis revealed that the heterogeneous nature of the disease impeded an optimal outcome. After dividing patients into cohesive groups (9 left-sided seizure onset, 8 right-sided seizure onset) perfect classification for the left group was achieved (100% accuracy) whereas the accuracy for the right group remained the same (88.9%).We conclude that a linear SVM combined with an ANOVA-based feature selection+PCA method is a good alternative in scenarios like ours where feature spaces are high dimensional, and the sample size is limited. The good accuracy results and the localization of the respective features in the temporal lobe suggest that a multi-parametric quantitative MRI, ROI-based, SVM classification could be used for the identification of TLE patients. This method has the potential to improve the diagnostic assessment, especially for patients who do not have any obvious lesions in standard radiological examinations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a powerful tool for the evaluation of patients with brain disorders and neurological diseases. For those with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), the most common type of epilepsy in adults [1], it is the entry point to a clinical workflow that may conclude with temporal lobe surgery and an improved quality of life. Finding evidence of seizures on MRI is a clear diagnostic element for TLE, however this task is not easy given that epileptogenic lesions are often small and can be missed, they can be uncertain due to subtle intensity changes, or only perceptible after image post-processing. Furthermore, due to the multi-factorial nature of the disease, the localization and type of the lesions can vary from patient to patient.While the visual inspection is a common radiological procedure for the diagnosis of TLE, it has been shown that the detection of brain pathologies associated with TLE can be improved with computer-assisted, automatic multi-parametric MRI analysis. For example, the detection of changes in the shape, volume and intensity of the hippocampus has been studied using structural T1- and T2- weighted images [2–5]; White matter abnormalities have been detected with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) in TLE patients [6–8], and DTI has been employed concurrently with functional MRI (fMRI) to perform language lateralization of TLE patients [9].A support vector machine (SVM) is a classifier that uses a priori knowledge in the form of group labels (supervised learning) and produces a decision boundary that can be used to determine the label of new examples [10,11]. Recent studies have examined the possibility of improving TLE detection using SVMs on MRI data. For example Focke et al. [12] show correct patient lateralization (left vs. right seizure onset) using SVMs on T1-weighted and DTI data. In addition to lateralization, Keihaninejad et al. [13], demonstrate the identification of TLE cases with hippocampal atrophy from cases without it using SVM on regional volumes obtained from T1-weighted MRI.In this context, the goal of the current study is to explore TLE detection using multi-parametric quantitative MRI and support vector machines. For that purpose, quantitative maps of T1, T2, as well as fractional anisotropy (FA), and mean diffusivity (MD) are estimated for every participating subject. Quantitative MRI measures biophysical tissue properties and it has the potential to be more sensitive to TLE detection than T1- and T2-weighted images. Additionally, quantitative measurements are independent of experimental settings and thus comparable between different scanners, institutions and over different points in time [14].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
