@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Skeleton Graph Matching vs. Maximum Weight Cliques aorta registration techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Comparison of two skeleton-based approaches in 3-D medical data registration.Skeleton Graph Matching vs. Maximum Weight Cliquess.Applicable to compare pre- and postoperative abdominal aorta aneurysm examinations.Efficient matching of different aorta structures (of different patients).Segmentation and feature extraction incorporate level set approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid level-set active contour,Image registration,Skeleton Graph Matching,Maximum Weight Cliques,Skeletonisation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Vascular diseases are one of the most challenging health problems in developed countries. Past as well as ongoing research activities often focus on efficient, robust and fast aorta segmentation, and registration techniques. According to this needs our study targets an abdominal aorta registration method. The investigated algorithms make it possible to efficiently segment and register abdominal aorta in pre- and post-operative Computed Tomography (CT) data. In more detail, a registration technique using the Path Similarity Skeleton Graph Matching (PSSGM), as well as Maximum Weight Cliques (MWCs) are employed to realise the matching based on Computed Tomography data. The presented approaches make it possible to match characteristic voxels belonging to the aorta from different Computed Tomography (CT) series. It is particularly useful in the assessment of the abdominal aortic aneurysm treatment by visualising the correspondence between the pre- and post-operative CT data. The registration results have been tested on the database of 18 contrast-enhanced CT series, where the cross-registration analysis has been performed producing 153 matching examples. All the registration results achieved with our system have been verified by an expert. The carried out analysis has highlighted the advantage of the MWCs technique over the PSSGM method. The verification phase proves the efficiency of the MWCs approach and encourages to further develop this methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, vascular diseases belong to the most challenging health problems in developed countries. According to statistics acquired by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) have been the cause of around 10,000 deaths only in the United States in 2009. A bit decreased, but still around 7000 deaths annually, have been indicated for the United Kingdom, by the British Heart Foundation (retrieved 2011). For the year 2012 the Statistical Federal Agency has counted 3500 deaths caused by AAA in Germany. An abdominal aortic aneurysm is a dilated and weakened segment of the abdominal aorta. It is an abnormal ballooning of the abdominal portion of the aorta, that occurs as a consequence of aortic medial degeneration and can break open causing death. To prevent from rupturing, interventional radiologists offer minimally invasive treatment for it. The open surgical repair by a vascular surgeon is the most commonly used treatment for a large, non-ruptured aneurysm. The less invasive and relatively new technique, eliminating the need for a large abdominal incision, is placing a graft within the aneurysm (see Fig. 1). It redirects blood flow and stops direct pressure from being exerted on the weak aortic wall [1].Thanks to research activities targeting medical image processing techniques, early diagnosis and treatment becomes nowadays possible. A contrast-enhanced CT angiography (CTA), which replaced a conventional angiography, is an imaging technique commonly used in vascular diagnosis. Despite the fast development of modern contrast-enhanced imaging techniques, providing complex 3D datasets, the tremendous amount of problems still remain unsolved. Hence, vascular segmentation as well as registration techniques are the topics of past [3,4,9] and ongoing [5,6,13,8] research activities.The high efficacy and efficiency requirements for diagnostic assistance in clinical routines, visually relating different datasets is especially well suited for endovascular therapies where patients with aortic stentgrafts have to be examined on a regular basis. The follow-up CTs are usually performed biyearly to reevaluate endovascular parameters, such as aortic diameters at anatomical landmarks (e.g. renal ostia) and landing zone configurations (i.e. proximal/distal neck lengths and shapes). Assisting the visualisation and/or active selection of corresponding positions for further assessment in the different datasets, the procedure becomes considerably less time-consuming and error prone. Moreover, it reduces the generally high user dependency and thus lower comparability of measurements performed by different clinicians. Given that aneurysm treatment is accompanied by considerable morphological changes of the aorta and branching vasculature (including restructured arteries, e.g. inferior mesenteric artery), a stable and efficient matching of the datasets is key for reliable long-term surveillance of aneurysm patients [7]. This is a specific requirement for common clinical settings where pre-interventional (for AAA patient “candidates”) and post-interventional situations (e.g. retreatment due to dislocated stentgrafts, extended or additional aneurysms) have to be assessed for further surgery planning.The AAA segmentation techniques [2–4,6,7] address either both, aorta lumen and thrombus analysis, or only one of the mentioned problems. An automated method for the segmentation of thrombus in abdominal aortic aneurysms from CT data is presented in [3]. The Active Shape Model (ASM) fitting is performed in sequential slices. As the starting point for the analysis the results obtained for the adjacent slice are used. The full 3D segmentation technique in CT is reported in [4]. The system analyses both global features and local information. The first one incorporates a-priori knowledge of the intensity, volume, and shape of the aorta and other structures. The second one considers voxel location, intensity, and texture information. All of them are used for training and driving a Support Vector Machine (SVN). As reported in [2] the current state-of-the-art in AAA segmentation is modelling, feature analysis or their combination, and in all these areas different efficient techniques can be found. The newest vascular segmentation approaches use the advanced deformable models like the level set method [6] or its hybrid extension [5].Despite the fact that the segmentation of vascular structures is valuable for the assistance of diagnosis, the currently developed computer aided diagnosis (CAD) software in efficient image registration targets treatment and surgery planning. It does not only allow measurements of lumen or thrombus volume, but combining different image information is also useful for treatment planning and monitoring. Thanks to it, the comparative analysis of consecutive (pre- and post-operative) CT studies as well as matching of different image modalities is possible.Depending on the application, various registration techniques have been reported [9–11,13,14,8]. The registration methods, which address the problem of simultaneous analysis of different image modalities are given in [9–11,13], whereas the pre- and post-operative CT sequence matching algorithms are presented in [14,8]. The authors of [11] propose a registration technique based on the overlaying the preoperative 3D model of the aorta onto the intraoperative 2D X-ray images. The presented technique utilises two X-ray images showing the abdominal aorta from different angles in an integrated way. They developed a hierarchical registration scheme deployed by a sensible partition of the registration parameter space based on the image acquisition protocol and the patients motion constraint.The 2D/3D registration technique is also addressed in [9]. The non-rigid method enables information from the CT to be overlaid onto the fluoroscopy images during the implantation procedure. The authors have investigated the use of manually picked landmarks and the thin plate spline algorithm to deform the CT surface so it more accurately represents the interventional scene. The automatic movement compensation in 2D/3D registration of fluoroscopy and preoperative volumetric data is presented in [13]. It proposes a pelvis boundary detection method that enables real time monitoring of patient movement and an automatic 2D/3D re-registration algorithm that compensates for it.The newest AAA registration algorithm described in [8] targets in matching of pre- operative CT with intra-operative non-contrast-enhanced cone-beam CT, characterising by the relatively low signal-to-noise ratio of the abdominal aorta without contrast enhancement.The idea of a graph-based approach is presented in [10]. The introduced 2D/3D registration method is there formulated on a 3D graph and applied for AAA interventions. As an input, the algorithm takes the 3D graph generated from a segmentation of the CT volume and the 2D distance map calculated from the 2D X-ray image. For computing the graph similarity, different measures are then used in a length preservation and a smoothness regularisation term.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
