@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tissue-specific sparse deconvolution for brain CT perfusion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tissue-specific deconvolution is proposed to preserve the low-contrast tissues.Tissue-specific dictionaries are learned from tissue segments of high-dose maps.Weighted sparse deconvolution is based on the tissue classification probability.A unified reconstruction framework for the low-dose perfusion deconvolution.Outperforms state-of-art in extensive evaluation on clinical datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Low-dose CT perfusion,Tissue-specific,Dictionary learning,Ischemic detection,Deconvolution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Enhancing perfusion maps in low-dose computed tomography perfusion (CTP) for cerebrovascular disease diagnosis is a challenging task, especially for low-contrast tissue categories where infarct core and ischemic penumbra usually occur. Sparse perfusion deconvolution has been recently proposed to effectively improve the image quality and diagnostic accuracy of low-dose perfusion CT by extracting the complementary information from the high-dose perfusion maps to restore the low-dose using a joint spatio-temporal model. However the low-contrast tissue classes where infarct core and ischemic penumbra are likely to occur in cerebral perfusion CT tend to be over-smoothed, leading to loss of essential biomarkers. In this paper, we propose a tissue-specific sparse deconvolution approach to preserve the subtle perfusion information in the low-contrast tissue classes. We first build tissue-specific dictionaries from segmentations of high-dose perfusion maps using online dictionary learning, and then perform deconvolution-based hemodynamic parameters estimation for block-wise tissue segments on the low-dose CTP data. Extensive validation on clinical datasets of patients with cerebrovascular disease demonstrates the superior performance of our proposed method compared to state-of-art, and potentially improve diagnostic accuracy by increasing the differentiation between normal and ischemic tissues in the brain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cerebral computed tomography perfusion (CTP) imaging has been advocated to detect and characterize the ischemic penumbra, and assess blood–brain barrier permeability with acute stroke or chronic cerebrovascular disease. In cerebral studies, perfusion hymodynamic parameters such as cerebral blood flow (CBF), cerebral blood volume (CBV) and mean transit time (MTT) can be computed from the time sequence of enhanced CT images to provide important guidance to clinicians. However, the associated excessive radiation exposure in the repeated scan during CTP examination is raising a great concern due to numerous recent reports from patients on over-dosage leading to biological effects including hair loss, skin burn and increased cancer risk. The issue is that reducing the radiation dose in CTP will introduce noise and artifacts into the acquired data and lead to quality deterioration in the perfusion maps that may mislead interpretation. Thus a key challenge remains in low-dose CTP is to obtain high-quality perfusion maps for accurate diagnosis.In this paper, we propose a tissue-specific sparse deconvolution method to address the limitations above. Previous methods fail to preserve the low-contrast, delicate tissue categories which are essential for cerebrovascular disease diagnosis. We overcome this difficulty by incorporating segmentation and deconvolution in the a unified framework and learning different dictionaries for each tissue category from the high-dose data, as shown in Fig. 1. Our method starts from segmenting the brain into different tissue classes. A modified version of automated model-based tissue classification [1] is employed to segment the brain tissue classes. Then tissue-specific dictionaries are learned from the training segments of each class. Then this model is propagated to a spatio-temporal energy function and minimized iteratively, where we use weighted sparse deconvolution method to restore each tissue class and stitch them together. The extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of our method. It is important to note that all the preprocessing methods to denoise the dynamic CT data can be complimented with our proposed deconvolution algorithm to achieve better performance.Our main contribution is two-fold: (1) tissue-specific dictionaries for each tissue class are employed in place of the global dictionary to capture the low-contrast tissue class and delicate structural details. (2) Weighted sparse deconvolution based on the probability of the tissue classification is proposed for a unified reconstruction of the low-dose perfusion maps. In vivo brain acute stroke and aneurysmal SAH patients data, we demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method in CBF estimation that leads to better separation between normal and ischemic tissue.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
