@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mapping and characterizing endometrial implants by registering 2D transvaginal ultrasound to 3D pelvic magnetic resonance images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a deformable slice-to-volume registration method to map a 2D TVUS into a 3D MR volume.The method uses curve to surface correspondences through a variational one-step ICP.This fusion technique localizes endometriosis with respect to the patient's anatomy.Our method maps the TVUS planar image to a curved 2D surface in MR volume.One-step ICP shows less sensitivity to increment of deformation and slant.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Endometriosis,Iterative closest point,Slice-to-volume registration,Multi-modality,Fusion,Localization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a new deformable slice-to-volume registration method to register a 2D Transvaginal Ultrasound (TVUS) to a 3D Magnetic Resonance (MR) volume. Our main goal is to find a cross-section of the MR volume such that the endometrial implants and their depth of infiltration can be mapped from TVUS to MR. The proposed TVUS-MR registration method uses contour to surface correspondences through a novel variational one-step deformable Iterative Closest Point (ICP) method. Specifically, we find a smooth deformation field while establishing point correspondences automatically. We demonstrate the accuracy of the proposed method by quantitative and qualitative tests on both semi-synthetic and clinical data. To generate semi-synthetic data sets, 3D surfaces are deformed with 4–40% degrees of deformation and then various intersection curves are obtained at 0–20° cutting angles. Results show an average mean square error of 5.7934±0.4615mm, average Hausdorff distance of 2.493±0.14mm, and average Dice similarity coefficient of 0.9750±0.0030.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Endometriosis is a poorly understood, multifocal gynaecological disease that can affect women of any age. The term endometriosis is derived from the word endometrium. It is the tissue that lines the inside lining of the uterus and has an ability to enhance and recede cyclically, in response to oestrogen. More specifically, this tissue builds up and is shed each month and discharged as menstrual flow at the end of each cycle. However, the endometrial tissue can sometimes grow or spread in abnormal ways. In endometriosis, tissues that resemble endometrium are found outside the uterus, typically in the pelvic area [1]. During a woman's menstrual cycle, these tissues respond to the growth and shedding signals as the ones inside the uterine cavity, resulting in internal bleeding. These areas can get irritated and sore. The endometrial tissues can also form scar tissues due to an immune response or fluid-filled sacs. These endometrial tissue sites may develop into what are called lesions, implants, nodules, or growths. The symptoms of endometriosis vary widely from patient to patient, and can run the gamut from none to severe. Consequently, endometriosis may cause chronic pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and infertility [2].Many patients with endometriosis experience an average delay of 8 years from presenting symptoms to diagnosis and treatment [3]. The diagnosis should not just reveal the existence of the disease, but should also include information such as depth of infiltration and exact location with respect to the patient's anatomy. Surgery benefits from this information since completeness of excision depends highly on the precision of diagnosis [4]. Generally, endometriosis may be diagnosed by performing medical imaging tests. The imaging modalities that have been mostly used to determine the stage of endometriosis are TVUS, MR, and laparoscopy. Fig. 1shows examples of these imaging modalities. Unlike MR and TVUS, in laparoscopy, diagnosis is confirmed intraoperatively. This imaging test is the gold standard for the diagnosis of subtle endometrial lesions. In the case of deep infiltrating endometriosis, the value of laparoscopy is limited, as it does not allow the surgeon to see the endometrial implants that are located inside or under the organs and to quantify the depth of infiltration. TVUS and MR imaging are tailored to avoid these drawbacks.TVUS imaging is a reliable method for detecting small endometrial implants and estimating their depth of infiltration. TVUS images are obtained using a two-dimensional array transducer that locally deforms the organs’ shape, due to the probe's pressure, and captures a planar image. The main TVUS limitations include its limited field of view and low signal to noise ratio. MR scanning is used as a complimentary examination, since it reveals the patient's pelvic anatomy and large endometrial implants, and gives higher resolution. However, it cannot show the small endometrial implants and their depth of infiltration.Currently, by visually comparing these two imaging modalities, the radiologists are faced with an overwhelming amount of information. In fact, this is not an easy task as: (1) there is a local deformation between the two modalities, (2) in many TVUS data, the implants’ neighbouring organs are only partially visible due to the small field of view, and (3) the tissues that are exhibited in both MR and TVUS images may not belong to the same slice. To ease the task of the medical experts in both interpretation and decision-making, we need to move towards more comprehensive visualization techniques. Thus, an accurate fusion between TVUS and MR images is needed to generate an augmented MR image. This comprehensive image must contain a patient-specific organ model, the location and shape of endometrial implants as well as their depth of infiltration in the host tissue. This information will help gynaecologists to determine a better intra-operative plan which may improve the precision of surgery by reducing the trauma done to healthy tissues and avoiding under-cutting the implants, which mostly causes recurrence [4].The TVUS-MR registration and fusion is a difficult technical problem due to the large disparity in gray-level intensities (multi-modality), different dimensionality, soft tissue deformations, and the limited field of view and low signal to noise ratio of TVUS images. Before we describe our method to register these two modalities, we summarize related research from the current literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
