@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Thickness related textural properties of retinal nerve fiber layer in color fundus images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A texture analysis approach for assessment of the retinal nerve fiber layer thickness in color fundus images.Suitable for computer-aided diagnosis of glaucoma.Advanced texture analysis methods – local binary patterns and Gaussian Markov random fields.Results compared to measurements provided by optical coherence tomography.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Glaucoma,Retinal nerve fiber layer,Texture analysis,Fundus images,Local binary patterns,Markov random fields,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Images of ocular fundus are routinely utilized in ophthalmology. Since an examination using fundus camera is relatively fast and cheap procedure, it can be used as a proper diagnostic tool for screening of retinal diseases such as the glaucoma. One of the glaucoma symptoms is progressive atrophy of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) resulting in variations of the RNFL thickness. Here, we introduce a novel approach to capture these variations using computer-aided analysis of the RNFL textural appearance in standard and easily available color fundus images. The proposed method uses the features based on Gaussian Markov random fields and local binary patterns, together with various regression models for prediction of the RNFL thickness. The approach allows description of the changes in RNFL texture, directly reflecting variations in the RNFL thickness. Evaluation of the method is carried out on 16 normal (“healthy”) and 8 glaucomatous eyes. We achieved significant correlation (normals: ρ=0.72±0.14; p≪0.05, glaucomatous: ρ=0.58±0.10; p≪0.05) between values of the model predicted output and the RNFL thickness measured by optical coherence tomography, which is currently regarded as a standard glaucoma assessment device. The evaluation thus revealed good applicability of the proposed approach to measure possible RNFL thinning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Glaucoma is one of the most common causes of permanent blindness worldwide. Quigley [40] introduced a model of glaucoma prevalence showing that there are 60.5 million people with glaucoma in 2010, which will increase up to 79.6 million in 2020. One of the glaucoma symptoms is progressive atrophy of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) resulting in permanent decrease of the layer's thickness. Glaucoma symptoms appear many years before the patients are able to observe any changes in their visual field. Therefore, it is extremely desirable to detect the disease as soon as possible. Generally, glaucoma diagnosis is currently based on evaluation of the optic nerve head (ONH) morphology and the RNFL thickness in the peripapillary area (area surrounding the ONH) [20]. Many ophthalmologists still use ophthalmoscope or fundus camera to evaluate the retina only visually. Nevertheless, such a qualitative diagnostic is subjective and barely reproducible. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is recently regarded as a standard glaucoma diagnostic device, since it provides a straightforward measurement of the RNFL thickness; thus allowing to make diagnostic procedures well reproducible. Unfortunately, OCT examinations are still quite expensive and not generally available at many ophthalmic clinics around the world. In contrast to OCT, fundus imaging is still considered as a fundamental diagnostic tool, since it allows much faster and cheaper image acquisition.Fundus images (Fig. 1) are successfully used for diagnosis of various eye and even systemic diseases, e.g. various retinopathies, diabetes, hypertension, arteriosclerosis, age-related macular degeneration, or glaucoma; by evaluation of different retinal features and diagnostically interesting structures (Fig. 1a) [13]. The RNFL can be observed as a bright striped pattern that appears on the background of red-free fundus photographs (Fig. 1). It is assumed that the pattern changes its visual appearance according to variations in the RNFL thickness. This has been already proven by several studies, although so far evaluated by subjective methods only [42,14,33]. The thickness variations can be caused by glaucoma process, or even in the healthy retina, the RNFL thickness varies anatomically depending on angular position around the ONH. These aspects bring an idea to analyze these RNFL changes via advanced image processing methods. Thus, fundus imaging can provide new useful and easy-to-access information about the RNFL structure to aid glaucoma assessment, optionally also in connection with other features that can be derived from fundus images (C/D ratio or GRI – glaucoma risk index) [3].Several scientific papers concerning assessment of RNFL status in fundus photographs have been already published by different authors. An attempt to utilize fundus camera for evaluation of the RNFL has been first introduced by Lundström et al. in the 1980 [21]. Black-and-white photographs were used for subjective evaluation of the RNFL textural appearance. Then, other authors have been investigating analog photographs in a more or less similar way [35,44,7,18]. Peli et al. [35] performed one of the first semi-automatic analysis of the RNFL texture using digitized black-and-white fundus photographs. They analyzed intensity information about the RNFL presence and tried to detect darkening caused by the RNFL atrophy. Only 5 images of normal subjects, 5 images of glaucomatous subjects, and 5 images of subjects suspected of glaucoma were included in this study. Tuulonen et al. [44] performed microtexture analysis of images of 7 normal subjects, 9 subjects with distinctive glaucoma damage, and 8 subjects with higher intraocular pressure (suspicious of glaucoma). Digitized fundus photographs with 1280×1024 pixels were analyzed. The hypothesis that changes in the RNFL structure can be seen as changes in the microtexture of digital images has been investigated. Although they achieved some positive results, the differences were not statistically significant because of small sample size. Recently, an intensity information about the RNFL texture was utilized by Dardjat et al. in [7]. The authors evaluated intensity differences in the RNFL texture along the intensity profiles between two concentric circles placed in center of the ONH. Other contribution also utilizing intensity criterion was published by Lee et al. [18]. A pilot study to search for RNFL thinning in color fundus images with size of 2256×2032 pixels was presented by Oliva et al. [33]. They presented a semi-automatic method to texture analysis based on evaluation of the RNFL intensity along 24 concentric circles centered in the ONH. Only small datasets of 9 images of normal and 9 images of glaucomatous subjects were tested. The results revealed correlation only 0.424 between the intensity-related parameters extracted from fundus images and the RNFL thickness measured by OCT.In the case of glaucomatous damage, the RNFL appears darker in comparison with the healthy areas in fundus image. Hence, many authors try to involve only the intensity criteria for detection of glaucomatous changes, even in the recent state in this field of applied research [12,27,39,1]. Hayashi et al. [12] used an approach with Gabor filters to enhance certain regions with the RNFL pattern and to classify these regions toward glaucoma detection. The paper presents preliminary results that were followed up by the same group in [27] (Muramatsu et al.). In comparison with their preliminary approach, the authors extended the proposed concept and carried out evaluation of the method using a larger dataset (81 images of each normal and glaucomatous subjects). However, these images have size of 768×768 pixels, which is still relatively low resolution to provide enough texture information about the RNFL. Detection of thin focal or even diffuse RNFL losses is not possible due to low resolution. Thus, the method is suitable only for detection of focal and even wider RNFL losses expressed by significant changes in image intensity. However, in spite of some lacks, this publication first presented a fully automatic method for the RNFL assessment that was evaluated using a rather large dataset. Prageeth et al. [39] published a method for glaucoma detection using intensity criterion as well. They analyzed a dataset consisted of 829 (300 normals and 529 glaucomatous) fundus images with size of 768×576 pixels. Although, the results were promising, utilization of intensity criteria used alone is probably not a good solution. Intensity changes in the RNFL pattern can be detected only if the RNFL atrophy is so distinctive than the patient has rather large vision loss already. Moreover, image intensity can be influenced by many factors, e.g. non-homogenous illumination, reflection of the retina, light power used for acquisition, etc. Acharya et al. [1] proposed a method to analyze the RNFL texture using higher order spectra, run-length and co-occurrence matrices. The method was tested on 60 images (30 normals and 30 glaucomatous). However, the images had a size still too small (560×720 pixels). The authors used several supervised classification techniques to classify normal and glaucomatous images. Although, the classification accuracies were more than 80%, the article does not thoroughly explain the process of feature extraction and which area of the image was analyzed. Moreover, the images presented in the paper seem to be of rather low quality and the RNFL texture is not visible.The diagnostic potential of current fundus images increases, since their quality and resolution are still getting better. The RNFL pattern is thus well recognizable in these high-resolution fundus images and it offers a possible use of advanced texture analysis techniques taking into account not only the intensity criteria, but also various spatial characteristics of adjacent pixels in the RNFL texture. Hence, as an addition to the state of the art, we have contributed with several advanced texture analysis methods for assessment of the RNFL status in color fundus images and published this work in several papers [16,28,30,31]. However, as presented in these earlier papers, the methodology was focused mainly on detection of the RNFL presence and classification of the texture roughly into two binary classes – RNFL and non-RNFL using red-free fundus images. Now, we came out from our previous approaches utilizing Gaussian Markov random field (GMRF) texture modeling and local binary patterns (LBP) and extended the potential of these advanced methods to capture continuous variations in the RNFL thickness via different regression models. The main contribution to the recent state of the art is the ability of the proposed methodology to predict the RNFL thickness using commonly available color fundus images. Furthermore, the proposed approach is evaluated using the RNFL thickness measured via OCT as a gold standard modality.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A complex approach for texture analysis of the RNFL in color fundus images has been introduced. Our evaluation revealed that the proposed texture features could be applied for quantitative estimation of the RNFL thickness and even better than intensity criterion used alone. Obtained values of ρ and RMSEP confirmed usability of the proposed approach for prediction of the RNFL thickness using only color fundus images and thus for measurement of possible RNFL thinning. One limitation of the proposed approach is availability of high quality fundus images. However, this will be probably no longer a problem due to progressive development of advanced fundus cameras. In addition, some preprocessing approaches could also be considered for enhancement of the RNFL in fundus images (e.g. as in [8]) or for improving the image quality using image restoration techniques (e.g. as in [25,36]). Moreover, using a contrast enhancing optical filter may also help to equalize color channels and to improve visibility of the RNFL [43]. Acquisition to RAW enables reconstruction of fundus images with linear gamma correction, which is also an advantage enabling quantitative measurement. The proposed methodology is not limited to utilization of presented texture analysis methods. Other approaches, with respect to noise robustness and rotation- and illumination- invariant properties, can be used as well. Then, different texture feature set could be used as an input to regression models. Hence, in the further development, possible addition of other texture features could be considered.