@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Features extraction in anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Finding of feature vectors is based on extraction process of both ACL and PCL.Feature vectors of the ACL and PCL based on the surface and the skeleton of the CLs.Feature vectors clearly define the ligaments structure.Feature vectors make easier to diagnose the ligaments structure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Feature vector of the cruciate ligaments,Anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments,Fuzzy c-means,Fuzzy connectedness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The main aim of this research is finding the feature vectors of the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments (ACL and PCL). These feature vectors have to clearly define the ligaments structure and make it easier to diagnose them. Extraction of feature vectors is obtained by analysis of both anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments. This procedure is performed after the extraction process of both ligaments. In the first stage in order to reduce the area of analysis a region of interest including cruciate ligaments (CL) is outlined in order to reduce the area of analysis. In this case, the fuzzy C-means algorithm with median modification helping to reduce blurred edges has been implemented. After finding the region of interest (ROI), the fuzzy connectedness procedure is performed. This procedure permits to extract the anterior and posterior cruciate ligament structures. In the last stage, on the basis of the extracted anterior and posterior cruciate ligament structures, 3-dimensional models of the anterior and posterior cruciate ligament are built and the feature vectors created. This methodology has been implemented in MATLAB and tested on clinical T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) slices of the knee joint. The 3D display is based on the Visualization Toolkit (VTK).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) and Posterior Cruciate Ligament (PCL) are anatomical structures responsible, together with the collateral ligaments, for the knee stability and ensure proper arthrokinematics, along with the shape of articular surface, muscles and contact forces. They also play an important role during passive and active motions of the knee joint. During a passive motion of the knee, the cruciate ligaments help to change rolling into sliding movements and during an active motion of the knee they resist translations and reduce shear forces. For that reason the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments belong to the group of anatomical structures frequently susceptible to injuries, especially in athletes [1–3].Nowadays, it is estimated that the annual incidence of cruciate ligaments injury is about 1 in 3000 amongst the general population in the USA [4]. For that reason the anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction surgery is a major area of research in the whole world. The analysis of medical literature shows how much has been written regarding general treatment and various surgical procedures of the destabilized knee. These papers discuss in the first instance the reconstruction of the cruciate ligament [5–7] and the rehabilitation after such cruciate ligament reconstruction [8–11]. And although the first surgical reconstruction of the cruciate ligament was executed about one hundred years ago (Mayo Robson, General Infirmary in Leeds, 1895), the dispute over the appropriate treatment method of the instability of the knee joint has continued to end up in a general disagreement [4,12]. The success of ligaments reconstructive procedure depends on many factors. For accurate recognition and proper diagnosis usually MRI slices are used [13,14]. In orthopedists’ opinion each additional element supporting the diagnosis is very important, but there are multiple factors that may contribute to the incorrect diagnostics of the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments. And the three-dimensional structures of reconstructed cruciate ligaments together with the construction of a vector containing the appropriate set of features are especially desired because they can still improve the diagnosis.The knee joint T1-weighted MRI slices with pathological anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments feature blurred geometrical shapes and difficulty to precisely describe the knee joint anatomy. The presented method of enhancing the idea of fuzzy images, creating and using the entropy measure of fuzziness to the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments location in the T1-weighted MRI slices of the knee joint and the fuzzy connectedness idea to the segmentation of these structures, seems to be very effective and promising [15–19]. Fuzzy logic applied to the cruciate ligaments location allows a comprehensive knee joint computer aided diagnosis tool to be developed. The classical methods are useful in the case of artificial image analysis, but unfortunately do not give correct results in biomedical use. The biomedical images feature large complexity that requires taking into consideration many elements which influence each other. Two important problems are faced: the first concerns inaccuracy (lack of possibility of precise description of the segmented structures) and the second concerns data uncertainty (identical results are difficult to obtain especially for the cruciate ligaments of the knee joint).Magnetic resonance imaging is today the primary method for the diagnostics of the knee joint cruciate ligaments lesions. Conventional radiography is an irreplaceable method in evaluation of bone injuries. In case of soft tissue injuries, especially intra knee joint structures, MRI is the method of choice. Therefore in this paper, the computer analysis of cruciate ligaments is shown on the example of MRI of the knee joint (Figs. 2 and 3).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
