@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel methodology for personalized simulations of ventricular hemodynamics from noninvasive imaging data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new imaging-modeling methodology to simulate ventricular hemodynamics is proposed.The models are solely based on noninvasive data from MRI or echocardiography.The workflow is patient-specific and time-efficient for direct clinical application.The models can quantify hemodynamic metrics and relative pressure with high resolution.The methodology is robust to noise and low resolution in the imaging data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cardiac hemodynamics,Personalized computational modeling,3D blood flow reconstruction,B-Mode and Color Doppler echocardiography,PC-MRI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Current state-of-the-art imaging techniques can provide quantitative information to characterize ventricular function within the limits of the spatiotemporal resolution achievable in a realistic acquisition time. These imaging data can be used to personalize computer models, which in turn can help treatment planning by quantifying biomarkers that cannot be directly imaged, such as flow energy, shear stress and pressure gradients. To date, computer models have typically relied on invasive pressure measurements to be made patient-specific. When these data are not available, the scope and validity of the models are limited. To address this problem, we propose a new methodology for modeling patient-specific hemodynamics based exclusively on noninvasive velocity and anatomical data from 3D+t echocardiography or Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Numerical simulations of the cardiac cycle are driven by the image-derived velocities prescribed at the model boundaries using a penalty method that recovers a physical solution by minimizing the energy imparted to the system. This numerical approach circumvents the mathematical challenges due to the poor conditioning that arises from the imposition of boundary conditions on velocity only. We demonstrate that through this technique we are able to reconstruct given flow fields using Dirichlet only conditions. We also perform a sensitivity analysis to investigate the accuracy of this approach for different images with varying spatiotemporal resolution. Finally, we examine the influence of noise on the computed result, showing robustness to unbiased noise with an average error in the simulated velocity approximately 7% for a typical voxel size of 2mm3 and temporal resolution of 30ms. The methodology is eventually applied to a patient case to highlight the potential for a direct clinical translation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cardiac pathologies often show a high interindividual variability in both the anatomy and the response to treatment, making population-based metrics less effective in defining therapy. A patient-specific approach is therefore crucial for successfully evaluating the pump function in the diseased heart and customizing treatment to the patient’s pathophysiology. Recent developments in clinical imaging have underpinned the value of personalized medicine as a powerful alternative to traditional healthcare. For example, blood flow velocity and direction can now be quantified noninvasively from both 3D+t echocardiography and Phase-Contrast MRI (PC-MRI) (Gatehouse et al., 2005; Gomez et al., 2015, 2013b). Metrics derived from these hemodynamics parameters, such as the diastolic vortex formation, have been recognized as indicators of cardiac performance, placing emphasis on the importance of the intraventricular blood flow patterns (Pedrizzetti et al., 2014; Sengupta et al., 2012). Intraventricular flow propagation speed can also be used to estimate left ventricular filling pressures and to evaluate diastolic function (Bruch et al., 2005; Firstenberg et al., 2000; Greenberg et al., 2001; Nagueh et al., 2009). Similarly, ejection parameters and blood kinetic energy obtained from both PC-MRI and 3D+t echocardiography by flow mapping can yield information on the cardiac energetic efficiency (Markl et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2007), and techniques of wall motion tracking are routinely used to infer the distribution of strains and their rate. These are generally based on tagged MRI data (Axel et al., 2005; Chandrashekara et al., 2004; Pan et al., 2005); however, algorithms have also been developed for 3D+t echocardiography and standard MRI Cine sequences (Papademetris et al., 2001; Shi et al., 2013). Despite this progress, however, the accuracy of measurement depends on the temporal and spatial resolution of the images, which is dictated by technical limitations and by the necessity to keep the acquisition times at a minimum. The errors associated with low spatiotemporal resolution are particularly significant when derivatives of velocity are used to quantify metrics such as the power loss in the blood flow, or in the derivation of relative pressures from the reconstructed velocity field (Lamata et al., 2013; Yotti et al., 2004). Metrics derived from echocardiographic data have also been proved unable to track reliably ventricular pressure variations as a result of treatment within individual subjects (Bhella et al., 2011).In this context, a synergy between clinical imaging and computer modeling has the potential to provide accurate patient-specific information to assist the clinical decision-making process. Recently, computational modeling has reached a stage of development with capability to simulate cardiac function realistically and to augment the traditional clinical approaches (McCormick et al., 2013; Tang et al., 2010). However, this potential is currently not fully exploited, as model personalization often relies on invasive pressure data acquired through catheterization, which in complex pathologies is limited by technical difficulties and risks for the patient, and on detailed information on the orientation of the myocardial fiber architecture. These factors currently limit the extent to which this technique can be effectively used for individual treatment planning. The main challenge lies therefore in the capability to personalize the models accurately with the least number of assumptions, given the available clinical data. Thanks to their very high spatial and temporal resolution, patient-specific models can provide an accurate quantification of velocity-based metrics and pressure gradients, and thus complement the information from imaging data. Specifically, the value of the approach resides in the ability to make use of the most reliable image-derived information available to build patient-specific models that, in turn, can quantify metrics that cannot be directly derived from the imaging data, such as pressure gradients and flow energy. Where a full description of myocardial properties and pressures is not available, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations of ventricular hemodynamics can be driven by velocities extracted from time-resolved image sequences. In this context, the ability to personalize the models solely based on velocity data would result in a more robust and time-efficient modeling strategy, with the additional advantage of not relying on invasive or non-standard measurements.This modeling strategy is promising but has a number of mathematical and numerical challenges. Even where low-noise imaging data are available, the exclusive imposition of velocity values (via Dirichlet boundary conditions) leads to a non-unique pressure solution and to a potential violation of mass conservation in the Navier–Stokes problem. For these reasons, commonly used models for ventricular flow tend to prescribe Dirichlet conditions on only a portion of the domain boundary. Traction or pressure conditions are then imposed on the valve planes in the attempt to recover an inlet or outlet velocity profile similar to that reconstructed from the images (Saber et al., 2003; Schenkel et al., 2009 Schenkel et al., 2009). In a different approach, the problem of mass conservation is tackled by imposing a hybrid boundary condition, consisting of a Dirichlet condition on velocity and a Neumann condition on pressure, where the derivative of the variable is constrained instead to its direct value. This hybrid condition is then prescribed on separate patches nested in the valve plane (Long et al., 2008, 2003). However, the definition of a pressure boundary of arbitrary size, value and position within the inlet plane is still not ideal, as it can lead to alterations in the valve velocity profile since the velocity inside the pressure patch cannot be controlled directly. Other studies propose a Lagrange multiplier technique to impose the actual flux at the inflow and outflow of vessels, where the boundary conditions are applied in a weak sense (Veneziani and Vergara, 2007, 2005). This method has also been extended to solve the Navier–Stokes equations with an additional constraint on the minimization of the difference between the computed and the given flow rate at a boundary (Formaggia et al., 2010, 2008). More recently, a different numerical approach to image-based CFD simulations has been presented (Chnafa et al., 2014, 2012). Here, an ALE formulation of the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations is solved using a fourth order finite-volume technique coupled with a Large Eddies Simulation (LES) turbulence model. In this method the valves are modeled using an immersed boundary method.The present numerical implementation proposes an alternative methodology for solving the problem of driving flow within ALE Navier–Stokes simulations with finite elements. The novelty of this technique resides in the application of penalty methods to image-based modeling. Specifically, the penalty term is introduced in the weak form of the Dirichlet boundary conditions on the velocity derived from imaging data so that global mass conservation is achieved. This is the first time that this technique is applied to achieve realistic ventricular simulations. To accelerate the model generation, the numerical solver is also fully integrated with the image processing workflow. Further, to broaden the applicability range of the method, this toolbox has been designed to be compatible with different imaging modalities, including 3D echocardiography and MRI. The methodology is first implemented and verified in a 2D idealized ventricle model with different levels of noise. The workflow is then applied to model the full cardiac cycle in the left ventricle of a pediatric patient. To test the robustness of the approach to variations in the image quality, synthetic imaging data with different combination of temporal and spatial resolution are generated from the same patient dataset. The workflow to extract the velocity from the image sequences is then performed for each combination of spatial and temporal resolution and the corresponding boundary conditions are used to perform the simulations in each case. The L2 error between the original and the down-sampled results is presented along with clinical metrics such as the blood kinetic energy and the intraventricular pressure gradients to demonstrate the potential for clinical applicability.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
