@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spectral clustering applied for dynamic contrast-enhanced MR analysis of time–intensity curves

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Original method to analysis dynamic contrast enhanced MR time–intensity signals.Spectral space transformation and non-supervised clustering.Validation on simulated and clinical data.Comparison with state of art techniques.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Curves analysis,Dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)–magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),Non-parametric analysis,Spectral clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)–magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) represents an emerging method for the prediction of biomarker responses in cancer. However, DCE images remain difficult to analyze and interpret. Although pharmacokinetic approaches, which involve multi-step processes, can provide a general framework for the interpretation of these data, they are still too complex for robust and accurate implementation. Therefore, statistical data analysis techniques were recently suggested as another valid interpretation strategy for DCE–MRI.In this context, we propose a spectral clustering approach for the analysis of DCE–MRI time–intensity signals. This graph theory-based method allows for the grouping of signals after spatial transformation. Subsequently, these data clusters can be labeled following comparison to arterial signals. Here, we have performed experiments with simulated (i.e., generated via pharmacokinetic modeling) and clinical (i.e., obtained from patients scanned during prostate cancer diagnosis) data sets in order to demonstrate the feasibility and applicability of this kind of unsupervised and non-parametric approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has become a reference technique for the diagnosis and staging of several types of cancer, including prostate, breast, and liver tumors. The typical multiparametric MRI protocol involves morphologic acquisition of T1-weighted (T1W) and/or T2-weighted (T2W) images as well as functional imaging using diffusion, spectroscopy, and perfusion sequences. Indeed, perfusion or dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) imaging, which is acquired following injection of a contrast agent, is commonly employed to enhance the characterization of early cancers prior to therapy and to monitor their progression during and after anti-angiogenic or mini invasive treatments [1]. Angiogenesis appears to play a central role in the growth and spread of tumors [2,3]. When a tumor grows, the capillary network proliferates due to the release of pro-angiogenic factors, and the permeability of capillary walls increases [4]. Also, it is known that DCE–MRI can allow the visualization of these aberrant microcirculation modifications, which represent a valid biomarker for cancer development [5,6].DCE–MRI involves rapid and repeated acquisition of T1W images before, during, and after the injection of a low molecular weight paramagnetic contrast agent. There are three ways to analyze these time-dependent signal-intensity curves: qualitative, semi-quantitative, and quantitative.Qualitative evaluation uses simple visual assessment, such as Kuhl's technique [7], whereas semi-quantitative analysis provides a set of parameters based on contrast agent dynamics (i.e., wash in [uptake], peak, and wash out [loss over time]) [8]. Although, the semi-quantitative method is reproducible, it can be heavily influenced by the selected protocol [9]. Moreover, it is not useful for precisely determining changes in contrast agent concentration, and therefore does not directly yield data on tissue physiology.In contrast to the two previous approaches, quantitative analysis is based on a pharmacokinetic model. The model conceptualizes the exchange of a low-molecular weight contrast medium between the intravascular and the extravascular extracellular spaces (EES) in the tissue. The application of this model to DCE–MRI data makes it possible to establish physiologic parameters, such as vessel permeability, perfusion, blood volume, Ktrans (transfer constant between blood plasma and EES), Kep (exchange constant rate between EES and blood plasma), and Ve (extravascular extracellular volume) [10]. It should be noted that clinical implementation of this technique in routine imaging protocols has remained limited. This is due to the fact until 2012, there was no standardized and generally accepted protocols for DCE–MRI. In 2012, the Quantitative Imaging Biomarkers Alliance (QIBA) DCE–MRI Technical Committee from the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) published recommendations to define basic standards for DCE–MRI measurements and quality control with the goal of promoting consistent and reliable results across platforms, clinical sites, and time [11]. According to these recommendations, QIBA DCE–MRI committee suggested the use of Toft's model as pharmacokinetic model.However, quantitative signal analysis is a complex, multi-step process. In fact, several studies focusing on this technique have demonstrated the difficulty of reproducing and repeating these physiological parameter measurements [9,12]. Quantitative analysis involves T1 mapping, transformation of signal intensity time curves S(t) into contrast agent concentration time curves C(t), and arterial input function measurement (AIF). Moreover, several techniques and approaches can be applied to achieve each of these steps. To further complicate matters, there remains a lack of consensus regarding standardized cutoff values for Ktrans, Kep, and Ve for clinical applications.To overcome the limitations of the methods in the literature, data analysis techniques were investigated for interpreting quantitative information [15] (Cluster analysis of the signal curves in perfusion DCE–MRI datasets). In fact, promising results were obtained without any prior knowledge of the underlying tissue vasculature and arterial input function. Indeed, no assumptions about the data distribution, pharmacokinetic model, or AIF model could be established. In these approaches, the aim was to group the voxels into homogeneous patterns that share the same properties. Each voxel is represented by a time–intensity curve, which is obtained by converting each frame of sequential images into a one-dimensional row signal vector. Each curve can then be characterized based on three states: wash in, peak, and wash out. Although these curves display similar shapes, their evolutions and magnitudes are tissue dependent. Fig. 1depicts typical signatures for characterizing tissue health status (e.g., tumor, healthy, and suspicious tissues).In addition, independent components analysis (ICA) has been used in recent studies [13,14]. In fact, Wu and Liu [13] applied ICA to the assessment of cerebral blood perfusion, analyzing the data as a summation of brain hemodynamic behaviors and external perturbations (head movements, physiological pulsations, and machine noise). Therefore, by assuming the spatial independence of the hemodynamic patterns and artificial processes, the ICA could be used to separate mixed signals and reveal brain hemodynamic abnormalities. On the other hand, Mehrabian et al. [14] developed an adaptive, complex ICA technique to distinguish extravascular and extracellular signals. This method was employed to calculate intravascular time–intensity curves, allowing separation of these signals during DCE–MRI of tumors.Furthermore, Chen et al. [15] introduced a probabilistic based approach where compartmental analysis was combined with convex analysis in order to determine pixel-wise partial volume effects, which can result in mixing of more than one compartment. Notably, this method is parametric and assumes Gaussian distribution of signal curves. More recently, Agner et al. [16] introduced a spectral embedded active contour technique. They employed this spectral-based approach to perform non-linear dimensionality reduction to drive an active contour, which could be used to segment breast lesions on DCE–MRI. Notably, this study reported the first results concerning the applicability of spectral techniques for reducing image space in DCE.In the present study, we investigated the use of a graph-based approach (i.e., spectral clustering) to analyze DCE–MRI time–intensity signals. In contrast to parametric methods, graph-based methods are non-parametric and do not require a priori assumptions about the size, shape, or distribution of clusters [17]. Our global approach was comprised of two steps: clustering and interpretation. The clustering step involved space embedding of the curves to make them linearly separable, and results were grouped based on homogenous patterns. On the other hand, the interpretation step was used to classify patterns according to their distance from the artery, with results presented as distance maps. This interpretation strategy is justified based on the assumption that tumor angiogenesis represents a principal factor that determines tumor growth and spread as well as increased capillary permeability. We propose that the map resulting from our approach could be combined with data obtained from other quantitative or qualitative methods in order to enhance DCE–MRI interpretation.In the following sections, we provide a background on graph-based clustering as well as a description of theoretical aspects associated with spectral clustering. In addition, we describe the application of this technique to the analysis of DCE–MRI (Section 3), which was illustrated using experimental systems based on synthetic and clinical data (Section 4). Finally, we discuss the spectral clustering method along with our results and provide conclusions for our study (Section 5).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
