@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An approach to locate optic disc in retinal images with pathological changes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An approach to locate OD in retinal image with pathological changes is proposed.Features are vessel direction, intensity, OD edges, and size of bright regions.It can locate OD robustly in both normal and diseased retinal images.Comparison shows it can handle the challenging images better.Total 340 retinal images from four public databases were tested.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optic disc,Localization,Retinal images,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automatic optic disc (OD) detection is an essential step for screening of eye diseases. An OD localization method is proposed in this paper, which aims to locate OD robustly in retinal image with pathological changes. There are mainly three steps in this approach: region-of-interest (ROI) detection, candidate pixel detection, and confidence score calculation. The features of vessel direction, intensity, OD edges, and size of bright regions were extracted and employed in the proposed OD locating approach. Compared with the OD locating method based on vessel direction only, the proposed method could handle the following cases better: OD partially appears in retinal image, retinal vessels are not obvious in retinal image, or there are bright lesions in retinal images. Four public databases with total 340 retinal images were tested to evaluate the performance of our method. The proposed method can achieve an accuracy of 100%, 95.8%, 99.2%, 97.8% for DRIVE database, STARE database, DIARETDB0 database, DIARETDB1 database respectively. Comparison studies showed that the proposed approach is especially robust in the retinal images with diseases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The detection of retinal structure is an important prerequisite to diagnose retinal diseases automatically. The retina contains several important structures, such as optic disc (OD), fovea, and vessels. Optic disc is the region where blood vessels and optic nerves converge. There are no light-sensing cells in OD area, so optic disc is also called blind spot. In the normal retinal images, OD is the brightest part and looks like a pale, nearly circular or vertically slightly oval disk. Correct OD detection is the basic step for computer aided diagnosis of different eye diseases, such as diabetic retinopathy [1] and glaucoma [2]. The changes of OD shape can reflect the extent of vision loss, thus various parameters of OD are used to diagnose eye diseases. For example, diameter and edge of cup, radius of OD, rim area, mean cup depth, and cup-disc-ratio are usually employed to detect glaucoma. OD detection is also a key step for the localization and segmentation of other anatomical structures such as fovea and retinal vessels. Since retinal vessels usually converge at the center of OD, vessel tracking can start from the rim of OD.The challenges of robust OD detection includes: individual differences, fundus ocular diseases, uneven illumination, and retinal vascular occlusion. Many algorithms have been proposed for OD localization. Usually satisfactory results can be achieved in healthy retinal images. However, for the images with pathological changes, there is still no good solution. Fig. 1shows some examples of these challenges. In Fig. 1(b), there are large areas of lesions in the image. The intensity of OD area is much darker than surrounding regions due to uneven illumination in Fig. 1(c). Only part of OD is shown in some retinal image as in Fig. 1(d). Most of the OD locating methods is effective for only one type of these difficulties.In this paper, an improved method based on edge information is proposed to locate OD robustly in normal retinal images as well as images with pathological changes. The main contribution of this work can be summarized as three aspects. (1) Vessel edge information and OD edge are combined to detect candidate OD pixels, which successfully detect the candidate pixel of OD center in images with poor illumination or few vessel information. (2) A confidence score is proposed to locate OD center, in which a new compensation value is proposed. For images with poor illumination or few vessel information in OD region, this score will compensate the value for missing vessel edge information. (3) Comparing with the method using vessel edge information only, the improvement on candidate pixel detection and the confidence value achieves promising results in the following situations: the images with dark OD due to uneven illumination and low contrast; the retinal images with incomplete OD; the images with bright exudates, whose size and intensity are similar to OD.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
