@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Statistical shape model reconstruction with sparse anomalous deformations: Application to intervertebral disc herniation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A sparse reconstruction algorithm from statistical shape models is proposed.The technique allows quantifying morphological anomalies.Evaluation on intervertebral disc herniation data showed improvements in diagnosis.The sparse reconstruction can deliver novel quantitative descriptors of pathologies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Statistical shape model,Sparse optimization,Computer-aided diagnosis,Segmentation,Intervertebral disc,Herniation,Magnetic resonance imaging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many medical image processing techniques rely on accurate shape modeling of anatomical features. The presence of shape abnormalities challenges traditional processing algorithms based on strong morphological priors. In this work, a sparse shape reconstruction from a statistical shape model is presented. It combines the advantages of traditional statistical shape models (defining a ‘normal’ shape space) and previously presented sparse shape composition (providing localized descriptors of anomalies). The algorithm was incorporated into our image segmentation and classification software. Evaluation was performed on simulated and clinical MRI data from 22 sciatica patients with intervertebral disc herniation, containing 35 herniated and 97 normal discs. Moderate to high correlation (R=0.73) was achieved between simulated and detected herniations. The sparse reconstruction provided novel quantitative features describing the herniation morphology and MRI signal appearance in three dimensions (3D). The proposed descriptors of local disc morphology resulted to the 3D segmentation accuracy of 1.07±1.00mm (mean absolute vertex-to-vertex mesh distance over the posterior disc region), and improved the intervertebral disc classification from 0.888 to 0.931 (area under receiver operating curve). The results show that the sparse shape reconstruction may improve computer-aided diagnosis of pathological conditions presenting local morphological alterations, as seen in intervertebral disc herniation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Prior shape modeling of human organs plays a distinctive role in many medical image processing algorithms, including image registration, segmentation, surgical planning or computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) [1,2]. Statistical shape models (SSM) of Cootes et al. [3] have become one of the most widely used algorithms for defining anatomical shape spaces and shape similarities [1]. The standard formulation of the SSM using principle component analysis (PCA) captures general anatomical variation by defining a space of plausible shapes (within certain standard deviations from the mean shape). If normal (i.e. healthy) shapes were used in the training, this shape space can be attributed to represent ‘normal’ instances. On the other hand, the SSMs cannot model local shape deformations that are not statistically significant in the training dataset. Many pathological conditions, such as intervertebral disc (IVD) herniation, locally affect the anatomical morphology and challenge automated processing techniques (e.g. segmentation, CAD) that rely on strong prior shape assumptions.Modeling relevant local information has been attempted with hierarchical shape modeling [4], sparse PCA [5] or medial shape representations [6]. However, these techniques still require the presence of similar shape instances in the training set. Focused shape models of Chandra et al. [7] enable to increase shape modeling sensitivity by targeting specific anatomical sub-regions. This strategy should hypothetically help to improve the modeling of ‘common’ anomalous (e.g. herniated) areas but is unlikely to capture larger pathological deformations (e.g. migrations of disc material) in absence of specific training data.Sparse optimization techniques have become a popular choice in computer visions and medical image processing applications dealing with modeling of local anomalies. A sparse optimization was used to robustly recognize facial expressions from large training datasets in the presence of occlusions and corrupted data [8]. Sparse representation shape models of Li et al. [9] define the shape space as a convex hull of sparse linear representations of training data which considerably improves accuracy of face localization in images. Sparse shape composition of Zhang et al. [10] represents a test shape instance as a sparse linear combination of training data and defines regions of specific local deformations. It has been successfully applied in several challenging medical image segmentation problems, such as lung localization and liver segmentation [10,11] or cardiac motion analysis [12], where modeling of previously unseen local shape deformations is required. Further improvements in medical image segmentation were achieved by combining sparse reconstructions of shape subregions [13,14] and by sparse modeling of the signal intensity appearance in the form of active appearance models [14]. The sparse shape composition and its alternatives have been shown to improve deformable model segmentation of anatomical features with pathologies that substantially alter the shape morphology. However, because the sparse shape composition uses prior information in the form of a linear combination of a subset of training shapes, it is not clear how to anatomically interpret the detected sparse anomalous differences. Unlike the SSMs, the definition of a ‘normal’ shape space and a shape distance metric is not available with the sparse shape composition. While it does not hinder the application to image segmentation, these notions are important for quantification of the pathology and for designing a CAD system.The aim of this work is to combine the advantages of sparse optimization and SSMs in order to deliver quantitative descriptors suitable for shape comparisons and classifications. The presented method of sparse reconstruction will be applied to the clinical case of IVD herniation. The hypothesis of this research is that the proposed sparse shape reconstruction can deliver sensible CAD of IVD herniation with the potential to provide novel quantitative descriptors of the lesions. The method will preserve the benefits of strong prior knowledge in the form of SSM while being able to automatically identify, quantify and classify areas of local shape abnormalities that cannot be modeled a priori (as is the case with the IVD herniation). As a result, quantitative descriptors of the morphological characteristics of the herniation that can serve as a basis for efficient radiological diagnosis will be readily available.The clinical application presented in this study, the IVD herniation, figure among the most common causes of low back pain. The term herniation encompasses a range of acute or chronic IVD pathologies (e.g. IVD bulge, protrusion, extrusion or sequestered disc) [15] and the references often differ in the reporting nomenclature and classification of the radiological findings [16]. Accurate and precise descriptions of normal and pathologic conditions of lumbar discs are therefore highly desirable. CAD systems capable to efficiently deliver quantitative information and consistent classification can have a significant impact on clinical diagnostic and therapeutic decision making.Previous CAD approaches for IVD herniation utilized a variety of algorithmical strategies. Herniation detection has been performed using features derived from the appearance of the IVD in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (e.g. raw intensity [17], mean intensities of IVD subregions [18], textural features [18,17]) and morphological features describing the IVD shape in a two-dimensional (2D) cross-section (major and minor axis [19,18], statistical models of global shape variations [20], geodesic distance to a healthy shape space [21]). The presented output of the classification is usually a binary decision about the normality of the IVD. To the best of our knowledge, computer-based reporting of quantitative characteristics of the herniation or sub-classification of the herniation to one of the clinically used nomenclatures has not been previously presented. Moreover, previous methods of computerized assessment of IVD herniation from MRI have been based on analyses of one (typically the mid-sagittal) 2D slice. However, IVD herniation is a three-dimensional (3D) pathology that affects the IVD in diverse locations in various forms and shapes. An evidence of improving CAD by 3D analysis of IVD volumes has been previously presented for the case of the degenerative disc disease [22] but not applied for CAD of IVD herniation.Classification of IVD herniation has been based on features extracted from pre-segmented IVDs. MRI segmentation of IVDs relies on signal intensity appearance cues and strong shape priors that in combination increase the segmentation performance. Several studies generated and employed prior probabilistic atlases of the spine shape in the segmentation [23,24], or created parametric models of the IVD anatomical structure [25,26]. The SSMs have also been a popular approach to modeling the prior shape constraints in the lumbar spine. They have been employed in the MRI segmentation of IVDs [27,28,20], vertebrae [29,28] and other musculoskeletal structures [7,30,31] but their use in CAD of IVD herniation remain largely unexplored.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
