@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Flexible and stretchable fabric-based tactile sensor

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A flexible and stretchable durable fabric-based tactile sensor capable of capturing typical human interaction forces was developed.We present elaborate measurement results of the sensor.A process of creating multiple sensor areas in a single fabric patch was developed.The measures against performance degradation due to moisture are presented.Using the developed technology, a tactile dataglove with 54 pressure sensitive regions was built.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tactile sensor,Flexible tactile sensor,Stretchable tactile sensor,Tactile dataglove,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We introduce a novel, fabric-based, flexible, and stretchable tactile sensor, which is capable of seamlessly covering natural shapes. As humans and robots have curved body parts that move with respect to each other, the practical usage of traditional rigid tactile sensor arrays is limited. Rather, a flexible tactile skin is required. Our design allows for several tactile cells to be embedded in a single sensor patch. It can have an arbitrary perimeter and can cover free-form surfaces. In this article we discuss the construction of the sensor and evaluate its performance. Our flexible tactile sensor remains operational on top of soft padding such as a gel cushion, enabling the construction of a human-like soft tactile skin. The sensor allows pressure measurements to be read from a subtle less than 1 kPa up to high pressures of more than 500 kPa, which easily covers the common range for everyday human manual interactions. Due to a layered construction, the sensor is very robust and can withstand normal forces multiple magnitudes higher than what could be achieved by a human without sustaining damage.As an exciting application for the sensor, we describe the construction of a wearable tactile dataglove with 54 tactile cells and embedded data acquisition electronics. We also discuss the necessary implementation details to maintain long term sensor performance in the presence of moisture.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The sense of touch allows humans and higher animals to perform coordinated and efficient interactions within their environment. An early experiment  [1] demonstrated the importance of tactile feedback for manual interactions. It showed that when the sense of touch was eliminated, subjects had severe difficulties in maintaining stable grasp. Similarly, the lack of tactile feedback in today’s industrial robots restricts their use to highly structured environments and contact with unknown objects and humans has to be avoided. Operating robots in open environments calls for a much higher degree of sensory data. We believe that robots can strongly benefit from force sensing capabilities when employed in unconstrained environments. An immediate benefit is the increased safety brought about by having contact detection. But, also important is the improved capability to manipulate objects under non-deterministic conditions that a sense of touch can facilitate  [2–4].In psycho-physiology, tactile sensors that can measure interaction forces at the human skin will allow for studies of human motor-control processes at a new level of precision. To date, much of the work done in this field concentrates on joint angle and positional information, such as given by posture datagloves or vision-based tracking systems  [5]. Studying tactile feedback in human interaction experiments will provide valuable insights into the design of manipulation algorithms, which heretofore could not be obtained from only postural sensor technologies. In previous studies we already used instrumented tactile objects to measure grasp forces  [6,7]. However, these experiments were restricted to specific objects that were fitted with tactile sensors.The fact that humans and many robots have curved body parts restricts the practical usage of rigid tactile sensors. In an effort to overcome the limitation of such sensors we introduce a novel, flexible, tactile sensor with multiple sensitive regions integrated into a fabric composite. The resulting sensor has a thickness of ≈1.5 mm and can be cut and sewn in the same way as a common fabric, which means that a wide variety of shapes can be produced. As a consequence, wearable haptic sensing garments, such as shirts, trousers, hats or force sensitive datagloves (Fig. 1) can be produced. It allows anthropomorphic robots to be covered with touch sensitive material and thus endowed with a sense of touch. Furthermore, the field of Ambient Intelligence can greatly benefit from our sensor, as it allows for the augmentation of rooms and furniture with tactile sensing material, thus making them responsive to the presence of people and pets. For example, sensitive bed-linen and pillows could allow for less obtrusive monitoring of patients in hospitals.There exist many attempts to develop flexible tactile sensors. A common technology employs flexible printed circuit boards (PCBs)  [8–10], which can be bent in one dimension at a time. Cutting the film carrier, tactile sensors capable of covering two dimensional curvatures have been demonstrated too  [11,12]. Stretchable materials can much better adapt to arbitrary, even dynamically changing surfaces. A sensor using gold-plated copper wire interwoven into conductive rubber was presented in  [13]. Although simple in construction, it was not very robust due to exposed fragile wiring on the outside surface of the sensor. A mechanically simpler sensor based on a sheet of pressure sensitive conductive rubber that was used as the sensor material was introduced in  [14]. It used a technology called electrical impedance tomography to gather the tactile data from connectors that were only attached to the boundary of a uniform sheet. Although simple in mechanical design, the electronics required to sample the values was relatively complicated and the output signal exhibited negative effects such as ghosting and mirroring (presenting tactile output on locations that in reality have none). An interesting approach to produce a complete wearable tactile suit employed a conductive fabric, but suffered from an almost binary output  [15]. Very high spatial resolution was demonstrated in  [16] in which a glove made from sprayed-on silicone elastomer was introduced, but it was unfortunately not removable from the hand without destroying the sensor and thus not reusable. Finally, micro-machined strain gauges on kapton film  [17] allow for a high spatial resolution, but are unfortunately not very robust due to exposed miniature mechanical components.Our design overcomes all the mentioned drawbacks: it is flexible, stretchable and robust, and allows independent sampling of multiple tactile pixels (taxels) in a relatively high spatial resolution with taxel spacing of less than 10 mm possible.In the next section we will introduce the construction of the fabric tactile sensor in detail. In Section  3 the sensor performance is evaluated and measurement results are given. Section  4 introduces an innovative application for the developed flexible tactile sensor in the form of a tactile dataglove. Finally, Section  5 summarizes the article and discusses future work.The specifications we set out for the required sensor were that it should be sensitive and robust enough to discriminate and withstand the forces occurring in everyday grasping and manipulation and that it should provide numerous taxels to acquire distinguished spatio-temporal tactile patterns. To the best of our knowledge, and after an exhaustive search for such a device, no single, flexible, tactile sensor design was found which fits all these specifications.After evaluating numerous compositions of various conductive fabrics, we decided on a design that uses 4 layers of different plain and conductive fabrics, which ensured good elasticity of the compound sensor (Fig. 2). The sensor is based on the piezoresistive effect, where the electrical resistance of a material changes under mechanical pressure. Our sensor uses a piezoresistive, stretchable knitted fabric (72% nylon, 28% spandex) and is manufactured by Eeonyx.11http://www.eeonyx.com/.The individual fibers within the fabric are coated on a nano-scale with inherently-conductive polymers. The material is available at different resistances, determined by the thickness of the applied coating. During experimental testing, we found a material with a volume resistivity of≈20kΩ⋅mto be most suitable for our application.22Measured with an ETS 803B resistivity probe, weighing 5 lb.By placing the piezoresistive fabric between two highly conductive materials, we can observe a change in the resistance measured at the two outer layers when pressure is applied to the compound. These outer layers constitute the low impedance electrodes that transport current into and out of the sensor with minimal losses. A low impedance of less than2Ω/sq. is achieved by plating nylon knitted fabric (78% polyamide, 22% elastomer) with pure silver particles.33UnitΩper square as used by the manufacturer. This means that the given resistance applies to arbitrary sized square specimen.Our experiments exhibited a higher signal repeatability, especially in the subtle pressure range of 0–50 kPa, when an additional non-conductive meshed layer was added between the middle piezoresistive layer and one of the electrode layers. Sensor sensitivity was found to depend on the thickness of the meshed layer and on the size of the mesh openings, with larger openings and thinner layers producing better sensitivity to first touch (determined by the smallest detectable force). We evaluated meshes with openings in the range of 0.2–5 mm. The final design is a 0.23 mm thick meshed fabric with a honeycomb structure (Fig. 2) and mesh openings (size ≈2 mm) accounting for ≈70% of the surface.With this additional mesh layer, the sensor has a very high resistivity (in the range of GΩfor a 50×50 mm sample) when not acted upon, which is achieved by the introduced gap between the electrode and the piezoresistive layer. Due to the minimal force required to close this gap, the sensor is sensitive to subtle forces. In tests, 0.1 N was experimentally found to be a reliable threshold when a 3 mm2 probe tip was used. Above this threshold, the sensor operates as a parallel circuit of force sensitive resistors (Fig. 3). The high resistance in its idle state has the additional benefit of minimizing the current flow through the sensor and thus minimizing the energy loss. This ensures a longer runtime of battery-powered portable systems and simultaneously has the positive side-effect of significantly reducing the heat produced by the sensor. Especially in large-scale applications, for example if the sensor were to be used to cover a sofa, this becomes an important feature.Constructing tactile sensors using similar piezoresistive material from Eeonyx has been tried before, such as in flat sensor mats by RSscan,44http://www.rsscan.com/.but to the best of our knowledge our tactile sensor design is one of the first stretchable designs that uses Eeonyx materials55FSA/Vista Medical Ltd. have recently demonstrated a stretchable sensor (http://www.vista-medical.com/subsite/stretch.php), but as it is a commercial product the manufacturing details are not provided.and in our opinion it is also ground-breaking due to its very high idle resistance.To evaluate the performance of our tactile sensor, we used a custom-built measurement bench capable of exerting forces from 0 to 80 N (Fig. 4). The reference force was measured by a calibrated industrial strain gauge force sensor connected to a signal amplifier. The strain gauge sensor is mounted on a vertical linear axis and its position is actuated by a stepper motor driven by the connected PC. The linear movement is transformed to a change in force via a coil-spring. Exchangeable probe tips made using different materials, and coming in different shapes and sizes can be mounted. To test the fabric tactile sensors introduced in this paper, we used circular plastic (POM) probe tips with 1, 3 and 5 cm2 tip areas. The fabric sensor was connected via a constant1.0kΩresistor to a regulated 5 V source. The voltage drop over the sensor, the supply voltage and the strain gauge reference sensor were sampled with a 16-bit DAQ-card. We limited the measurements to an upper value of 35 N, as in a recent experiment we found the typical maximum finger force produced by humans to be no higher than 30 N  [18].First we measured the sensor hysteresis by exerting force using a 1 cm2 flat probe tip. We loaded the sensor from idle to 35 N and retracted the probe tip back to idle again. For this, we loaded the unstretched fabric tactile sensor and iteratively moved the probe tip downwards in steps of 0.1 mm. At each step we waited for 0.3 s for the mechanics to stabilize and then performed simultaneous measurements of the test sensor and the reference strain gauge sensor. We continued until a force of 35 N was produced, after which we retracted the probe tip in the same fashion to produce measurements in both directions. Approximately 320 data points were gathered in a single trial, which lasted for approximately 3.5 min. Fig. 5depicts the sensor output over 10 consecutive trials. As can be observed from the graph, the sensor repeatability is high. The gaps between the measurement points, visible more clearly in the lower force range, result from the stepper motor step size limitation in the measurement bench, effectively limiting the minimal applicable force change. We found that with increasing iteration count, the load curve converges to the unload curve. This is also validated in the long-term behavior described in detail later and can be explained by an increasingly better intertwinement of the fibers in the sensor fabric with an increased number of trials and the material creep in the fabric as explained in  [19].Second we evaluated the response of the sensor using 3 and 5 cm2 circular flat probe tips in addition to the 1 cm2 tip (Fig. 6). As can be observed, the smaller the area of contact, the more hyperbolic the output resistance curve becomes. This can be explained by a faster saturation of the piezoresistive material produced by a smaller tip. In our fabric based tactile sensor there are two effects of changing resistance working in parallel: the piezoresistive change of the material and the parallel arrangement of resistances, according to the surface area of contact (graphically depicted in Fig. 3). Both these effects are themselves nonlinear and their sum can be observed in the resulting output curves.In Fig. 7we plot the sensor resistance against pressure, by exerting up to 120 kPa using the same probes. As can be observed, the curves overlap more strongly when the applied force is normalized to pressure, especially when considering only the bigger probe tips (3 and 5 cm2). This allows us to conclude that our fabric based tactile sensor is more suitable for pressure measurements than direct force measurements.The composite 4-layer sensor remains stretchable up to 125% of its original size, and this is limited by the mesh layer (the electrodes and the piezoresistive material alone remain stretchable up to 200%). We verified the sensor operation while stretched by bulging it over a convex POM surface with an 80 mm radius using numerous stretch ratios and a 3 cm2 concave probe tip (as shown in the inset of Fig. 4). The sensor output in its stretched state is shown in Fig. 8. Starting from an ≈10% stretch ratio, the idle resistivity decreases as the usual pressure threshold has already been overcome. Apart from the first touch behavior, the sensor exhibits only marginal output differences between unstretched, 5% and 15% stretched states.From a 12-bit sensor output, the pressure is extracted using a 4096-deep lookup table, which is generated from the arithmetic mean of measured data points over the whole measurement range. Fig. 9depicts the arithmetic mean which is used to create the lookup table. The same figure also shows the standard deviation and the normalized root mean square error of the measured signal.To evaluate how the sensor behaves over time, we measured the sensor output for 10 min by constantly loading it with 10 kPa (1 N using a 1 cm2 plastic cylindrical flat probe tip). Fig. 10displays the relative change of measured voltage compared to the initially recorded value. The voltage decreases in the first half minute strongly and then stabilizes at values 3%–4% lower than the initial value. This effect is explained by material creep.As can be seen from the quantitative results presented here, our sensor is able to measure the pressure range typically found in human manual interaction  [18]. The hyperbolic output of the sensor is beneficial for measuring pressure over multiple orders of magnitude. The resolution of the sensor decreases with the applied pressure, which is what happens in the human sense of touch (according to the Weber–Fechner law or Stevens’ power function  [20]). The repeatability of the sensor is high and the hysteresis of the sensor remains in a similar range to that of other flexible tactile sensors  [11–14,16]. Flexibility, stretchability and a simple construction result in a robust and universal tactile sensor that can capture pressure information from free-form surfaces.We are striving for a better understanding of human grasping and manipulation skills and are convinced that by observing humans we can gain a deeper insight into the control processes involved in manual intelligence  [5,21,22]. Having only postural information about the hand does not reveal the associated forces and we therefore sought an explicit sensing channel for contact forces during manipulation. However, we found that there are very few commercially available datagloves with tactile sensing capabilities. The Pinch Glove from Virtual Realities Ltd.66http://www.vrealities.com/pinch.html.and the now discontinued X-IST Data Glove HR3 from No-DNA both only provide tactile sensing at the fingertips. As only a very limited set of human grasps rely solely on the fingertips, a tactile covering of the fingers and palmar side of the hand is needed. Therefore using the fabric sensor we developed a dataglove that allows us to capture tactile patterns from the complete palmar surface of the hand and all fingers. It uses a total of 54 tactile sensitive areas (Fig. 1)We discovered that the conductive coating of the covering electrode fabrics were etchable with a ferric chloride (FeCl3) solution, a common etchant used in printed-circuit-board development to remove the copper between tracks. A very mild solution of 30 mol/m3 of FeCl3 dissolved in distilled water produced good results. By etching the areas between desired taxels on one electrode sheet, we can effectively isolate taxels from each other within a single fabric patch, allowing us to build compact multi-taxel flexible fabric sensors.We optimized the glove fabric cut-pattern towards a minimum amount of patches. We wanted a large single piece for the palmar side of the hand to simplify taxel placement and achieve low seam stresses. This resulted in a glove design with three fabric patches: a palmar patch carrying all tactile areas, the back of the hand, and a small area between the thumb and the index finger (Fig. 11). For an optimal placement of tactile-sensitive areas on the final glove, we marked desired taxel areas on the palmar patch directly on a human hand coated with a latex skin. The contours and taxel positions on the corresponding latex patches were subsequently digitalized with a scanner.The contours of the taxels and the fabric patches were imported into a CAD program, and a double sided etch mask was created (Fig. 12). On areas that were to be etched, grooves were placed into the mask to facilitate circulation of the etching solution. Using a CAM program, the drive code for the CNC mill was generated based on the CAD design. The two mask halves were then milled from PVC.During etching, the fabric is placed between the mask halves and the heated (≈60 °C) ferric chloride solution is circulated through the milled grooves from one side of the mask through the fabric to the other side with a pump. This effectively etches off the conductive particles in the fabric in areas that the solution reaches. During etching the mask is manually rotated to better distribute the solution and to speed up the process. To keep the solution only in the desired areas and to avoid the etchant creeping into the material, all mask edges were applied with silicone to ensure a tighter seal. Our system employed a vacuum, which further reduced the possibility of solution creep, and all regions not processed with etchant (taxel areas) were equipped with a vent hole. After approximately 10 min of etching, the fabric was immediately rinsed with fresh water and dried. The etching rig and the treated fabric of the glove’s palmar patch are displayed in Fig. 12. The chosen materials allow the rig to be used for a high number of etchings without performance deterioration.After the desired taxels have been separated using the etching process, the layers forming the tactile glove are assembled in a lightly stretched state on a frame. Each glove layer more proximal to the hand is stretched slightly more in the frame to obtain a natural convexity of the finished glove. The etched fabric forms the first layer on the frame and the most distal layer in the final glove. The mesh, piezoresistive sensor and the unetched electrode layers come next. Then, a fine-meshed, elastic, non-conductive fabric with approximately 0.2 mm mesh opening is used as the main glove material, providing good ventilation for the hand. Finally a water soluble embroidery backing is added to allow the sewing head of the machine to advance properly on the stretchable material. The layers are then sewn together around the borders of the tactile sensor patches (Fig. 13). Great care needs to be taken to sew only the borders surrounding the taxels to avoid having a permanent load on the tactile sensitive areas. The fabric sensor material between the tactile patches is cut with a fine scissors outside the seam around the tactile patches and removed. This is important to keep the glove as thin as possible around joints it becomes folded. No taxels can be placed in these areas, as they would output a false positive contact during finger flexion movements. Another seam is sewn around the perimeter of the tactile sensors for additional strength (Fig. 13). The embroidery backing is removed by immersing the glove in water and the three fabric elements of the glove are sewn together to form a glove. Finally Teflon coated wires(⌀0.3mm), produced by Vishay Measurements Group GmbH,77http://www.vishaypg.de/.are connected to the sensor patches by removing the insulation from the tip of the wire and interweaving it into the electrode layer. The wire is additionally fastened at the very tip and at the strain relieving knot with one-component silicon rubber, which cures at room temperature.In our developed tactile dataglove with 54 taxels, the taxel area range from 34 to 130 mm2 in the finger and 195–488 mm2 in the palm, with a spatial resolution of 7.2–9.6 mm in the fingers and 12.4–29.7 mm in the palm. The density distribution of the receptive fields is designed to be similar to the mechanoreceptor density distribution in the human hand. We note that the absolute density in the human hand remains thus far unachievable for stretchable tactile sensors  [23].During the evaluation of the initial tactile dataglove prototype, we noticed a significant non-recoverable drop in sensor sensitivity after prolonged use. We found this to be due to moisture, such as natural sweat produced by the hands, reacting with the silver-coated electrode layers, which results in a reduction of the conductivity and thus elevates the electrode layer’s resistivity.To avoid this damage to the sensor due to moisture, we complemented the tactile dataglove with an additional impervious barrier layer, placed between the glove base material and the sensor patches. The barrier consists of a ductile polyethylene-foil with a thickness of 10 μm. Additionally, we apply a thin rubber coating to the outer surfaces of the sensors, thus effectively sealing the sensor fabric. This provides a number of benefits: a higher robustness for everyday human usage, a higher electrical isolation between taxels and the environment, an enhanced friction coefficient and also a higher mechanical robustness of the sensor surface. Due to the added layers, the haptic feel of the glove slightly worsens. For the external coating we use a self-leveling silicon-elastomer. By pressing the fingertips into an appropriately textured mold during curing, it is possible to mimic human fingerprints on the surface of the dataglove.The wires from the sensor patches terminate in an embedded data acquisition electronics unit, located at the dorsal side of the glove, slightly shifted towards the elbow from the wrist joint. This position was chosen, as it produces minimal interference in everyday manual interactions.As the sensor is based on the piezoresistive effect, an applied load results in a change of output resistance (see also Section  2). Using a voltage divider circuitry (Fig. 14), we convert the resistance change into a voltage change. By implementing a fixed pull-up resistor R1, the output voltageUsenseis only dependent on the resistance of the taxel R2:(1)Usense=Uconst⋅R2R1+R2.The output of the voltage divider is sampled using an ADC and converted into a numeric value. Each individual taxel is sampled by a separate input on the ADC, which is connected via an SPI bus to a microcontroller that relays the data to a connected host system via USB. To sample the most active tactile areas of the human hand in a sufficient way, we use 54 sensor cells on the tactile glove (as seen in Fig. 1). Employing dedicated ADC channels for all taxels avoids crosstalk and ghosting and allows us to achieve high sampling rates. As a consequence, for each taxel a fixed resistor (R1) and an ADC input channel is needed, along with the components to generate the supply voltage and electronics to transmit the acquired data to the PC. For these tasks we developed two PCBs, the communication board (depicted in Fig. 15) and a sensor board (Fig. 16). The sensor board contains the ADCs and pull-up resistors and is used to convert the resistance of the sensor cells to digital values. Two such sensor boards are used to capture all the 54 taxels of the dataglove. The sensor boards are connected to the communication board via the SPI bus. Its function is to sample the ADCs and relay the gathered information to a host system. To this end a PIC18F24J50 microcontroller is employed, running at 48 MHz. The gathered tactile data is packaged into a custom binary format and transmitted over the USB bus to the host. For this purpose, the microcontroller was programmed to register as an USB CDC device, such that the tactile data can be received by the host via a virtual serial port. The tactile dataglove is powered by the host over the USB bus.The printed circuit boards are fitted into an ergonomically formed cylindrical wrist band (Fig. 17). A broad belt is used for a firm hold.Manual assembly and the differences in used material properties across different areas introduce deviation in sensor performance between taxels and devices (such as multiple tactile datagloves). Thus, an increase in measurement accuracy can be noticed by separately calibrating each taxel in each device.In Fig. 18, we demonstrate the tactile dataglove during operation while grasping an apple. On the right image the resulting output of the sensors is displayed. Live demonstration of the dataglove in operation can be seen in an online video.88http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YFDfSIRei7c.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We introduced a novel, flexible, and stretchable tactile sensor. The construction of the sensor was presented in detail and extensive quantitative results were provided. The highlight of the tactile sensor is that multiple tactile cells can be embedded in a single sensor patch. Demonstrating the versatility of the sensor we constructed an advanced wearable tactile dataglove with 54 taxels. The tactile dataglove allows pressure measurements for the complete palmar surface and all fingers. It is thin and flexible, allowing natural manual interactions to be captured. The meshed substrate guarantees excellent ventilation of the hand, making extended data acquisition trials comfortable for participants. Necessary precautions were taken to avoid the degradation in sensitivity due to moisture. An additional thin layer of rubber on the outside surface allows increased grip and fingerprint-like structures for the glove. As the fabric tactile sensor design allows for its integration into almost arbitrary garments, numerous other applications for capturing tactile patterns can be explored, for example in research, entertainment, health-care and ambient intelligence.We next plan to develop improved data acquisition electronics for the dataglove. This will include incorporating a wireless real-time data transmission module in addition to an on-board micro-SD card slot to allow later offline data analysis similar to our previous work presented in  [7]. We would also like to integrate additional sensors into the glove to capture the posture of the hand, as this has been very important in our previous work  [24,25].The developed tactile datagloves will be used to investigate human manual intelligence in our Manual Intelligence Lab  [26] together with numerous other sensors, such as motion capture and eye tracking devices. This will allow us to better understand how humans perform grasping, manipulation and manual exploration tasks.Another near-term goal, in which the developed sensor technology will be employed, is to augment the palm and fingers of the Shadow Robot Hands in our lab with the sense of touch. Finally, plans are afoot to develop an interactive novel game interface that incorporates the new sensor technology.