@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrating wireless sensor networks with statistical quality control to develop a cold chain system in food industries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Wireless sensors are adopted to construct a time-temperature indicator system,Switching from frozen storage to cool storage is achieved in a food cold chain,Annual rice sales are increased from 4.44 million bowls to over 6 million bowls,More than 150 jobs and extra revenue of 6.35 million in $USD are created,10% reduction in energy costs is accomplished to enhance turnover of electricity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cold chain,Control charts,Internet of Things,Time–temperature indicator,Wireless sensors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cold chain management is of importance for manufacturers in the food industry since they face the dilemma of having to choose between frozen storage and cool storage in delivering products to retailers or end-consumers. Frozen storage incurs high-energy consumption for the preservation of food products, whereas cool storage involves the constant threat of bacterial decay. Contemporary cold-chain development in temperature control usually focuses on single logistic chain rather than serving multiple channels. In order to overcome the aforementioned deficiency, this study proposes a time-temperature indicator (TTI) based cold-chain system, which uses wireless sensors for collecting temperature data and implements the formulation of Critical Control Point (CCP) criteria throughout the entire delivery process. In particular, this approach is based on an Internet-of-Things (IoT) architecture as well as international food standards named ISO 22,000. More importantly, four new business models including (1) cold chain home-delivery service; (2) Convenience store (CVS) indirect delivery; (3) CVS direct delivery; (4) flight kitchen service, are successfully developed for conducting performance assessment. Experimental results indicate that the proposed framework can increase annual sales of braised pork rice from 4.44 million bowls to over 6 million bowls, create more distribution channels to increase extra revenue of more than US$6.35 million, and reduce 10% energy consumption in central kitchens to enhance turnover of electricity from US$14.23 raised to US$18.64 per kilowatt hour.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a growing trend with a powerful influence in shaping the development of the information and communication technology (ICT) sector. Today, the IoT encompasses a wide variety of items used in our daily lives, including radio frequency identification (RFID) tags, sensors, actuators, and even smart devices like mobile phones. A unique addressing scheme enables these objects to communicate and interact with other items to achieve common goals [1,4,10,13,23,26,30,31]. In practice, the IoT is expected to develop in areas such as wireless sensor networks with the aim of collecting contextual data [29,43,44]. Progress is also being made in service-oriented architecture (SOA) [18], which is a software approach to expanding web-based services using the capabilities of IoT (Web of Things, WoT) [14].Developments in the IoT will no doubt lead to new services applicable to all facets of our lives. From a system-level perspective, IoT can be viewed as a highly dynamic and radically distributed networked system comprising a large number of smart objects and the information they collect [7]. In contrast, from a service-level perspective, the IoT is fundamentally a means of integrating or composing the functionalities and/or resources provided by smart objects. In many cases, this integration is in the form of data streams [6,16,19]. However, from a user perspective, the IoT makes it possible for new services to be developed in response to the needs of users for use in everyday activities [39].As we know, cold chain management (CCM) is used to optimize the freshness and safety of food products [11]. Currently, manufacturers in the food industry face the dilemma of having to choose between using frozen storage and cool storage. This issue is relevant in all stages, including cooking, cooling, freezing, delivering, and storage. Frozen storage incurs high-energy consumption for the preservation of food products, whereas cool storage involves the constant threat of bacterial decay. Contemporary developments in temperature control tend to focus on single logistic chain rather than serving multiple channels simultaneously. This type of business model obviously confines the range of options with regard to food supply and often makes it impossible to meet the complex requirements of the food industry. Although frozen storage can reduce the constant threat of bacterial decay, but it will bring a lot of shortcomings, such as high-energy consumption, taste deteriorates due to residual ice, and the number of sale channel is limited. Under strict temperature monitoring, switching a number of products from frozen storage to cool storage seems to be feasible to improve the shortcomings mentioned above.Again, temperature is the main post-processing parameter in the determination of shelf-life in a cold chain of chilled and frozen food products. This study developed an innovative cold chain time–temperature indicator (TTI) system, which uses wireless sensors for collecting temperature data and formulating Critical Control Point (CCP) criteria. Then,X̅–R control charts are formulated for monitoring each point in the process. This approach is based on an IoT architecture and international food standard (ISO) 22,000. In particular, the proposed methodology was applied to a prestigious food franchise in Taiwan to evaluate its efficacy. The proposed IoT solution employs sensors to collect temperature data at each point in the process for later ISO 22000/HACCP standard CCP criteria. Analysis of the collected data facilitates decision-making process regarding frozen and cool storage.In practice, changes in storage procedures can reduce energy consumption and expand the number of selling channels, which may otherwise be subject to the limitations inherent in using only one form of cooling. In addition, changes in food storage can lead to changes in conventional business models in the food industry, such that food manufacturers have been able to include restaurants, catering services (even in airplanes), convenience stores, and home delivery services among their potential clients. These changes have considerable potential in enhancing brand value. The IoT also makes it possible to address environmental concerns by reducing energy costs. In summary, the main contributions of this study are highlighted as follows:•An industrial case in which the process is transformed from frozen storage to cool storage is implemented to take food taste as well as food quality into account.A time-temperature indicator system via using wireless sensors enables a service-oriented architecture to achieve innovative cold chain management.New business models in the food industry, such as (1) cold chain home-delivery service; (2) Convenience store (CVS) indirect delivery; (3) CVS direct delivery; (4) flight kitchen service, are generated and assessed for benchmarking.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 and Sections 3 outlines the existing cold chain service models and the proposed cold chain system, respectively. Section 4 develops four new business models and demonstrates performance analysis of the case company for validity justification. Lastly, concluding remarks are drawn in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Today, many studies have been published to address temperature monitoring of the cold chain for environmentally sensitive goods. The emphasis on this issue stems from the critical role of temperature because it has great impacts on the social, economic, and environmental performance of food supply chain. Different from the previous studies, this paper proposes a cold chain system for a multi-channel Chinese food processing system, including preparation in a centralized kitchen and transportation to branch stores. The whole system includes several sub-systems, such as a freezing/thawing module, a cool-storage delivery module, and a cooling-storage management module in branch stores. After the proposed system was successfully applied to the VIP room of China Airline and other 6 airlines, the proposed cold chain system also helped the case company receive orders of cool storage products from China Pacific Catering Services and more than 1000 Hi-Life convenience stores. In particular, for improving quality control of cold chain systems, this study proposes an quantitative framework which combines a wireless sensor network with CCP criteria based onX̅–R control charts.In summary, it contributes to both academic researchers and industrial practitioners by demonstrating the following merits:•In an economic context, enhancing product sales: introduction of the new system increases annual sales of braised pork rice from 4.44 million bowls to over 6 million bowls within a year.In a social context, creating job opportunities: it also produced 150 job opportunities, with extra revenue of more than US$6.35 million, and a 10% reduction in energy costs.In an environmental context, reducing energy consumption: the consumption of electrical power in the central kitchen was reduced, to contribute turnover from US$14.23 raised to US$18.64 per kilowatt hour. Likewise, it was also used in stores to contribute turnover from US$4.32 raised to US$4.58 per kilowatt hour.In the near future, the case company will continue to expand the ratio of cool storage products to all products expected to increase from 50% to 75%. Eventually, the case company wishes to invite its upstream suppliers to involve a wider coverage via supply chain collaboration and so to make other new channels to join as well. In future studies, fusing big data mining with the architecture of IoT (internet of things) in food industries deserves to be further explored.