@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel blood pressure verification system for home care

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed system immediately generates an alarm upon detection of abnormal vital signs, building a personal blood pressure system based on HLFPN.A fuzzy blood pressure system using an Android system on the HMI-6410S integrated biomedical-electronic platform by DMATEK has been constructed.Bluetooth communication technology and the measuring equipment with various sensors enable the proposed system to be applied to real-time tele-home care.The proposed system also assists the patients in being aware of their daily physiological changes, helping them keep tracking and self-managing their health conditions, and preventing any further illness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy analytic hierarchical process (FAHP),Blood pressure control,Real-time home care,Petri nets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since the human resource-intensive traditional medical care practices often lack consideration of natural human reasoning, they follow procedural knowledge as the knowledge base, and therefore, they lack precision of knowledge description. In order to reduce dependency upon human resources and quickly and accurately discern a patient's health condition, we have constructed a fuzzy blood pressure verification system, which consists of an intelligent mobile device integrated with fuzzy comparison and a fuzzy analytic hierarchical process. This personalized and humane blood pressure verification system can provide assistance for the health and safety of the elderly. In stage one, the system development involves computation of the hierarchical levels of patient's various physiological data using the fuzzy analytic hierarchical process (FAHP). In stage two, a fuzzy blood pressure verification system was constructed using the fuzzy analytic hierarchical process and high-level fuzzy Petri nets. Plotting functionality was added for the convenience of observing the blood pressure trends in patient records in the database system. Upon detection of an abnormal physiological signal from a patient, the intelligent mobile system can generate an alarm, thereby facilitating real-time home care.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As information technology advances rapidly and the quality of life needs to be improved, the humanist and intelligent living spaces are becoming a reality. People who require care, such as the elderly and those people suffering from chronic illness, require daily monitoring of blood pressure, heart rate, and body temperature. Given the trend of aging populations combined with declining birth rates observed in recent decades, the current working forces are faced with an ever-growing burden of providing care for the elderly [3,4,10,20]. Humanist and intelligent home care technology has been replacing the traditional hands-on aged care by combining the aged care with monitoring and information technology. This enables home care to be flexible, intelligent [9], and compassionate, in the hope that individual health awareness can be raised, medical expenditure can be lowered, and the quality of health care can be increased [1,2,3].A fuzzy verification system allows users to verify a rule class that is a collection of knowledge about a specific problem. When the estimation of a specific problem is performed, the specific rule class can be appointed as the knowledge base, with environment or any other factors relevant to the problem as additional rules. Fuzzy estimation works well based on the degree of certainty [2,20]. In such an estimation model, the certainty of a rule represents a change in the possibility of the fact post estimation [7]. The possibility of a fact is recalculated based on its original possibility and the degree of certainty in a rule. We have used this approach for designing the blood pressure verification system.The current research report shows that half of the top ten causes of death in Taiwan are related to hypertension, making it a serious health risk [7,12,13,19]. On this basis, the main purposes of this paper include the following:1.using results of the fuzzy analytic hierarchical process as a basis for tele-home care, generating alarms, and notifying the patient's family when the patient's blood pressure becomes abnormal;adding functionality of plotting to the database to allow comprehensive monitoring of the patient's physiological changes;combining the experimental results with intelligent devices, creating a knowledge system that closely resembles human thinking, thereby realizing humanistic health care.The remained sections of this paper are organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the definition of a home care system, blood pressure and cardiovascular conditions, and a high-level fuzzy Petri net (HLFPN). Section 3 describes the methods of creating a fuzzy blood pressure analysis system using the fuzzy analytic hierarchical process (FAHP) combined with the HLFPN. The system transmits pulse and blood pressure data gathered by the blood pressure monitoring and management system. In Section 4, the structure and operating steps of the implementation in experiments are explained, followed by a discussion of experimental results from diastolic pressure measurements, and comparisons after connecting with an intelligent device. In Section 5, the results from all of the preceding sections are summarized and a conclusion is given. Suggestions for the follow-up research are also proposed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
