@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Communicating standards through structured terminology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a framework for categorizing and presenting terminology in standards.We develop a schema for classifying terminology from sustainable manufacturing standards.We develop a visualization and query mechanism for this information.This framework will allow non-experts to easily understand standards content.The interactive interface will allow non-experts to find and use specific information that is harder to find when browsing document standards.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Standards,Terminology,Sustainable manufacturing,Ontology,OWL,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present an informatics approach to synthesize and classify terminology as defined in standards. Traditional document style standards and dictionary style definitions are very limiting when it comes to getting a holistic picture of the application of standards and regulations. We focus on standards for sustainable manufacturing, but the approach is not limited to this domain. By studying the structure and relationships within those standards we developed a schema for representing and relating standards to each other. We then used that schema as a basis for visualization and querying, which enables interactive and intuitive perusal of the material.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Technology is evolving at a rapid rate today. As part of that evolution a network of information standards also evolves. Standards span a wide range of technology areas and serve multiple purposes. For instance, performance standards ensure that technology components perform as expected so that the components can be integrated into larger products and enterprises. Other standards define business processes to support interoperability between enterprises. Still more standards prescribe regulations that constrain how different materials may be used and limit the negative impacts of different processes and practices. This conglomerate of standards contributes towards an orderly yet rapid development of new technology.One of the functions of these standards is the containment of technology such that a sustainable system will evolve. The sustainability of the system can be measured by the impact the system has on the overall environment in terms of the resources consumed and produced by the system. In the manufacturing area this evaluation is discussed as the study of sustainable manufacturing. To develop the discipline of sustainable manufacturing, a language of discourse needs to be properly and clearly communicated, for both manufacturers and consumers. Producers need to clearly understand and articulate their requirements and the services they provide, while consumers need to understand the meanings of that information to make informed choices. As such, a lexicon of sustainable manufacturing is evolving and is often captured in standards documents.The rapidity of growth in this lexicon is further complicated through the globalization of commerce. The terms being used to discuss sustainable manufacturing are emerging in the form of research, policy and regulations in locales all over the globe. Many of these are being formalized within standards that are also dispersed and disconnected. Concurrently, businesses are developing and producing products that will be marketed all over the globe. Businesses need to understand how their products relate to the concepts being promoted locally as sustainable manufacturing and at the same time have a global understanding of the sustainability of their practices.In this paper, we present an informatics approach to synthesize and classify the terminology defined in standards by studying the structure and relationships within those lexicons. Traditional document style standards and dictionary style definitions are limiting when it comes to getting a holistic picture of sustainability requirements. The task of understanding the challenges in achieving a sustainability objective is difficult when non-experts have to browse through several pages of document standards to find relevant information. Recently, many standards have been made available as electronic documents, searchable on the web. However, these searches are usually simple text searches, with no direct relevance to the semantic content of the standards. Our objective is to build a classification system of sustainable manufacturing terminology and a repository for knowledge dispersion to assist in sustainability decision making (for both manufacturers and consumers). Therefore, not only do we collect the relevant sustainable manufacturing terminology, we also define a means for classifying these terms and constructing relationships between them. This structure will aid in improved understanding and decision-making ability.Understanding the challenges of sustainable manufacturing can be a daunting task. While there are a diverse range of standards that address various aspects of sustainable manufacturing, it is very challenging for non-experts to navigate through the standards documents to identify information, and devise a plan of action to address their sustainability objectives. Our approach to this problem is to organize the standards information in such a way that different standards can be related while still maintaining the connectivity back to their authoritative sources. The terminology of the standards is synthesized and classified based on a multi-faceted classification scheme. We develop an ontological schema to capture the main concepts in sustainable manufacturing, and construct an ontology that classifies a wide range of sustainable manufacturing terminology. We take a standards-centric approach in capturing a set of standard terminology that address the most critical aspects of sustainable manufacturing. Finally, we produce a prototype implementation to demonstrate a visual interface built upon the underlying logical framework. The work is designed in such a way that contributions may be solicited from experts to expand the network of information by including a wide range of standards. We expect that this approach will be relevant to other areas of study beyond sustainable manufacturing.Fig. 1depicts the architecture of our system, the NIST Ontological Visualization Interface for Standards (NOVIS).11NOVIS is a software tool developed at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to provide an interactive visual interface to the terminology used in a variety of standards related to sustainable manufacturing [21].NOVIS uses the Web Ontology Language (OWL) [1] for organizing terminology related to sustainable manufacturing. We develop a classification scheme for terminology related to sustainable manufacturing, by surveying the literature. We create an OWL representation of this classification scheme to be used by the NOVIS tool. Next, we extract terminology from a number of standards documents, and classify them according to the classification scheme. The collected terminology is represented as an OWL ontology, the technical details of which are described in Section 2. A query and control engine, and a visual interface are designed to present the information contained in the OWL ontology in an intuitive way to the user. An enhancement to the system could be to use the query and control engine to interactively modify and update both the classification scheme and the OWL ontology. These aspects are described in detail in Section 3. We use existing software tools that process OWL to produce a prototype implementation of this approach.The remainder of this section provides background on the multiple facets of the work related to the project including various sustainability-related standards and work on knowledge representation and visualization. Section 2 goes into the details of the classification schema for sustainable manufacturing and the OWL implementation. Section 3 describes the query and visualization approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
