@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
PPREM: Privacy Preserving REvocation Mechanism for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design a mechanism to convey revocation data that preserves the user’s privacy.Certificate status checking can be performed within few milliseconds.Fresh revocation data is available even when disconnected from the infrastructure.Even if RSUs are compromised, attackers cannot infer personal information.Even if RSUs are compromised, attackers cannot infer personal information.Message loss ratio due to authentication delay is reduced to less than 5%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Revocation,Privacy,One way accumulators,VANET,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One of the critical security issues of Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) is the revocation of misbehaving vehicles. While essential, revocation checking can leak potentially sensitive information. Road Side Units (RSUs) receiving the certificate status queries could infer the identity of the vehicles posing the query. An important loss of privacy results from the RSUs ability to tie the checking vehicle with the query's target. We propose a Privacy Preserving Revocation mechanism (PPREM) based on a universal one-way accumulator. PPREM provides explicit, concise, authenticated and unforgeable information about the revocation status of each certificate while preserving the users' privacy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs) have recently attracted extensive attentions as a promising technology for revolutionizing the transportation systems. VANETs consist of entities including On-Board Units (OBUs) and infrastructure Road-Side Units (RSUs). Mobile nodes are capable of communicating with each other (i.e. Vehicle to Vehicle Communication — V2V communication) and with the RSUs (i.e. Vehicle to Infrastructure Communication — V2I communication). Multi-hop communication facilitates information exchange among network nodes that are not in direct communication range [1,2], by means of short range wireless technology based on IEEE 802.11p.Obviously, any malicious behaviors, such as injecting beacons with false information, modifying and replaying the previously disseminated messages, could be fatal to the other users. Thus, identifying the message issuer is mandatory to reduce the risk of such attacks. According to the IEEE 1609.2 standard [3], vehicular networks will rely on the public key infrastructure (PKI). In PKI, a certification authority issues an authentic digital certificate for each node in the network. Due to misbehavior, intentional or otherwise, certificates need to be revoked in order to limit the risk that potential misuse poses to the rest of the network. The IEEE 1609.2 standard [3] states that VANETs will depend on certificate revocation lists (CRLs) to achieve revocation. CRLs are black lists that enumerate revoked certificates along with the date of revocation and, optionally, the reasons for revocation.As VANETs can have a great amount of nodes (i.e. vehicles), CRLs will be large. Moreover, each vehicle in the network will own many temporary certificates (also called pseudonyms) to protect the users' privacy. Consequently, these lists will require hundreds of Megabytes [4–6]. However, distributing and updating CRLs raise a challenge. If there are no more communication media than the own VANET, no trusted-third parties (like the corresponding CA) can be assumed to be permanently available. Thus, online certificate status protocol (OCSP) [7] or, in general, any online solution is not suitable for this context. Several CRLs distribution protocols have been proposed for this purpose. For instance, to distribute these lists efficiently, authors in [8] proposed revocation using compressed CRLs. They divided the CRL into several self-verifiable parts and strongly reduced its size by using Bloom filters. Authors in [5] also propose the use of Bloom filters to store the revoked certificates for increasing the search speed in the CRL. On the other hand, authors in [9] proposed to use regional CAs and short lived certificates to decrease the number of entries in the CRL. However, these works overlooked the authentication delay resulting from checking the CRL for each received certificate. Regarding this issue, in the literature there are some mechanisms for distributing certificate status information (CSI) in environments prone to disruption [10–13]. They mainly use caching strategies combined with hashing techniques to enhance the availability of the revocation service. Nevertheless, none of these approaches takes into account the loss of privacy due to the CSI checking process.On the one hand, traditional CRLs satisfy both privacy of the target and authenticity of the membership. The CRL is free from the privacy issue because sending a list does not reveal information about the target. However, CRLs are bandwidth-inefficient due to their size, which grows linearly to the number of revoked users (O(n)). Other explicit revocation methods just exchange information about the target certificates. This makes them much more bandwidth-efficient than CRLs but then, they have privacy issues [14]. In particular, a non-trusted third party (e.g. a RSU) could gain knowledge about who is talking to whom, by just analyzing the CSI requests. In other words, a RSU could determine the identity of the party posing the query, as well as the target of the query. This is significant, because the revocation status check typically serves as a prelude to actual communication between the two parties. Hence, RSUs could acquire significant statistics such as who sends a message to whom, how often, etc. Recently, there appeared to be some works that intend to provide privacy during the revocation process [15,16]. However, they mainly use CRLs to convey the revocation information. Though CRLs provide a certain degree of privacy, they result bandwidth inefficient.To provide privacy and, at the same time, a bandwidth-efficient revocation mechanism we propose PPREM, a Privacy Preserving REvocation Mechanism for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks. PPREM is based on a universal one-way accumulator (OWA) to check the validity of the certificates. The CA accumulates all the revocation information in one single value that is transmitted to all the entities in the network. Then, any vehicle can convince any other entity that its certificate is still valid by providing the witness for the unique value contained in its certificate. To obtain and update this witness, vehicles contact RSUs without leaking personal information. The only data vehicles need to check the validity of any certificate are the accumulated value and the corresponding witness. This data can be downloaded from any mobile repository which is in charge of contacting the RSU in range and downloading an updated copy of the OWA and the auxiliary information necessary to update the witness. Thus, PPREM provides explicit, concise, authenticated and unforgeable information about the revocation status of each certificate while preserving the users' privacy. By conducting detailed performance evaluation, PPREM is demonstrated to be reliable, efficient, and scalable.The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2 we summarize the related work regarding CSI management. Section 3 describes the Privacy Preserving REvocation Mechanism. Next in Section 4 we perform a security analysis of the proposed mechanism. In Section 5 we evaluate and compare our proposal to the traditional method of periodical issuance. Finally, we conclude in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have proposed PPREM for VANETs, which enhances the certificate status checking process by replacing the time-consuming CRL with a fast revocation checking process employing a one-way accumulator. PPREM not only satisfies the security and privacy requirements of VANETs but can also significantly reduce the revocation cost. Moreover, PPREM enhances the driver's privacy so that the adversaries cannot trace the communication of legitimate vehicles, although they have compromised the RSUs.Analytic results show that allocating a small bandwidth is enough to ensure that vehicles can download fresh revocation information within few milliseconds. The performance improvement is obtained at the expense of having an implicit revocation protocol, where vehicles have to obtain a witness of the certificate prior to validate its status. Therefore, PPREM significantly reduces the complexity of certificate management and achieves great efficiency and scalability, even when it is deployed in heterogeneous vehicular networks.