@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A proposal to contribute to ITS standardization activity: A valuable network mobility management approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analysis of ITS standardization activity regarding security and efficiencyDefinition of a strategy for secure and efficient network mobility managementAn analytical evaluation of the handover signaling delay and comparison with NEMO BSEvaluation of QoS considering ITU-T-Y.1541 and 3GPP-TS-22.105 recommendations

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ITS,Standards,Security,Efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The introduction of communication services in the demanding ITS scenarios strongly relies on the existence of technologies that enable mobility and security. ITS related standardization bodies, mainly ISO and ETSI, are actively producing and developing new specifications in this regard. In this paper, we study those ITS standards related to security and communication efficiency and analyze the suitability of our NeMHIP protocol, in order to be considered for ITS scenarios. NeMHIP provides secure mobility while at the same time constitutes a framework to protect user data and services. In addition, despite being based on the introduction of a new namespace, its introduction in the current Internet architecture is considered affordable. Aware of the need to satisfy users for having a new technology accepted in a certain scenario, we have also assessed analytically the efficiency of our approach. Specifically, in this paper we analyze and compare the handover signaling delay with the standardized NEMO BS protocol, showing that our approach provides satisfactory results and outperforms it in specific cases. Moreover, we present the results obtained by means of a simulation tool, and show that QoS requirements for the demanding video streaming application are fulfilled. All of these features make our approach a candidate for being considered by standardization organizations and a valuable facility for ensuring secure and efficient communications in the ITS.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently, the provision of intelligent services to vehicles is rapidly flourishing. In addition, the penetration of smart user devices and the deployment of wireless access technologies are a reality. All these aspects converge into a scenario where communication services are requested to be offered also while traveling. In fact, Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) have a lot to say in the Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) context, since connectivity to outside networks like the Internet will not only provide means of remotely assisting the vehicles, but will also offer communication services to the onboard users. These scenarios give place to vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and to vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communications, where infrastructure commonly refers to roadside units.From the communications point of view, a vehicle can be regarded as a cluster of mobile nodes that move together as a whole, that is, a mobile network. An example of these scenarios is a vehicle equipped with several devices to measure the state of the engines, pressure of the tires, etc. that are requested to provide reports of the operation of the vehicle to the control center; and end user devices like smart phones, laptops, etc. brought in by the crew and/or by travelers are examples of scenarios where a set of nodes comprise a mobile network. In this context, a non negligible amount of onboard nodes will demand ubiquitous connectivity to the Internet. In this scenario, the vehicle is constantly changing its location and consequently its Point of Attachment (PoA) to the Internet to have continuous connectivity onboard. As a result, its mobility has to be managed. The main goals of the mobility management protocol are twofold: to provide continuous communications without service disruption owing to mobility events; and to allow reachability to nodes onboard regardless of their location.In such scenario, where there is a significant amount of nodes onboard, dealing with the mobility of each node independently turns into an unmanageable situation because a significant amount of signaling is generated, overloading the wireless link. Since all onboard nodes move at the same time and following the same trajectory, managing the mobility of all devices jointly dramatically reduces the amount of signaling traffic in the wireless link and optimizes the use of the available bandwidth. In addition, if mobility is managed by a single entity, nodes onboard do not need to support mobility, that is, they can be isolated from the mobility management procedures. In fact, in the ETSI technical recommendation ETSI TR 102 638 [1], it is pointed out that the V2X facilities, i.e. facilities to be used from a vehicle to another vehicle or to an entity in the communication infrastructure, have to support in cooperation with network and/or transport layers of the protocol stack transparent mobility management, while the vehicle moves and changes its PoA. Moreover, the NEMO BS protocol is considered the enabling technology in the above-mentioned recommendation.A key factor to be considered in ITS is security. It is even more important to provide security in this scenario than in other communication scenarios due to the critical nature of the information exchanged in this context, and its relation to human safety. More specifically, security properties should not only be to data communication services, but also to the network mobility management exchanges. If mobility management procedures are not protected, attacks could result in breaking ongoing communications, preventing from establishing new ones, or in even isolating the mobile network. At a first sight, this could not be regarded as a major problem, but in the ITS context, where vehicles are likely to benefit from the remote assistance offered by ITS services, aforementioned attacks could become an outsize problem. A clear example of isolation is that not having communication with the vehicle, a car for instance, will not receive the information of an obstacle in its route. Thus, special attention should be paid to secure network mobility management, which to the best of our knowledge, is still a unaddressed issue.Apart from securing mobility management procedures, services to be deployed in the ITS context commonly need to be secured. Due to the critical data they can transport, security provisioning to ITS operational services is evident. In addition, security properties like confidentiality to the information exchanged by the users are also desirable. Moreover, there are applications that transmit personal user data which has to also be protected. Last but not least, legal concerns also apply in the ITS scenario where legal liability related issues should be taken into account, so, security properties like integrity are also demanded. Therefore, security support by the technologies and procedures to be introduced in the ITS context is fundamental to have them accepted by the agents that comprise the transportation scenario [2].Aligned with the need to have secure services, security related standards from ISO focus on defining security requirements for specific ITS applications instead of defining an overall security framework that guarantees secure mobility and privacy preserving services. In addition, security related standards from ETSI aim at specifying security objectives, requirements and services to secure V2V and V2I communications. However, to the best of our knowledge, little attention has been paid for securing mobility management procedures, regardless of being specifically pointed out that the NEMO BS solution should be used, and a route optimization scheme should be included, which poses additional challenges related to security.Together with communication security, communication efficiency should be provided in emerging scenarios like the ITS, satisfying users' expectations. Moreover, in the ITS scenario, real-time applications will be common, which in fact, poses additional challenges when addressing communication efficiency. In this regard, it is crucial to ensure quality of service (QoS) to applications, also taking into account the highly demanding ones, because user satisfaction is one of the key factors to have novel technologies successfully exploited.The novelty of this paper resides in the assessment of the standardization activity in ITS, specifically analyzing the ISO and ETSI standards related to security provisioning and communication efficiency, and in the feasibility analysis of our NeMHIP protocol for being considered by standardization bodies, by analytically comparing our approach to the standardized NEMO BS protocol in terms of handover signaling delay. In addition, we analyze the performance in terms of delay, jitter and packet loss of the demanding Internet-based video streaming application in a simulation tool, because we consider that it is a good example and a realistic candidate for being deployed of a highly demanding real-time service. From the results obtained, we can conclude that our approach shows satisfactory results and it is feasible for being introduced in the ITS context (Table 1).The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of ITS standardization activity focusing on security and communication efficiency related standards. Section 3 provides an overview of the NeMHIP protocol, which has been designed to cover the need of having secure network mobility while at the same time constitutes a framework to protect user data and services, and ensures efficiency by means of providing required QoS to demanding real time applications. In Section 4, we summarize the security analysis and in Section 5 we present the analytical and simulation-based models developed for evaluating the efficiency of our approach and we show the most relevant obtained results. In Section 5 we also compare obtained analytical results in terms of handover signaling delay with the standardized NEMO BS protocol and show by means of a network simulation tool that key performance parameters of an Internet-based video-streaming application are met. Thus, we demonstrate the feasibility of our approach for being considered by the standardization bodies. Finally, Section 6 provides concluding remarks.Owing to their major role in the design of communication architectures, we will next highlight the main standardization initiatives that have been undertaken by organizations such as ISO or ETSI. It is interesting to mention that having detected that ITS is an essential application scenario, standardization organizations have established ad hoc working groups among ETSI, ISO, IEEE, IETF and ITU for the joint development of specifications. On the other hand, industry is also actively contributing to the specification of communication solutions for ITS.In this working context, different architectures are being designed. The ISO 21210 recommendations where the CALM (Communication Access for Land Mobiles) architecture [3] and the ETSI architecture are defined [4] are the most relevant. Due to the complexity derived from the characteristics of the ITS context, the architectures that are being standardized are open and still let room for further introduction of new protocols and procedures. This issue results in having several protocols and functionalities underspecified, so there is a real need to further define them to have the demanded necessities covered. An example of the underspecification is the inclusion of Internet connectivity provisioning to vehicles, which has lately been considered in the definition of these communication architectures because it has been found that Internet-based applications are beneficial for safety, and fundamental for non-safety purposes [5]. In fact, the ETSI TR 102 638 [1] document, where the Basic Set of Applications (BSA) for the ITS context are described, lightly introduces applications that require Internet connectivity. Table 2shows the BSA defined. Additionally, ETSI TR 102 638 points out that Global Internet services may include infotainment services, but to the best of our knowledge, no further specification of Internet-based applications is provided in the standards.Apart from the work of the standardization bodies, many efforts are being put by different research entities to address the challenges posed by ITS scenarios with respect to security and efficiency. In addition, the kind of communications that can take place in ITS scenarios, i.e. V2V or V2I, rises completely different concerns and thus, they demand specific solutions to guarantee the required level of security and efficiency. Among them, we can underline the approach presented in [6], where a delay and reliability aware routing protocol for VANETs which is based on cross layer communication between the MAC layer, where parameters such as the SNR are observed, and the network layers, where the best path is selected, is presented. In the approach introduced in [7] authors introduce a group-based protocol and a mobility model also for VANETs that let car co-drivers and passengers access the Internet only taking into account a public transport company. In this approach an algorithm that defines how a node enters a group or how a node within a group forwards traffic is presented. Both approaches focus on different procedures and technologies that enable efficient data transportation in VANETs, but no reference is provided to the mobility management protocol used. On the other hand, there are works like the ones introduced in [8] that aim at securing and optimizing the handover schemes of Mobile IP and SIP protocols, but do not consider an ITS scenario. In [9], we provide a thorough taxonomy and description of the network mobility management approaches that are introduced so far that aim at ensuring security and efficiency.Next, we provide an overview and analyze the main documents released by the major standardization bodies regarding communication security and efficiency, which, as mentioned in the introductory section, are the cornerstone of any solution for the ITS context. For more details please see the standardization documents.Currently, standards that aim at specifying security services in all possible application types that are deployable in ITS scenarios are being defined. The few available standards, ETSI TR 102 893 [10] and ETSI 102 731 [11], are focused on vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communications. However, Internet services are slightly mentioned, and no specific security concerns are pointed out for them.The ISO organization is also actively contributing to the definition of security requirements for the different applications that can be deployed in the ITS scenario. For example, ISO/TR 11766:2010 [12] standard defines the acquisition of data pursuant to lawful authority for analysis or evidence purposes in the CALM environment. Another example is ISO/TS 17574:2009 [13], which defines security requirements and specifications for a product or system devoted to ITS to be used in an electronic fee collection system. Apart from documents that define security requirements for specific applications, the ISO 16788 IPv6 Networking Security document, which is currently under development, focuses on defining security requirements and functionalities of IPv6 communications under the CALM environment.This document summarizes the results of the TVRA (Threat, Vulnerability and Risk Analysis) conducted in an ITS. Specifically, the analysis considers V2V and vehicle-to-roadside network infrastructure communication services defined in the ITS BSA.The TVRA method followed determines, first of all, the security objectives for the considered ITS communications, and then, defines the security requirements. Regarding security objectives for ITS communications, the standard enumerates the following:•Confidentiality. Any information held or sent by an ITS station (ITS-S) should not be revealed to any unauthorized third party. Moreover, an unauthorized third party should not be able to deduce the user location, identity or the route taken by means of analyzing communication traffic flows.Integrity. Any information held or sent by an ITS-S should be protected from unauthorized modification and manipulation.Availability. Access to the operation and services of authorized users should not be prevented by any malicious activity.Accountability. It should be possible to audit all the modifications to security parameters and applications.Authenticity. Unauthorized users cannot communicate or use restricted services or receive and process data as authorized ones.It is worth pointing out that the confidentiality security objective entails data, location and identity privacy or anonymity. From the security point of view, the mentioned concerns should be treated separately, since each presents its own challenges and requires different solutions. In addition, the location and identity privacy comes face to face with the accountability objective, because the auditing feature has inherent the need to identify and locate the ITS-S. Therefore, a trade-off between both objectives is needed.The ETSI TR 102 893 document suggests security requirements for each of the aforementioned objectives. In most of the cases, the requirements result in specifying that access has to be restricted to ITS-S services and applications, but the means of achieving this restriction is not determined. For the location and identity privacy a more detailed requirement is provided. Specifically, it determines that an ITS-S entity shall not use a persistent user identity with location privacy to an unlimited multicast addresses, and that it may include a persistent user identity with location data sent to a unicast or limited multicast addresses. For the availability objective, it defines that an ITS-S entity should be able to detect Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks. Note that although more detailed requirements are defined for the mentioned objectives the enabling technologies and mechanisms to achieve them are left out of the scope of the document.The TVRA conducted identifies functional and data assets for the vehicles and for the roadside units. With the assets identified, the document provides a thorough threat analysis, identifying the possible attacks, vulnerabilities and risks. It should be highlighted that, despite being mentioned in the document and included in the BSA, the identified assets are exclusively related to ITS services but not for services such as infotainment services that are commonly based on Internet connectivity. It is significant that the document points out that the majority of the threats is considered to have a critical risk. This fact shows the crucial importance of communication security in ITS.Finally, a set of countermeasures is presented. Although, the identified countermeasures are defined for V2V and V2I communications, which in principle, imply short range communications, we highlight the countermeasures that could also be adopted for communications between vehicles and any node connected to the Internet.•Add source identification. The source address must be identifiable and non-forgeable, so that the receiving station can trust on the source address.Digitally sign each message. A message sender can use symmetric or asymmetric cryptography to digitally sign the message. This way, the receiver will have confidence in the originator of the message, its permissions and that the message has not been modified in transit. Kerberos-like or PKI-based signatures are considered.Include a sequence number in each new message. The validity of the received messages can in part be ensured including a sequence number, which is considered practical only for V2I communications.Encrypt the transmission of personal and private data. The encryption of personal and private data can be used for providing location and identity privacy. Moreover, it is considered only effective as a countermeasure on messages that are directed to a specific location, i.e. V2I communications.Use a pseudonym that cannot be linked to the true identity of either the user or user's vehicle. The pseudonyms should prevent from obtaining personal information to an eavesdropper. Nevertheless, at the same time, it should be possible for an ITS authority to resolve the true identify from the pseudonym.As mentioned, more countermeasures such as the reduction of the frequency of beaconing or the implementation of frequency agility within the 5.9GHz band are suggested, which we consider are targeted to short range communications, and have little or none implications in the end-to-end Internet communications.This document describes the mechanisms for having secure and private communications in the ITS context. Specifically, the document gives refinements of the countermeasures against the threats specified in ETSI TR 102 893.The ITS security architecture is also introduced, which details the entities that take part in a secure communication. Note that this architecture is tailored to secure V2V and V2I communications, which communicate using a 5GHz band between the communicating ITS-Ss.Next, we describe the main security services that are defined as the implementation of the refined countermeasures for the given architecture.•Security associations (SAs): establishment, updating, usage and removement. The goal of the SA establishment process is to share an encryption key between the ITS-Ss. This establishment is based on a keying material generation process, which can optionally include a challenge–response strategy. The document points out that the number of keys, their type and how they are derived is out of the scope.Integrity protection. The document simply mentions that the integrity protection can be accomplished either using cryptographically generated check values, or non-cryptographic ones. No further definition of the algorithms to protect the integrity of the messages is provided.Replay protection. The document only specifies that the replay protection is achieved using either timestamps or sequence numbers.As can be observed, the ETSI TS 102 791 document defines the functional description of the security services, while the specification of the enabling technologies, algorithms and protocols is left out of the scope. This issue opens the door to propose communication solutions for ITS detailing the service-enablers and technologies, and resulting in a ready-to-go approach. Moreover, although the ITS scenario has inherent the demand to address mobility and security, to the best of our knowledge, no specific requirements for securing the network mobility management have been gathered by ETSI or ISO documents.In a demanding scenario like the ITS, different applications have to be taken into account when defining application requirements. On the one hand, there are applications related to the operation and control of a vehicle, which must be provided fulfilling specific requirements. And on the other hand, communication frameworks should satisfy customer expectations regarding end-to-end QoS for all applications, also for infotainment services. Although these are briefly mentioned in the BSA, the need to provide them also in the ITS is a reality. This type of services is nowadays a true demand from users so, any technology to be introduced in the ITS context has to cover this need. Moreover, satisfied users will contribute to the success of the technology, and to the exploitation of new business models. Consequently, it is essential to analyze and evaluate the QoS provided by new communication solutions, specially, in environments like the ITS scenario, where highly demanding real-time applications will be a reality, as a key factor for its feasibility and success.Standardization on QoS aspects has a long trajectory. In fact, different standardization bodies are working on defining requirements for different classes of services, or types of applications, which should be provided regardless of the scenario and of the type of technologies used underneath. Specifically, ITU and 3GPP have been working on defining different information services and classifying them into different classes, considering their features and needs. In the 3GPP TS 22.105 (11/2012) Report [14], also published by the ETSI [15], and the ITU-T G.1010 Recommendation [16] user expectations for different types of applications are indicated. It is important to mention the ITU-T Y.1541 (12/2011) Recommendation [17], which defines classes of network QoS, with objectives for Internet Protocol network performance parameters.ISO and ETSI are both also paying attention to communication performance in the ITS. In fact, in the ETSI TR 102 638 [1] document, different system performance requirements are outlined, since the availability of those requirements will condition the selection and behavior of the applications. The technical requirements that are specifically mentioned are the following:•Communication performance requirements: maximum latency time, maximum round trip time.Vehicle positioning requirements: absolute position accuracy, relative position accuracy, map matching accuracy.Communication systems reliability and dependability requirements: radio coverage, Bit Error Rate (BER), black zones.Security requirements: signature, message and certification verification.As can be observed, these requirements are mere representations of the kind of information that is required to select available applications, but additional critical requirements that vary depending on the nature and type of the applications are not mentioned. In this regard, the ISO organization has published several documents, defining the performance requirements for specific ITS applications. For example, the ISO/TS 17444-1:2012 [18] document, where the metrics for the charging and performance of electronic fee collection systems are defined.Industry and the research community have also been working to provide insight in the specification of QoS requirements for applications in different ITS scenarios. For example, for the railway scenarios, we must mention the performance requirements in terms of QoS parameters for the ETCS service defined by EIRENE [19].Owing to the fact that network mobility management procedures are inherent in the ITS scenario, and since optimum application performance is desired, the network mobility management procedures should also contribute to it and do not prevent from fulfilling QoS requirements of user applications. This issue will be difficultly achievable by solutions that do not consider efficient routing schemes because packets usually traverse longer paths than necessary, delaying the transmission. In this regard, the ETSI recommends using route optimization techniques to improve the performance provided to final users for all types of services [1], which show the importance attached to the performance of end user applications by standardization bodies. The IETF has also worked in defining NEMO Route Optimization Requirements for different scenarios, considering non-critical safety applications and infotainment [5,20]. This last document is based on works carried out by the Car2Car Communication Consortium, ISP Technical Committee 204 Working Group 16 (CALM) and ETSI TC ITS, which reflect the awareness of the main agents working in the ITS context about the necessity of guaranteeing an adequate performance.From the assessment and study of the standardization documents conducted, we can conclude that specific security requirements for network mobility management procedures are not specified, and documents mainly focus on securing V2V and V2I communications. Additionally, standards point out that the network mobility management protocol considered, NEMO BS, should include route optimization schemes to improve the performance provided to end users. Nevertheless, the specification of a secure network mobility management protocol that at the same time follows route optimization schemes still remains open.As mentioned before, the feasibility to have communication services in the ITS scenario strongly relies on the existence of technologies that enable security and mobility. Moreover, in order to be feasible for practical deployment, the solution has to ensure efficient communication services, preferably in terms of critical parameters such as handover signaling delay and end user application performance parameters, fulfilling their QoS requirements.In the light of the ISO and ETSI documents analyzed, and having observed the underspecification of a secure network mobility management solution, we herein give an overview of our approach named NeMHIP, which provides secure and efficient communication services in the demanding ITS context. The fundamental ideas and the basic philosophy behind the NeMHIP protocol were briefly introduced in [21].The need of identification in ITS is constantly mentioned in the analyzed standardization documents, but no reference to possible implementation techniques is provided. Currently, the namespaces used in the Internet to identify a node are IP addresses. However, the use of IP addresses as identifiers has significant shortcomings. To mention, when a node changes its IP address, transport layer connections will be broken. In addition, when IP addresses are used as namespaces, the authentication of the host is not supported, which may entail spoofing attacks. Furthermore, the use of IP addresses as namespaces does not provide privacy-preserving communications. Based on these arguments, our approach is built over the paradigm that any node in the Internet has to be univocally identified through an identifier and located using its IP address currently in use for routing purposes in order to deal with the challenges introduced by mobility. In fact, this strategy is the core idea of the approaches that aim at introducing mobility in the TCP/IP stack.In our case, we trust on the architecture defined by the Host Identity Protocol (HIP) [22], where the nodes are identified using public–private key pairs, and are located using their IP addresses. This way, the limitations of the TCP/IP stack to deal with mobility are overcome effortlessly. It should be noted that the consideration of HIP as the base protocol results in assuming that all the communication endpoints support the HIP protocol. Moreover, the introduction of cryptographic namespaces aids inherently in providing security services to the communications and in mitigating security attacks that otherwise would be difficult to address. However, introducing cryptographic namespaces in the TCP/IP architecture requires a new resolution level. Although at a first sight defining a network mobility management protocol based on a protocol that introduces new cryptographic namespaces may seem to have more drawbacks than benefits, the fact is that limitations related to mobility and security support of the TCP/IP stack are straightforwardly addressed.As mentioned, the provision of secure mobility management in the ITS context is the cornerstone for the feasibility of these scenarios. Moreover, application security turns into essential due to the nature of the exchanged data.Owing to the fact that our solution is based on HIP, which is an end-to-end security association establishment and maintenance protocol, those characteristics are directly extrapolated to our network mobility management protocol defined for ITS scenarios. Specifically, NeMHIP provides the means to securely establish a communication between any nodes located in the outside network, for instance, a node connected to the Internet, i.e. a Correspondent Node (CN), and a node within the mobile network, i.e. a Mobile Network Node (MNN). In addition, NeMHIP provides a secure management of the mobility of the network and the location of the MNNs, letting the MNNs be transparent to the mobility management process, as recommended by the standards [1]. That is, in our approach, the mobility is managed by a specific entity, the Mobile Router (MR).With the goal of integrating the security and mobility management in a single framework, the pillars of the strategy we have considered in the design of NeMHIP are the following:•A hybrid solution. The architecture defined by NeMHIP merges the end-to-end concept of the basic HIP and the delegation of signaling rights paradigm to exploit the benefits of both, resulting in a simple and efficient solution.Centralization of mobility and security frameworks. The mobility procedures and the end-to-end security association maintenance procedures are centralized in the MR. This framework reduces management complexity, generated signaling overhead and consequently, gains efficiency. This way, a suitable security level is ensured regardless of the mobility of the mobile network, and security vulnerabilities related to the mobility management are mitigated.Generation of independent and secret keying material in a single exchange between the CN, the MR and the MNN. We have defined a mechanism based on an authenticated Diffie-Hellman (DH) named NeMHIP Association Establishment, for generating keying material agreed upon between the CN and the MR is used for securing mobility management procedures, while the latter is used for securing the end-to-end data exchanges.Management of security associations by a third party (MR). The end-to-end security associations established between the CN and the MNN endpoints are managed in a secure way by the MR. This behavior allows reducing the signaling exchanges required, while at the same time renewing end-to-end keys to avoid vulnerabilities related to mobility, and keeping the MNNs oblivious to the mobility of the mobile network.The NeMHIP protocol consists of three different and complementary procedures to deal with the secure mobility management requirements of the ITS scenario. These procedures are derived from the basic HIP protocol, but new messages, fields and processing rules have been defined to support secure and efficient network mobility.•NeMHIP Registration. This procedure is required for ensuring reachability from the outside network, i.e. any node connected to the Internet (CN), to any node onboard (MNN). By means of this service, every node within the mobile network is registered in the RendezVous Server (RVS) and will be reachable. Note that the identifier of the MNN together with the identifier and locator of the MR will be registered. As can be observed in Fig. 1, NeMHIP Registration provides simultaneous registration of all of the identifiers of the mobile nodes onboard in a single exchange, which contributes to the efficiency of the procedure and timeliness of the reachability to embarked equipment.NeMHIP Association Establishment. This procedure is the previous step to the secure data exchange between the MNN and the CN as it has the goal of establishing a security association between both nodes. During the security association establishment, the CN and the MNN generate keying material from which encryption and integrity keys are derived, and they agree upon the encryption and integrity algorithms to protect user data messages. In the same NeMHIP association establishment process, the MR and the CN also generate keying material and agree upon keys to protect mobility management messages. That is, two independent and parallel SAs are generated. Fig. 2shows the schema of the exchanged packets. The NeMHIP Association Establishment is based on the authenticated three-way DH handshake. By means of the DH exchange, keying material is agreed upon between the peers. Specifically, two different DH exchanges are executed, but both take place simultaneously. That is, packets between the CN and the MR convey information of DH.2, which corresponds to the MR–CN SA and is further used to protect mobility management (drawn in orange in the figure), and also information of DH.1 (drawn in blue in the figure), which corresponds to the CN-MNN SA and is further used to protect user data packets. All the packets convey the identifiers of the endpoints, as well as their location as recommended by the standards [10]. Additionally, a challenge–response procedure is also included for both SAs, i.e. between the CN and the MR and between the CN and the MNN, as suggested by the standards [11]. Since encryption and integrity keys are derived from the keying material agreed upon the different entities, keying material indexes are agreed for this purpose. It must be noted that the keying material index used in the generation of end-to-end (CN–MNN) integrity and encryption keys is also provided to the MR, which is used in the NeMHIP Association Update process. However, the MR is not able to compute those end-to-end keys because it is not able to generate the end-to-end keying material. Consequently, data privacy is ensured.NeMHIP Association Update. This procedure is used for maintaining the established communications and ensuring the continuous reachability to MNNs as it is used for updating the already established NeMHIP association. Thus, this procedure answers to mobility and security related demands of the mobile network. Specifically, messages exchanged in the mobility management process are sent protected between the MR and the CN. At the same time, whenever a mobility event occurs, the MR will suggest to the MNN and to the CN to renew their end-to-end keys to guarantee secure mobility and mitigate possible attacks related to the change of the wireless access link. In order to do so, it informs to the MNN and to the CN about the old and the new keying material index, from where they should derive new keys. It must be pointed out that the MR only notifies the new location (IP address) to the CN, but not to the MNN. Fig. 3shows the NeMHIP Association Update schema.Although standards recommend that the mobility should be transparent to MNNs, this transparency issue should be rethought. If MNNs are notified by the MR about the handover execution process informing them about the new communication features like BER, RTT, etc. that information could be useful for the upper layers like TCP or the application layer of the MNNs, to prepare themselves by adapting their throughput, congestion windows, etc. to the characteristics of the new wireless access link. This way, the penalization of the applications performance that results from the handover will be smoothed. Moreover, requesting to renew the end-to-end SAs to the MNNs will avoid security vulnerabilities related to the change of the PoA and specially those inherent in the wireless access technology change. Owing to these reasons, mobility should be transparent for MNNs in the sense that they do not need to manage their own mobility, but they could take advantage of being aware of the mobility events to improve performance and security.As mentioned, thanks to being based on HIP, the NeMHIP solution provides inherent security services. Specifically, HIP ensures the following security services: (1) mutual authentication, which is achieved thanks to the use of public key-based signature, and thus, a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is present; (2) integrity protection, which is achieved through a cryptographic Hashed Message Authentication Code (HMAC) computed using a symmetric key derived from the keying material agreed upon in the authentication phase; and (3) confidentiality protection, which is achieved by means of a shared encryption key derived from the keying material agreed upon in the authentication phase. HIP defines that the keying material has to be generated through an authenticated DH exchange. Additionally, the algorithms to derive the integrity and encryption keys are also specified [22,23]. Since HIP was designed for being resilient against DoS attacks [22], our protocol NeMHIP also inherits this properties, therefore, it also ensures the availability security objective.In the case of NeMHIP, the aforementioned security properties are guaranteed for the end-to-end SA established between the CN and the MNN (used for protecting data), and also for the SA established between the MR and the CN (used for protecting mobility management messages). Consequently, we can say that NeMHIP provides an integrated communication framework that allows ensuring both user data protection as well as mobility management protection.Another security property that NeMHIP provides is replay attack protection. This characteristic is guaranteed through the introduction of randomly generated signed data and sequence numbers in the exchanges.Thanks to the inclusion of a new namespace, user privacy or anonymity is straightforward. Each node of the NeMHIP architecture owns an identifier that univocally identifies it. These identifiers will at a first sight be long-term identifiers that will be used for lawful interception and/or auditing purposes. By means of using multiple short-term identifiers mapped with the mentioned long-term identifier, the anonymity will be ensured. One of the drawbacks of this solution is that an additional resolution level is needed, where the multiple short-term identifiers are mapped with the long-term identifier. However, this issue could be solved by having this information stored and updated in the ITS authority, and having communication among different ITS authorities, comprising a DNS-alike architecture.Comparing the security services offered by our protocol, with the security objectives, countermeasures and security services defined by the standards in [10 and 11] respectively, we can argue that NeMHIP meets the security objectives and that the countermeasures defined by our protocol are aligned with those defined by standards. Furthermore, the fulfillment of security properties has been demonstrated in [24]. The security services provided by NeMHIP also follow the services defined by the standards to secure ITS communications. Moreover, we provide additional services and we also identify the technologies to accomplish them, to ensure secure mobility management that was not specifically considered by the standardization bodies, which in fact, are very important:•Mutual authentication between the MR and the CN. Mobility management packets are authenticated through a signature and the integrity key previously agreed in the NeMHIP association establishment process and used in the HMAC computation.Integrity protection. Mobility management packets exchanged cannot be modified en route thanks to the use of the HMAC field and the signature computed over the entire packet.Key freshness. Thanks to the inclusion of a randomly generated piece of data by the CN that has to be echoed by the MR in the UPDATE 2 packet, the new keys generated during the mobility management process will be fresh.Corroboration of the liveliness of the MR and the CN. The randomly generated piece of data introduced by the CN and echoed by the MR corroborates the liveliness of both parties.Replay attack protection. Mobility management packets include a sequence number, which is used to protect them from replay attacks.In conclusion, the proposed approach covers the needs found in the standardization documents for providing secure mobility management in the ITS context, while at the same time meets the requirements specified by them.NeMHIP provides communication efficiency to ensure QoS to user applications by means of two complementary strategies. On the one hand, the end-to-end nature of the basic HIP results in addressing the route optimization need pointed out by the standardization organizations [1], which aids in improving the performance. On the other hand, we contribute to the fulfillment of application QoS thanks to the hybrid strategy of managing mobility and security in an integrated manner. That is, since mobility is managed by the MR, no end-to-end (MNN–CN) exchanges are required in the process, but the MR itself is in charge of requesting the rekeying of the end-to-end communications when a mobility event occurs. Consequently, the signaling overhead introduced by these two processes that in fact come together (mobility management and end-to-end security association maintenance), is reduced compared to other approaches that are based on the independent management of both of them.In addition, the NeMHIP Registration procedure reduces the delay and the signaling overhead significantly, compared to other approaches that do not consider bulk registering of the nodes, which we demonstrated in [25].As the NeMHIP protocol assumes that all the communication endpoints support the HIP protocol, a compatibility solution to enable the communication between NeMHIP upgraded scenarios and legacy nodes is required.If a transportation agent decides to deploy new technologies and systems onboard to enhance its services upgrading to HIP, this will result in having mobile islands that demand Internet connectivity. At the same time, it is hardly probable to have a pure overall HIP architecture deployed; therefore, a communication solution to enable the coexistence of NeMHIP upgraded systems and the current Internet are required. Through this compatibility solution between legacy nodes and NeMHIP-aware nodes, we also assist in the promotion and deployment of our approach, reducing the impact of its introduction in the already deployed architecture.In order to make the compatibility possible, middleboxes between the legacy and the NeMHIP-upgraded nodes are required. These middleboxes translate HIP signaling messages into legacy messages to make the communication possible. As a result of introducing these intermediate entities which will act as proxies, the behavior of the communication endpoints does not need to be modified, which is a key factor for having a feasible and successful compatibility solution.This compatibility solution is based on individually identifying the legacy nodes through pseudoidentifiers managed by the proxy. This approach provides flexibility to choose the security level required in each circumstance, so an on-demand security solution for the legacy node is achieved. Following this strategy, an enhanced resolution process is defined to resolve the individual pseudoidentifiers of the legacy nodes and locate them in order to enable the establishment of a communication between a legacy node and a NeMHIP-aware node and vice versa.Due to the security, efficiency and compatibility properties it presents, NeMHIP is considered a good candidate for being applied in the demanding ITS context.One of the core functionalities that introduces our approach in the ITS scene is the provision of security. As described before, security is provided in two different planes: in the signaling plane, and in the data plane. The formal security evaluation conducted over our approach is thoroughly presented in our previous works [24].In this section, we provide a summary of the evaluation of the security of the mobility management procedure, and more specifically of the ability to rekey the end-to-end association involving the MR. To this end, we developed the NeMHIP model in the AVISPA automatic security evaluation tool [26]. In order to evaluate that no security vulnerabilities exist in the process of generating new end-to-end keys based on a keying material index determined by the third party (the MR), we have defined an active intruder that follows the widely known Dolev–Yao model [27]. In the security tests performed, we have defined that the intruder acts as the MNN, the MR and the CN. The execution of the security tests using the OFMC and the CL-AtSe back-ends, which analyze all the possible attacks in the search space, and also analyze the security of the algebraic theory with respect to the cryptographic operators used, has shown that there are no attacks. This is because although the intruder can obtain the new index, since it is not aware of the keying material generated in the NeMHIP Association Establishment, it cannot compute the new end-to-end keys. See [24] for further details.Consequently, we can certify that the mobility management of our approach ensures key freshness, integrity protection, confidentiality protection and replay attack protection.As mentioned, the ITS scenario is a highly demanding scenario in terms of communication efficiency. In this section, we compare our approach in terms of handover signaling delay with the standardized NEMO BS protocol. In addition, we also demonstrate that it provides satisfactory QoS to highly demanding user applications.In this subsection, we describe the analysis conducted over the mobility management scheme defined in our approach. One of the most significant parameters in a mobility management solution is the time required for completing the mobility management process. This parameter is critical because the fulfillment of user application QoS parameters could be at stake if the mobility management procedure does not provide acceptable performance. Because of this, we have developed an analytical model to evaluate the delay of the mobility management process, also named handover signaling delay throughout the paper.In [28] we presented the analytical modeling of user applications to analyze how link layer retransmissions and the retransmissions of our protocol affect to the performance of the VoIP application. Unlike in [28], in this paper, we do not consider the retransmissions nor user applications and focus the study of scalability issues regarding number of MNNs and mobile networks in a specific cell, to compare the handover signaling delay, i.e. the mobility management process merely excluding user application performance, of our approach and of the NEMO BS approach.In this study we assume that the cell residence time of the moving network is an exponentially distributed variable with mean value 1/ηMR. For computing the cell crossing rate, we have selected the City Section Model (CSM) [29] to model the mobility.Let NMNNand M be the number of MNNs per moving network and the number of moving networks per cell respectively.Whenever a user requests a communication with a different CN, a new NeMHIP association is established. We define a Poisson distribution with average session arrival rate λSA, for modeling the connection query arrival process for each MNN. We also assume that the established NeMHIP association duration time is also an exponentially distributed variable, with mean value 1/μd. In the same way, as the MNNs may request end-to-end NeMHIP association updates, due to rekeying necessities, we define the time elapsed between two consecutive NeMHIP association updates requested by a single MNN as anexponentially distributed variable with mean value 1/ηMNN. We also assume an unloaded cell where all the requests are served, following the First Come First Served (FCFS) algorithm.In NeMHIP, all the established end-to-end associations have to be updated with each mobility event. We define a subsession as a part of an end-to-end association contained in a certain cell. Therefore, the average number of simultaneous subsessions per moving network is the same as the number of simultaneous associations, but with a higher subsession arrival rate and a shorter duration.As the association arrival process follows a Poisson distribution, the probability to have k subsessions in a moving network when a handover takes place, i.e. k subsessions that are updated at the same time, is computed as:(1)Prk=NMNNλSA/μdkk!e−NMNNλSA/μdwhere NMMMλSA/μdis the average number of subsessions per moving network.Assuming that there is equilibrium between the arrivals and departures of the moving networks in the cell, the average number of moving network handovers is computed as:(2)λHONEMO=ηMRμdMλSA.In order to compute the handover signaling delay, we have defined a memoryless continuous time Markov Chain that models the moving network arrival process in a certain cell, i.e. the number of subsessions to be handed over in a cell. Fig. 4shows the queueing system defined for evaluating the handover signaling delay.Each state of the chain models the number of simultaneous NeMHIP UPDATE procedures within a cell. Notice that the transition rate between states i and i+1 depends on the probability of havingPri+1subsessions and the NEMO handover rateλHONEMO.The equilibrium equation of the Markov Chain presented above is the following:∑k=0∞PrkλHONEMO+μπi=μπi+1+∑j=0i−1Pri−jλHONEMOπjλHONEMOπ0=μπ1where πiis the probability of being the system in state i and μ is the service time of the packet in the wireless link.LetN¯be the average number of subsessions in a cell computed asN¯=∑i=0∞iπi. Applying Little's formula [30] the handover signaling delay is obtained as:(3)HOdelay=∑i=0∞iπiλHONEMO.Following the same guidelines, a queueing system for evaluating NEMO BS has been worked out. Details are omitted for brevity.This section shows the most relevant results of the performance evaluation.•Impact of the number of MNNs in the handover signaling delay. Unlike NEMO BS, the NeMHIP handover signaling delay depends on the number of MNNs onboard and on the user behavior requesting new connections, λSA, that results in establishing new NeMHIP associations that have to be updated. With the goal of studying the case where the MR is the limiting entity, we have assumed a scenario where a single moving network is present, and that the wireless link has a service time defined by μ=1000. Figs. 5 and 6show the impact of the aforementioned parameters in the handover signaling delay.As expected, the handover delay of the NEMO BS protocol remains constant regardless of the number of MNNs in the moving network, while this delay increases for the NeMHIP protocol. As can be seen in Fig. 5, for the case of 25 MNNs, the difference of the delay of the NeMHIP protocol compared to the NEMO BS protocol can be reduced to 21μs with an average connection request rate of λSA=0.0001, i.e. one connection every 1000s.On the other hand, the difference between the delays of both protocols can be 140ms when the average connection duration time is μd=1/60 as can be observed in Fig. 6. That is, the performance of the NeMHIP protocol highly depends on the user behavior and service types. Therefore, we can conclude that the NeMHIP protocol can be exploited for services that require a high security level and a low association request rate and low duration, like ITS operational services, which are mandatory for controlling the operation of the vehicle and commonly transport a low amount of data.•Impact of the number of moving networks in the handover signaling delay. With the goal of analyzing the limitation of the wireless link, we have considered the case where there are several moving networks with a single MNN onboard. For doing so, we have considered that the wireless link is also defined by a service time of μ=1000 (Fig. 7).In this scenario, the NeMHIP protocol can have a 1.38ms higher delay than NEMO BS in the case where λSA=0.01, and an increment of 47.5ms in the case of μd=1/180 as can be observed in Fig. 8. In addition, we have observed that the scalability in terms of number of moving networks provides better results than the scalability in terms of number of MNNs, that is, in the analyzed scenarios the MR can be considered a more limiting element compared to the wireless link. It is worth pointing out that in the case where the connection request arrival rate is λSA=0.0001, the NeMHIP protocol outperforms NEMO BS. Hence, we can conclude that end-to-end network mobility management protocols can be successfully exploited in scenarios where the connection request rate is low while the number of moving networks can be high.It should be mentioned that the handover process comprises other procedures that result in incrementing the overall handover delay such as the IPv6 Duplicated Address Detection (DAD) process which may take 1s [31]. Therefore, the aforementioned increase of the NeMHIP handover process compared to the NEMO BS protocol is affordable. Notice that this increase is the result of introducing end-to-end security properties to the communications, which is crucial in the ITS context.In this section, we show the feasibility of our approach in terms of user application QoS satisfaction. We have selected a demanding application, the video streaming application, which models a common real-time application in these scenarios like the transmission of the image in real time triggered by a specific event (e.g. the transmission of the video image captured by a car when an accident has happened to evaluate the damages, to aid in solving caused problems, etc.), in order to assess if the QoS parameters are satisfied when our approach is running underneath. To this end, we have selected the OMNeT++ discrete event simulation tool. The advantage of a performance evaluation based on simulation tests is the ability to perform evaluations under scenarios that are not easily deployable in a real test bed. Furthermore, the simulation tool provides the ability to evaluate our protocol under different scenarios that cannot be captured by analytical modeling due to the assumptions which the analytical model considers, such as link layer mechanisms which are modeled as mere delays. Consequently, an additional view of how the proposed protocol performs is presented to better show how the behavior of the proposed solution.In order to evaluate the performance of our solution analyzing user application QoS fulfillment, we have considered the network topology shown in Fig. 9.The network topology has been configured as explained next. The MR is located 1.5 Km away from the AP_home in the x axis when the experiment start. The distance between APs is 6 Km. Regarding physical and MAC parameters of IEEE 802.11 technology, the configuration that has been introduced in the wireless module of the OMNeT++ is shown in Table 2.The MNN transmits 2mW and has a sensibility of −89dBm. The MR transmits 1W to communicate with the Access Point (AP) which acts as the point of attachment to the Internet and also has a sensibility of −89dBm.For modeling the delays in the networking elements, we have considered that R3 and R2 routers have processing delays of 10 and 20μs respectively and that the wireless and wired link latencies are 0.2ms and 0.5μs. The propagation delay in the link between the R2 router and the RVS has been set to 100ms. The propagation delay between the R2 router and the CN has been configured as 120ms and 95ms as the propagation delay of the link between the R2 router and the HIP DNS server. These values correspond to the mean values of a test battery conducted from a PC located in the I2T lab [32] and common servers in the Internet (www.google.com, www.youtube.es) to measure the delay. In addition, as a database writing process takes place in the RVS whenever a MNN is registered, we consider that this process takes 0.1ms per each MNN.On the other hand, with the goal of having a realistic simulation model we have considered the processing time of the NeMHIP packets in the involved nodes, i.e. MNN, MR, CN and RVS. Following the benchmarking of cryptographic algorithms available at [33] and summarized in Table 3, we have defined the processing times for the NeMHIP packets.Regarding the mobility model selected, we have considered linear mobility for the mobile network. Linear mobility perfectly fits with certain vehicular scenarios such as the railway scenario or the motorways.With respect to the modeling of the video streaming application, we have assumed that the video server is located in the mobile network, that is, the MNN acts as the server, while the video client is located in the Internet, hence, the CN will act as the client. Consequently, the data is transmitted from the MNN to the CN.We have defined that the size of the video stream packet is 1000B and that the video to be transmitted has 10MB. We have also defined that the sending interval between packets is 50ms. The duration of the simulation is 2000s and the video streaming starts at t=50s.In this section, we present the metrics obtained when analyzing the performance of the video streaming application for different wireless link capacities, and compare the results with the QoS recommendations specified in ITU-T Y.1541 and 3GPP TS 22.105.Fig. 10shows the impact of the wireless link capacity in the end-to-end delay of the video streaming packets.As expected, the higher the wireless link capacity is, the lower the end-to-end delay is. Again, this is because with a higher wireless link capacity the throughput is increased, and consequently, the transmission delay of the wireless link is reduced, hence, the overall end-to-end delay is reduced. The 3GPP TS 22.105 recommendation states that the video streaming delay should be preferably <150ms and 400ms at most, while the ITU-T Y.1541 recommendation defines that the end-to-end delay should be <1s. From the results obtained and as shown in Fig. 10, we can say that the end-to-end delay of video streaming packets satisfies both ITU-T and 3GPP recommendations with a probability of 99% for the wireless link capacities studied.The jitter parameter is not a critical metric for the video streaming application. This is because buffering mechanisms are commonly utilized, and because the compression methods commonly used (MPEG2, MPEG4) implement iterative methods to compute missing samples. Nevertheless, and for the sake of homogeneity, Fig. 11shows that when the wireless link capacity increases, the variation of the end-to-end delay decreases.Fig. 12shows the lost packets of the video streaming application.As expected, the percentage of lost packets increases when the wireless link capacity increases. This is because with a higher capacity, not only packets are transmitted with a higher throughput, but also the number of packets transmitted in the same period of time is higher. That is, the amount of packets transmitted during the handover delay is higher, so the percentage of lost packets is higher. In this case, we can affirm that this metric satisfies with 99% of probability of the 3GPP TS 22.105 recommendation with all the wireless link capacities studied, as the recommendation specifies that the amount of lost packets should be <2%. However, the ITU-T Y.1541 recommendation, which defines that the lost packets should be 0.1%, is only satisfied by the mean value of the metric for wireless link capacities lower than 20Mbps.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The feasibility of being ITS a reality strongly relies on the existence of technologies that enable mobility. Furthermore, security and service performance constitute a pillar for the satisfaction of users, and thus for the introduction and promotion of new communication technologies in the ITS context.The ongoing work in standardization organizations that aim at defining communication solutions for the flourishing ITS scenario is significant. In this regard, in this paper we contribute with the study of the standards related to ITS highlighting the main concerns related to security and communication efficiency that should be covered. The work from ETSI and ISO stand out among others in ITS, but there are organizations such as IETF, IEEE and ITU that are also working on defining requirements and providing recommendations. Currently, work is still under development. This fact provides the opportunity to contribute to the specification of new solutions and approaches.Owing to the implications ITS presents in human safety, communication security turns into a critical concern. In addition, the need of mobility management is inherent in the ITS scenario. Consequently, mobility management should also be provided securely. It is worth pointing that standardization documents define security objectives, requirements, services and even countermeasures, but enabling technologies and mechanisms to achieve them is not specified. Moreover, the defined security related features are general, and are basically defined for V2V and V2I communications, while security on Internet-based communications is not specified. In addition, the standards recommend the use of NEMO BS with route optimization schemes to manage mobility in ITS, which poses additional security challenges, but no reference to how can this be addressed is provided.As mentioned, user satisfaction and communication efficiency are intimately related. In this regard, ITS related standards rely on the use of the aforementioned route optimization schemes in mobility management and point out interesting metrics for being considered as communication performance requirements, but no specific value is given for them. Because of this, research should continue on the specification of application performance requirements tailored to the ITS context.Based on the analysis carried out of ITS standards that tackle security and efficiency, we contribute to the ITS standardization activity with respect to security and mobility by evaluating the suitability of our secure and efficient network mobility management solution, NeMHIP, to be considered as an alternative solution to NEMO BS. This solution meets the security related aspects specified by the standards, while it also includes security services for network mobility management procedures that were missing in the current standards. Moreover, although our approach relies on the introduction of a new namespace for the nodes, it is considered affordable to introduce it in the current Internet architecture. In addition, in this paper we show by means of analytical evaluation that NeMHIP provides acceptable results and even outperforms the standardized NEMO BS solution in specific cases. We have also evaluated the performance of the video streaming application in the OMNeT++ simulation tool, as an example of a highly demanding real-time service, showing that the introduction of NeMHIP does not prevent from fulfilling the QoS-related ITU-T Y.1541 and 3GPP TS 22.105 recommendations. All of these features make NeMHIP a feasible and worthy solution for being considered by the standardization organizations.