@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Building trust from context similarity measures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have defined the concept of similarity measure.We have used similarity measures to define similarity networks.We have defined a trust model based on similarity networks in order to establish trust along a path of entities.The trust model has been validated in a proximity-based scenario where the most trusted entity is identified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Similarity networks,Trust model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Trust is an essential feature of any system where entities have to collaborate. Trust can assist entities making decisions before establishing collaborations. It is desirable to simulate the behaviour of users as in social environments where they tend to trust users who have common interests or share some of their opinions, i.e., users similar to them. In this paper, we introduce the concept of context similarity among entities and derive a similarity network. Then, we define a trust model that allows us to establish trust along a path of entities. We validate our model in a proximity-based trust establishment scenario.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Online communities are becoming more and more popular as it is shown by the growth on the number of users. The types of relationships that are taking place in an online community might vary. Sometimes users have to interact among them and some other times they might only be interested in knowing the opinion of others about a certain issue. Due precisely to the growth of these networks there are a huge variety of users registered, not all of them honest or reliable enough. When information is to be shared or a user is interested in knowing the opinions of others, uncertainty might be a problem. It would be desirable to have a tool that aids users in overcoming this uncertainty, and it is then when trust can play an essential role. The question that arises is to whom to trust in an online community and how to establish that trust. Moreover, this trust cannot be a general concept or a general value that can be obtained by a user and valid for all its functions in the network. Trust has to depend on specific contexts where the user or entity is involved. It is a well-known example that one might trust a dentist to take care of your teeth but not for repairing your car. There is not a consensus on the definition of trust. Many different definitions can be found in the literature, depending in most of the occasions, on the type of system where they are applied and on the problem they address. However, it is becoming an essential feature to be considered in any system where entities have to collaborate among them. Trust can assist the decision-making process by determining which is the most suitable entity to collaborate with in a system.In a social setting, people tend to trust those who are close to them in taste, opinion or hobbies, i.e., those who they believe are similar to them. It becomes then natural to try to simulate this behaviour in a computational setting. Nowadays, social networks are experiencing the growth of the so-called recommender systems [1,2]. These systems use the opinions of members of a community to help others in identifying what products or information they might be interested in following other users' opinions or tastes.In this paper we intend to establish trust in computational settings by following a similar approach as the one users adopt in social settings. That is, we are interested in finding which users are similar to a given one for a specific context in an online community. Following this similarity between users a function for deriving trust is defined. As a first step towards determining similarity between users we create similarity networks that can be represented by a graph. Then, we derive trust by using the similarity graph. This similarity graph will have a trust graph associated to it. Once the trust graph is also established we calculate trust by following a specific trust propagation model [3], and the similarity values we have calculated earlier.We introduce the concept of similarity networks and design a formal model for them. Similarity between entities or users is defined with respect to a specific context that is relevant to the environment where these entities are. We define trust on top of this concept. This differs from another attempt to relate trust and similarity [4] where the assumption is that certain correlation already exists between trust and similarity and it is shown through some empirical examples. On the contrary, our only assumption is that users are related through a numerical value that defines how far in terms of a specific context they are from each other. This numerical value is a distance in our case. Then, similarity can be calculated by using this distance and a certain threshold that determines the size of the network. It could be the case when there are users who are not related at all since the similarity network depends on the threshold.There are many cases where our model can be used and proven useful. We have presented two case scenarios, a profile matching in social networks and in an emergency scenario where the entities involved are interested in the most suitable entity that could deal with the situation in a satisfactory manner.The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work. The first step towards building our trust model is the definition of similarity networks, which is done in Section 3. The trust model we propose is based on a specific type of trust models called Propagation models, which are presented in Section 4. The proposed model is introduced in Section 5. Some use cases are presented in Section 6. We have validated our model in one of these cases, in particular, a scenario where an emergency arises. The experimental results of the validation are presented in Section 7. Section 8 concludes the paper and outlines the future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
