@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Building an IT service catalog in a small company as the main input for the IT financial management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A metamodel related to IT service catalog and IT service financial ManagementThe metamodel has been experienced in a small company.The solution includes a standard model and a specific model tailored to SME.These models are the base for implementing the IT financial management process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
IT service catalog,Very small, small and medium companies,Process asset library,IT financial management,IT service management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IT departments in non-IT small companies lack guidelines for defining the services they provide and for assigning costs to these services. This article compares international models and standards and describes an approach that can be used by these companies in order to define and implement their service catalog to be used as an input for their IT financial management. The proposed solution is based on the concept of a process asset library. The proposal has been tested in a non-IT small company. The results provide useful insights for companies interested in defining their own service catalog from a standard service catalog.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The past few decades have supposed a drastic transformation in the use of Information Technology (IT) [1]. Since the early 80's until today, the data centers, large and expensive, have been replaced by personal computers that are affordable even for very small and small companies. The current presence of computers in business supports its growth in terms of productivity, regardless of size or industry [2,3]. Also, it is not surprising that IT investments are an ever-increasing cost of business. According to a business report conducted in the U.S. [4], the majority of CEOs (Chief Executive Officers) and CIOs (Chief Information Officers) consider IT as a strategic advantage.Therefore it would be logical to assume that IT spending is under control, after all, it is essential for productivity growth and is considered an important asset, especially for very small and small companies. However, this is not what happens: according to Schneider [5], 86% of U.S. financial executives reported that their IT expenditures are not under adequate control. These are alarming news for the corporate world, especially for very small and small companies that are a total of 99% of companies worldwide [6] and, particularly, in Spain [7] (see Table 1).It is also a common practice in companies that their financial departments include the costs of the IT infrastructure without making any distinction with other existing costs. This is worse, if the company does not know what services associate to these costs (lack of service catalog) [8].In most very small and small companies, the IT department is often seen as a cost center [9]. A cost center is a department whose cost is added to the overall cost of the company, but only contributes indirectly to the profits (its costs must be paid whether the company does business or not). Thus, according to Trastour and Christodoulou [10], IT managers are under increasing pressure to justify IT costs and show the other managers of the company that they can transform IT assets into business services, while they clearly link costs identified with the company profits.On the one hand, there are many methodologies that quantify the return on IT investments, and on the other hand, those companies (mainly very small and small companies) where the IT department is a cost center, are left to chance the assessment and allocation of IT costs. Therefore, the very small and small companies that consider IT as a cost center [9] are lacking in the financial management of IT.This policy of financial management (cost center and traditional accounting system) together with the lack of a service catalog does not help one understand the actual costs associated with different IT services due to their complexity. It can also create a false perception of disconnection from the internal and/or external client, between price and quality. In fact, one of the main problems is to determine the costs of IT services that users receive. The users perceive IT services as a tool for their day to day activities, without being worried, mostly, to make adequate use of them. Customers are not worried about the proper use of services and do not assess objectively whether the services received are balanced between price and expected quality because users are not being aware of the services they receive and their associated cost, and costs are not imputed. Any complaints, from customers or users, about such services will never have an objective basis, creating a gap between the business and the IT department.When an organization detects that some services are not working well or the perception that the customer has about the services provided by IT is very poor, we begin to question where we are doing things wrong. So we need to take an internal look at the IT department and identify how to improve it. To do this, indicators related to a poor or deficient service level are often used, and can assist in identifying where improvement is needed and where to take appropriate action. According to Esterkin [11], among the typical indicators of a poor service level are the absence of a service catalog and not controlling the costs (i.e., the processes of IT service catalog management and IT financial management).All these issues would be solved if a company gets to have a good IT service management [12]. It should include the process related to IT service catalog management (available services) and the process related to IT financial management (budgets, costs and charging of the services). The purpose of this research is to create a standard catalog of IT services for helping very small and small companies to define their own IT service catalog as one of the main inputs for their IT financial management process (this process is outside of the scope of this article).To do this, companies try to implement some of the models and/or standards of best practices related to IT service management used as reference. However, these models and/or standards do not provide guidelines for implementing them. The research methodology that has been followed is presented in Section 2.This paper is organized into the following sections: Section 2 presents the research methodology that has been followed so that readers can have a better understanding of the article. In Section 3, the main service models and/or standards in terms of IT service catalog management and IT financial management are presented as well as other related works (a summary of the systematic review carried out and some final considerations about IT service management) and the concepto of process asset library. Then, in Section 4, the proposed model based on the concept of process asset library is presented. Section 5 presents a case study and the obtained results. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section 6.The research methodology has consisted of the following steps:•First, a thorough study of the literature related to IT service catalog and IT financial management was performed. In this direction,○The main standard and/or process models have been studied in depth.A systematic review related to the topics of IT service catalog and IT financial management were carried out to uncover relevant academic publications and to know if there were some approaches to these topics that can help us for implementing them in a very small or small company.The knowledge gained studying the literature is used to conceive a solution that can be applied in very small or small companies.Then, a solution has been proposed based on:○The concept of process asset library. In this way, a standard solution will be provided and each company will have to adapt this solution though the tailoring guidelines (called defined solution). While the standard solution will be the same for all companies, the defined solution will be unique for each one. It is important to indicate that the solution has also included the IT financial management process (although it is outside the scope of this article).The requirements of a specific, non-IT small company.A survey from the National (Spanish) Statistics Institute related to the use of IT infrastructure by company size obtained through the systematic reviews.Finally, the solution has been experienced in the non-IT small company and has been validated by them.An overview of the main IT service management models and/or standards is presented and references to the processes related to service catalog management and financial management are included. Then, the IT service catalog management process and the IT financial management process are briefly described in general terms as well as other related work performed (a systematic reviews). Finally, some considerations related to the IT service catalog management and IT financial management are presented.The IT service management models and/or standards provide guidance on how services can be managed effectively during their life cycle [13]. The main service management models as they relate to the IT service catalog and IT financial management are: Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) [14–18], Microsoft Operational Framework (MOF) [19], ISO/IEC 20000 [20–24] and CMMI for services (CMMI-SVC) [25]. Next, an overview of these models is presented.•ITIL v3 is a collection of guidelines aimed at helping commercial business and government agencies to conduct IT services. The guidelines are maintained by many collaborators under supervision of the United Kingdom's Office of Government Commerce (OGC), which published the 3rd version of the standard composed of five books, each describing a phase in the ITIL's service life cycle as shown in Fig. 1: Service Strategy [14], Service Design [15], Service Transition [16], Service Operation [17] and Continual Service Improvement [18].Service portfolio management (which includes the service catalog) and the financial management for IT services are included in the service strategy phase. Detailed information about the service catalog is also included in the process of service catalog management that is included in the Service Design publication phase.•Microsoft® Operational Framework (MOF) 4.0 [19] is a meta-framework released in 2008 — that is, it incorporates the core requirements of the service management industry's best practices and frameworks into one free, easy-to-understand set of guidance. The goal of MOF is to provide guidance to IT organizations to help them create, operate, and support IT services while ensuring that the investment in IT delivers an expected business value at an acceptable level of risk. The IT service lifecycle is composed of three ongoing phases (plan, deliver and operate), and one foundational layer (manage) that operates throughout all of the other phases. MOF organizes the processes into Service Management Functions (SMFs). Fig. 2shows the IT service lifecycle phases and the SMFs within each phase.The plan phase is related to IT service portfolio, services and IT financial management. The SMFs are the business/IT alignment for the IT service portfolio and services, and the financial management for the IT financial management.•ISO/IEC 20000 is the first international standard for IT service management. It was developed in 2005, by ISO/IEC JTC1 SC7 and revised in 2011 [20]. It specifies requirements for the service provider to plan, establish, implement, operate, monitor, review, maintain and improve an SMS. The requirements include the design, transition, delivery and improvement of services to fulfill agreed service requirements. The standard is divided into five parts as follows: ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011 Service management system requirements [20]. ISO/IEC 20000-2:2012 Guidance on the application of service management systems [21]. ISO/IEC TR 20000-3:2012 Guidance on scope definition and applicability of ISO/IEC 20000-1 [22]. ISO/IEC TR 20000-4:2010 Information technology – Service management – Part 4: Process reference model [23]. ISO/IEC TR 20000-5:2010 (Information technology – Service management – Part 5: Exemplar implementation plan for ISO/IEC 20000-1) [24].Processes related to service management are classified into categories (see Fig. 3): Processes related to the IT service catalog and IT financial management are under the service delivery category.•The CMMI-SVC model [25] provides guidance for applying CMMI best practices in a service provider organization. Best practices in the model focus on activities for providing quality services to customers and end users. CMMI-SVC integrates bodies of knowledge that are essential for a service provider. CMMI-SVC contains 24 process areas. All CMMI-SVC practices focus on the activities of the service provider. Seven process areas focus on practices specific to services, addressing capacity and availability management, service continuity, service delivery, incident resolution and prevention, service transition, service system development, and strategic service management processes.The process area related to service catalog and financial management is Strategic Service Management.All models and/or standards explain these processes in a similar way. Therefore, both processes (IT service catalog and IT financial management) are going to be briefly explained in a general way in the next two subsections. As a summary, it is important to define the services (service catalog) that the IT department will provide the organization. Besides, IT financial management provides a way to measure, control and cover the costs of IT services which have been defined previously in the catalog of services.The service portfolio is a complete set of services that is managed by a service provider. It describes the services of a provider in terms of business value. It represents the commitments and investments of the service provider across all customers and market spaces. It includes three categories of service:1.Service pipeline. All services that are under consideration or development but are not available to customers. It provides a business view of possible future services and is not normally published to customers.Service catalog. All live IT services, including those available for deployment. It is the only part of the service portfolio published to customers.Retired services. All services that have been retired. Retired services are not available to new customers unless a special business case is made.An IT service catalog is like a restaurant menu: it presents the IT services that can be provided and supported to customers. This definitely influences the decisions that customers have about what IT can help.The goal of the service catalog management process is to ensure that the service catalog is produced and maintained, containing accurate information on all operational services and those being prepared to be run operationally. So, it is necessary to define the services, and produce and maintain an accurate service catalog.In most very small and small companies the IT service catalog is not considered or its usefulness is not understood and where it exists, it has a very technical guidance or is never aligned with business objectives [11]. In addition, an added difficulty is that there are no operational guidelines to guide us in building the IT service catalog oriented or not to very small and small companies (what to do is indicated in all models, but how to do so is not established). So, defining an IT service catalog becomes a very difficult task to be performed by a very small or small company.Financial management for IT services identifies the balance between the cost and quality of service and maintains the balance of supply and demand between the service provider and their customers. It consists of three main activities:1.Budgeting. This is the activity of predicting and controlling the income and expenditure of a money within the organization. Budgeting consists of a periodic negotiation cycle to set budgets (usually annual) and the monthly monitoring of the current budgets.Accounting. This is the activity that enables the IT organization to account fully for the way its money is spent. It is necessary to define the cost model to be used (by IT organization, by service, by customer, by location), the categories to record expenses (cost types and cost elements), and the cost classification (capital or operational costs, direct or indirect costs, and fixed or variable costs).Charging. This is the activity required to bill customers for the services supplied to them. It is necessary to define the charging policies (for example, cost recovery, recovery with and additional margin, notional charging), to decide the chargeable items, to establish how much customers will be charged (pricing), and to produce and present an invoice for services to a customer (billing).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
IT is still considered by many managers as a representative part of the business expenses. Therefore, the service catalog is a very important component to make visible to the entire company the services that the IT department is providing. In this way, a picture of how IT is linked to the corporate strategy is shown.A model for helping companies to implement their IT service catalog is proposed. The model is based on the concept of process asset library, where the standard process is defined. The IT services provided have been obtained taking into account the needs of the small company where the model has been implemented and a survey about the use of IT given.Although the case study has obtained successful results, in the sense of improving the coverage of the service catalog process, however additional experimentations should be carried out for adding validity to the proposed model. Another weakness of the proposal is that the input to the model, that is, the first phase “defining the standard model” is based on the requirements of one enterprise and on a survey from the National (Spanish) Statistics Institute. It should be taken into account the requirements of more companies in order to ensure that the standard categories and services are a comprehensive model. In the case of the survey, new IT technologies like cloud computing are not present when gathering the information for the survey. This new IT technology will probably appear in the update of the survey.The proposed solution is very flexible, in the sense that standard services could be used by many enterprises and the defined services are the ones related to each enterprise. Each enterprise could propose new categories and/or services to the standard model and, therefore, to the defined model.The implementation of the service catalog has enabled the company under the case study understanding of the services provided by its IT department and the purposes for which they relate to the business. It is also the entry point for the implementation of the IT financial management process. After implementing the IT service categories and services, THE COMPANY is ready for developing budgets, controlling the money that is spent by department, this is, implementing the IT financial management process.As a final conclusion, the CEO of the small company indicated that “it is possible to influence in the behavior of the staff, making visible to all the departments of the company, all the services that the IT department is providing them, and sensitizing them about their cost in order to make a good use of the IT”.One open future research line that can be accomplished is related to the automation of the model. It can be done at different levels: first the assessment phase, then the standard phase, and finally the defined phase.