@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
XML privacy protection model based on cloud storage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new XML privacy protect model by separating the structure and content is proposed.Based on access purposes and privacy preferences, DTD sub-views are created.Start–end region encoding scheme is used skillfully in this model.Only content of XML is stored in the cloud, which has high security and efficiency.This mechanism has a good performance in space and time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
XML privacy protection,Privacy policy,DTD views,Cloud storage,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When eXtensible Markup Language (XML) becomes a widespread data representation and exchange format for Web applications, safeguarding the privacy of data represented in XML documents can be indispensable. In this paper, we propose an XML privacy protection model by separating the structure and content, and with cloud storage to save content information and Trusted Third Party (TTP) to help manage structure information. To protect data privacy more effectively, we will create different Document Type Definition (DTD) views for different users according to users' privacy practice and the provider's privacy preferences. To further speed up the process of gaining access to data we will adopt the start–end region encoding scheme to encode the nodes in XML document and DTD views. The experiment result shows that this mechanism has a good performance in space and time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the development of information technology, XML documents have been applied in many fields as a standard for data representation and exchange over the Web, especially in economic, finance and medical areas. More and more personal information will be collected, stored and released by different organizations and institutions, which can easily be accessed in a network environment so that privacy disclosure is facing security threats. The traditional solution for privacy protection is to establish the access control model or to encrypt the sensitive information [1–3]. Access control mechanism focuses on the authorization user to get valid access data, and the encryption mechanism adopts the encryption method to protect the secret information. However, access control mechanisms may ignore the privacy protection, and the encryption methods may limit the access of data, which have become the major obstacles in data sharing. In a word, these traditional solutions can't ensure the protection of privacy while legitimating access is permitted, at the same time they also lack flexibility and efficiency. Therefore, there is now a strong demand for a new privacy protection model to protect data privacy and prevent disclosure of sensitive information in XML documents.In this paper, we propose a new XML privacy protection model by separating the structure and content, using TTP to manage the structure and choosing the cloud to save the content. As far as an XML document is concerned, its tree-structure determines that it is meaningless to have a structure with no content or to have the content with no structure. Therefore, this method of separating information can protect the private information in an XML document effectively. To further protect such sensitive information, we create DTD views based on the users' purposes and the data provider's privacy preferences [4]. Privacy policies are focused on the purpose rather than on the user, which offers more flexibility to both data collectors and providers. The DTD view is a tailored structure tree, which can reflect structure information and access authorization. Valid authorized users with different purposes can get different DTD views. Further we will adopt the start–end region encoding scheme to encode the nodes in XML document and DTD views skillfully, which can speed up the process of data access.The main contributions of this paper are as follows:(1)We propose a new model for protecting privacy by separating storage of the structure and content in an XML document.With the help of TTP, we develop DTD views based on the users' access purposes and the data provider's privacy preferences, so that authorized users with different purposes can have different DTD views.We adopt the start–end region encoding scheme to encode the nodes in XML document and DTD views skillfully, which can speed up the process of data access.Only content of XML document without structure information is stored in the cloud, which will get high efficiency in both storage and management.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Some current access control mechanisms and privacy protection models concerning XML document are described in Section 2. Section 3 presents the new model and an algorithm for producing DTD views, which is the primary component of this architecture, and then gives an example to describe the search processing. In Section 4, we have set up a series of experiments to measure the model's performance. Section 5 concludes the privacy protection model and makes suggestions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have proposed a new privacy protection model that separates the structure and the content in an XML document. This method of separating information can effectively protect the private information in an XML document. As it is meaningless to have the structure with no content or to have content with no structure, only by simultaneously taking structure and content into account can obtain the complete information. To further protect the sensitive information, while offering more flexibility to data collectors and providers, we produce different DTD views for different users. The DTD views not only represent the structure information but also reflect the collector's access purposes and data provider's privacy preferences. Furthermore, we adopt a start–end encoding scheme to encode the nodes in XML document and DTD views skillfully, which can quickly find the content information and speed up the access process.The results of experiment show that this model has a good compression ratio in space compared with the ViewAC mechanism, which effectively make maintenance more convenient and lower storage costs especially for a large number of users. On the other hand, the method of separating information has changed the way of information storage, which benefits the query of information. From the time of query, we conclude that the method obviously improves the efficiency of the query, which benefits to data access.In this paper, the focuses of study are on protecting data privacy and getting good performance in space and time, but some problems should be further concerned. This model only considers the query of information, but sometimes some special users with super authorization need to add, modify or delete some information in an XML document, so adding an update function to data is very necessary. In addition, the security of an XML document involves not only confidentiality but also integrity and usability, so further problems should be considered in the future.