@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING and Human–Computer Interaction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This special issue is devoted to Natural Language Processing and Human–Computer Interaction.9 high-quality research contributions have been gathered.The synergies between these two research fields are analyzed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human–Computer Interaction is a discipline concerned with studying the way people interact with computers. The main aim of this research area is to design, evaluate and implement computer systems that allow people to carry out their activities productively and safely. In recent years, the utilization of Natural Language Processing in the form of Natural Language Interfaces toward an effective Human–Computer Interaction has received much attention. Several platforms have been developed to enable humans to interact with computers through Natural Language Interfaces such as speech recognition systems, natural language query systems, semantic search engines and question answering systems. However, the full extent of the synergies between these two research fields is yet to be realized.The purpose of this special issue was to collect innovative and high-quality research contributions regarding the role played by Natural Language Processing techniques in Human–Computer Interaction. This special issue aims to explore the synergies between these research fields and give insights on the recent advances in these topics by soliciting original scientific contributions in the form of theoretical and experimental research and case studies.The call for papers for this Special Issue was published on major international email lists, on the home page of the journal, as well as on the home page of several universities. We received a large amount of submissions that were peer-reviewed by top experts in the field. Based on the reviews and our reading of the papers we selected 9 high-quality ones to be published. Contributions of these papers are summarized as follows:In the first paper, entitled “Named Entity Recognition: Fallacies, Challenges and Opportunities”, by Marrero et al., the authors provide a thorough analysis of the challenges that are yet to be faced in the Named Entity Recognition field. They conclude that it is necessary to take Named Entity Recognition back to the research community and develop adequate evaluation forums, with a clear definition of the task and user models, and the use of appropriate measures and standard methodologies.The second contribution, entitled “OpinionMining-ML”, by Robaldo & Di Caro, presents a formalism for tagging textual expressions and enabling the annotation of sentiments and opinions within textual documents. This XML-based formalism has been validated through an inner-annotation agreement evaluation that indicates that OpinionMining-ML represents an effective annotation scheme that is able to cover high complexity while preserving good agreement among different people.The third paper, entitled “Statistical Speech Translation System based on Voice Recognition Optimization using Multimodal Sources of Knowledge and Characteristics Vectors”, by Canovas et al., proposes a speech translation statistical system that adds additional other-than-voice information in a voice translation system to improve its accuracy. In this manuscript, a prototypical implementation has been developed to validate the approach in pedagogical environments. This prototype represents a real-time speech translation system from Spanish to English adapted to teaching-related scenarios.The fourth contribution, entitled “How to make a Natural Language Interface to Query Databases accessible to everyone: An example”, by Llopis & Ferrández, introduces {AskMe*}, an adaptive natural language interface and environment system to query arbitrary databases. {AskMe*} is based on ontologies and is thus fully reconfigurable being able to target multiple knowledge domains. The proposed system has been compared against other existing state-of-the-art tools using some specific benchmarks with promising results.In the fifth paper, entitled “Tackling Redundancy in Text Summarization through Different Levels of Language Analysis”, by Lloret & Palomar, the authors present a detailed analysis of three complementary methods (lexical, syntactic and semantic) to detect redundant information in documents. The authors also include a study concerning how to take advantage of such redundant information. From the experiments conducted, they conclude that semantic-based methods surpass both syntactic- and lexical-based approaches.The sixth contribution, entitled “Semantic tagging of video ASR transcripts using the web as a source of knowledge”, by Perea-Ortega et al., proposes the use of the Internet as a rich source of knowledge to generate learning corpora for the task of semantic tagging of videos using their Automatic Speech Recognition transcripts. The authors analyze both learning-based and information retrieval based approaches for this task reaching the conclusion that the use of one or another highly depends on the size of the corpora being dealt with.The seventh paper, entitled “Multimodal Interaction for Information Retrieval using Natural Language”, by Revuelta et al., provides a general architecture to develop interactive systems that allow users to query relational databases using natural language. For interactivity purposes two approaches are discussed, namely interactive text generation and dialog manager. In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of their proposed architecture, the authors (1) present a functional prototype based on such architecture, and (2) provide an automatic evaluation framework that shows promising results.In the eighth contribution, entitled “Sentiment Analysis via Dependency Parsing”, by Di Caro & Grella, the authors introduce a system that allows users to navigate and filter data in a highly-interactive way. The proposed system is based on a novel algorithm for Sentiment Analysis and a context-based model that allows tuning of users' sentiments according to user-specified context of analysis. The authors also include information about the evaluation of the efficacy of the presented system through a number of case studies.Finally, the ninth contribution, entitled “Modular Natural Language Interfaces to Logic-Based Policy Frameworks”, by Perry et al., present a translation module capable of mapping sentences written in a subset of standard English, namely Attempto Controlled English, to first-order logic. This module is then used to define logic-based policy frameworks. The proposed translator has proven to be flexible and easily adaptable to new domains.We would like to take this opportunity to thank the Editor-in-Chief Asst. Prof. Barbara Carminati for providing the opportunity of this special issue, her guidance and support. We are also very grateful to the reviewers who kindly agreed to referee the manuscripts in a timely manner and provided valuable feedback to the authors. Finally, we commend the authors for their valuable contributions and insights.The preparation of this Special Collection has been partially supported by the Spanish Ministry for Science and Innovation and the European Commission (FEDER/ERDF) through project SeCloud (TIN2010-18650).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
