@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
RankCNN: When learning to rank encounters the pseudo preference feedback

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Our approach integrates deep learning with pseudo preference feedback to rerank the initial list.The optimal set of pseudo preference pairs is detected by a modified graph-based method.Ranking is then reduced to unsupervised pairwise classification in the architecture of CNN.Accelerated Mini-Batch Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent (ASDCA) is introduced to the framework to accelerate the training.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pseudo preference feedback,Convolutional neural networks,Learning to rank,RankCNN,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Learning to rank has received great attentions in the field of text retrieval for several years. However, a few researchers introduce the topic into visual reranking due to the special nature of image presentation. In this paper, a novel unsupervised visual reranking is proposed, termed rank via the convolutional neural networks (RankCNN). This approach integrates deep learning with pseudo preference feedback. The optimal set of pseudo preference pairs is first detected from initial list by a modified graph-based method. Ranking is then reduced to pairwise classification in the architecture of CNN. In addition, Accelerated Mini-Batch Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent (ASDCA) is introduced to the framework to accelerate the training. The experiments indicate the competitive performance on the LETOR 4.0, the Paris and the Francelandmark dataset.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The content-based visual retrieval [1] has been extensively investigated and applied in a number of applications. While successful, the traditional content-based search sometimes fails with some irrelevant retrievals (Fig. 1). As a result, many methods are proposed to rerank the initial results, known as learning to rank. Learning to rank has been applied to document retrieval, collaborative filtering, expert finding, sentiment analysis, and product rating [2]. In conducting learning to rank, the major methods fall into three categories: (1) the pointwise approach, (2) the pairwise approach, and (3) the listwise approach. In the pointwise approaches, each training instance is associated with a rating. The learning is to find a model that can map instances into ratings that are close to their true ones. The listwise approaches use a list of ranked objects as training instances and learn to predict the list of objects. The pairwise approaches take document pairs as instances in learning, and formalize the problem of learning to rank as that of classification. Specifically, document pairs are collected from the ranking lists, and each pair is assigned a label representing the relative relevance of the two documents. A classification model is then developed based on the labeled data to rerank the list. Based on the Support Vector Machines (SVM), Boosting, and Neural Network classifiers, some known methods are developed such as RankSVM [3], RankBoost [4], and RankNet [5]. Considering the most existing methods are pairwise approaches, we choose the pairwise approaches as the basic conception in this paper.It is interesting to note “learn to rank” has attracted great attention in text retrieval not for the visual ranking. This may be due to the major difference between the document representation and the image representation. For example, the dimension of visual feature is generally much greater than that of document feature; each dimension of document feature has real physical meaning but visual feature does not. Let image be presented as a (Bag of the Word) BoW vector, it will be up to million dimensions which truly challenges the classifiers such as SVM, Boosting or Neural Network.Fortunately, convolutional neural networks (CNN) [5], one of variants of multilayer perception (MLP), have been proposed to handle the natural image classification problem effectively. According to [7], the current best error rate of CNN on the MNIST digit recognition task is less than 0.3% which is comparable to human performance [8]. CNN thus has the promise to be applied in the visual reranking if it is offered the correct preference pairs. During the reranking process, there is a need to detect the maximum likelihood preference pairs. A method proposed by [9], termed pseudo preference feedback (PPF), is demonstrated to be successful to automatically discover an optimal set of pseudo preference pairs. This method could potentially integrate with CNN as an unsupervised learning pipeline to handle visual reranking problem. While promising, one challenge in the field is the computation expenses. It is known that the efficient gradient descent method is able to accelerate the convergence, and obtain better local minimum. Yet, implementing the method in the parallel computing system is less touched.In this paper, we propose an unsupervised learning-based visual reranking. Before training, a graph-based method [10] is improved to detect the pseudo preference pairs. During the learning, a simple probabilistic cost function is proposed, which reduces the ranking to the pairwise classification. This approach called RankCNN, motivated by RankNet, is implemented in the architecture of Convolutional Neural Networks to model the underlying ranking function. Fig. 2outlines the overall framework for visual reranking.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces related work. The detection of pseudo preference pairs is introduced in Section 3 and the RankCNN model is described in Section 4. Section 5 reports our experimental results followed by conclusion in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
