@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Citation analysis of Computer Standards & Interfaces: Technical or also non-technical focus?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conducted a citation analysis of CSI articles published in 2011, 2012, and 2013.CSI has been following its scope very closely in the last three years.The majority of CSI publications have a technical focus.CSI focuses on standards and interfaces, interpreted in a technical sense.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer Standards,&,Interfaces,Citation analysis,Standardization research,Journal scope,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper analyzes to which extent research published in Computer Standards & Interfaces (CSI) has a technical focus. We find that CSI has been following its scope very closely in the last three years and that the majority of its publications have a technical focus. Articles published in CSI constantly cite research from various technical disciplines, but there are also a limited number of references to non-technical literature. Mostly technical journals cite CSI papers, with a few exceptions of non-technical journals. We conclude that CSI stays within its scope of computer standards and interfaces interpreted in a technical sense.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computer Standards & Interfaces (CSI) is an international bimonthly journal that provides a platform for publishing research work in the areas of Standards, Information Management, Formal Methods, Software Quality, Software Process, Distributed Systems, Open Systems, E-Topics, Data Acquisition and Digital Instruments Standardization. This scope suggests that the journal has a technical focus, but also covers more general topics such as technical, social, and political aspects of computer standards, market impacts, cost benefit analysis, and relationships between national and international standard bodies. This paper investigates to what extent CSI is a technical journal by analyzing citations in the journal and references to the journal from between 2011 and 2013.On its homepage, CSI states that the journal: “provides information about activities and progress on the definition of computer standards, software quality, interfaces and methods, at national, European and international levels; publishes critical comments on standards and standards activities; disseminates user's experiences and case studies in the application and exploitation of established or emerging standards, interfaces and methods; offers a forum for discussion on actual projects, standards, interfaces and methods by recognised experts; stimulates relevant research by providing a specialised refereed medium” [1].Thus, CSI aims to publish papers that are primarily related to computer and software standards and interfaces, and focuses on publishing research within its specialized scope definition. Therefore, we would not expect articles to cite research from beyond the field of software, computer standards, and interfaces. Similarly, we would not expect articles which are outside the scope of software and computer standards to cite papers from CSI. However, the journal website adds: CSI also covers general topics concerning the standardisation process, such as technical, political and commercial aspects of standards, their impact on the marketplace, cost/benefit analyses, legislative issues, and relationships among national and international standards bodies[1]. Most of these topics are non-technical although they may relate to the technical contents of standards. Accordingly, we would expect non-technical papers to be included in the journal.In this paper, we investigate the balance between technical and non-technical papers in the journal by performing a citation analysis of CSI from 2011 to 2013. We determine the number and types of journals that articles in CSI refer to and vice versa. This includes the journal's primary field (the first field in the case more than one field is mentioned), the articles' date of publication, and the name of the journal. We start with a brief introduction of the research field of computer standards and interfaces. Next, we describe our methodology, and then present our results. We conclude with a discussion of the results and the limitations of the analysis.Research on computer standards and interfaces is a subset of the broader domain of research on standards and standardization. De Vries [2] has mapped this field of research and the disciplines that study it — both mono-disciplines such as mathematics, physics, psychology and economics, and applied sciences such as engineering, business and medical science. Applied sciences may be related to the topic of standardization (in the case of CSI: software and computer standards or interfaces) or to standards-related activities such as standards development, standards acceptance, and standards implementation. These activities are non-technical and may be studied by other disciplines than those related to the technical contents of standards and interface specifications.CSI addresses both software and hardware [1]. The term ‘interfaces’ is not defined explicitly but it is stated that hardware and software need well-defined interfaces. Once such interface definitions are intended and expected to be used repeatedly by the intended users, we can call them standards [5]. Standards for interfaces can be classified as compatibility standards [3,4]. CSI also addresses other software and computer-related standards such as quality standards. De Vries [5] shows that standards have in common that they provide criteria for entities because of their relations with other entities. In the case of CSI's research field, at least one of these entities is computer hardware or software. Within this field, all categories of standards listed by De Vries [4] and Blind [3] apply.CSI was founded 36years ago and is by far the oldest standardization journal. Other scientific journals in the field of standardization include the International Journal of IT Standards and Standardization Research (JITSR), the International Journal of Services and Standards, the (Korean) Journal of Standards and Standardization (a new journal with only a few papers in English), and the Journal of ICT Standardization (a mixed scientific and professional journal, also new).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
