@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Location service and session mobility for streaming media applications in home networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a digital multimedia home environment based on SIP, RTP and SLP.We design the MediaService extension header in SIP to provide a streaming service.The SLP UA and SIP UA are integrated to discover and initiate a streaming service.The Substitute Request is introduced to provide service discovery across domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Service Location Protocol,Session Initiation Protocol,Session mobility,Home network,Open Service Gateway initiative,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the near future, home networks are expected to become an important part of the user's ubiquitous environment. However, how to provide service discovery and multimedia services in such networks becomes a great challenge. In the paper, we propose an extension header, referred to as the “MediaService” header, into the Session Initiation Protocol to provide video streaming service. The streaming control and session mobility functions are also considered in the MediaService header. We also propose a peer to peer Service Location Protocol architecture for users to search for location of services across domains. We added a Substitute Request Message and cache policy into the Service Location Protocol to search for location of services across domains. A prototype implementation shows the performance of our prototype.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, both mobile and fixed communication technologies have evolved to offer opportunities for interoperation between mobile devices and devices residing in a home network. The network interface embedded into various home appliances improves our daily life at home. Using these home networked appliances, users can remotely access and control home electrical appliances from their office, and the network services can access appliances in the kitchen, living room, or bathroom. The long expected intelligent home network will come of age in the near future.The rapid advancement of communication technologies has increased the demand for network multimedia services in home. These multimedia services are proliferating at an accelerated pace and today include: video blogs, YouTube, and audio or video streaming. Due to the various multimedia services, the processes of accessing, managing, and searching for desired information have become a great challenge. Numerous different protocols, standards, and transmission modes, such as Service Location Protocol (SIP) [1], Service Location Protocol (SLP) [2,3], Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) [4], and Juxtapose (JXTA) [5] have been proposed for interconnection or discovery with these home networked devices and services.In this research, we will propose a digital home environment with multimedia services. We utilize the SIP to create and maintain the multimedia session. SIP is an application layer signaling protocol, and has been adopted by the Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) communities for their signaling protocol. SIP can be used to create, modify, and terminate sessions using one or more devices. However, SIP cannot be used to create and control a video streaming with RTP.Thus, we design an extension header, referred to as the “MediaService”, to provide a video streaming service using SIP with RTP [27]. The control functions for the video streaming service, such as pause, replay, and session mobility, are considered in the MediaService header. We implement the MediaService header in a SIP user agent (UA) based on the results proposed in [6]. We also integrated the SLP user agent function into the results proposed in [6]. Thus, the user can use the SLP UA to discover the video streaming or channel information which is provided by the media server, and initiate a video streaming session with the media server using SIP.Moreover, the user may access the video stream from the Internet, such as MOD. The user can discover these potential video streams using a search engine via his or her computer. These search results are maintained only in the local host and cannot be shared by any other user. The Substitute Request Message and a cache mechanism are introduced into the SLP directory agent. Based on the Substitute Request Message, the SLP directory agent can discover services from another SLP directory agent and caches these search results in the SLP directory agent. To evaluate the ability of the proposed architecture, we implement the proposed architecture through modification of the code from several open source projects.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The related literatures and standards are discussed in Section 2. A digital home environment with a multimedia services architecture is proposed in Section 3. Section 4 presents the digital home environment implementation with multimedia services. A performance evaluation for the proposed system is provided in Section 5. Our conclusions and future works are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
