@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The making of an OMG standard

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We describe the experience of developing a Software Engineering standard using the OMG standardization process.There are several similarly-focused IT standards with misaligned definitions.Standardization efforts are barely appreciated in the research curricula.We suggest some improvements to make the most of OMG standardization process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Standardization process,SEMAT,OMG,KUALI-BEH,ESSENCE,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In 2010 SEMAT launched a call for action to refound Software Engineering. Later, the Object Management Group endorsed it as a request for proposals to deal with SEMAT concerns. The KUALI-KAANS Research Group responded to the request as a submitter by creating the KUALI-BEH proposal. The objective of this paper is to present the roadmap KUALI-BEH followed throughout the OMG standardization process: its origins, fusion with the ESSENCE proposal and eventual appearance as a standard. The subsequent lessons learned highlight the lack of aligned definitions among IT standards and the standardization process shortcomings, to which improvements are suggested.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Object Management Group (OMG) [1] is an IT consortium that was established in 1989. The OMG is made up of organizations such as Microsoft, Boeing, Oracle, Ericsson and NASA, and is in charge of developing IT standards such as UML, XMI, CORBA and BPMN. OMG members form working groups called task forces, which are in charge of transforming initiatives into technology specifications.In 2010 Software Engineering Method and Theory (SEMAT) [2], an important initiative for the software engineering community, emerged for the purpose of generating a theoretical basis for the discipline. Several influential members of the software engineering community participate in SEMAT, some of whom are involved in organizations that are OMG members. SEMAT determined the need to define fundamental concepts for practices, identify specific theories backed up by examples of their successful application, elucidate a set of universals and a kernel language to describe them, and establish a set of metrics to assess software practices, products and people [2].The OMG endorsed SEMAT and made it a standard project: A Foundation for the Agile Creation and Enactment of Software Engineering Methods RFP (FACESEM) [3]; this project has provided the initiative with greater stability and visibility.Owing to the fact that SEMAT was being closely followed by our research group, KUALI-KAANS assumed it as a promising line of work as soon as the RFP was published and responded to the FACESEM RFP with its own proposal, called: KUALI-BEH: Software Project Common Concepts[4].In 2011, the OMG standardization process was started, and two proposals became involved: KUALI-BEH and ESSENCE – Kernel and Language for Software Engineering Methods[5].The objective of this paper is to describe the roadmap followed throughout the OMG standardization process, from the creation of KUALI-BEH, its later fusion with ESSENCE through to its eventual (after three years) adoption as a formal OMG standard. The KUALI-KAANS background along with the experience in similar projects, the KUALI-BEH creation process and the specific steps followed during the OMG standardization process (in bold type) are shown in Fig. 1.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the FACESEM RFP and its requirements, Section 3 describes the process followed by the research group to create a proposal, while Section 4 provides more details on the standarization process carried out in the context of the OMG. The lessons learned and the improvement opportunities are presented in Section 5. The conclusions and future work related to this experience are provided in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
SEMAT's phrase “support a process to re-found software engineering based on a solid theory, proven principles and best practices”[2] set out a common ground for the community involved in the discipline, which includes theory and pragmatics. The call attracted people from all around the globe who started to contribute to this quest. A mechanism with which to manage and control it was therefore needed. Thanks to the endorsement of this plan by the OMG, it became possible to establish a process to create an IT standard that dealt with the software engineering community's initiative.Moreover, the significance of the SEMAT Call for Action, and later the FACESEM RFP, led to international collaboration. Researchers and practitioners, academics and industry worked together in the quest to create a standard that moved them closer to the goal.In this paper we have presented how our research group responded, by creating KUALI-BEH, thus making an active contribution to the SEMAT initiative. Most importantly, it contributed to the OMG specification process when the proposal was integrated with ESSENCE and constituted as an improved standard.Although the standardization process followed in the OMG proved to be strong and effective, it still has some room for improvement. We believe that the evaluation process for submissions could be enhanced by focusing on the individual analysis and assessment of each mandatory requirement defined in the RFPs, rather than by evaluating the submission as a whole. It is important for assessment reports containing the analysis results to be delivered to submitters so that they can improve their submissions. An intermediary force to manage fusions between submissions may also be of help; lastly, rules such as V2V could be avoided.After living through this experience we have realized that there is a wide variety of standards that undertake similar aims. Nevertheless, they handle terms and definitions that differ in usage and meaning, thus making it difficult to unify criteria. ESSENCE is not the only work that seeks to homogenize concepts. We can also point to [12] and [54], which present very promising alternatives and results to consider when facing this challenge.The academic community that is engaged in standards development should receive adequate recognition, since its activity is a valuable and fundamental task in building knowledge. In our experience, and as a lesson learned, there was an underestimation and unawareness of the implications of standards development, and we felt this ourselves. Academic institutions evaluate researchers in terms of number of papers, but are reluctant to consider the development of standards as being an equally important effort.The discussion must not focus on which is best, papers or standards; these are different types of work. The debate must rather focus on recognizing the real value and effort implied in the development of a standard. Not receiving proper recognition by institutions causes researchers to refuse to work in standardization, leading them to search out other paths and go in other directions. This means that when creating a standard, a valuable part of the knowledge may not be present during discussions.Various lines for future work have been identified. On the one hand, KUALI-KAANS will continue with the formalization step of the KUALI-BEH project and finalize the construction of two software tools to make it more feasible for the framework to be used by practitioners and organizations. On the other hand, the research group will take advantage of its important background and experience working with VSEs and encouraging them to use and apply the standard created.The post-adoption steps of the OMG standardization process will continue, moreover. Since KUALI-KAANS is still part of the RTF, it will continue to develop corresponding revision tasks, seek feedback from more organizations and improve the standard. We trust that this successful experience will serve as another example of how industrial-academic collaboration can obtain a valuable and relevant outcome for both parties. We hope to help to convince universities and organizations to start this kind of cooperation, or at least encourage them to consider it in the near future.