@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Semi-asynchronous and distributed weighted connected dominating set algorithms for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose weighted connected dominating set algorithms for wireless sensor networks.Proposed algorithms are fully distributed and semi-asynchronous.Algorithms have 3ln(S) approximation ratio (S is the cost of the optimum solution).We provide theoretical analysis for message, time and space complexities.Algorithms are compared with the previous work through extensive simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor networks,Weighted connected dominating set,Distributed approximation algorithm,Backbone formation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Energy-efficient backbone construction is one of the most important objective in a wireless sensor network (WSN) and to construct a more robust backbone, weighted connected dominating sets can be used where the energy of the nodes are directly related to their weights. In this study, we propose algorithms for this purpose and classify our algorithms as weighted dominating set algorithms and weighted Steiner tree algorithms where these algorithms are used together to construct a weighted connected dominating set (WCDS). We provide fully distributed algorithms with semi-asynchronous versions. We show the design of the algorithms, analyze their proof of correctness, time, message and space complexities and provide the simulation results in ns2 environment. We show that the approximation ratio of our algorithms is 3ln(S) where S is the total weight of optimum solution. To the best of our knowledge, our algorithms are the first fully distributed and semi-asynchronous WCDS algorithms with 3ln(S) approximation ratio. We compare our proposed algorithms with the related work and show that our algorithms select backbone with lower cost and less number of nodes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
WSNs do not have any fixed infrastructure and consist of sensor nodes that perform sensing and communicating tasks. Habitat monitoring, health care, environmental control, military surveillance and target tracking are example application areas of WSNs [1–3]. Backbone formation to construct a robust communication structure is a significant research area in WSNs. Backbones are provided in WSNs in order to decrease the number of messages and total time spent for routing the sensed data to the sink. By clustering the network and backbone formation, an energy-efficient topology is constructed which makes routing and data aggregation tasks easier. In clustering schemes, each node is classified as either cluster head or cluster member. Cluster members are ordinary nodes whereas cluster heads perform various task on behalf of the members of the clusters.A WSN can be modeled as a graph G(V, E) where V is the set of vertices (nodes of WSN) and E is the set of edges (communication links between the nodes). A connected dominating set is a subset S of a graph G such that S forms a dominating set and is connected. CDSs have many advantages in network applications such as ease of broadcasting and constructing virtual backbones [4]. Due to this fact, CDSs have been extensively studied by researchers [5–7,4,8–10]. Existing CDS algorithms generally aim at minimizing the number of backbone nodes without considering other issues, on the other hand energy-efficient cluster head selection is very important for sensor networks. In the weighted connected dominating set (WCDS) construction problem, the total weight of the set is aimed to be minimized. When the node weights are related to their energy then WCDS becomes a robust backbone architecture. To the best of our knowledge, although central WCDS is studied by researchers [11–14], there are few work on distributed WCDS construction [15–18].In this study, we propose WCDS algorithms for energy-efficient backbone formation for sensor networks. For WCDS construction, we firstly design a weighted dominating set algorithm then we provide a weighted Steiner tree algorithm to connect dominators. Our proposed algorithms are semi-asynchronous and fully distributed in nature making them suitable for large scale applications in sensor networks. We use β synchronizer independent from the timer events.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the network model, backbone formation problem and distributed algorithm model with the synchronizers are described and the related work is surveyed in Section 3. The proposed algorithms are described and analyzed in Section 4 and Section 5. The results of performance tests of the proposed algorithms are presented in Section 6. The performance evaluation of a sensor network application is analyzed in Section 7 and conclusions are given in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed weighted connected dominating set algorithms for energy-efficient backbone formation in WSNs. We first design ASYNSET algorithm in order to produce a small weighted connected dominating set. ASYNSET is the semi-asynchronous and fully distributed version of CENTSET. After producing the weighted dominating set, we connect the dominators by designing ASYNTREE algorithm. This fully distributed algorithm use a heuristic derived from the Klein’s algorithm. We gave the analysis for the proof of correctness, approximation ratio, time complexity, message complexity and space complexity of the algorithms. All algorithms are implemented in ns2 simulation environment and the results obtained show that our proposed algorithms select lower cost backbone than the other approaches. Although our proposed algorithms consume more energy than the related work during the backbone construction phase, the backbone construction is performed initially and possibly only after a topology change in the network. On the other side, communication via the backbone is performed regularly and the energy consumption of a sensor network application is decreased when our backbone is applied instead of the others as a result of our break-even analysis. So for the energy-efficient and long-lived sensor network applications, our algorithms are favorable.