@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A validated ontology for global software development

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an ontology that covers three important issues regarding GSD: the goals, barriers and different concepts involved in a GSD project.The ontology was produced as the result of an exhaustive literature analysis. Moreover, the ontology was evaluated and validated by experts by means of two surveys.The proposed ontology may be useful for both researchers and practitioners since it provides a common language that will allow them to understand GSD and reason and avoid misunderstandings related to it.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Global software development (GSD),Global software engineering (GSE),Distributed software development (DSD),Ontology,Meta-model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The global software development (GSD) paradigm has, over the last 15fifteen years, shifted from being novel and ground breaking to being widely adopted and mainstream. This wide adoption is partly owing to the many benefits provided by GSD, such as reduced labour costs, proximity to new markets and access to a diverse and experienced skills pool. Yet taking advantage of these benefits is far from straightforward, and research literature now includes a proliferation of guidelines, reviews and models to support the GSD industry. Although this active area of study is firmly established as a research area in its own right, the boundaries between general software engineering and GSD are somewhat confused and poorly defined. In an effort to consolidate our understanding of GSD, we have developed an ontology in order to capture the most relevant terms, concepts and relationships related to the goals, barriers and features of GSD projects. The study we present here builds on research conducted in a collaboration project between industry and academia, in which we developed an ontology in order to provide practitioners with a “common language and conceptualisation”. Its successful outcome encouraged us to create a broader ontology that captures the current trends in GSD literature. The key ontology, along with its three subontologies, are the result of a review of the relevant literature, together with several expert evaluations. This ontology can serve as a useful introduction to GSD for researchers who are new to the paradigm. Moreover, practitioners can take advantage of it in order to contextualise their projects and predict and detect possible barriers. What is more, using a common language will help both researchers and practitioners to avoid ambiguities and misunderstanding.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is currently a strong and growing trend that involves IT organisations employing multisite teams that span geographic boundaries to build their software. Organisations are adopting a Global Software Development (GSD) paradigm, either out of necessity or owing to the promise of competitive benefits. GSD can take various forms, and the proliferation of literature reviews on the subject reflects this active area of research and practise. Indeed, there are now even two tertiary research studies [1,2] that capture the groups of secondary literature reviews. Since GSD has now become a dominant paradigm, and thanks to the proliferation of research that the community can draw on, the research community now needs a common understanding of the terms and concepts related to GSD projects.One way in which to achieve this goal is to create a GSD ontology. An ontology is defined by Gruber [3] as the formal specification of a shared conceptualisation. Ontologies provide a visual means to share a common understanding of the structure of information among people or software agents. Moreover, ontologies enable the reuse of domain knowledge, thus making domain assumptions explicit and helping us to clarify any ambiguities [3,4]. What is more, and as is illustrated by the successful applications of ontologies in the Software Engineering field, an ontology can provide numerous benefits, from serving as a basis for discussion to achieving the necessary agreement and consensus and contributing to the harmonisation of standards in the field, as a vehicle for achieving the interoperability required between the ever-increasing number of groups and organisations working on languages and tools, or to support model driven engineering initiatives (see [5,6,7,8]).Bearing in mind the aforementioned issues, our main research objective has therefore been to build an ontology with which to determine the advantages, challenges and concepts related to GSD projects. This ontology is based on the relevant related GSD ontologies that exist in the field and has been agreed on by experts in the field.The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. The background to this research is presented in the following section, while the research method followed to build the GSD ontology is described in Section 3. In Section 4, we focus on describing the systematic mapping carried out to discover the ontologies and taxonomies exist in the literature related to GSD, and Section 5 provides a description of the process carried out to discover new terms and relations and the results obtained. An evaluation of the first version of the ontology by experts is presented in Section 6 and the refined result obtained (GSD ontology v2) is then described in Section 7. In Section 8, we present the validation of GSD ontology v2. Finally, the conclusions, limitations and guidelines for using the ontology, along with an outline of future work, are presented in Section 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
