@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling maintenance projects risk effects on ERP performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the effects of risks activated in the implementation of maintenance requests on ERP performance over time.Static analysis reveals that the management of risks derived from participants is critical.Dynamic analysis shows that risks derived from internal personnel always prevail over the impact derived from external agents.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ERP maintenance,System performance,Software project risks,Simulations,Soft computing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Worldwide organizations have made important efforts to replace their legacy information applications by ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) solutions. However, a suitable system implementation does not guarantee the ERP adoption success. This also depends on the modifications carried out in the system during the ERP maintenance. The implementation process of these changes is risky and may negatively affect application performance. Therefore, practitioners must handle the existing ERP maintenance risks in order to preserve the system performance. Hence, we propose an innovative and flexible technique to manage risks impacts on ERP performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
ERP systems are defined as a single software system allowing the complete integration of information flow from all functional areas in companies by means of a single database and accessible through a unified interface and channel of communication [1–3]. Many companies have adopted ERP packages to fully integrate, standardize and coordinate their business processes.These systems are more or less customized to fit them to the adopting firm through the implementation process. Each ERP package thus is considered as unique, since these contain singular extensive additions and configurations [4]. But when the ERP is operative, practitioners undergo changes in the system. These modifications are carried out to correct or prevent failures, migrate the ERP to new releases and align the application regarding the specific business requirements or ERP users' expectations. ERP value and performance can be thus improved [5].The requirements of ERP changes arise from maintenance requests originated by users, consultants, vendors and the maintenance team itself. Subsequently, analysts deeply examine the request to decide whether to accept or reject it. At first, they determine if the requests had been previously created or if it is a mistake. If both situations do not happen, the team assesses the request scope and impact on ERP as well as the resource required to modify the software. In other words, they examine the requirements' conversion, identify potential ripple effects and generate alternative possibilities.Despite this evaluation, modifications, which are made in the system through ERP maintenance, are not free from difficulties and risks [6]. Without proper risk management, ERP maintenance projects can easily run out of control. This often leads to side effects on the system performance. In fact, it is recognized that unsuitable implementation of requests may damage software performance [7]. For example, the order of the maintenance tasks affects software maintainability [8].Other factors such as the capability or the stability of the staff have a significant influence on software quality [9]. Their high turnover rate is indeed very common with IT (Information technology) projects [10]. In this regard, new personnel require a progressive period to adjust to the project. During this time, they may not understand properly the documentation, functionality, coding and logical architecture of the system. The quality of system programming can thus be damaged and hence ERP quality. In such a case, the daily business activity of the firm would be hindered. It consequently causes huge losses for adopter companies. For example, companies such as Hershey foods and Avis Europe PLC incurred loss of 151 and 54.5million dollars respectively, from problems with its ERP systems [11]. Failures in ERP projects have even forced enterprises into bankruptcy [12].So as to avoid the above-mentioned consequences, ERP performance should not be worsened during ERP maintenance. In this way, practitioners have to manage properly the implementation of ERP maintenance requests. To do so, they should identify, assess and control the existing risk factors in the implementation of maintenance requests. However, the literature lacks research on ERP maintenance risks.Accordingly, the present study identifies the risk factors that lead to failures in the implementation of ERP maintenance requests. In addition, we have built a FCM to statically and dynamically assess these risks. FCM specifically allows to foresee the impact of maintenance project risks on ERP performance. This tool can be used to answer the following questions: (1) Which maintenance risks will impact the strongest on ERP performance? (2) How will these impact on the rest of the risks? The results will help ERP practitioners to manage the implementation of changes in a better way.This paper is structured in five sections. Section 2 studies some maintenance issues of ERP systems. Section 3 introduces the FCM technique. Next, this explains the following steps to build the FCM of ERP maintenance risks. Section 4 shows the findings obtained in the static and dynamic analysis of Augmented FCM. Finally, Section 5 exposes the main conclusions obtained in this research.Once ERP implementation has been concluded and the system is operative, the normal operation of ERP can attain great benefits [13–15]. But, to achieve them, organizations have to rework and adjust the system and themselves in the course of the ERP life-cycle [16,17]. That is, ERP adopter companies have to perpetually maintain their ERPs until the end of their life span. However, frequent ERP modifications cause high risks and costs, which impact on software performance [6]. In such a case, business activity of the ERP-adopting organizations may be hindered. Hence, ERP maintenance is considered a critical process which needs to be managed carefully.ERP maintenance can be defined as the process addressed to identify and perform changes required for improving or maintaining system usability and performance through the ERP post-implementation stage. The maintenance team implements each request by means of projects. ERP maintenance projects start when the users, vendor, consultants and/or maintenance team itself detect an ERP modification need (e.g., an enhancement standardized business process or correcting failures in the ERP code by means of patches) and create a request. In this way, the ERP vendor usually plays a significant role. This specifically provides software updates and patches, monitors frequency and extensiveness of system updates, so that performing system users training [7,18].Subsequently, the project team studies feasibility of the maintenance request. By way of illustration, the project team carefully tests how the upgraded ERP will affect both its existing enterprise systems and its long-established business processes before implementing new releases [19,20]. Once the project team makes sure that the system has been no harm so that running properly, the maintenance manager states the implementation plan.Following this, the maintenance team performs the required modifications and integrates them into the ERP. Nevertheless, the execution of changes is normally carried out through a bit-structured process. In fact, ERP practitioners lack a clear framework that indicates the way [21]. These packages even contain extensive additions which limit system maintainability [4]. Hence, practitioners may have difficulties in understanding the system architectures, the program codes and/or the business requirements.Likewise, ERP maintenance requires the use of unfamiliar technologies and tools for not very experienced ERP practitioners. In fact, there is normally a high personnel turnover in the maintenance team and a scarcity of replacements. In addition, ERP maintenance can be regarded as great size projects because these are usually complex, costly, lengthy, and demand the active participation and assistance of many stakeholders [22,23]. Hence, many risk factors [24] threaten the ERP maintenance success and, consequently, the ERP's performance can be made worse.The changes performed in one ERP during its maintenance can positively or negatively affect system performance. This term implies to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of the ERP adopted. With this in mind, several studies propose measures for monitoring ERP performance (e.g., [25,26]). In this way, some researches have developed a detailed framework of system measures under fuzzy environment [27]. As well as identifying system performance measures, others provide interdependencies among them by means of a road map [28]. Table 1summarizes a set of measures for ensuring proper maintenance of system performance during its life cycle.In order to evaluate the modifications performed in one ERP, the literature gathers together a study which presents an innovative system. This allows to assess the effect of changes on ERP performance [29]. However, the proposed support system does not regard the existing risks in the process. Moreover, a study assesses risks in maintenance projects [21], but this does not explore the relationships between factors and their impact on ERP performance. Another work identifies and evaluates the ERP post-implementation risks [30]. However, this is specifically focused on exploitation risks. Other papers on ERP projects risks also exist in the literature, but these are focused on the implementation stage [12,31–35]. In contrast, software development and maintenance risks articles are very abundant in the literature, but their findings cannot be extrapolated to ERP maintenance.Numerous issues differentiate ERP maintenance management with respect to classical systems [7,12,16,21–23,36,37]. Matters such as demanding maintenance requests [7], the performed maintenance activities through the software maintenance lifecycle model [16,37], the role of ERP maintenance participants [23], the active cooperation of managers and ERP users [21] and the organizational impact of the maintained systems [12,36], among others, highlight differences in both of them. The ERP maintenance projects' complexity is also greater than other software maintenance projects due to the continuous modifications carried out on these applications through their life-cycles [7]. Furthermore, ERPs integrate the information flows and processes in the enterprise supply chain and in customer relationships. Likewise, these solutions are strongly linked to others. Professionals should thus maintain ERP taking into account the effects of the changes on other, connected applications, increasing the projects' complexity [36].Therefore, the literature lacks proper ERP maintenance risk studies. In contrast, to avoid the negative effects of specific risks on system performance, practitioners need to proactively manage risks instead of dealing with them intuitively. Based on all the above mentioned aspects, we decided to build a tool to foresee risk impacts on ERP performance during the implementation of maintenance requests.Modeling techniques are rarely applied for risk assessment in ERP projects. A research has developed a specific system to manage risk factors associated with ERP implementation [33]. However, in order to accurately represent risk effects, their features should be considered. ERP project risks are closely interrelated factors [38]. Hence, the chosen technique has to be capable of representing all possible interactions between risks. With this in mind, a study has proposed an application based on colored petri nets, in order to model ERP project risks [39]. In the same line of thinking, a work has also been conducted to risk analysis, although using a different technique: interpretive structural modeling [40].In general, IT project risks are also characterized by uncertainty [41]. According to this perspective, a research has created an expert system framework to assess the risk of ERP projects [42]. However, it is based on a linear structure. In consequence, the feedback dynamics of the model propagations follow an established pattern, conditioning their propagations at successive times [43]. Meanwhile, dynamic behavior of the FCM models is not limited. In addition, this technique can accurately represent complex problems using a causal effect fuzzy reasoning. Hence, the FCMs had been applied in a great variety of domains, such as medical diagnosis [44], environmental change [45], agriculture [46], artificial emotion forecasting [47], planetary exploration [48], and supervision of chemical process [49], among others.FCM is an artificial intelligence technique based on the cognitive maps presented by Axelrod [50], and incorporating concepts from fuzzy logic and neural networks [51]. This allows modeling dynamic systems composed of interrelated variables and clarifying any complex decision environment. In addition, it can be used for developing what-if analysis, through the definition of scenarios [52,53]. Hence, we consider that FCM is the most suitable technique to model risk effects on ERP performance.FCMs are made of nodes and edges. These specifically describe the behavior of a complex system in terms of concepts (e.g., risks); each concept represents a variable or node of the system. The edges represent the sense (sign) and intensity (fuzzy weight) of causal relationship among the variables [50]. A positive relationship (+) between two nodes indicates that changes in the causal variable provoke changes in the effect variable in the same direction. When the relationship is negative (−), then the changes are in the opposite direction.The variables' state evolves depending on the fuzzy weight values assigned to the edges. The fuzzy weight (ωij) indicates the intensity of the relationships between two nodes (i and j). The ωijvalues are within the interval [−1, 1]. The closer the ωijvalues are to the interval extremes, the more the casual variable will impact on the effect(s) variable(s). If there is no relationship between the variables, the assigned ωijwill be zero. The ωijvalues are represented in the nxn (n is the number of nodes) matrix called the adjacency matrix (A), which doesn't have to be symmetric:A=…………ωij…………ωij∈−1,+1∀i,j.FCMs are normally designed by experts with a long experience in the matter studied. They specifically provide the FCM nodes as well as the intensity and sign of their edges. There are various approaches in the literature for building FCMs [51,54–59]. The selection of the most suitable approach depends on the features of the research. In this case, similar preliminary studies are scarce. Moreover, the effects of ERP maintenance risks may vary depending on the solution implemented. So, in order to build an FCM which adjusts to the ERP maintenance reality, we decided to follow the AFCM (Augmented Fuzzy Cognitive Map) approach [54,55].This approach is widely used in previous researches for building FCMs in diverse domains (e.g., [56,59–62]). This allows the creation of a complete FCM that represents all the experts' opinions without restrictions [60]. In this way, it is foreseeable that the model may contain a large number of nodes and causal relationship between them. AFCM indeed makes the achievement of consensus between experts easier. For this purpose, AFCM approach requires that experts do not change their judgment for consensus purposes, as is required by the Delphi methodology [55]. For all above-mentioned reasons, we adopted this method in order to reach consensus between experts.According to AFCM methodology [54], the augmented adjacency matrix is built by aggregating the adjacency matrix of each expert. The elements' aggregation depend on if there are or are not common nodes.On one hand, if the experts' adjacency matrix had no common nodes, the elements ωAUGijin the augmented matrix (AAUG) are computed by adding the adjacency matrix of each expert (Aexpert_k).Let two FCMs with no common nodes. The adjacency matrix of FCMAis Aexpert_A=(ω12A); and the adjacency matrix of FCMBis Aexpert_B=(ω21B). The resulting matrix of adding them is:AAUG=0ω12Aω21B0.On the other hand, if the experts' adjacency matrices have common nodes, the elements ωAUGijin the augmented matrix are computed by Eq. (1)[55].(1)ωijAUG=∑K=1nAexpert_k/n=∑K=1nωijk/nn being the number of FCMs added (one per expert), k the identifier of each expert, and i and j the identifiers of the relationships.We carried out the steps indicated in Fig. 1to build the FCM. Firstly, we identified the preliminary nodes. To do so, we performed a broader literature review of software project risks and ERP project papers. We thus achieved an initial great risk list. But, the great majority of risk papers found are focused on classical software development or maintenance. Therefore, the initial list did not solely gather ERP maintenance risks. So, we carefully analyzed the initial list to identify ERP maintenance risks. To do so, we explored the activities required to implement maintenance requests described in the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) std. (Standard) 1219 [63]. In this maintenance project phase, the maintenance team specifically performs the modifications required for the ERP system. At the same time, we determined which ERP maintenance risks affect negatively the execution of those activities.Subsequently, those risks affecting ERP maintenance were renamed, while the other risks were eliminated. We specifically eliminated those risks which do not affect the execution of those activities addressed to perform the changes required in the ERP system. In this way, we obtained the preliminary risk nodes of FCM. This gathered together the following risks: high changing structure/processes/tasks of the ERP-adopting organization (R1), high turnover within the ERP maintenance team (R3), the ERP maintenance team members are unmotivated/not committed (R4), lack skills/knowledge/experience/trained ERP maintenance team members (R5), the quality of code (R6), poor establishment of standard process/procedures/methodology (R7), excessively-complex procedures (R8) and ERP project milestones not clearly defined (R9). These risks threaten the execution of those activities addressed to perform the required changes in the ERP system. We explain how these risks make the implementation of ERP maintenance request difficult in Appendix A.The following activity consisted of selecting experts who were willing to take part in our research. In this study, multiple choices were explored to select the experts. The main selection criterion considered was the absence of conflicts of interest and profound knowledge in the ERP maintenance. Three measures were used to assess it: 1. the number of years working in ERP maintenance projects, 2. academic qualifications, and 3. professional career (specifically, his/her current professional position). To ensure a minimum level of expertise, we disqualified those who had not taken part in, at least, one ERP maintenance project finished off. Moreover, in order to build an accurate FCM which faithfully represents ERP maintenance reality, we decided to make up a heterogeneous panel of experts. A heterogeneous group is understood to be a group of people with the same knowledge but on a different social or professional scale. This took place in our study.In no case, did we select the experts because they were easily accessible. We contacted experts by e-mail, and invited them to take part by explaining the purpose of the study and the research methodology to be used. Finally, a total of 10 leading experts decided to take part with us in this study. These experts belong to different professional scales (maintenance team managers, analysts, programmers, consultants, among others). Moreover, they had participated or participate in the maintenance of ERP solutions supplied by different vendors. Therefore, we achieved the making up of a heterogeneous group of experts, 10 being a good size [64,65]. Appendix B shows descriptive data of the participating experts.Thirdly, each expert individually built an FCM. To help them, we sent the list of preliminary risk nodes, which were only indicative. So, they checked them and eliminated those risk nodes, which do not affect ERP maintenance. Moreover, those experts, who concluded that we had not identified all ERP maintenance risks, added the non-identified risk(s) node(s) to the initial list. The risks added by them were: miscommunications or misunderstanding of the maintenance request (R2), inadequate measurements/tools/technology for test/simulation/evaluation (R10), Wrongly-fit ERP system with pre-existing applications (R11) and external parties (consultants, ERP vendors, subcontractors) do not participate properly in the maintenance process (R12). Subsequently, the experts state the relationship between the nodes. They also pointed out the risk impacts on ERP performance. We thus achieved one adjacency matrix for each expert.We finally built the augmented matrix (AAUG) adding the adjacency matrix of each one of them [54]. The elements' aggregation depends if there are or are no common nodes. The experts' adjacency matrix had common nodes. So, the elements ωAUGijin the augmented matrix were computed by Eq. (1)[55]. The AAUGobtained is the following:AAUG=00.06000.070000.120.0400−0.05000000.0300000.10−0.1080000.2550.3250.1850.05000000000.1500.105000000000000.0400.62500.170000−0.01800000000.060000−0.109000000.1200.080000−0.038000000.1100000.080−0.0290000000000000000000000000−0.025000000000000−0.03200.140000.280.3150.03500.020.020−0.1340000000000000Table 2summarizes the final FCM nodes and their descriptions. Measures of ERP system performance are detailed in Section 2.The FCM obtained contains 13 nodes and 34 edges. This is showed in Fig. 2. The node connections are detailed in Table 3.In order to know how much agreement there was across the panel of experts, we have included the ranges (maximum and minimum extremes) and Standard Deviations (SD) of the connections indicated by the participating experts in Table 3. The largest differences in opinion are reached in those connections with a SD greater to 0.3, those connections that obtained maximum and minimum extremes. These reached values closer to 0.3 in the SD, except the connection wR5→R6(0.466). In contrast, 74% of connections reached values of less than 0.3 in the SD and, in most cases, these values are closer to 0.2 or less. Therefore, there was no great disparity in expert's opinions despite the fact that they built their FCM in a private manner.The graphical representation of the FCM shows us significant findings. The connections between the risk nodes are positive. That is, if it increases the risk exposure of one ERP maintenance risk (not R9), the risk exposure of connected effect(s) variable(s) also increase(s). Therefore, the existing risk effects in the implementation of maintenance requests on ERP performance will be seen as multiplied. In the same way, if risk exposure of one risk decreases, the risk exposure of another (other) risk(s) also decrease(s). Thus, ERP maintenance risks will have a lesser negative influence on ERP performance.Moreover, 9 to 12 risk nodes directly and negatively impact ERP performance. That is, system performance will be damaged if it increases the risk exposure of R1, R2, R5, R6, R7, R8, R10, R11 or R12. However, the intensity of the risk impact depends on the assigned ωij. So, to be more efficient in the risk management, ERP practitioners should minimize:1.Those risks that have most influence on other risks. In this case, R12 (7 outputs), R1 (5 outputs) and R3 (4 outputs) are the risks that most impacted on other risks. Hence, it is advisable for ERP practitioners to treat and control the previous risks.▪Practitioners minimize R12 improving the involvement and cooperation of external parties. So, they should take measures such as selecting proficient consultants, to be in continuous contact with vendors or to supervise subcontractor activity, among others.Practitioners reduce R3 avoiding the instability and lack of continuation of the ERP maintenance team personnel. This is a very common problem in general ERP projects due to the lack of specialized professionals. To avoid this, managers can take varied decisions. In this sense, various experts indicated to us that continuous training is very valuable for personnel even, in some cases, more than other matters such as the salary. If managers are not able to avoid R3, they should demand proper documentation of the modifications carried out in the ERP. This will allow new professionals to adapt more quickly to working requirements.Not all risks are controllable to the same degree [66], R1 being a low controllable risk. In fact, practitioners cannot stop continuous changes in the organizational structure or business process. But, practitioners should reject maintenance requests which threaten the usability and ERP performance. In this sense, it is essential for them to be able to make the generators of maintenance requests aware of the negative effects of these modifications.Those risks that most intensively impacted on ERP performance. The FCM shows that R12, R6 and R2 are those that most strongly affected on the system. Therefore, practitioners should strenuously manage them.▪R12, as well as the risk that most impacts other risks, is the risk that directly impacts the strongest on ERP performance. It is logical given the role that external parties play in the ERP maintenance. In fact, vendors mark ERP standard quality. In addition, they provide the maintenance team with releases, software patches, as well as other technical services. Consultants are usually the link between the team maintenance and the vendor. Moreover, consultants provide management support, indicating “best practices”, standard procedures or the system improvements needed. Subcontractors, such as ERP maintenance teams, carry out modifications in the system.R6 is the risk most influenced by others (6 inputs: R2, R3, R5, R7, R8 and R12). This reveals that the quality of original programming can be damaged by the scarce knowledge or skills of the maintenance personnel, the procedures performed, the misunderstanding of maintenance requests and, again, the lack of involvement of external parties. Therefore, to reduce R6, practitioners have a range of possible actions such as establishing standard procedures for each type of maintenance request or engaging experienced professionals in ERP technology, among other options.R2 arises at the beginning of ERP maintenance projects. But, to reduce this, practitioners should improve the communications with the generators of request maintenance through the entire project. It is noteworthy that R12 is the risk, which has the strongest impact on R2. It marks again the necessity of minimizing R12.The static analysis of FCM only permits the identifying of the existing connections between each pair of nodes. However, to foresee the intensity of risk impacts on ERP performance, we need to perform a dynamic analysis of the FCM. This is done by means of a dynamic simulation of the FCM behavior over time. For this purpose, firstly, we defined what-if scenarios at the instant 0. In other words, the values of all variables of the FCM are represented in a 1xn initial state vectorCSi0Eq. (2):(2)CSi0=c10c20…cn0.The static analysis of FCM corroborates that the involvement and support of vendors, consultants and subcontractors are keys in the ERP maintenance success as is seen as well in other studies [16,23]. Other risks (R3, R4 and R5) stand out from the rest in the static analysis. Furthermore, numerous previous studies on software project risks cite them. These risks refer to issues derived from ERP maintenance members. But, which risks will impact the strongest on ERP performance during the system maintenance: risks derived from external or internal agents or both at the same time? How it will impact on the remainder risks? To answer the previous questions, we created 3 scenarios and simulated them separately:In Scenario 1, we activated, or ascribed a value different from zero, in (2) to the risk derived from the external agents:CS10=0000000000010.In Scenario 2, we activated risks derived from the internal agents:CS20=0011100000000.In Scenario 3, we activated risks derived from the internal and external agents:CS30=0011100000010.Subsequently, we simulated these Scenarios computing AAUGandC0Sithrough the following mathematical expression:(3)Cit+1=f∑i=1i≠jnCit⋅ωijwhere f(x) is the activation function.The state changes along the process. In this way, four activation functions can be used: sigmoid function (4), hyperbolic tangent function (5), step function (6) and threshold linear function (7)[52,67,68].(4)fx=11+e−λ⋅x(5)fx=tanhx=eλ⋅x−e−λ⋅xeλ⋅x+e−λ⋅x(6)fx=0if1ifx≤Tx>T(7)fx=0ifx−Tifx≤Tx>TT being a subjective value defined by the FCM designer and included onto the range [0,1].Step function (6) and threshold linear function (7) may decrease the likely of obtaining simulations regarding the phenomena represented by the model [52]. Hence, the most applied activation functions in FCM dynamics are sigmoid function (4) and hyperbolic tangent function (5). The first one make possible the transformation of the values in the [0,1] interval. However, in our model, the fuzzy weights (x) are within the range [−1,1]. These values can only be transformed by the hyperbolic tangent function. Hence, we used this function in the dynamic simulation of the FCM.Hyperbolic tangent function uses lambda as a constant for function slop. This has to be defined by the FCM designer. For large values of lambda (e.g., λ≥10), the hyperbolic tangent function approximates a discrete function; for smaller values of lambda (e.g., λ≤1) this approximates a linear function; while values of lambda closer to 5 provide a good degree of fuzzification. Hence, we applied the hyperbolic tangent function using λ=5, such as previous studies also suggested [52,67,69]. At this point, the FCM inference process could begin.The FCM inference process finishes when stability is reached. The final vector state shows the effect of the change in the value of each node on the FCM. After the inference process, the FCM reaches one of three states following a number of iterations. It settles down to a fixed pattern of node values, the so-called hidden pattern or fixed-point attractor.Alternatively, the state can continue cycling between several fixed states, known as a limit cycle. With a continuous function, a third possibility is a chaotic attractor. This occurs when, instead of stabilizing, the FCM continues to produce different results (state vector values) for each cycle. In this case, the technique fails to offer a useful outcome for risk analysis.The simulation finishes when the output of Eq. (3) reaches the stability (at a fixed point or limit cycle) or a chaotic behavior [70]. In this research, Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 reached the stability in the interactions 5000, 298 and 5000 respectively. Table 4presents the results obtained simulating each Scenario.The findings of Scenario 1 reveal that the impact of the unsuitable involvement of external agents (R12) in the project was positive and varied from null (0) to low (+0.255256472) on the rest of the risks. The quality of the original programming (R6) and fit the system with pre-existing applications (R11) were the ones highest affected by R12, both technical risks. The intensity of influence of R12 on ERP performance was higher than on the risks. This specifically was negative and slightly moderate (−0.308378881). Therefore, R12 directly affected ERP performance instead of indirectly, that is, by means of other risks.The results of the simulation of Scenario 2 show that the effect of risks derived from internal agents in the project (R3, R4 and R5) was also positive. However, in this simulation, the effects on ERP maintenance risks were higher by far. In fact, the intensity of impacts was usually high (except R2). The intensities of impacts were from 2 to 6 times higher in Scenario 2 with respect to Scenario 1. Specifically, the influence of R3, R4 and R5 on other risks was from null (0) to strong (+0.830216721). As well as Scenario 1, R6 was the highest impacted risk. But the intensity of impact of the risks activated in Scenario 2 was three times greater than the risk activated in Scenario 1. Moreover, the findings reveal that the risks derived from team maintenance personnel have a slightly strong impact on the complexity of performed maintenance procedures.The findings also show that underperformance by both external and internal agents do not increase the risk of miscommunications or misunderstanding of the maintenance requests. The intensity of influence of risks activated in Scenario 2 on ERP performance was two times greater than the risk activated in Scenario 1. The intensity of influence was negative and slightly strong. R3, R4 and R5 impact directly less on ERP performance than on some other risks. Therefore, risks derived from internal agents directly and indirectly affect ERP performance.A singular trend can be observed in the results of Scenario 3. If one risk was influenced by only one of the previous two scenarios, the intensity reached in Scenario 3 was the same. For example, R10 is only influenced by risks in Scenario 1 and, in Scenario 3, this obtained the same intensity of influence. In the same line, if one risk was neither impacted by risks activated in Scenario 1 or 2, neither was this impacted in the third simulation. This was the case of R1 and R9. But, when one risk is affected by both Scenarios 1 and 2, the value reached in Scenario 3 is the same as that obtained in Scenario 2. For example, R6 is influenced by risks in Scenario 1 (+0.255256472) and Scenario 2 (+0.830216721). In Scenario 3, this obtained the same intensity of influence like Scenario 2 (+0.8302314). Thus, when the risks derived from internal personnel affect other variables, its influences always prevail over the influence of the risks derived from external agents.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
ERP maintenance is necessary to maintain or improve the usability and system performance. With this in mind, risky and complex maintenance projects follow one another continuously through the ERP life span. However, numerous risks can arise during the implementation of maintenance requests. To prevent these risks negatively affecting system performance, ERP practitioners have to manage them properly. But, in many cases, practitioners deal with these risks intuitively and inefficiently.In order to avoid this, this research aims at supporting practitioners work managing risks in maintenance projects. To do so, we decided to create a FCM. This identifies risks in the implementation of maintenance request, as well as the existing connections between them. In order to guarantee that the most relevant risks and connections were included in the FCM, we selected the augmented approach to build it. Augmented FCM is an additive method which requires that experts do not change their judgment for consensus purposes. Moreover, participants' answers are not constrained by strict nodes. Thus, this approach allows us to build a complete FCM that represents all experts' opinions. In order to create and validate the FCM, we carefully made up heterogeneous panels of experts. That is, a group of people with the same knowledge but on a different social or professional scale. Therefore, we have built an FCM which represents all possible point of views.For the same abovementioned reasons, this tool can be used in any particular situation. That is, practitioners have not modify the FCM, adding or eliminating further variables and/or estimating specific fuzzy weights, to faithfully model their particular situation. To reinforce it, the predictions of FCM were verified by an expert in ERP maintenance project. He has been a leader of various ERP maintenance projects. This expert specifically corroborated that the results reached in ERP maintenance real projects and simulation results are similar when the risks simulated convert to problems.This work has certain limitations that need to be taken into account when examining its findings. On the one hand, the study only focused on accurately predicting risk impacts on one specific process: the implementation of maintenance requests. Hence, the results cannot be extrapolated to analyzing this problem in the rest of maintenance stages. On the other hand, the FCM proposed can quantify, in relative terms, the effect of one risk or groups of risks on the ERP performance. It must be noted that those effects are representing the current model. If any random factors appear, since FCMs are deterministic, the model must be changed to represent the new factors in the stage as well. In this context, FCM are flexible and can be easily customized in order to incorporate further elements or assumptions.Future studies shall provide insights into risk management in ERP maintenance projects. In contrast, risk identification, analysis, planning, treating and monitoring are complex activities, resulting in difficulties to manage ERP maintenance projects in an intuitive way. Frequently practitioners have indeed difficulties to make proper decisions, at just the right moment. In such cases, ERP maintenance projects have usually finished in failure. In spite of this, we have not identified any research, stating the most effective strategies for managing each risk in ERP maintenance projects. That is, taking into account variables such as the probability of occurrence, impact and frequency of each risk. Hence, in order to support practitioners' activity in ERP maintenance projects, further research about this matter is required.ERP maintenance teams constantly identify, analyze and design the system's changes based on the received requests and specific documentation. Subsequently, they perform the modifications required for the ERP system. Programmers specifically introduce these changes in the software through coding and unit testing. To do so, the quality of code (R6) is an essential issue because it makes the understanding of the system code more or less difficult. Other risks also threaten the performance of this activity. Companies evolve to adapt their structure, processes and tasks to a changing environment. But if the changes are continuous (R1), this affects the ERP maintainability. That is, the capability of the ERP to be modified. To make the programmers' tasks easier, they must have standard process/procedures/methodology. These indicate what is the best way to perform the changes. If the establishment of a standard process, procedures and/or methodology is poor (R7), the programmer will carry out excessively-complex procedures (R8). In this case, the implementation changes will need greater time and efforts, also increasing the ERP complexity. Moreover, inadequately-trained ERP maintenance team members make these effects worse (R5).When the modification package is programmed, the team members have to integrate it into the ERP. At each integration, the exact moment must be fixed clearly in the project and be guided by the milestones indicated in the implementation plan (R9). Otherwise, the coordination between both the programming and the integration activity is not optimal, and this threatens the maintenance performance. Moreover, in this activity, the team members' ability and experience are crucial because they must detect whether the impacts of the changes are appropriate or not. So, a high turnover within the ERP maintenance team (R3) also affects the task performance. When all the necessary integrations are finalized, a test-readiness review must be performed.In addition to the abovementioned tasks, the ERP maintenance team carries out continuous risk reviews in the whole phase. However, this task is not usually evaluated by them. This is why they do not obtain a specific result. In spite of this, it is a crucial activity for preventing problems. For this reason, the ERP maintenance managers must increase the team members' motivation and commitment (R4).Table B.1Experts' profile.PositionProject leaders4Consultants3Analysts2Programmer1Academic backgroundMSc.4MBA3BSc.1BBA1Graduate1Average of experience in ERP maintenance1–5years26–10years610years and over2