@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance evaluation of two narrowband PLC systems: PRIME and G3

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Performance evaluation of PLC Standards: PRIME and G3Improvements proposed for PRIMEEvaluate G3 and PRIME in different noise environments

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
PLC,PRIME,G3 - Source coding,Interleaver,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present work analyzes and compares two popular standards for data transmission over power line networks: PRIME and G3.A complete and detailed description of both standards is presented together with simulation results of their performance in a power line environment. In order to create an accurate analogy of the transmission channel, background and asynchronous impulsive noises are included using previous results from literature. Simulation results show how PRIME and G3 behave in several noisy environments.Finally, with respect to PRIME, a proposal is made to increase its performance in a hardly impulsive noise channel.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Utility companies around the world have recently started looking at their power line networks and have been trying to transform them into communications networks. A valuable application of this infrastructure is its capability to, automatically, retrieve each user's independent electricity consumption, something which, until recently, had been done manually. This is commonly referred to as Automated Metering Infrastructure (AMI).Some other alternatives for reaching the entire customer community have been studied [1], but PLC (Power Line Communication) has a major advantage: it has already been deployed.This paper focuses on analyzing and evaluating two of the major alternatives for the implementation of AMI applications: G3 [2], powered by Maxim company, and PRIME [3], developed by the PRIME Alliance. It extends the comparison made in other studies [4] by including simulations with different impulsive noise environments taken from real measurements [5].Due to the severe channel disturbances, both PRIME and G3 provide source coding techniques to correct as many errors as possible at the receiver side. G3, however, makes a bigger effort by using an outer encoder/decoder. The properties of source coding are enhanced by the use of an interleaver, which shuffles the bits within a symbol (in the case of PRIME) or among several of them (in the case of G3). Finally, data is modulated using Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) over the CENELEC-A band. Thanks to the orthogonality, OFDM makes a more efficient usage of the available spectrum. OFDM has proven to be very efficient in frequency fading mediums since each one of the sub-bands is treated as very narrow and independent channels, allowing an easier equalization. Due to this advantage, this technique has become a popular method for transmitting information over different types of noisy channels ranging from wireless transceivers [6] to communications between train vehicles [7].The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a detailed description of all elements present in a G3 and PRIME transceiver. Section 3 contains a description of the channel model used in order to evaluate both systems. In Section 4, simulations of packet transmission and receptions are described. In addition, the use of different types of noisy environments to evaluate the designs under several cases is discussed. In Section 5, an improvement proposal is made for PRIME for the context of a channel with a heavily impulsive noise. The final section presents the authors' conclusions.This section describes both the G3 and PRIME specifications that are used to transmit information over a PLC Network. In addition, Section 2.3 offers a more detailed comparison of the main G3 and PRIME characteristics.A scheme for a PRIME transmitter is shown in Fig. 1a. The standard makes use of the spectrum between 42 and 89kHz to insert OFDM symbols. Each one of these symbols consists of 97 sub-carriers placed in the mentioned bandwidth as is depicted in Fig. 2. One of these carriers is a pilot with the mission of giving a phase reference for the receiver. Additionally, carriers present in negative and positive frequencies are conjugated to each other so that the output of the IFFT block is a pure real signal. To build up such a spectrum, a clock frequency of 250kHz and a 512-length IFFT are used, giving a sub-carrier spacing of ∆f=250kHz/512=488.28125Hz. Before the parallel to serial conversion, a cyclic prefix extension of 48 samples (192μs) is performed to avoid Inter Symbol Interference (ISI). The whole transmission scheme is represented in Fig. 1a and Table 2 details all OFDM parameters regarding PRIME. More information about their physical meaning can be found in [8].A PRIME's signal is composed of a preamble, followed by some PHY information placed in the header, and of the payload encapsulating data from the MAC layer. Fig. 3shows this structure with lengths in OFDM symbols. A linear chirp (Eq. (1)) is used as preamble for synchronization and channel estimation. As can be seen in Fig. 4, the signal sweeps all frequencies where OFDM sub-carriers will be placed (from f0=41992Hz to ff=88867Hz) during T=2048μs.(1)st=cos2πtf0+tff−f02T,0<t<T.Prior to entering the OFDM block (Fig. 1a), data is modulated with a Differential Phase Shift Keying (DPSK) modulation and, optionally, redundancy is added. The payload might be modulated with a DBPSK, DQPSK or D8PSK (Differential Binary/Quadrature/8 Phase Shift Keying respectively) constellation with or without FEC, depending on how noisy the channel is; whereas the header will always be DBPSK modulated by using FEC. The reason for this more robust mode is that the information encapsulated in the header is vital for decoding the rest of the frame. This information includes, for instance, the type of constellation used for the payload.The FEC mechanism consists of a convolutional encoder together with an interleaver. The convolutional encoder is a 1/2 rate encoder with a binary generator polynomial gencoder=[001111001, 001011011]. The interleaver's function is to shuffle the input bits. The features of the encoder are enhanced by the use of the interleaver which provides protection against burst errors that might corrupt several consecutive symbols. However, since the shuffling is done over an entire OFDM symbol (96, 192 or 288bits depending on the digital modulation), if the burst event lasts at least the duration of that symbol, the shuffling mechanism will be helpless. Burst errors are produced, as will be detailed in Section 3.3, by aperiodic impulsive noise.Finally, the scrambler block is used to randomize the incoming data from the encoder. This guarantees that the Power Spectrum Density (PSD) of the signal does not depend on the transmitted information. The binary representation of the generator polynomial is gscrambler=[10001001].As in PRIME, the final proposed modulation method for the G3 specification [2] is also based on OFDM. In this case, 36 subcarriers are used to create a symbol between 34 and 90kHz. As can be seen in Fig. 5, only positive frequencies are used. Once the spectrum has been transformed to time domain, only the real part is transmitted.The OFDM modulation is computed with a sampling frequency of 400kHz and a FFT of 256 samples. In this case, the frequency separation to achieve orthogonality is Δf=400kHz/256=1562.5Hz. The first subcarrier is mapped to the position 23 (35.938kHz) in the IFFT and the last one to the position 58 (90.625kHz).A G3 frame is shown in Fig. 6. As in PRIME, it starts with a preamble, used for channel estimation purposes, is followed by a header, which encapsulates data regarding the PHY layer, and ends with the payload, which carries the data for the higher layer. In this case, the preamble is composed of 8 P symbols and 1.5 M symbols. P symbols are 36 tones whose phase follows a pseudo-random sequence. These tones are mapped in the same frequencies that will be used by the data carriers later on. An IFFT of 256 samples is applied to transform them to the time domain. M symbols are a copy of P but each of the carriers has a phase change of π radians. The payload is composed of groups of 4 OFDM symbols as can be seen in Fig. 6 and its length is set in one of the header's fields.Before the OFDM modulation, other blocks carry out signal processing computation in order to fight channel interferences. The FEC in G3 consists of a nested structure of a Reed–Solomon and a convolutional encoder together with an interleaver. These three elements are used in the normal operation mode, whereas for the robust mode, an extra block inserts 3 redundant bits for each input data bit (block RC in Fig. 1b).The structure of the convolutional encoder is identical to the one used in PRIME (Section 2.1). For the Reed–Solomon, two possible configurations are used: RS(N=255, K=239, R=16) and RS(N=255, K=247, R=8), where N is the total number of symbols per codeword and K and R are the number of data and parity symbols per codeword respectively. Given this, the number of correctable symbols is R/2. Each one of the symbols is composed of a fixed size of 8bits.As in PRIME, an interleaver is provided to avoid burst errors which may corrupt several OFDM symbols in a row. However, in contrast to PRIME, the interleaver block used in G3 applies a two-dimensional shuffle of data and, additionally, it does the shuffling between various OFDM symbols. The first step is to arrange the whole frame in a matrix with as many columns as the number of subcarriers and as many rows as the number of OFDM symbols to be transmitted in the frame. A scheme can be seen in Fig. 7. Then, all columns are circularly shifted, the number of times depending on the size of the matrix. This will spread a corrupted OFDM symbol over the rest. Next, all rows are circularly shifted as well. This clearly increases G3 immunity against errors, since the shuffling involves several symbols. In this case, a burst event which lasts a complete OFDM symbol will not necessarily corrupt all the information. This, however, requires a more complex device, since the whole frame has to be received (and therefore stored) to start the de-interleaving process.Prior to entering the OFDM modulation block, all these interleaved bits are digitally modulated following either a DBPSK or DQPSK constellation. This results in different transmission speeds as is shown in Table 1. Due to the lower number of subcarriers and the redundant information attached by the source encoders, G3 achieves lower transmission speeds than PRIME. An upgrade to the D8PSK scheme has recently been proposed for the expansion of G3 to CENELEC B/C/BC/D/BCD/BD frequency bands [9].It can be seen from Fig. 1a and b that the main schemes for PRIME and G3 are quite similar. Both of them complement an OFDM-based modulation with different source coding techniques to increase the immunity against noise. Moreover, different digital modulation techniques are available on demand depending on the disturbances in the channel. The main characteristics of the OFDM modulation are compared in Table 2.Looking at the transmitters' schemes, it can be seen how G3 implementation follows a more conservative approach. It not only includes an outer Reed–Solomon encoder but also adds a repetition code to spread the signal over a longer period. These two features, which are meant to increase noise insensitivity, are responsible for the considerable difference in data-bit-rates achieved for both standards. Table 1 offers a full comparison of the transmission speeds for each transmission mode.G3 has also opted for a different configuration for the interleaver. While PRIME shuffles the coded bits within a whole OFDM symbol, G3's interleaver utilizes a complete frame. Consequently, if an impulsive noise burst lasts longer than the OFDM period, PRIME's interleaver will be worthless since all bits will be corrupted. G3, however, will have a better chance given that the burst will be spread over not adjacent bits. In this case, a burst event which lasts a complete OFDM symbol will not necessarily corrupt all the information. Nevertheless, a longer extension for the interleaver introduces extra latency, since the receiver needs to wait for the whole block prior to processing it.Another interesting difference between PRIME and G3 is their preamble structure. Whereas PRIME uses a frequency sweep running over the entire OFDM spectrum, G3 modulates 256 pseudo-random symbols through the IFFT. Since both sequences are known in advance by the receiver, they are used to estimate the channel transfer function. But not only the preamble schemes are different; both of them also vary in length. PRIME's preamble lasts as long as an OFDM symbol without Cyclic Extension (2048μs) and G3 sends the 256 pseudo-random symbols 9.5 times before starting to send the information. This takes 6080μs, i.e. the duration of 9.5 OFDM symbols without Cyclic Extension.G3 uses this preamble both for channel estimation, as has already been mentioned, and for establishing phase references for the sub-carrier demodulation. Since no phase information is introduced in PRIME's preamble, a sub-carrier is used as a pilot to provide the phase reference needed by the DPSK demodulator. No pilots are used in the case of G3, as can be seen in Fig. 1b.It is also worth mentioning that G3 provides a longer possible frame. In its frame header, 6bits are reserved for indicating the length of the payload. This value multiplied by 4 gives the number of incoming OFDM symbols in the payload. As it can be easily computed, the maximum length for the payload is 26·4 OFDM symbols for G3, whereas in PRIME this value is lowered to 26.In Section 4, simulations under different environments will show how all these differences will play a role in combating all noise sources present in the PLC networks.As has already been mentioned, the power line channel is a very hostile and harsh communication medium, specially for low frequency signals. In this part of the spectrum, there is a great deal of noise and interference.In this study, the following noise/disturbances will be taken into account [5]:•Frequency selective channel with reflections.Background noise.Impulsive noise.A detailed explanation of the computation procedure followed to compute the channel selectivity in frequency is given in Section 3.1.The noise (nk), will be seen as:(2)nk=wk+ikwhere the wkand ikterms stand for the background and impulsive noises respectively. One of the main differences of the modeled noises is that, whereas background noise remains stationary for a longer time, aperiodic impulsive events make the PLC channel a fast time-variant transmission medium.The corresponding descriptions will be given in Sections 3.2 and 3.3.In this paper, the presence of a typical European LV network topology, where a main distribution line is connected to a Transformation Center, is assumed. All users are then linked to the backbone by a dedicated power line. The architecture is depicted in Fig. 8as it is shown in [10] and [11].The basic attenuation of the signal in a PLC network is due to losses in the transmission media (wires) and its terminations (loads). A cable can be modeled very accurately using its per-unit-length (p.u.l.) parameters. These are the resistance, capacitance, inductance and admittance per length unit (R, C, L and G, respectively). With these, it is possible to compute the characteristic impedance (Zc) and propagation constant (γ) of the wire:(3)Zc=R+jωLG+jωC(4)γ=α+jβ=R+jωL⋅G+jωC.These parameters are also known as the distributed line parameters. With Zcand γ it is possible to compute the transfer function of the network between two of its points, and to obtain the channel frequency response.When computing the overall PLC network transfer function, two types of approaches are commonly used:•Top–Down Approach.Bottom–Up Approach.In this paper, this second approach is used to compute a transfer function of the transmission line from a low-voltage transformation center to an end-customer input impedance. For a more detailed description and discussion of Top–Down and Bottom–Up approaches the reader is invited to see [12] and the references therein.The Transmission Matrix of a two-port network describes the relationship between the voltage and current values at both ports. Fig. 9shows a two-port network defined by its ABCD parameters. Eq. (5) defines the relationship between the pairs (U1, I1) and (U2, I2) through the Transmission Matrix.(5)U1I1=TU2I2=ABCDU2I2.This type of noise is mainly caused by the contribution of several low power noise sources.Some measurements have been carried out in broad [13] and narrow [14] band environments in order to characterize this type of noise.To compute the PSD of the background noise, the following expression is commonly used [14,15]:(6)Nf=10K−3.95⋅f⋅10−5W/kHzwhere K follows a normal distribution with mean μ=−5.64 and a standard deviation σ=0.5.The background noise used in simulations presented in this paper was synthesized by filtering a white noise source, as was proposed in [16]. The idea is to transform the power density spectrum using a linear filter. Assuming that Gw(f) is the PSD of a white Gaussian process and H(f) is the frequency response of the filter, the PSD at the output can be computed with:(7)Gcf=Hf2Gwf.Given this, a filter (H(f)) has been designed so that the output PSD follows the trend given by Eq. (6). Fig. 10shows the Power Spectrum Density of the filtered noise (Gc(f)).The asynchronous impulsive noise is mainly caused by different transients that occur in the network.Regarding the additive impulsive noise, it will be modeled with the expression:(8)ik=bk⋅gkwhich follows a Bernoulli Gaussian Model as in [17] and [18]. In Eq. (8), gkmodels the amplitude of the noise following a white Gaussian process with 0 mean and σi2 variance; and bkis a Poisson Process for modeling the time instants of the impulsive noise events. Given this, assuming a rate of λ impulsive noise events per second, the probability of having k disturbances in t seconds will be described by:(9)Pkt=e−λtλtkk!,k=0,1,2,3,⋯.Fig. 11shows an example of a time realization of background and impulsive noise added together.In order to evaluate the performance of PRIME and G3 in a channel which integrates the disturbances described in Section 3, a numerical model has been developed using Matlab. This program calculates the Transfer Function for the paths between a Transformation Center and all end users in the network based on an XML file. In this file, all the logical connections and the mathematical description of the elements in the network are described. This is a requirement if one is using a Bottom–Up approach.The case studied in this paper will use a network topology such as that described in Fig. 12. As can be seen in the scheme, it consists of a number of meters hanging from a Transformation Center. There is a backbone transmission line where all meters are connected via a dedicated or shared local loop. It is intended to look like a rural environment, where meters are separated some hundreds of meters from each other in an irregular shape.All power lines will be assumed to use the NAYCWY 185/185se cable model. The corresponding p.u.l. parameter description can be found in [19], where measurements showed an attenuation coefficient (α) of 1dB/km around 80kHz. The attenuation suffered by each termination given the network topology in Fig. 12 and the cable characterization can be found in [12].The evaluation for PRIME and G3 will be based on using the Matlab model to simulate transmission through different PLC noisy environments. In contrast to other studies [4], different impulsive noise data taken from [5] will be used. This data is summed up in Table 3. IAT stands for the Inter-Arrival Time, which is the reciprocal of λ in Eq. (9), and Tnoiseis the mean noise duration. Following the work of [5] different scenarios have been classified as heavily, medium and weakly disturbed.Since no specific information about the receiver implementation is provided in either G3 or PRIME specification, we have designed a modulus which is able to decode the respective G3 and PRIME frames. Channel estimation is based on the information provided by the received preamble. In addition, the convolutional decoder works with binary values (hard decoding scheme) and uses a traceback length of 35 samples.The following sections will show the performance comparison for both standards under different disturbed environments. In all cases the channel attenuation will be present.As a starting point, Fig. 13a and b shows the performance of both systems working in an additive white Gaussian noise channel. These figures show the performance as far as the digital demodulators before any source coding has been applied. To provide some validation of the simulator, the theoretical curve for DBPSK under a white Gaussian noisy channel (page 324 in [20]) is included in a thicker line.It can be seen that simulations coincide completely with what could be expected from a theoretical point of view.Trying to test the systems under more real life scenarios, both systems will be compared assuming that only background noise is present in the channel.Fig. 13a and b also include the performance with background noise when no source coding is used. It can be seen that results are slightly worse than when white Gaussian noise is present.The performance improves when coders and interleavers are included in simulations. This is shown in Fig. 13c and d. Colors group communications using the same digital modulation, as described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2.In this section, a more real-life scenario will be taken into account with the introduction of impulsive noise in the channel. In contrast to the performance study carried out in the previous section, here the channel will be disturbed both with background and impulsive noises.Let skbe the generic G3/PRIME transmitted OFDM signal. The corresponding time domain signal at the receiver (rk) side could be seen as:(10)rk=sk∗hk+wk+ikwhere wkand ikstand for the realization of the background and impulsive noises as described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 respectively.Moreover, the power relationship between the impulsive and the background noises is defined as follows:(11)μ=PowimpPowbkg=σimp2σbkg2where σbkg2 and σimp2 stand for the background and impulsive noise power respectively.Henceforth, this relationship will take the value of 15dB, as stated in [5].Communication simulations within an impulsive noisy channel were carried out in order to evaluate the performance of both PRIME and G3. For the sake of brevity, the heavily scenario will be shown, as it represents a worst-case scenario. Fig. 15shows two time realizations of weakly and heavily impulsive scenarios. Impulsive and background noises are represented in different colors to make identification easier.Fig. 14a and b show the performance of both G3 and PRIME when no source coding is used. As can be seen, due to the presence of the impulsive noise, more transmitted power is needed to reach lower BER levels. One can also see that there is an SNR range with a flat BER performance. This effect is produced by the high power impulsive noise bursts. Once there is enough power to overcome them, BER curves recover their trends.It is also worth noting the different levels at which the BER gets stuck. In addition, it can be seen that G3's curve goes slightly deeper than PRIME's. This is the result of the different OFDM configurations. G3 works with a frequency separation approximately three times higher than PRIME, which provides this extra robustness against noise.The big differences appear when the rest of the blocks are included. Fig. 14c and d show the overall system performance under a channel corrupted by background and heavily impulsive noises.It can be seen in Fig. 14d that the interleaver and encoder blocks included in PRIME cannot cope with the impulsive noise bursts present in the channel. As a consequence, there is little improvement in the performance.However, Fig. 14c shows how G3 handles the same heavily impulsive scenario. It can be seen that the improvement is quite significant. The main reason for this difference in behavior is the use of a wider interleaving process (see Section 2.2) in the G3 scheme. This design does not eliminate errors due to the fact that impulsive events are more isolated from each other in time. When this frame full of sparse errors enters the Viterbi decoder at the receiver, they can more easily be corrected. As a result, G3 is more robust with respect to impulsive noise.In this section, an alternative modification to PRIME specification is proposed in order to improve performance described earlier.It should be clear, from the figures in Section 4, that G3 performs better than PRIME in environments with background noise and, especially, in environments with asynchronous impulsive noise. However, not all aspects about G3 are desirable. As was pointed out at the end of Section 2.2, due to all the redundant information included and to its OFDM scheme, G3's transmission bit rate is significantly lower (by a factor of 7 in the most robust mode).PRIME's poorer performance is mainly due to the fact that its interleaver block is not able to spread the impulsive bursts enough. As a result, the Viterbi decoder deals with erroneous bits too close to each other and cannot correct them. An outer decoder would help in this respect as it would fix the erroneous bits that the inner decoder could not handle.Taking this into account, this paper describes experiments which involve including an outer encoder and a longer interleaver in the PRIME's transceiver.It will be seen how adding a low-redundant encoder improved PRIME's performance without significantly decreasing its data bit rate. For such a block, a Low-Density-Parity-Check (LDPC [21]) encoder was chosen. In order to retrain PRIME's main advantage (data bit rate), two different low coding ratios were selected: 9/10 and 8/10 (9 and 8 out of 10bits are redundant respectively). The bit rate achieved by a configuration of 8/10 redundancy would be comparable with G3 running under normal mode. Data bit rates for all configurations are shown in Table 4where the column labeled 10/10 (PRIME) is an original robust PRIME configuration.Fig. 16a shows the performance when the outer encoder (R=9/10) is included and the default PRIME configuration including FEC is used. It can be seen that the outer encoder cannot undo the effect of the impulsive noise and the BER is stuck as it was in Fig. 14d. However, once there is enough transmitted power to catch up with the impulses, the outer encoder shows some performance improvement.Increasing the outer encoder redundancy (Fig. 16b) does not produce any changes in the flat area. However, the BER falls faster when the strength of the signal is greater than the power of the impulses.In order to increase the immunity against long impulsive noise events, a longer interleaver was replaced in the PRIME block diagram. The duration was extended to a whole PRIME frame, which lasts a maximum of 64 symbols according to the specifications (up to 2304bytes). As a result, errors were spread over a longer period of time, increasing the decoder's capabilities. The results are shown in Fig. 16c, where a comparison with the previous LDPC encoder with redundancy equals 8/10 is made. The BER curve performs considerably better and does not show such significant sensitivity to the impulsive noise. However, it still does not drop as fast as the G3 scheme.Those small errors still present in the communication with a long interleaver are quickly removed by combining both proposed blocks (Long Interleaver+Outer Encoder). This hybrid-scheme is also shown in Fig. 16c, in which an interleaver of 64 symbols has been combined with a low-redundant outer encoder (R=9/10).Finally, Fig. 17offers a comparison of G3 and PRIME schemes taking into account the additions proposed in this section. It can be seen that the normal mode in G3 performs very similar to the proposed scheme including a longer interleaver and an outer encoder. Using a redundancy of 8/10, data bit rates for PRIME are similar to G3's operating in robust mode, as can be seen from Tables 1 and 4, so this could be a fair comparison. However, when G3 switches to its robust mode, differences are bigger. Nevertheless, this is done at the cost of a strong reduction in bit rate.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper offers a detailed review of specifications for what are currently the most popular solutions for AMI: G3 and PRIME. Together with this theoretical description, a software model has been built using the Matlab environment to evaluate both standards.Simulation comparisons have been performed using different channel scenarios typically present in the PLC environment and channel characterization has been developed using several noise environments from the literature.Generally speaking, as could be observed in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, G3 offers a better performance in terms of noise robustness. However, one of its biggest drawbacks concerns the available transmission data bit rate. In Table 1, it can be seen that, generally, the numbers are lower than those that PRIME is able to reach. In this respect, an upgrade has been proposed for the expansion of G3 to CENELEC B/C/BC/D/BCD/BD frequency bands: D8PSK is included as a new digital modulation to increase the transmission bit rate in less noisy environments.However, as commented in Section 2.2, the increased length of the interleaver in G3 complicates the hardware, since the whole frame needs to be stored prior to being de-interleaved.Some proposals have been made in Section 5 for the improvement of PRIME's performance by changing the length of the interleaver or adding an outer encoder block with different redundancy lengths. Fig. 16 shows the improvement achieved. In particular, increasing the length of the interleaver both produces a lower bit error rate and keeps the transmission bit rate unchanged, one of the main advantages of PRIME against G3. Nevertheless the BER's slope is not as sharp as in G3 and higher SNR is needed to reach 0 errors. Combining the two modifications produces a significant improvement in performance and speeds up to a point at which there are no errors.Finally, it is clear from the figures in Sections 4.2 and 4.3 that PRIME behaves worse in terms of noise interference. Robustness has been sacrificed for the sake of higher transmission rates. However, PRIME specifications for the Medium Access Control (MAC) layer include some features that are meant to increase the communication performance. For instance, some of the nodes present in the network may promote to “Switch” mode. By doing so they behave as routers creating subnetworks. This would reduce the distance between communication links, leading to a reduction in the transmission path and, eventually, a better signal to noise ratio at the receiver.