@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance analysis of power line communication in industrial power distribution network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Application of power line communication (PLC) in industrial environmentDesign of instrument architecture for performance evaluation of PLC standardsImplementation of instrument using software defined radio technologyExperimental characterization of the instrumentAnalyses of the performance of PLC in a real industrial environment

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Power line communication,Low-voltage grid,Communication performance,Software defined radio,Industrial communication,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Power line communication (PLC) seems to be one of the best trade-off between cost and benefit for implementing Smart Grids in industrial context. Unfortunately, industrial environment may compromise the reliability of PLC technologies due to noisy communication channel and interfering/competing PLC systems. In this work, a multi-protocol instrument for PLC performance estimation is presented. The proposed solution is able to characterize and to decode several PLC systems with different physical modulations using a software-defined architecture. A working prototype of the proposed instrument has been characterized and used in a real industrial plant in order to study potential issues affecting PLC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The control and monitoring systems for grid management, also known as Smart Grid technologies, are not largely diffused in industry [1]. On the contrary, the Smart Grid approach is widely adopted in power transmission and distribution grid [2–5], as one of the communication media adopted from the network infrastructure [6,7], and it is becoming appealing also for home automation [8], as confirmed by the plurality of available international standards [9,10].There are many reasons for industry delay in Smart Grid development. The first one is economical: the deployment of additional communication infrastructure in an industrial facility is extremely expensive. Traditional fieldbus, Ethernet-based solutions, and wireless field-buses are available for implementing a Smart Grid, but they are not cost effective. Probably, the most viable solution for industry is the power line communication (PLC): this technology adopts the power line channel to transmit information, solving the main problem of placing dedicated cables. Traditionally, PLC is widely employed in several Smart Grid application areas, e.g. for the automation of the power grid [11], for the connection of the smart meters [12] (as an alternative to wireless connection [13]) and for home automation with the connection of smart appliances [14]. The authors demonstrated feasibility of PLC in industrial environment in [15], confirmed also by other research works [16], but the impact of the highly distorting communication channel must be carefully taken into account. In industrial sites, many reasons can affect the performance of PLC; the bad quality of the power cabling can affect the signal quality in terms of multipath and selective fading [17]; the loads connected to the power line can introduce time-variant noise on the cable in several bands of the frequency spectrum [18].In addition, a well-defined standard approach for industrial PLC is still missing, also due to some concerns about disclosure of information and the security of transmitted data [19]. When power utilities transport sensible data using Smart Grid communication they are operating on private network (e.g. the high voltage grid) to whom the malicious access is very difficult/dangerous. When metering data are transmitted over home Smart Grids, the data hijacking is simple but the data relevance is low. Such situations are reverted in industrial environment. The data are sensible and the communication takes place on a shared grid; for instance, the information about power consumption may lead to infer the production strategy, or external attacks may shutdown the facility [20].Recently, the IEC started a working group for the standardization of Smart Grid interface between power grid and industry applications, with the aim of defining the data format to exchange. However, a harmonized physical layer is out of the scope of the standard, meaning that several PLC modulations could be present on the same power line, interfering with each other.Resuming, Smart Grid deployment in industry is impaired by costs that can be mitigated using PLC, but PLC seems not fully reliable in industrial environment.Previous experiences demonstrate the usefulness of on-line monitoring tool, as shown in [21,22]. For this reason, this work proposes a flexible and compact Multi-protocol PLC Analyser (MP-PLCA) for the analysis of PLC reliability and behavior in industrial environment. The instrument, based on the work introduced in [23], has been inspired by software defined radio (SDR) architecture. It is able to perform the analysis of the power line channel and to decode different PLC modulations at the same time. In addition, the proposed instrument is able to generate test data stream on the power line, for testing the PLC before the installation of a real PLC system. The generated stream and the decoding of the data can emulate commercial PLC transceiver, without introducing additional data process stages that can improve the quality of the PLC signal. Such an architecture could be integrated easily, thanks to its PC-based architecture, into a hardware in the loop (HIL) simulation system for home and industrial smart grids [24], to provide the required communication emulation support which lacks in the current HIL system.After introducing some of the standard PLC technologies in Section 2, the architecture of the proposed multi-protocol instrument is described in Section 3. The prototype with LabVIEW user interface is presented in Section 4 and experimentally characterized in Section 5. In Section 6, the case study of PLC in an industrial plant is presented. Finally, the results are summarized in Section 7.PLC is a well-known technology and the first implementations were developed at the beginning of the previous century for the automation of the distribution grid over high voltage (HV) and medium voltage (MV). Nevertheless, PLC has become a reliable and performing communication solution only; thanks to the recent technology improvements. The following analysis focuses on PLC on low voltage (LV) grid. The issues related to the PLC on medium voltage (MV) grid are out of the scope of this paper.During the last few years, several PLC solutions have been proposed. A first classification of the different PLC technologies is based on the frequency bandwidth occupied: narrowband and broadband. The frequency bands allowed for narrowband PLC (the only subjected to regulation at the time of writing) are regulated differently in accordance with the local authority. In the USA, the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) allocates PLC in the band from 9kHz to 500kHz (FCC Part-15), whereas in Europe, the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC) defines the narrowband from 3kHz to 148.5kHz (EN 50065). On the contrary, the broadband PLC is not allowed in wide area networks, and the only regulation regards the allowed signal power and the limitations to reduce electro-magnetic compatibility (EMC) disturbances. In the following, a detailed analysis of standards regarding the PLC over the LV is presented.One of the first PLC technology developed was X-10, typically adopted for home automation and still implemented for smart appliance applications. The transmission is performed using the on–off keying (OOK) modulation using burst signal at 120kHz, synchronized with the zero crossing of fundamental frequency (50Hz Europe, 60Hz USA). Therefore, the maximum bitrate available is of 50b/s over a 50Hz power grid, like in Europe, (or 60b/s over a 60Hz power grid). X-10 solutions are now typically replaced by LonWorks solutions [27], now defined in ANSI/CEA-709.X standard [28], which provide a more reliable communication in industrial environment for lighting, alarm, and smart metering applications. The LonWorks devices transmit using spread spectrum modulation FSK (Frequency Shift Keying) or using dual channel BPSK (Bi-Phase Shift Keying) modulation in the frequency ranges 125–140kHz (primary band) and 110–125kHz (secondary band), providing data rate up to 5.4kb/s. In 2005 it was approved as UE standard in the EN 14908 and it is an open protocol standard from 2009 ISO/IEC 14908–1. The Enel ‘Telegestore’ project system, one of the first examples of smart metering application on large scale, adopts the LonWorks neuronchip for its power line communication devices.Nevertheless, the greatest progress in the PLC communication occurred with the exploitation of the OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing) modulation, which increases the available data rate and reliability [29,30]. One of the first PLC solution based on OFDM is PRIME (PoweRline Intelligent Metering Evolution), an open technology optimized for smart metering and smart grid [31] applications. The OFDM PRIME PHY specifies the frequency band from 41.992kHz to 88.867kHz, divided into 97 equally spaced subcarriers (96 data and one pilot), reaching up to near 130kb/s raw data rate with 8-DPSK modulation. The sample rate is 250kHz and the IFFT has length of 512. The upper layer is usually IPv4.G3-PLC standard [32] is a similar solution, which adopts the OFDM modulation to improve reliability and data rate. The transmission bandwidth is larger than PRIME one because the regulated CENELEC band is extended on the lower frequencies. The data rate in CENELEC A band (from 35.9kHz to 90.6kHz) is up to 33.4kb/s using up to 36 subcarriers with sampling rate of 400kHz and IFFT size of 256. Considering the whole FCC frequency band, G3-PLC uses 72 subcarriers from 145.3kHz to 478.125kHz, with sampling rate of 1.2MHz and an IFFT size at 256, reaching data rate of 207.6kb/s. The Media Access Control (MAC) is given by IEEE 802.15.4. The higher layers are based on IPv6. The protocol 6loWPAN has been chosen to adapt IPv6 to the constrained resources provided by the power line channel. 6loWPAN defines IP header compression, packet fragmentation, security and routing. G3-PLC technology became an international standard (G.9903 from ITU-T) in 2011. A comparison between PRIME and G3-PLC standards is provided in [33].Different attempts to define a unified PLC standard have been performed. IEEE 1901.2 [34] tries to unify different PLC solutions, extending G3 protocol to higher frequency inside the FCC specification. This standard includes technological advances, maintaining G3 and PRIME specifications. In CENELEC band A the frequency range is from 35.9kHz to 90.6kHz, which allow obtaining a data rate of 52.3kb/s using the same frequency sampling and IFFT length features of G3. The provided modulations are 2-DPSK, 4-DPSK, 6-DPSK, and 8-DPSK (and QAM).The International Telecommunication Union-Telecommunication Sector (ITU-T) defined the G.hnem. This specification has been defined in order to reach the same target of 1901.2 group of IEEE. In CENELEC band A, it exploits frequency band from 35.9kHz to 90.6kHz, using a sampling rate of 200kHz and an IFFT length of 128, reaching up to 101.3kb/s. In FCC it transmits from 34.4kHz to 478.1kHz, with a sampling rate of 800kHz and an IFFT length of 256, reaching up to 821.1kb/s. The signal is modulated using 2-QAM, 4-QAM, 8-QAM, and 16-QAM.In addition to narrow-band PLC, other solutions, the so-called Broadband PLC (BPL), are rather common in domestic environment. These protocols are able to provide high data rate, up to several hundreds of Mb per second, but they are more sensible to noises over the power grid, limiting their application in industrial environment. In the following, a brief description of the main BPL solutions is provided to give a complete overview, but they are out of the scope of this paper. Home Plug AV is the protocol defined by HomePlug Alliance [25]. This technology provides for a transmit frequency band from 2MHz to 30MHz, reaching up to 200Mb/s, using BPSK, QPSK, 16-QAM, 64-QAM, 256-QAM, and 1024-QAM modulations in OFDM schema. Whereas Home Plug is the solution that is experiencing most commercially successful, the IEEE defines an alternative standard, the IEEE 1901 [26]. This standard, released in 2010, specifies the guideline for BPL. The standard allows the use of OFDM, FFT, as well as wavelet based modulation, and it is able to reach bandwidth up to 5000Mb/s in low noise channel conditions. BPSK, QPSK, 8-QAM, 16-QAM, 64-QAM, 256-QAM, 1024-QAM, and 4096-QAM are the modulations allowed.Typically, the power grid of an industrial plant is segmented in different parts: the service grid, used to provide power to light and to the air conditioning system; the production grid, used to power up the production machineries (Fig. 1). The power quality monitoring is one of key functionalities in modern industrial plants, as demonstrated in [35,36], because the proper operation of the machineries has to be ensured.As demonstrated in [15], the modern PLC technologies can be adopted to deploy communication infrastructure suitable for not demanding automation applications where traditional cabled or wireless fieldbus solutions are not feasible. Typically, the power grid of an industrial environment is affected by distorting and noisy loads, like motors, robots, arc welding, and production machineries, which can prevent from the use of PLC communication. Hence, the installation of PLC requires a careful analysis of the quality of the power line channel under different load conditions. In addition, different PLC solutions, which can interfere each other, may have to coexist over the power grid of an industrial plant.In this work, a flexible, compact, rugged and multi-protocol capable measurement device, has been proposed and developed for monitoring and characterizing PLC in industrial automation, although it can be also adopted for home and smart grid automation.The desired features are:•analysis of the physical channel;capabilities to receive and decode multi-standard PLC communication at the same time (after proper configuration);capabilities to generate stimulus signals and reference data stream;easy and graphical user interface;transmission of performance measurements over LAN (Local Area Network).As described in the previous section, many protocols and standards are available for PLC transmission over LV power grid. Therefore, the evaluation of PLC communication performance typically requires several measurement devices, as shown in [37,38]: e.g. an oscilloscope is required for the analysis of the quality of the physical channel; a different packet network analyzer, like [39], is required for decoding each communication protocol; PLC devices are required for testing the communication channel and to inject testing traffic. As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed Multi-protocol PLC Analyser, in the following named MP-PLCA, can be connected to any plug on the power grid, as a stand-alone device, to analyze the power line channel or to monitor the communication performance of an existing PLC installation.The architecture of the proposed measurement instrument is shown in Fig. 2. In order to satisfy the flexibility requirements of a multi-standard system, the measurement instrument cannot use a solution based on dedicated off-the-shelf physical PLC transceiver, which is inevitably limited by the hardware, since different PLC standards require different PLC transceivers. In addition, it is not possible to decode at the same time different PLC signals modulated over the same channel, unless using parallel transceivers, a solution which limits the compactness.The authors propose a software defined architecture for overcoming all these limitations. In literature, similar systems for wireless operation are known as software defined radio (SDR) [40]. Typically, a software-defined system is composed by a minimal analogue front end and signal acquisition/generation board, which acquires/generates the analogue signal, and by a PC, which performs the modulation/demodulation.Several solutions are available for the deployment of a software-defined system, including open source software. For instance, the GNURadio for SDR provides a complete, modular and expandable library to support the most important signal processing operations. The modulation/demodulation parameters could be modified in real-time [41] to change the device behavior. Other implementations are based on proprietary solutions, like the NI SDR from National Instruments. The strength of this solution is the complete integration of the SDR into LabVIEW, the widely accepted system design software with powerful graphical user interface. For this reason, in this work the NI SDR system has been used as the instrument core.Generally speaking, the only difference between SDR (wireless RF) and the proposed instrument is in the analogue front end. The power line requires the use of a dedicated analogue front end (AFE) board, to adapt the voltages level, to isolate the measurement system from the power grid under analysis, and to filter the incoming and outgoing signals. Typically, the AFE board is connected to the power grid by means of an inductive or capacitive coupler.The core of the MP-PLCA is the NI SDR system connected to the power line by mean of dedicated hardware. In the realized prototype, the AFE board included in the TMDSPLCKIT-V3 demo kit from Texas Instruments has been adopted. The instrument connection/insulation of the system to/from the power grid is obtained by means of a capacitive coupler for single-phase line at 220V. On the transmission stage, a low pass filter (cut-off frequency fcoff=500kHz) has been placed before the coupler to avoid the imaging effect due to the zero-order reconstruction.The AFE board is connected to the NI USRP-2921, which provides hardware features required by the SDR: ADC/DAC conversion, filtering, and digital pre-processing. The incoming signal is sampled by a two channel, 14 bit, 100MSample/s ADC. Regarding the DAC, samples are updated at 400MSample/s with a 16 bit resolution. Numerical samples are processed by FPGA, which implements Digital Up/Down Conversion (DUC/DDC) stages, including mixer, filters, and decimators/interpolators. The baseband data are exchanged with the host PC at 20MSample/s over a Gigabit Ethernet port.The modulation and demodulation of the signal is performed using LabVIEW 2011 system design software and the “modulation toolkit”, which supports the SDR developer offering a rich library of modulation and demodulation algorithms, making the development of the SDR system easier. An intuitive graphical user interface (GUI) has been implemented to control the measurement system, analyze readouts and present the results (Fig. 3). As shown in Fig. 3, the interface is controllable by different tabs, each of them is dedicated to a specific elaboration/visualization: physical layer settings (PHY settings), physical layer analysis (PHY analysis), data link layer analysis (DLL analysis), and transmission.This tab provides to the user the possibilities to configure the instruments. Among the available settings: frequency band, PLC modulation, and more.This tab provides the possibility to analyze the power-line channel quality at the physical level. In details, it implements the typical functionalities of a real-time spectrum analyser. It is possible to display the raw signal on the power line (before the demodulation), to estimate the fast Fourier transform (FFT), the power spectral density (PSD), and the short time Fourier transform (STFT) of the signal, to visualize the modulation constellation and to estimate the bit error rate (BER) and the packet error rate (PER).Typically, the BER/PER can be estimated injecting a well-known stream of data on one side of the power line channel under test and recovering the data, counting the errors, on the other side. Due to the active role of the instrument, the network performance can be degraded during the test. As an alternative passive approach, the BER can be estimated from the energy per bit to noise power spectral density ratio (Eb/No). The relationship between the BER and Eb/No depends on the modulation scheme adopted, and can be estimated measuring the channel to noise ratio (CNR) [42].This tab provides sniffer functionalities: i.e. the demodulated packets, whose protocol is supported by the instrument (PRIME and G3 at the time of writing), are decoded and the content is presented to the user. The analysis performed in this tabs are completely passive, i.e. the PLC channel is not stimulated.This tab provides the possibility to actively generate stimulus signals at physical layer or to transmit data packets one of the predefined modulations (FSK, BPSK, DPSK, QAM, OFDM at the time of writing), e.g. for emulating the presence of a real PLC device on the power line. This feature allows the instrument to operate as a channel estimator, injecting reference signal to analyze behaviors of the network under test which cannot be highlighted in passive mode. For instance, the frequency analysis of the power line channel can be performed generating a sinusoidal signal, or the communication performance of a protocol can be evaluated transmitting reference packet on the power line.An automated test equipment (ATE) can be realized with the proposed instrument; the services offered by the different tabs can be used to create measurement scripts, useful for testing the quality of the power line channel and to verify the coexistence issues of different PLC protocols on the same power line.The data collected by the tests and the results of the different analysis can be saved and re-opened for a following off-line analysis. In addition, the data can be easily exported using the network connection of the PC, on which the system has been implemented. The complete prototype of the instrument is shown in Fig. 4. The control and analysis software, based on LABView has been implemented on a laptop (i7-2640M processor).The MP-PLCA device can perform several analyses on power line communication and on power-line channel noises which may affect the communication performance. As already mentioned, a preliminary validation of the approach has been presented in [23]. In the following, the characterization of the instrument (power line channel analysis, monitoring of real PLC systems) is presented, focusing on PLC in industrial environment. Several tests have been performed in a controlled environment, the power grid of the LABEL laboratory at the Brescia University, whose simplified electrical schematic diagram is reported in Fig. 5. In the LABEL laboratory only electric loads with low voltage supply and limited power consumption, like PCs and measurement instruments, are present. The power grid of the laboratory is fed by a three-phase central electrical panel: different parts of the plant are fed by different phases. The tests are performed only on the parts of the plant fed by the phase L3, on which large part of the devices present in the laboratory are connected. Since the PLC signal is carried only on a single phase (L3), the MP-PLCA and PLC devices under test should be connected only to electrical panels fed by phase L3. In detail, during the experiments, the MP-PLCA is connected to the electrical panel Q12, while PRIME PLC devices (TMDSPLCKIT-V3 C2000 Power Line Modem Developer's kit from Texas instruments) used to test the monitoring capabilities of the system are respectively connected on electrical panel Q6 (PLC_1) and Q14 (PLC_2). The maximum end-to-end length of the laboratory grid is less than 30m.During the first experiment, the capability of the MP-PLCA to characterize the behavior of the LV power channel under test has been evaluated. In particular, the STFT of the power line signal acquired at the electrical panel Q12 when no PLC transmission occurred is shown in Fig. 6. The MP-PLCA has been configured to sample the analogue signal at 8MSample/s. The sampled data are decimated by a factor 10. Then, the STFT is estimated using a sliding time window of 10.2ms (i.e. over blocks of 8192 samples), to highlight the variation of the power line channel noise during the measurement. The power line channel has been analyzed in the band up to 400kHz, the frequency range in which narrow-band PLC devices typically transmit.As clearly highlighted by Fig. 6, a narrowband noise centered on 10kHz is present in the channel (constant during the experiment), highly affecting the PLC communication in this frequency range. This contribution is probably due to the switching power supplies connected on the grid, which typically operates at these frequencies. Another typical contribution in a laboratory environment is due to the lighting system. Many other noise sources, like motors, arc-welding machineries, may be present, in noisier environment, like industrial plant. The contribution of each source can be easily quantified using the MP-PLCA, which can provide information about the noiseless frequency band. For instance, in the sample measurement the noiseless portion of the spectrum compatible with CENELEC bands is the frequency range [75,130] kHz.As mentioned in Section 4, the proposed instrument is also able to generate stimulus signals, which can be used to perform a more detailed analysis of the quality of the channel. In particular, it is possible to define a measurement script to evaluate the amplitude response of the power line channel, configuring properly the system to generate a chirp-like signal in the desired frequency range. The amplitude response of the power line channel, evaluated by the instrument in the bandwidth between 50kHz and 250kHz by step of 10kHz, is shown in Fig. 7.a. In the considered range, the AFE has a flat response. The power line channel has a pass-band behavior, with a flat response in the range 150–200kHz, which is also one of the noiseless frequency ranges on the power line under test as shown by the time-frequency analysis. Nevertheless, it should be noted as the difference between in-band and out-of-band signal is limited (less than a decade). Therefore, in a noisy and time variant environment, like the power line channel, the amplitude response of the channel may not be a meaningful indicator of the quality of the channel because it does not take into account the noise which can affect the communication performance. BER is a more interesting indicator from the communication point of view.The (passive) BER analysis has been performed considering the modulations of each subcarrier adopted in PRIME and G3, i.e. DBPSK, DQPSK, and D8PSK. The bandwidth considered in the analysis is 488.28Hz, i.e. the distance between each subcarrier in PRIME. The BER evaluated in the range between 50kHz and 250kHz is shown in Fig. 7.b; the plotted values are the maximum (worst case) over five BER evaluations taken in different hours of the day. As expected, BER analysis provides information slightly different from the previous case because of the noise on the power line channel. The ideal transmission frequency range is between 110kHz and 250kHz, where the BER is about 10−4. Despite the non-optimal amplitude frequency response in the range between 200kHz and 250kHz, the low noise affecting the signal in this band allows the transmission of the PLC signal also in this frequency band. As expected, the DBPSK is the most robust modulation: BER about 10−3 can be obtained also in the bandwidth between 50kHz to 100kHz. On the contrary, a more band-efficient but less robust modulation, like DQPSK or D8PSK, provides a worse BER, respectively 0.6% and 6.9%, in the frequency band between 50kHz and 100kHz.This measurement routine can be performed run-time, in order to be able to identify the characteristic of the power line channel, also in the case of time-variant noise, providing a detailed analysis of the disturbances introduced by loads and of the non-ideality of the channel (e.g. selective frequency fading, multiple signal paths).The proposed MP-PLCA is able to monitor and evaluate the performance of already existent PLC. As described in Section 3, the MP-PLCA can modulate/demodulate several modulation schemes, including the OFDM, a modulation typically adopted by modern PLC protocols, such as PRIME and G3-PLC, to reduce noise influence and to increase data throughput.In the following tests, the capability of the proposed system to monitor PLCs at the physical level has been evaluated. In the first experiment, the two PLC devices (PLC_1 and PLC_2), have been programmed to exchange PRIME messages. The MP-PLCA has been connected on the same part of the plant on which the PLC_1 and PLC_2 were installed. The instrument has been configured as in Section 5.1 and used to acquire the PRIME signals in the time domain. A portion of the acquisition is shown in Fig. 8. The first part of the PRIME message (up to t=4s in the figure), the preamble, is a sinusoidal chirp, ranging from 42kHz to 89kHz. The chirp signal is adopted by the PLC receiver for the frequency locking. The second part is the payload, modulated in OFDM, using DBPSK for each subcarrier modulation.As mentioned in the previous section, the main feature of the instrument is the capability to monitor and to code/decode different PLCs present at the same time on the power grid, thanks to its architecture based on SDR, which allows the acquisition and the parallel decoding of different signals. In order to evaluate this capability, the previous setup has been modified in a new experiment. The PLC_1 device has been configured to transmit PRIME messages (OFDM modulated in the band 42÷89kHz), while the PLC_2 device has been configured to use DBPSK modulation centered at 20kHz. As clearly shown by the single-side amplitude spectrum of Fig. 9, the instrument is able to acquire both the signals at the same time, to process them (showing to the user the single side amplitude spectrum under the “PHY analysis” tab) and to decode them in parallel (showing messages under the “DLL analysis” tab). It must be highlighted that the MP-PLCA system is not able to automatically identify the modulation and the protocol used during the communication, the choice among available modulations must be taken during the configuration of the instrument.The noise at high frequencies is negligible and does not affect the PLC (as already discussed in previous section), while the noise at low frequencies (centered around 10kHz), is comparable with the signal transmission, limiting the available transmission bandwidth.The compactness and the ease of use of the proposed instrument facilitate its use also in industrial environment. The feasibility of the approach, already validated by means of the experiments described in the previous section, has been confirmed by its adoption in the monitoring of PLCs in a real scenario: the power grid of a truck manufacturer factory. In particular, the MP-PLCA has been used to evaluate the effects of the noise affecting the factory power grid on the PLC signals. Note that, for security and manufacturing reasons, not all the machineries were working during the experiment.The experimental set up is shown in the schematic of Fig. 10. Two monitoring devices (MP-PLCA1 and MP-PLCA2) are placed on the same part of power line where a PLC module is transmitting using a proprietary protocol. The PLC device transmits the data using BPSK modulation, with carrier centered on 100kHz. The power-line channel behavior has been analyzed by acquiring a transmission session; for this purpose the transmitter has been set up to continuously transmit packets. The two MP-PLCA systems receive simultaneously the PLC signal; thus, the signal attenuations and distortions due to the channel and electrical loads can be evaluated comparing the acquisition performed in different points of the power line. Each MP-PLCA instrument samples the LV channel at 8MSample/s. The sampled data are decimated by a factor 10 and then, the STFT is evaluated over 10.2ms large time window (i.e. 8192 samples). The single side STFTs, obtained from one second of signal acquisition in two different point of the power grid, have been reported in Fig. 11.a and b. Fig. 11.a shows the STFT of the signal acquired by the MP-PLCA1 placed on the pillar of the F42 segment of the plant, far 44m in beeline from the pillar where the transmitter is located (about 70m of cable length). Fig. 11.b shows the STFT of the signal acquired by the MP-PLCA2 placed on the last pillar (about 140m cable length far from the transmitter). As evident by comparing Fig. 11.a and b, the longer is the power line segment between the PLC transmitter and the receiver (i.e. the instrument), the higher is the noise contribution and the degradation of the signal. It must be highlighted that the frequency band below 100kHz is particularly affected. In fact, the estimated BER of the BPSK modulation evaluated at the first pillar is 1.4 · 10− 6, while the BER at the second pillar is two orders of magnitude greater, i.e. 3.4 · 10− 4. During the evaluation of the BER, the MP-PLCA devices have been configured to emulate commercial PLC devices, without making use of advanced filtering techniques that could improve the SNR. The use of advanced data processing techniques, allowed by the SDR architecture, to improve the PLC transmission capabilities is out of the scope of the paper.Nevertheless, as demonstrated by the experiment, the PLC is feasible also in industrial environments over line segments longer than 100m, without the use of repeaters if a careful selection of the operating frequency range is carried out. For instance, in the considered scenario the use of an operating frequency lower than 100kHz should be avoided, since the noise level is higher than PLC signal as highlighted by the previously described analysis. Therefore, network engineer can deploy a PLC network by configuring properly off-the-shelf PLC transceivers, which allow the transmission over multiple frequency bands and different coding techniques, as PRIME or G3-PLC devices.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Today, the power line communication is a good trade-off for implementing Smart Grids in industrial context. Regrettably, harsh industrial environment, noisy communication channel, installation issues and interfering communications may reduce the reliability of PLC and require preliminary on-site surveys to be carried on. Currently, the performance of a PLC system is characterized using different dedicated measurement devices which may not be suitable for industrial applications.In this work, a compact and rugged Multi-protocol PLC Analyser, based on SDR technology, has been proposed and adopted to perform the characterization of PLCs in a real industrial plant. The advanced features of the measurement system have been experimentally characterized on a test-bed. The results of the experiment demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed approach and its capability to identify PLC issues. After the characterization, the MP-PLCA has been use in a case study: the analysis/monitoring of PLC communication in a real industrial grid. The results of the analysis performed using the instrument indicate that, after a careful selection of transmission frequency band in order to limit the influence of distorting electric loads, the PLC technology can be used in industrial environment to provide non-time critical information over a distance longer than 100m.