@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The relationship between industrial process maturity and quality certification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze the maturity and quality certification of ten Brazilian Companies.The ten companies are in the electronics, motorcycle and food industries.We examine the relationship between industrial maturity and quality certification.The certification process itself led to some improvements occurring over the years.Maturity level 2 (from low: 1 to high: 5) is enough to have ISO 9001 certification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quality,Maturity,Product development process,ISO 9001,CMMI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Companies seek quality certification but, depending on the maturity of their manufacturing processes, may not always able to obtain it or keep it in the long run. This article evaluates the correlation between ISO certification and product development process maturity. It addresses subjects related to the product development process, the maturity of this process and certification and then analyzes the maturity and quality certification of ten Brazilian companies in the electrical and electronics, motorcycle and food industries (two, three and five companies, respectively). Each company's level of maturity is identified and related to the status of the company's quality certification.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Companies seek to acquire quality certification as a means of ensuring the quality of their products and services [1]. ISO 9001:2008 certification (International Organization for Standardization) is intended to ensure quality and increase customer satisfaction [2]. However, it is only valid for three years. After this, a recertification audit is required to reevaluate and renew the certification, which the company may lose if it does not comply with a compulsory requirement [3]. According to [2], the certificate can be canceled as a result of major non-conformances or suspended temporarily until the standards and contractual clauses have been complied with.The credibility of ISO 9001 should ensure both product and service quality. However, although companies adhere to international standards, this does not always ensure that the quality of the production process or end product is controlled [1]. One study showed that companies' product development processes (PDPs) may not be sufficiently mature for them to obtain or keep this certification [4].According to [5] and [6], a mature enterprise not only has the potential to generate a design and manufacture it in a clearly defined, documented, managed, measured and controlled manner, but also has an integrated process, an essential characteristic for a PDP to perform well.There are various ways of evaluating the maturity of a PDP, including CMMI (Capability Maturity Model Integration). This was developed by the SEI (Software Engineering Institute) in the United States as a quality certification for IT (Information Technology) companies in the '80s and is currently available in Version 1.3. Although CMMI is not specific to manufacturing companies' PDPs, [5] and [6] used a simplified version of it to evaluate the maturity of two successful automobile manufacturers in Brazil. They identified PDPs that had been certified by ISO as maturity level 2 on a scale from 1 (low) to 5 (high), i.e., they had low overall maturity.Analysis of the literature shows that the correlation between ISO certification and PDP maturity has been discussed from a number of different perspectives. A study described in [7] presents the use and adaptation of some ISO models in the creation of an organizational maturity model for the software industry. This model was used satisfactorily to improve the software processes and obtain an organizational maturity certification in several small firms. Comparing IS0 9001 and CMM (the predecessor of CMMI), the potential for the two models to be used jointly was identified [8]. Subsequently, another group proposed a model for integrating certification and CMMI based on a method for adding the requirements for CMMI appraisal to ISO 9000:2000 certification [9]. Later, the question of where certification adds value to PDP and to the quality system was investigated, and it was concluded that there is a correlation between “quality certification” and “PDP maturity”. However, the authors did not give details of this correlation [10]. Along the same lines, the issue of improvements in product quality as a result of improvements in PDP maturity was addressed [11]. According to the authors, the improvement in cycle time and quality as a result of process improvement effort outweighs the additional effort and resources required to achieve higher levels of process maturity.With a view to assessing the correlation between ISO certification and PDP maturity, the present study investigates the maturity level of companies in three Brazilian industrial sectors and compares these with the status of quality certification in each company. It starts with a review of PDP, process maturity and quality certification. Next, field studies in ten companies in the following three industries are described: food (five companies), motorcycle (three companies) and electrical and electronics (two companies). The study gave rise to three MPhil theses, whose results are being published jointly in this article.In order to evaluate the correlation between ISO certification and PDP maturity, subjects such as PDP, process maturity and quality certification were reviewed, and the industry sectors and companies to be studied were chosen. The sectors were chosen based on the authors' experience with these particular sectors; the companies included were those that had a complete PDP from the product design to manufacture phase and agreed to take part in the study.The manufacturing companies were analyzed using the guidelines for multiple case studies described by [12] (Table 1). In line with the objective of this study, a case study [12] was chosen as the most appropriate approach because it allows access to contemporary events, which can only be investigated in the field. Furthermore, according to Yin, a case study allows a relatively small number of situations to be analyzed in detail.For the purposes of clarity, the method described by [5] and [6], which formed the basis of the final questionnaire, is described briefly here. The authors proposed a method based on the concepts of CMMI in which various questions are addressed in order to check whether generic and specific goals in various PAs related to the respective maturity level are being met or satisfied. The method consists of twenty-seven questions divided into four groups. Each group represents the goals the company must achieve to be at a particular maturity level. The levels are as follows: 1 — poorly controlled and unpredictable (when none of the groups of questions are satisfied); 2 — some tasks can be repeated (evaluated with questions 1 to 7); 3 — a well-characterized and well-understood process (evaluated with questions 8 to 19); 4 — a measured, controlled process (evaluated with questions 20 to 24); and 5 — focus on continuous improvement (evaluated with questions 25 to 27). The questions, together with some minor changes made as a result of a pilot carried out before the case studies, are shown in Table 2.According to [5] and [6], for a particular level to be validated, the organization must belong to the highest level for which the medians of all the answers are greater than or equal to four. In the present study, a scale from 1 to 5 was used, where 1 corresponds to never, 2 to rarely, 3 to sometimes, 4 to frequently and 5 to always. If any answer to a question in a group is less than four, this means that the goals for the level in question are not being satisfied, even if the median for the group is four or five. At level 2, if only one question has an answer of less than four the PDP is still considered to be at level 1 rather than level 2, even if the median is four. This is the procedure used to evaluate all the levels in the cases studied. If the company scores 4 in all the questions for all the levels except for one question in level 3, for which it scores less than 4, the company is still considered to be at level 2.In all the cases studied, to answer the questionnaire (Table 2) people who had a good understanding of the operational and managerial details of PDP in the company were chosen. In some companies only one person was able to answer all the questions in the questionnaire, while in others this could only be done by a group of people together. In the latter case, each person answered a group of questions so that each question was answered by only one person.After presenting and analyzing each case study, some strengths and weaknesses of the PDP in each company in each industry sector are identified based on the answers to the questionnaire.PDP consists of a set of activities carried out to produce goods or services for a specific group of clients [14]; these activities are divided into three stages: pre-development, development and post-development. Here we focus on the “development” stage, which involves the design, manufacturing planning and manufacturing activities for an industrial product. The maturity of the PDP depends on how these activities are carried out and integrated with each other.Mature organizations have their PDPs institutionalized through organizational policies, standards and structures, which provide the infrastructure and support for the procedures needed to carry out all PDP activities [15].Existing models for evaluating the maturity of a PDP can serve as a guide for the organization to identify where and in what state it is so that it can plan to progress to higher levels [16]. These models make use of maturity levels, which were proposed in [17]. Based on this concept, in 1987 the SEI published a description of a software development process maturity model, CMM, which was followed in 2000 by CMMI.CMMI appraises a company or sector by means of maturity levels. This appraisal exists in two representations: continuous and staged. The continuous representation determines the maturity of specific process areas based on six levels: (0) Incomplete; (1) Performed; (2) Managed; (3) Defined; (4) Quantitatively Managed; and (5) Optimizing. The staged representation was considered here because it allows the overall maturity of the company to be classified, which was a requirement of this study. With this representation, industrial maturity is classified into one of the following five levels [5, 6]:Level 1 (Initial) — the organization does not provide a stable environment for process development or has established management practices. Its planning is inefficient and its systems are reactive;Level 2 (Managed) — projects ensure that requirements, products and services are managed and that processes are planned, performed, measured and controlled. The status of products and services is visible by management at specific points. Practices are maintained during times of crisis, with projects performed and managed according to documented plans. Commitments are made as required, and products are reviewed to confirm that requirements are being met;Level 3 (Defined) — processes are well characterized and understood and described according to standards and procedures. Processes are established, documented, integrated and improved over time. Management establishes objectives based on standard processes and ensures that these are followed and that training is provided as required;Level 4 (Quantitatively managed) — there are quantitative product quality and process performance goals and criteria for managing quantitative objectives based on clients' and the organization's needs. The productivity and quality of project activities are measured and form the basis of process and product appraisals. Projects include statistical control of products and processes and are managed throughout the life of a process. The risks associated with application in a new domain are known and understood;Level 5 (Optimizing) — the organization focuses on continually improving process performance by means of established measurable objectives that are reviewed to reflect changes in the business and are used as criteria to improve management. Data on process effectiveness is used to perform cost/benefit analyses of new technologies and changes. Lessons learned are disseminated to other projects, and the optimization of fast, innovative processes depends on workforce participation and autonomy. There is a cycle of continuous improvement.In short, each level includes a set of objectives which, when met, ensure that important aspects of the process are stabilized, enhancing the organization's capabilities. At the operational level, the staged representation of CMMI covers 22 process areas (PAs) grouped as shown in Table 3so that each level of the company can be evaluated [18]. Table 3 shows which actions in each area need to be performed for the company to be considered to be at level 2, 3, 4 or 5.To analyze whether a PA in the company is being satisfied, each PA is broken down into specific goals (SGs), which are in turn broken down into specific practices (SPs). These SPs are correlated with generic practices (GPs), which are obtained by breaking down the company's generic goals (GGs) (see Fig. 1). An example of the content of the “Project Planning” (PP) process area, which is used to evaluate level 2 maturity, is the crossover between GP 2.2 (Process Planning) and SP 2.1 (Establish the Budget and Schedule). In other words, in an appraisal, the question would be asked whether “there was any planning in the company to establish a budget and schedule for the project being carried out”.In a staged CMMI appraisal, the number of variables involved in an analysis if all maturity levels are included results in 2656 checks. This is based on the crossovers between each SP and each GP associated with the PAs for the level being evaluated. To evaluate subsequent levels, all the crossovers at lower levels must have been previously evaluated. For level 2, which covers most companies, including those that have ISO certification, there are 570 variables to be checked. This type of measurement requires time and has a high cost for the company. It was therefore decided to use the CMMI model adapted by [5] and [6], in which, although there are fewer items to be checked in the company, the goals evaluated are similar to those evaluated by CMMI. The details of this method have already been presented in item 2.The questions used in this method seek to clarify the extent to which the company uses structured methodologies for its designs, how much control the company has over its designs and manufacturing processes and to what extent it can absorb lessons learned from previous projects so that mistakes are not repeated. On the other hand, evaluations carried out for a company to become certified focus on determining to what extent the activities performed by the company to support its PDP are standardized and reproducible.Quality certification indicates that the product, process or service meets certain minimum quality standards. The certification process is based on ISO technical standards, which cover a range of different areas. These include the ISO 9000 series, which specifies the guidelines to be taken into consideration in an organization's quality management system [19].According to [20], the ISO 9000 series consists of three main standards: NBR ISO 9000 — Fundamentals and Vocabulary of Quality Management Systems, which defines the terms used in this set of standards; NBR ISO 9001 — Requirements for a Quality Management System, which specifies the requirements for meeting customer and regulatory requirements; and NBR ISO 9004 — Guidelines for Performance Improvements in Quality Management Systems measured through client satisfaction.To receive ISO 9001 certification, which is widely accepted in the manufacturing industry, a company's quality system must be documented and processes must be performed according to the documented procedures. Periodic audits are required to prove that procedures are being maintained [21].ISO 9001 has a total of nine sections divided into two parts: Generalities and Requirements. Generalities cover the overall content of the standard, how it is applied and definitions, among other items. Requirements define the items needed to implement and maintain a quality management system and have five sections, numbered as follows: 4. Quality Management System; 5. Management Responsibility; 6. Resource Management; 7. Product Realization; and 8. Measurement, Analysis and Improvement [19]. Of these, only section 7 addresses activities related to PDP and is therefore the focus of this study.Section 7 is divided into six requirements: 7.1 Planning of Product Realization; 7.2 Customer-related Processes; 7.3 Design and Development; 7.4 Purchasing; 7.5 Production and Service Provision; and 7.6 Control of Monitoring and Measuring Equipment. Of these, requirement 7.3 highlights the need for the organization to plan and control product design and development, manage the interfaces between the different groups involved in the design and development, ensure communication and designate responsibilities. The company must also define the various stages in the design and development process and the critical analysis, verification and validation for each stage, as well as individual responsibilities and the person in charge of design and development [19].Although the requirements are specified, operational details of how the company should develop and use information during the design stage are not discussed, unlike in CMMI and other models derived from it. Hence, according to [21], standardization of a mature process is no different from standardization of an immature one as long as there is at least some standardization, which in terms of CMMI means a company at level 2. Certification is therefore not always synonymous with quality products. After all, quality products are the result of mature, comprehensive processes, which, for some companies to achieve, would require an analysis prior to certification in order to identify where the company is and where they want to get to.After a brief literature review to gain a better understanding of CMMI and ISO 9001 certification, the following methodology was used to identify the relation between the maturity of an industrial process and the status of the company's quality certification.The studies started with a pilot in a food company. After the data collection instrument had been updated as described earlier in Table 4, the other case studies were carried out. The updated questionnaire was first used in the food industry and then in the companies in the electronics and motorcycle industries.The results for each company are shown in the following order: a short company history; details of the respondents; comments on the responses to the questions for each maturity level, with the medians; and the responses related to quality certification. The study was carried out between 2008 and 2010, but the data was collected in 2010.The five companies investigated are referred to as A (the company where the test pilot was carried out), B, C, D and E. Companies A, B and C are large, D is small and E is medium-sized according to the [22] classification, which is based on the number of employees. The number of respondents in each company was 1 (company A), 2 (company B), 1 (C), 2 (D) and 1 E, or a total of seven people. The number of respondents varied according to their availability and their knowledge of the process being evaluated.In company A the PDP was first observed to obtain an overview of the company and its products, after which the interview was held so that the questionnaire could be filled out. Established in 1977, the company processes pork and milk and is located in Curitiba, Brazil. It has a presence in over twenty countries and is a leader in the food sector in Brazil. Data were collected with the aid of the Quality Management System Manager, and the results are shown in Table 4.Although company A is at level 1 and is not certified, it has a number of strengths; for example, it uses integrated product development planning and produces any documentation that is required, such as project information and specifications. However, it has a number of weaknesses that prevent it from obtaining the certification it is seeking, including a lack of metrics, measurements or performance evaluations for new product development process planning and execution, and a lack of a shared vision among those involved in projects.This company, which was established in Curitiba in 1968, produces dried vegetables and fruit, cereal bars and similar products. It has a branch in the state of Minas Gerais and has links with a Dutch group. Data were collected with the aid of the New Product Development Process Manager and Quality Management System Manager, and the results are shown in Table 5. For this and subsequent cases, the medians for each level are given but details of the answers are not.Company B was at level 1 and, although not certified, had a well-defined, controlled PDP with a focus on continuous development. In spite of this, the information design stage was inadequate, as there was no methodology to help identify customers' needs and convert these into technical design requirements. The company even gave details of a product that was not accepted in the market and had to be withdrawn as a result of this deficiency.Located in the city of Auracária, in the state of Paraná, company C works with soy products, from receiving, storing and crushing the soy to producing and bottling refined oil, as well as soy protein concentrate and alcohol. Data were collected with the aid of the Quality Management System Manager, and the results are shown in Table 6.Company C is at level 2 and has certification. Its strengths are that it has processes that are well characterized, understood, maintained and controlled. However, the company has several weaknesses: there is a lack of integration among the PDP team and insufficient encouragement for those involved in new product development to integrate and collaborate.Based in the city of Piraquara in the state of Paraná, the company produces cocoa and chocolate products. It has 23 distributors in Brazil. Data were collected with the aid of the Process Manager and company director, and the results are shown in Table 7.This company was at level 1 and, despite not being certified, had some strengths, such as the fact that it works directly with customers to identify their real needs. Its weak points are the lack of integration among those involved in PDP, the lack of training for the skills required during product design, the lack of methodologies to support some design activities and failure to identify the roles of those involved in the PDP.The company is based in Curitiba and started production in Brazil in 1971. It has eight plants in the states of Paraná, São Paulo and Santa Catarina that produce and sell grain. Data were collected with the aid of the Food Engineer, who is responsible for all processes at the Curitiba plant. The results are shown in Table 8.The company was at maturity level 1 and, despite not being certified, had a number of strengths, including new product planning, performance measurements and evaluations, corrective actions when necessary and senior management involvement. The company's weak points include a lack of integration among those involved in PDP and a lack of a methodology in the information design stage to identify customers' needs and convert them into technical design requirements.All of the five companies appraised in 2010 had a low level of maturity, with processes that were poorly controlled and, in some regards, unpredictable. Company C had a higher maturity level than the other companies because some of the PDP tasks could be repeated. It is the only company that has quality certification; companies A, D and E intend to obtain certification and company B has no plans to do so. Companies B, C and D export their products, but companies A and E do not. Tables 9 and 10summarize the results.The two companies studied (A and B) are large companies. There were six respondents in company A and eight in company B, giving a total of fourteen people.This Brazilian company was established in São Paulo in 1942. In its early days it manufactured radios, later starting to produce high-technology appliances such as televisions, cordless telephones, cell phones, facsimiles, audio equipment and DVD players. It currently has a factory in Manaus with approximately two thousand employees. Data were collected with the help of employees from the engineering department (3), quality department (2) and senior manufacturing management (1). The results are shown in Table 11.Company A is at maturity level 3 and has certification. It has several strengths, namely, well-characterized, well-understood and, consequently, well-defined processes. Standard development and maintenance processes are documented and used to ensure consistency throughout the organization. The company provides training for the various teams so that they have the necessary knowledge and skills to perform the duties assigned to them. Quality is monitored on the production line, integration and communication between departments works well and costs, schedules and functionalities are under control. Concerned with its image and with maintaining customer loyalty, the company communicates effectively with its internal and external audiences. It endeavors to reduce costs and waste, to ensure the quality of raw materials and supplies, to adopt an innovative approach to logistics and distribution, to be aware of innovation and to adapt to change.Negative points include problems related to passing information to the project team to enable team members to evaluate the performance of the PDP and adjust it in line with initial planning. With regard to question 20, the organization's business objectives are not broken down into quantitative objectives so that process quality and performance cannot be planned and indicators produced to evaluate process performance.The company has been in Manaus since 1999 and manufactures high-technology products such as cable and satellite decoders and internet modems for high-speed internet service providers and customers who supply pay TV services. It has approximately six hundred employees. Data were collected with the aid of eight employees from the following areas: production engineering (3), quality engineering (3) and process engineering (2). The results are shown in Table 12.Company B is at maturity level 3 and has certification. It has good financial results and invests in process optimization, quality and productivity improvements, cost control and staff training. It also has a project office to support the management of staff involved with improvement projects. Although the company does not have a product development department in Manaus, a number of shortcomings in the designs used were identified. The first was the failure to convert technical design requirements into product concepts, layout and detailed design, with evaluation methodologies and methods that take into account the product type, performance requirements and development costs and schedules. The second was the failure to ensure that the end product meets the defined requirements from initial design to checks on the end product.The two companies in the electrical and electronics sector in Manaus are seeking to improve their processes with the aid of tools focused on quality, as shown in Table 14. ISO 9001 certification was essential for them to improve their processes as well as win new clients and ensure their loyalty. These improvements helped them to achieve maturity level 3, and both companies have been certified for more than five years. A summary of the situation in both companies is given in Tables 13 and 14.Of the three companies investigated, two (A and B) are large and one (C) is medium-sized. There were seven respondents in each company, giving a total of twenty-one people.The company has been based in Manaus since 1976 and manufactures motorcycles. The 150cm3 (cubic centimeter) model has a 95% national content. The overall national content for all the models produced is 70%. There are approximately ten thousand employees at the Manaus plant. Data were collected with the aid of seven employees from the following departments: manufacturing (2), new product engineering (3) and quality (2). The results are shown in Table 15.Company A was at maturity level 3. It received its quality certification in 1995 and exports to six countries. Among its strengths is the fact that there is a well-organized PDP at all stages that satisfies the twenty ISO 9000 requirements. The technology used in less powerful motorcycles, which has been developed in Brazilian factories, and the growing demand for these products are driving factors behind the growth in exports. One of the weaknesses observed was the absence of any metrics for measuring PDP performance.In 1985 a Japanese motorcycle manufacturer set up its second factory in Brazil, this time in Manaus. The company produces 350cm3 sports motorcycles and on-/off-road 600cm3 motorcycles. In 2000 it started to produce 250cm3 and 535cm3 motorcycles, which were followed by a 650cm3 model in 2003. The plant in Manaus has approximately 2300 employees. The data were collected with the aid of seven employees from the following departments: production (1), product engineering (3) and quality (3). The results are shown in Table 16.Company B is at maturity level 2, it gained its quality certification in 2003 and it exports to other countries in Latin America. Its strengths include compliance with ISO 9000 requirements; design control requirement management; inspection, testing, handling, storage, packing and shipping; project control; critical analysis of contracts and purchasing; and having documentation under control. Weaknesses included the lack of a single, integrated methodology for the PDP so that this process is not visible to the whole organization. Other weaknesses can be identified from the questions to which the answers were not adequate for the level (Table 2).The company started operations in Brazil in 2006 and produces motorcycles, scooters and trikes over 100cm3. It has approximately three hundred employees. Data were collected with the aid of seven employees from the following areas: production (3), product engineering (1), quality (2) and human resources (1). The results are shown in Table 17.Company C is at maturity level 1, it does not have quality certification and it does not export. Despite the company's low maturity level, there is a great demand for its products among classes C and D because of their low prices. A negative point is that the company does not use suitably documented projects, focusing instead on meeting a specific demand in a short time. This adversely affects quality and, consequently, productivity because of the need for costly, time-consuming rework and improvements.All three companies (which were considered the most representative of the sector because of their sales volumes) had maturity levels in 2010 that were compatible with their status in terms of quality certification. Tables 18 and 19show a general summary of the findings.Analysis of the ten companies in the three sectors studied shows that there is a correlation between the maturity of their processes and the status of their certifications. Companies at maturity level 2 or higher manage to obtain certification and keep it in the long term. Table 20shows the correlation based on the Pearson product–moment correlation coefficient [23].The classification of values for the Pearson correlation coefficient in Table 21shows that there is a very high correlation between “company maturity level” and “company certification status” (Pearson correlation coefficient=0.972).Conversely, companies that have been certified for longer have better maturity levels in their industrial processes. Fig. 2shows this trend in the companies analyzed here.As none of the companies studied had used any method to help them measure and improve the maturity of their processes before certification, it is likely that the certification process itself led to some improvements occurring over the years, with a consequent increase in maturity of the company's processes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study has shown that there is a correlation between ISO certification and PDP maturity. Of the ten companies studied in three different sectors, five were at maturity level 1 and did not have certification and five were at maturity level 2 or 3 and had had certification for some time. From level 2 upwards all the companies had certification, and their maturity level increased as the length of time for which they had had certification increased.The sector with the greatest maturity was the electrical and electronics sector, where the companies were at maturity level 3 and had had certification for more than ten years. However, although the two companies studied claimed that they did not have sufficient resources to advance to higher maturity levels, they were introducing some process improvement methodologies such as Six Sigma and Lean Production. Only one company was at level 2 in the food sector, and the other four were at level 1. The maturity level in the motorcycle sector varied considerably as each of the companies was at a different level (1, 2 or 3).Turning to features that were common to companies at the same level of maturity, all the companies at level 3 were concerned to improve but claimed that they did not have sufficient resources to do this. In all the companies at level 2 there was a notable failure to integrate activities, and the design methodologies adopted were deficient, particularly with regard to the breaking down of customers' needs into technical design requirements. Companies at level 1 also had problems with integration, methodology and uniformity across procedures, resulting in the need for corrective actions and rework, which adversely affected profitability. This compromised any process improvement planning, making it difficult to gain quality certification in the medium or long term.As only ten companies could be included in the study and a greater number of documented cases would lend greater credence to the results, we suggest that further studies be carried out in which this analysis is extended to other industry sectors.