@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A short identity-based proxy ring signature scheme from RSA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The first short and efficient identity-based proxy ring signature scheme without bilinear pairings has been proposed.It is provably secure in the random oracle model under RSA assumption.It has a proper advantage in security reduction compared to those from RSA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Identity-based proxy ring signature,Random oracle model,RSA assumption,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Identity-based proxy ring signature concept was introduced by Cheng et al. in 2004. This primitive is useful where the privacy of proxy signers is required. In this paper, the first short provably secure identity-based proxy ring signature scheme from RSA assumption has been proposed. In addition, the security of the proposed scheme tightly reduces to the RSA assumption, and therefore, the proposed scheme has a proper advantage in security reduction compared to the ones from RSA. The proposed scheme not only outperforms the existing schemes in terms of efficiency and practicality, but also does not suffer from the proxy key exposure attack due to the use of the sequential aggregation paradigm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The notion of proxy signatures was introduced by Mambo et al. [1] in 1996. In a proxy signature scheme, an original signer delegates her signing right for signing messages to a proxy signer. This kind of signature supports ensuring service availability for the customers in distributed networks to avoid the dependency to a single server. Since the introduction of the notion of proxy signatures, several variants of proxy signatures such as proxy signatures from RSA and integer factorization problem [2–7], designated-verifier proxy signatures [8–10], short proxy signature [11], proxy verifiably encrypted signatures [12], proxy signature schemes without random oracles [13] and proxy ring signatures [14–18] have been proposed.In a proxy ring signature scheme, an original signer delegates her signing right for signing messages to a group of proxy signers with different public keys, called the proxy agent, such that they can generate proxy ring signatures on behalf of the original signer while he could be anonymous. This type of signature not only supports ensuring service availability for the customers in distributed networks to avoid the dependency to a single server but also supports preserving privacy of proxy signers. As mentioned in [14–16], this primitive can be used when the requirement of proxy signer's privacy protection is necessary. For example, it is assumed that a parliament member would like to reveal an important news on behalf of the cabinet, while he wants to be anonymous. The other practical motivation for this primitive is electronic voting protocols, where just eligible voters anonymously can cast their ballots after authenticating themselves. The voting authority (an original signer) in the voting protocol authenticates eligible voters and issues certificates (generates valid delegations) for them. Voters (proxy signers) anonymously cast their ballots (generates proxy ring signatures). On the one hand, employing identity-based proxy signatures violates the most important property of voting protocols, voter privacy. Additionally, employing blind signatures in voting protocols enables the malicious voting authority to cast its ballot instead of abstained voters, and so violates accuracy of the election. Proxy ring signatures incorporate three requirements (privacy of voters, authentication and accuracy) at the same time. We should highlight that some access control mechanisms are necessary in the voting protocol to provide uniqueness property. Indeed, this primitive is a solution to the problem of electronic voting protocols based on blind signatures in which a malicious voting authority can vote instead of abstained voters.To facilitate public key certificate management of proxy ring signatures, Cheng et al. for the first time presented an identity-based proxy ring signature [19] in which signers' identities are used instead of their public keys and certificates. Subsequently, there have been some follow-up works for identity-based proxy ring signatures [20–26], but unfortunately, none of them supports provable security, and also all of them are designed based on bilinear paring. In 2014, Asaar et al. [27] presented the first formal definition and security model for identity-based proxy ring signature schemes, and also proposed the first provably secure identity-based proxy ring signature scheme without incorporating bilinear pairings, and showed that it is secure under RSA assumption in the random oracle model. Since breaking the unforgeability of the scheme with high probability leads to solving the RSA problem with too small probability, the security reduction is loose. Therefore, the guarantee on the signature scheme can be quite weak.In addition, previous identity-based proxy ring signature schemes proposed in [20–22,19,23–26] are vulnerable to the proxy key exposure attack [28] presented by Schuldt et al. in 2008. In fact, in previous schemes, if temporal secret keys of proxy signers are leaked, their long term secret keys will be compromised.In this paper, we present the first short identity-based proxy ring signature scheme from RSA. The proposed scheme is proved secure under the RSA assumption, a widely accepted assumption, in the random oracle model. The advantages of the proposed scheme are threefold. First, it is the shortest identity-based proxy ring signature scheme without bilinear pairings. Second, it has a proper advantage in security reduction since a reduction of the proposed scheme is independent of the number of members in a proxy ring. Third, it is as efficient as or more efficient than the existing identity-based proxy ring signature schemes. Furthermore, the proxy key exposure attack [28] cannot be applied to our scheme since the paradigm used in designing this primitive is sequential aggregation of an identity-based signature and an identity-based ring signature scheme.One may think that it is possible to build short and efficient identity-based proxy ring signature schemes without bilinear pairings from the idea of concatenated Schnorr signatures [29]. We should emphasize that if we use this idea in designing this primitive, the result scheme is no longer identity-based since public keys according this idea are not just identities of signers, and in this primitive, each proxy signer needs to interact before signature generation to attain proxy signers' public keys, and cannot easily use identities of other proxy signers to generate an identity-based proxy ring signature.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents notations and RSA complexity assumption employed as the signature foundation. The security model of identity-based proxy ring signature including outline of the identity-based proxy signature scheme and its security properties are given in Section 2. The proposed scheme and its formal security proofs are presented in Section 3. Section 4 presents the comparison and discussion. Conclusion and future work are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
