@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A methodological approach for trustworthiness assessment and prediction in mobile online collaborative learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Methodology to modelling trustworthiness in mobile online collaborative learningGuidelines for incorporating security into mobile online collaborative activitiesProvide trustworthiness assessment methodsTrustworthiness prediction based on a neuronal network approachEvaluation of trustworthiness prediction and methodology on real online courses

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information security,Trustworthiness,e-Assessment,Online collaborative learning,Mobile learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Trustworthiness and technological security solutions are closely related to online collaborative learning and they can be combined with the aim of reaching information security requirements for e-Learning participants and designers. Moreover, mobile collaborative learning is an emerging educational model devoted to providing the learner with the ability to assimilate learning any time and anywhere. In this paper, we justify the need of trustworthiness models as a functional requirement devoted to improving information security. To this end, we propose a methodological approach to modelling trustworthiness in online collaborative learning. Our proposal sets out to build a theoretical approach with the aim to provide e-Learning designers and managers with guidelines for incorporating security into mobile online collaborative activities through trustworthiness assessment and prediction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the last decade, Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) has become one of the most influencing paradigms devoted to improving e-Learning [1]. Similarity, mobile learning is an emerging educational model devoted to providing the learner with the ability to assimilate learning any time and anywhere [2]. Mobile learning provides ubiquity and pervasiveness, which have become essential requirements to support learning and allow all learning community members from a variety of locations to cooperate with each other by means of a large variety of technological equipment [3]. While there has been an explosion of mobile devices and applications in the marketplace to gain access to e-Learning systems and collaborative learning processes, the development of mobile supported collaborative learning guided by technological security as a key and transverse factor has been, to the best of our knowledge, little investigated [4]. However, Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) have been widely adopted and exploited in most of educational institutions in order to support e-Learning through different learning methodologies, ICT solutions and design paradigms. In this context, e-Learning designers, managers, tutors, and students are increasingly demanding new requirements. Among these requirements, information security is a significant factor involved in e-Learning processes. However, according to [5,6], e-Learning services are usually designed and implemented without much consideration of security aspects. This finding has been usually tackled with ICT security solutions, but as stated in [7], the problems encountered in ensuring modern computing systems, cannot be solved with ICT alone. In contrast, current advanced ICT security solutions are feasible in many e-Learning scenarios though assessment processes in CSCL involve specific non-technological components. Indeed, online assessment activities (e-assessment) usually have specific issues, such as student's grades or course certification, that e-Learning designers have to consider when they manage security requirements. In this context, even most advanced and comprehensive technological security solutions cannot cope with the whole domain of e-Learning vulnerabilities.An e-Learning activity is a general concept that can involve very different cases, actors, processes, requirements, and learning objectives in the complex context of e-Learning [8]. To conduct our research we focus on specific online collaborative activities, namely, online assessment (e-assessment). In [9], the authors report that the e-assessment process offers enormous opportunities to enhance the student's learning experience, such as delivering on-demand tests, providing electronic assessment, and immediate feedback on tests. In this context, e-assessment is considered an e-exam with most common characteristics of virtual exams, and is typically employed to deliver formative tests to the students. An e-assessment activity is an e-exam with most common characteristics of virtual exams. Moreover, in [10] it is discussed how unethical conduct during e-learning exam-taking may occur and an approach that suggests practical solutions based on technological and biometrics user authentication is proposed.In our real context of online higher education, we mainly consider peer-to-peer assessment processes and online collaborative activities, which will form e-assessment components. In this context, we propose security technological solutions extended with a functional trustworthiness approach [11–13] by proposing a hybrid assessment method based on trustworthiness models. From these previous works, in this paper, we endow trustworthiness models for security in e-Learning with a trustworthiness methodology. This approach is devoted to improving security in CSCL by building a trustworthiness methodology to offer guidelines for designing as well as managing security in online collaborative activities, through trustworthiness assessment and prediction. To this end, we propose a trustworthiness methodology with the aim of managing and predicting reliable assessment processes in e-assessment. As a result, by predicting collaborative e-assessment results, e-Learning designers will be able to manage assessment process with additional information generated by automatic prediction models.This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we review the main works in the literature on mobile collaborative learning and security in CSCL, how trustworthiness assessment and prediction are related to security, and trustworthiness methodologies. In Section 3, we describe the theoretical features, phases, data, and processes of our methodological approach. In order to validate and support the application of the methodology, in Section 4 we concrete the most significant aspects in terms of specific methods through their application in real online courses. Moreover, in Section 5 we present and evaluate a neural network approach for peer-to-peer e-assessment prediction. Finally, conclusions and further work are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
