@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An access authentication protocol for trusted handoff in wireless mesh networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A trust-based protocol is proposed for secure handoff in wireless mesh networks.Security properties are formally verified based on an enhanced Strand model.Performance is evaluated and shown to be more advantageous than the EMSA scheme.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless mesh network,Seamless handoff,Security,Access authentication,Trusted network connect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
WMNs (Wireless Mesh Networks) are a new wireless broadband network structure based completely on IP technologies and have rapidly become a broadband access measure to offer high capacity, high speed and wide coverage. Trusted handoff in WMNs requires that mobile nodes complete access authentication not only with a short delay, but also with the security protection for the mobile nodes as well as the handoff network. In this paper, we propose a trusted handoff protocol based on several technologies, such as hierarchical network model, ECC (Elliptic Curve Cryptography), trust evaluation and gray relevance analysis. In the protocol, the mobile platform's configuration must be measured before access to the handoff network can proceed and only those platforms whose configuration meets the security requirements can be allowed to access the network. We also verify the security properties through formal analysis based on an enhanced Strand model and evaluate the performance of the proposed protocol through simulation to show that our protocol is more advantageous than the EMSA (Efficient Mesh Security Association) authentication scheme in terms of success rate and average delay.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
WMNs are a new wireless network structure that is expected to set free the restrictions of Ad Hoc networks, WLANs (wireless local area networks), WPANs (wireless personal area networks) and WMANs (wireless metropolitan area networks), and will be used to establish commercial wireless mobile networks. Combining the advantages that WLANs and Ad Hoc networks can offer, WMNs are a wireless broadband network structure based completely on IP technologies, and become a growing effective broadband access measure that can provide high capacity, high speed and wide coverage. To some extent, WMNs are mainly a network design idea with features including no-center, self-organization, multi-hops, best routing-judgment, etc. [1]. Since a WMN does not rely on fixed infrastructure and is operated in an open space, any user within the coverage area of the radio waves can access the network. Therefore, secure access authentication is the first provision to prevent unauthorized users from accessing the network [2,3,4]. For handoff in WMNs, it is required that mobile nodes complete access authentication not only with a short delay, but also with the protection for the mobile nodes as well as the handoff network.Past practice in the areas of information security has shown that most security problems just come from the network but more from terminal nodes [5,6,7]. Thus, the original idea of trusted computing was proposed to ensure the security of network terminals. Moreover, trusted computing is relied upon to secure the entire computer system through successive steps. First, a root of trust is established to construct a chain of trust, namely, from the root to the hardware platform to the operating system and finally to applications. Thus, trust can spread to the entire system through graded trusted authentications. For handoff in a WMN, the platform's configuration must be measured before access to the network can proceed and only those platforms whose configuration meets the security demands of the network can be allowed to access the network. Consequently, a terminal with potential threat cannot gain access to the network directly. Moreover, the terminal can verify the security of the AP (Access Point) with which it is associated and will only connect to the network when it satisfies the terminal's security demands [8].Based on the current 802.1× authentication scheme and trusted computing technologies, we present a trusted handoff protocol in this paper to ensure security and trust in WMNs. Our goal in the design of the protocol presented in this paper is to ensure that only a legitimate user operated on a trusted platform can complete handoff to a new secure network without too much sacrifice on performance. In addition to proposing a trust-based authentication protocol to achieve the above goal for secure handoff from one network zone to another, our other contributions in this paper include the following. We propose a trust model for the trust evaluation of both starting and runtime system states, prove the security properties of the protocol through formal analysis based on an enhanced Strand model, evaluate the performance of the protocol in terms of success rate and handoff delay using simulation, and compare our protocol to a comparable scheme to demonstrate the advantages of our protocol over the other scheme.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews some related work on handoff protocols in WMNs. Section 3 provides some background information on TPM (trusted platform module) and TNC (trusted network connect). Section 4 contains a zone-based hierarchical network model for hybrid WMNs and a universal handoff model in WMNs. Section 5 describes the method for evaluating the trust degrees of both the starting and the runtime states in a trusted system. Section 6 presents our handoff protocol, which is based on several technologies such as the hierarchical network model, ECC, trust evaluation and gray relevance analysis. Then, a formal analysis of the security properties of the protocol based on the strand space model and a demonstration of the security performance based on experiment results are provided in Sections 7 and 8, respectively. Finally, Section 9 concludes the paper, which also contains a description of our future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
