@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A data hiding scheme based upon DCT coefficient modification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hiding data in DCT coefficients and solving rounding errors when extracting the dataUse an integer mapping to keep the modified DCT coefficients remain as integers.DCT based method has potential in competition with the pixel-value based method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information hiding,DCT,Secret communication,LSB substitution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we propose a steganographic scheme based on the varieties of coefficients of discrete cosine transformation of an image. The major problem of hiding data in the high-frequency coefficients of discrete cosine transformation is that rounding errors will be added into the spatial-domain image, and thus cannot be transformed back to the correct modified coefficients of the discrete cosine transformation. To solve this problem, we use integer mapping to implement our discrete cosine transformation. Thus, the image recovered from the modified coefficients can be transformed again to the correct data hidden coefficients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Steganography [1,28,10,17] is the process of hiding data within other readable data to avoid that unreadable data attracting the attention of eavesdroppers. Many data hiding approaches have been proposed. These approaches can be classified into two categories: the spatial-domain and the frequency-domain categories. In the spatial-domain, data hiding technologies directly manipulate the pixel value for hiding data. For example, the LSB substitution replaces the length-fixed LSB of a pixel with the fixed length secret bits. Simple steganography involves hiding the secret message in the least-significant-bit (LSB) of the pixels of an image [4,11,15]. It is easy to use the simple LSB substitution method to create a noticeable distortion for the human eye because a little variant of smooth area can be noted by humans. The LSB substitution method is also easily detected by programs. For example, Fridrich et al. [7] use the RS-diagram to detect LSB steganography. Thus, Wu and Tsai [26] proposed a steganographic method using the difference value between two adjacent pixels to avoid detection by the RS-diagram.Therefore, several approaches have been used to adjust the position and amount of embedding secret data in order to decrease the noticeable distortion. Recently, Yang et al. [27] proposed a pixel-value differencing (PVD) steganographic method that modifies the difference value between two adjacent pixels so that more secret data is embedded into two pixels located in the edge area than in the smooth area. Yang et al. [27] extended the technique for embedding data in an image using pixel-value differencing. Their approach provides high capacity and avoids detection by the RS-diagram.Traditionally, frequency-domain processing has been a counterpart of the spatial-domain technique in signal filtering, pattern recognition, and image compression. An intricate problem in the spatial-domain approach sometimes becomes easy to deal with in the frequency-domain approach. For example, in the spatial domain, it is hard to find the redundant part of an image for lossy image compression, but this redundant part can be collected at high-frequency content when the image is transformed to frequency domain. Intuitively, edges and sharp transitions in an image contribute significantly to the high-frequency content of its discrete cosine transform. Thus, to look for the proper pixels for hiding data, transform-based schemes are reasonable approach. In these schemes, cover images are transformed by some frequency-oriented mechanism, e.g., discrete cosine transform (DCT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT). Then, the secret data are embedded into the frequency-form images by modifying the coefficients.In this paper, we propose a steganographic scheme based on the ability of human vision which is insensitive to the varieties of high-frequency components of an image. To improve the quality of the stego-image, we utilize the concept of decomposition of images. In the proposed method, images are decomposed into several different frequencies, and the high-frequency parts contain hidden data. A similar idea has been used to compress images in JPEG. In JPEG compression, the information loss due to fixed-precision data storing and computing in the domain transformation stage and also in the quantization stage creates a huge compression rate.The major problem of hiding data in DCT coefficients is that when we transform the modified DCT coefficients back to the spatial-domain, because the pixels of the image are stored in integer form, rounding errors will be added into the spatial-domain image, and thus cannot be transformed back to the correct modified DCT coefficients when extracting the embedded data. For an illustration of this problem, see Fig. 1.To solve this problem, we use one of the forms of integer mapping [9,18] to implement our DCT transformation which maps integer to integer. Thus, if the modified DCT coefficients remain as integers, the image recovered from the modified coefficient can be transformed again to the correct modified coefficient, and the embedded data can be extracted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
To look for the proper pixels for hiding data, a transform-based scheme is proposed in this paper. To improve the quality of stego-images, cover images are decomposed into several different frequencies, and the high-frequency parts contain hidden data. Our experimental results show that the proposed scheme provides high image quality and large message capacity. We conclude that steganography based on DCT coefficients has high potential in competition with the pixel-value differencing based method. Our future work will focus on further increasing the embedding capacity, while maintaining the quality of the stego-image. A possible method is to find the way to hide different numbers of secret bits at different coefficient components to achieve this goal.