@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ontology-based approach to automated trust negotiation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ontologies are used to facilitate the semantic interoperability among negotiators.An ontology for the automated trust negotiation (ATN) framework is defined.Ontology inference techniques are used to perform ATN policy compliance checking.A semantically relevant negotiation strategy exploiting the ATN ontology is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automated trust negotiation,Ontology,Description logic,Negotiation strategy,Semantically,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose an ontology-based approach to automated trust negotiation (ATN) to establish a common vocabulary for ATN across heterogeneous domains and show how ontologies can be used to specify and implement ATN systems. The components of the ATN framework are expressed in terms of a shared ontology and ontology inference techniques are used to perform ATN policy compliance checking. On this basis, a semantically relevant negotiation strategy (SRNS) is proposed that ensures the success of a negotiation whenever it is semantically possible. We analyze the properties of SRNS and evaluate the performance of the ontology-based ATN.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Automated trust negotiation (ATN) [1] is a promising approach to establishing mutual trust between two strangers who wish to share resources or conduct business transactions in a distributed environment. In the ATN framework, each negotiator establishes access control (AC) policies to regulate the disclosure of sensitive information to negotiation opponents. Trust is established by iterative disclosure of AC policies and credentials between negotiators. Automated trust negotiation has been thoroughly studied from both theoretical and practical perspectives in the last decade [2–6]. Many ATN systems have been proposed, using various notation systems to represent credentials and access control policies, such as role-based trust-management language (RT) [7], attribute-based trust negotiation language (ATNL) [8], PeerTrust [9],X-TNL [10], and Cassandra [11]. However, the variety of ATN notations with different vocabularies and semantics negatively affect interoperability. In open distributed systems, negotiators usually belong to different security domains, and each domain may use a different vocabulary to denote attributes, credentials, and AC policies. Suppose two subjects A and B from security domains DAand DB, respectively, endeavor to establish trust. If the trust requirements within the policies of B cannot be understood by A, then A will not know how to satisfy them. On the other hand, if the attributes disclosed by A cannot be evaluated by B in DB, B cannot determine whether to grant A the desired service. In this case, establishing trust between them is impossible. Negotiation over heterogeneous domains relies on semantic interoperability. One of the goals of this paper is to establish a common vocabulary of ATN across domains.Semantic Web technologies and ontologies in particular provide the means to address this problem. The attributes, credentials, and AC policies of ATN systems can be given meaning through the use of ontologies. An ontology is a formal, explicit specification of a shared conceptualization [12]. More specifically, an ontology provides unambiguous and flexible meaning agreement on the semantics of concepts and their inter-relationships in a specific domain. In this paper, we propose an ontology-based approach to automated trust negotiation. We present an ATN ontology and show how ontologies can be used to implement the ATN system. Our ontology-based ATN has the following advantages.1.Given an ontology that modeling the key entities and their relationships typically found in ATN, our proposed model has a higher degree of semantic interoperability compared to other ATN systems. By aligning different terms that might be used in different domains, negotiators reach a mutual understanding of the exchanged information.The ontology-based ATN promotes the completeness of negotiation. Completeness is an important property of ATN, meaning that negotiations should succeed whenever possible [1]. In ATN, access control is based on attributes of negotiators, that are proven through disclosure of digital credentials. Unfortunately, ATN has been limited to syntactically identical attributes and their values for access control. In our model, ontologies provide semantics for attributes to make negotiations succeed by addressing semantically equivalent attributes. Besides the semantics of attributes in domain-specific ontologies, the ATN ontology defines the relationships between attributes formed by delegations, which means that having one attribute may imply having another attribute.Ontology inference techniques can be used to perform the tasks of ATN policy compliance checking, which determines which credentials satisfy a policy and whether particular sets of credentials satisfy the relevant policy [13].Negotiation strategies in ATN govern the exchange of credentials between negotiators in terms of policies. More specifically, negotiation strategies determine which credentials to disclose, when to disclose, and whether the negotiation succeeds or fails. Most previous strategies [14–16] determine relevant credentials of the eventual negotiation goal by syntax; that is, a credential C is related to resource R iff C appears in R's policy or C appears in the policy of a credential C′ that is relevant to R[17]. These strategies are not semantically complete because the negotiation may fail in some cases where it would succeed if the semantics of attributes were exploited. To address this issue, we propose a complete ATN strategy that determines the relevant credentials by semantics.In this paper, we propose an ATN ontology that is an explicit and declarative representation of ATN components. The ATN ontology helps to establish a common understanding of ATN components across domains and facilitates the semantic interoperability among negotiators. As another major contribution, we propose a semantically relevant negotiation strategy (SRNS) that discloses credentials and policies that are semantically relevant to the negotiation goal. SRNS can find a set of credentials of a negotiator to satisfy a given policy, which may not be requested by the policy but can semantically imply those requested. By taking advantage of the semantics of attributes defined in ontologies, SRNS makes a negotiation succeed whenever possible. Furthermore, SRNS enforces the attribute acknowledgment policies (ACK policies) to protect information about sensitive attributes.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We begin with a discussion of the related work in Section 2 and provide an overview of automated trust negotiation with ACK policies in Section 3. The ontology-based ATN and the semantically relevant negotiation strategy are proposed in Section 4. The implementation and evaluation of our ontology-based ATN are presented in Section 5, and the comparison with different negotiation strategies is summarized in Section 6. We conclude the paper in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we showed how available Semantic Web technologies, namely ontology and Description Logic, can be used to build the automated trust negotiation system. To this end, we developed an ATN ontology and proposed a semantically relevant negotiation strategy (SRNS). The ATN ontology defines a vocabulary for ATN components to enhance semantic interoperability between negotiators. We formalized the ATN ontology with the Description Logic (DL)SHOIND. Based on this logical formalization, it is feasible to conduct ATN policy compliance checking automatically via the state-of-the-art DL reasoners. The semantically relevant negotiation strategy exploits the semantics of attributes, credentials, and access control policies defined in the ATN ontology to make a negotiation succeed whenever possible. SRNS supports delegation of authority by modeling delegations as the semantic relationships between attributes. We verified the desirable properties of SRNS and evaluated the performance of our implementation of the ontology-based ATN.Future work would involve the following aspects.•Based on the DL formalization of ATN policies presented in this paper, we will attempt to conduct automatic policy analysis (conflict detection, redundancy checking, policy comparison, etc.) by leveraging DL reasoners. The tasks of policy analysis can be mapped to DL reasoning services (e.g., conflict detection can be reduced to concept satisfiability, policy comparison can be reduced to concept subsumption). Because ATN policies are of vital importance in the protection of resources from unauthorized access, a detailed policy analysis before the negotiation process begins is non-trivial.We will further compare the performance of our implementation with the original TrustBuilder2 implementation, especially for policy compliance checking. The benefits of DL reasoning about policies and the limitations on the growth of time overhead will be further investigated.Further improving the performance of SRNS implementation is still an important area of future work. Our experiment results have shown that ontology-based ATN becomes costly as the size of the ATN ontology grows. Thus, reducing the size of the ontology is highly desirable. We plan to use the module extraction technique of ontology as a way to reduce the size of knowledge bases related to negotiation. Module extraction computes a subset of an ontology with respect to a supplied signature that is ensured to be small and adequately capture the meaning of symbols in that signature. A signature is set of interested symbols referring to individuals, concept names, and role names. To identify only those concepts and axioms relevant to negotiation will promote efficient reasoning and thereby reduce the time overhead of SRNS.