@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A file-deduplicated private cloud storage service with CDMI standard

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A private cloud storage service with file deduplication mechanism is proposed.We also integrate the Cloud Data Management Interface (CDMI) standard in the proposed system.Superiority of transmission and storage efficiency by comparing with the existing system “Gluster Swift”Much suitable for the service environment where most of the transmitted data are small files

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud storage,Private cloud,Data deduplication,CDMI,DFS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The emergence of cloud environments makes users convenient to synchronize files across platform and devices. However, the data security and privacy are still critical issues in public cloud environments. In this paper, a private cloud storage service with the potential for security and performance concerns is proposed. A data deduplication scheme is designed in the proposed private cloud storage system to reduce cost and increase the storage efficiency. Moreover, the Cloud Data Management Interface (CDMI) standard is implemented in the proposed system to increase the interoperability. The proposed service provides an easy way to for user to establish the system and access data across devices conveniently. The experiment results also show the superiority of the proposed interoperable private cloud storage service in terms of data transmission and storage efficiency. By comparing with the existing system Gluster Swift, the proposed system is demonstrated much suitable for the service environment where most of the transmitted data are small files.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cloud storage is a service model where data is maintained, managed and backed up for users over network. Different from traditional local device storage, in general, cloud storage is an on-demand self-service which can be easily accessed via standard Internet APIs and communications protocols [1]. Since cloud storage service provides users with abundant storage space and gives users convenience in synchronizing files across platform and devices, it is now adding its appeal for many citizens. The different forms of cloud storage design are public cloud storage and private cloud storage. Public cloud storage, such as Dropbox [2] and Google Drive [3], are provided by service providers and the storage infrastructure is hosted by the cloud vendor at the vendor's premises. The charge of the storage is depended on how many resources the user used [4] and it can scale storage space up or down elastically in accordance with the request. The data of different customers are likely to be stored at the service provider site and mixed together on the cloud storage systems. The public cloud storage makes immediate acquiring of data more convenient for the user. However, the data security and privacy are still critical issues in public cloud environments, especially for the exclusive clients who care about the privacy and ownership of files. Chen and Zhao point out that data security and privacy issues are the top concerns of consumers, especially for large enterprise [5]. It is difficult to set powerful security boundaries and protect data privacy in cloud storage. After surveying with 402 participants, Ion et al. [6] also indicate that most of the cloud storage users are worried about data privacy issue. Hence, the private cloud storage appeared on the scene.Different from public cloud storage, private cloud storage [7] is built for the exclusive use of one person or organization with low bandwidth environment. It is suitable for the users who want to have customization service or who don't trust the public cloud storage vendors. The users of private cloud storage must establish the infrastructure personally and they just need to download the software from private cloud service provider and install it on their own hardware. Consequentially, private cloud storage is equipped with the attributes of public cloud storage and protects the security of private files meanwhile. However, there are still some aspects of private cloud storage service that need concern. Firstly, since private cloud storage users have the responsibility to establish the infrastructure, the space of storage system has to be used in an efficient way. According to the research of Symantec [8], there are 37% duplicated data in Taiwan enterprises and 42% duplicated data in global enterprises. The duplicate copies of data would result in redundant consumptions of storage space and network bandwidth. Moreover, most of the files transmitted in enterprise are images or documents with small size. Therefore, how to efficiently reduce the redundant cost of storage spaces, especially dealing with small files, has already been a complex and challenging issue for enterprises [9]. Secondly, elasticity is also an essential factor for a private cloud storage system. An elastic system means that the potential system must have the ability to dynamically add or reduce resource according to the requirements. The private cloud storage owner would easily manage storage and get resource benefit if the underlying infrastructure provided primitives for elasticity. Thirdly, the interoperability of a storage system with international standard interface should be treated as another important characteristic. The unique interface released by a single vendor would remain under the change control of the vendor. It may be essentially locking customers into that service. Compared to the storage system with unique interface, the storage system with a standard interface which accommodates requirement from multiple vendors and can be extended for proprietary functions would be more convenient and less restrictive for users.To solve the issues mentioned above, this research constructs a data deduplication private cloud storage system with Cloud Data Management Interface (CDMI) [10] standard based on the fundamental distributed file system (DFS). A data deduplication scheme which can detect and remove the redundant data in the storage is designed in the proposed system to reduce cost and increase the storage efficiency. The deduplication algorithm is also designed to be suitable for the service environment where most of the transmitted data are small files. Moreover, the international standard interface CDMI is implemented in the proposed system to increase the interoperability. Finally, Gluster [11] is chosen as the fundamental DFS in our proposed private cloud storage system. Integrating with distributed file system as back end storage makes the proposed system have the elasticity, good performance at backend storage, and be managed conveniently [12]. By integrating these characteristics, the proposed private cloud storage service can provide users an easy way to establish the system and access data across devices conveniently. The experiment results also demonstrate the superiority of the proposed system in terms of data transmission and storage efficiency.The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides background and related works of the proposed system; Section 3 elaborates on the proposed system's architecture, components and the details of working; Section 4 describes the experimental results; and, finally, we give concluding remarks and future works in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
