@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A methodology for structured ontology construction applied to intelligent transportation systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a methodology to build ontology's in the domain of ITS (Intelligent Transportation Systems).We have proposed: DPK (Discrimination of Paragraphs with Keywords) and IRWDP (Retrieval with Weighted Data in Paragraphs).The two new methods proposed, allow reducing the sample size of the study.Much information irrelevant has been discarded, achieving greater performance in the ontology construction.The methodologies proposed can be used to build ontologies in any domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intelligent transportation systems,Ontology,Collaboration,Distributed systems,Statistical data analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The number of computers installed in urban and transport networks has grown tremendously in recent years, also the local processing capabilities and digital networking currently available. However, the heterogeneity of existing equipment in the field of ITS (Intelligent Transportation Systems) and the large volume of information they handle, greatly hinder the interoperability of the equipment and the design of cooperative applications between devices currently installed in urban networks. While the dynamic discovery of information, composition and invocation of services through intelligent agents are a potential solution to these problems, all these technologies require intelligent management of information flows. In particular, it is necessary to wean these information flows of the technologies used, enabling universal interoperability between computers, regardless of the context in which they are located. The main objective of this paper is to propose a systematic methodology to create ontologies, using methods such as a semantic clustering algorithms for retrieval and representation of information. Using the proposed methodology, an ontology will be developed in the ITS domain. This ontology will serve as the basis of semantic information to a SS (Semantic Service) that allows the connection of new equipment to an urban network. The SS uses the CORBA standard as distributed communication architecture.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The real-time estimation of traffic parameters and the control operations constitute a challenge for control of urban traffic systems [4]. Until now, the equipments installed in urban networks usually work in a centralized way, providing information to the traffic control center through the urban data network and performing actions according to the decisions of an operator at the control center. However, the enhancements of transport equipments due to the evolution of electronics and data networks allow them to share information and work cooperatively. The main challenge in the design and operation of ITS is information exchange, which is a difficult task in highly distributed systems. From a technical standpoint, there are difficulties in integrating information using compliant standards and connecting multiple systems, especially when considering the complexity and volume of information flows involved in the field of ITS, where both, the hardware as the data generated are highly heterogeneous [49]. Therefore it is necessary to optimize the interoperability, security and efficiency of processes and devices which are part of the ITS by developing new technologies. More specifically, it is necessary to analyze the needs of the transport and logistics from a multimodal perspective, and to design new systems and tools able to provide “higher intelligence” in the process of information exchange and interoperability between devices. Distributed systems are well known for their difficulty of interoperation among agents, which justifies the interest in unified software platforms [51]. SOA (Service-Oriented Architecture) is presented as an attractive alternative to enable interoperability of systems and the reuse of resources. But SOA applications face many security problems during design and development [37]. In SOA architectures, the WS (Web Services) are a commonly used technology. WS use SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) as the communication protocol between various services. SOAP is an XML-based protocol. However, processing large SOAP messages significantly reduces system performance, causing bottlenecks in comparison with other technologies like CORBA [46]. This represents a problem in wireless communication networks [35] and in the ITS field, where the number of connected devices is growing over time. In practice, SOA-based applications are not always successful as most of them are done on an ad-hoc basis, and primarily based on personal experiences [23]. Although companies are increasing their dependence towards SOA, these systems are still in an immature early stage with important security problems [25]. The common problem in all the mentioned technologies is the interoperability between services and devices that are part of ITS, due to the differences in the information representation and semantics. The use of ontologies in this field would be a solution to enable reuse of domain knowledge and to generate smart clients. Agents that share semantic information could use this ontological information to respond to requests DD (Device–Device), serve as input to other services, enable reuse of domain knowledge or work cooperatively with other existing ontologies.A methodology to define an ontology in the field of ITS is proposed. The ontology will be used in a CORBA-compliant Semantic Service, which allows finding services in a distributed environment. The developed ontology will serve as initial DataBase to the intelligent system of semantic management, where the hardware devices can exchange information through a communication system and work cooperatively. Section 2 provides an overview of previous related work. In Section 3, the proposed methodology is introduced, using as a starting point Systematic Literature Review (SLR) techniques, and then applying semantic analysis techniques and statistical data analysis to build the ITS ontology. Section 4 details the obtained results with the proposed methodology, testing the resulting ontology in a CORBA distributed environment. Finally, Section 5 shows the conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
