@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating energy cost of route diversity for security in wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An LP framework that is capable of jointly modeling energy dissipation and route diversity in Wireless Sensor Networks is developed.Through the developed framework, a comprehensive analysis by exploring the design space in a systematic fashion is conducted.The energy overhead characteristics of route diversity countermeasures for resilience against node capture only (NCO), eavesdropping only (EAO), and node capture and eavesdropping (NCE) attacks are investigated.LP problems are solvable in polynomial time. Hence, from computational point of view it is preferable to model a problem using LP rather than with a nonpolynomial time formulation which makes a comprehensive analysis infeasible. Thus, the novel LP framework presented in this paper can be used with minor modifications for future analysis on different aspects of route diversity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor networks,Network lifetime,Network security,Eavesdropping and Node capture,Multi-path routing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Route diversity improves the security of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) against adversaries attempting to obtain sensitive sensor data. By limiting the fraction of data relayed over each link and/or routed through each relay node, route diversity can be achieved, thus, extracting useful information from the network is rendered more challenging for adversaries. Sensor nodes operate with limited energy resources, therefore, energy consumption of security mechanisms is a central concern for WSNs. In this paper we evaluate the energy cost of route diversity for security in WSNs through a novel Linear Programming framework. We characterize energy dissipation and data relaying behaviors of three route diversity techniques to mitigate node capture only, eavesdropping only, and node capture and eavesdropping attacks. Effects of node density, network area, level of resilience, and network topology on energy cost are investigated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are composed of small form factor devices (nodes) that are instrumented with different types of sensors to carry out certain sensing tasks within a designated operation area. With limited computation and energy resources, nodes are capable of sensing physical phenomena, processing the sensed data, and transmitting the information. Being densely deployed, nodes cooperate with each other to achieve the assigned tasks. For example, cooperation in conveying sensed data towards the base station is achieved using other nodes as relays. Self organization and infrastructureless characteristics of WSNs make them promising solutions for surveillance and control tasks [1,2]. Since WSN characteristics are suitable for utilization in hostile environments, they are invaluable assets for tactical communication and networking in military applications.Security is a critical issue for WSNs because nodes usually operate unattended and communication takes place in a broadcast medium. A common and successful technique used against eavesdropping is cryptographic encryption. With encryption, sensor data is scrambled using a key to make eavesdropped data unintelligible to anyone who does not possess the key. However there is always a possibility that a single technique may be flawed or cracked (e.g., IEEE 802.11 WEP protocol). Moreover, in WSN sensor nodes can be captured (i.e., node capture attacks) and vital cryptography information such as keys can be extracted from them. If keys are captured, this would render the encryption useless. Eavesdropping attacks are usually unnoticed (i.e., it is challenging to detect a passive attack), thus, these attacks can succeed without encountering any active defense [3]. Layered approach to security and “defense-in-depth” strategy mandate that alternative or complementary techniques be used.Security can be enhanced by using route diversity (i.e., multi-path routing) which exploits multi-hop characteristics of WSNs by providing multiple paths between the source node and the base station to split data on these paths. Route diversity can be used as a standalone security countermeasure or in conjunction with encryption. While encryption is a good defense against attackers who are already eavesdropping wireless transmission, route diversity makes eavesdropping more difficult in the first place11While route diversity can also be useful against denial of service attacks [4], our main motivation in this paper is to study it in the context of data confidentiality.[3]. By splitting data along different paths, an adversary has to capture portions routed through different paths to construct one node's data which requires more effort than extracting information in a single path case. In other words, an adversary needs to spend more resources to collect data from the network if route diversity is implemented.Lifetime optimization of WSNs is one of the most important functional design objectives because WSNs are envisioned to be operating in hostile and harsh environments where human intervention is risky or costly. In such environments, battery replenishment is not possible or highly challenging. Adding security capabilities to a WSN without considering energy efficiency can lead to inefficient energy dissipation characteristics in the whole network and network lifetime can decrease dramatically. Thus, while enhancing WSN security, energy requirements should not be overlooked.Our goal in this paper is to investigate the energy impact of route diversity countermeasures in WSNs. There are at least two types of energy overhead route diversity brings. First of these is due to the need to discover, establish, and maintain multiple routes instead of a single route between sensor nodes and the base station. In WSNs consisting of stationary nodes, this is a one-time operation for a substantial amount of time [5], hence, can be ignored. There is a second factor which makes the energy cost of route diversity more than the energy cost of single route paradigm. When data is split into multiple parts and forwarded via multiple routes, it is no longer possible to carry all data in energy-optimal paths. Some portion of the data should be transmitted towards the base station via less efficient paths. In fact, all routes can be sub-optimal from an energy efficiency perspective when compared to a single energy-efficient route. Broadly speaking, we can say that the second factor is more significant than the first one because it is applicable not only for a limited period of network operation but during the entire network lifetime. In other words, since WSNs generally exhibit stationary topology and connectivity behavior, route updates are infrequent. On the other hand, data transport by using multiple paths is a continuous operation spanning the entire network lifetime.While it is tempting to state that the energy cost of route diversity is high, we are not aware of any clear scientific evidence or convincing analysis to support such a claim. It can also be argued that (with equal lack of convincing scientific evidence) the energy cost associated with route diversity is small and can easily be neglected. Given the fact that without a proper analysis it is not possible to quantify or even give a rough estimate on the energy cost of route diversity, in this paper we make the first attempt to carry out an analysis on this subject by building a framework using Linear Programming (LP). LP is a technique to solve the problem of maximizing or minimizing a linear function whose variables are required to satisfy a finite set of constraints that are expressed either as linear equalities or linear inequalities. In the context of WSNs, LP approach has previously been applied in many studies to model the unique characteristics of WSNs and to determine the optimal solutions to problems that are specific to WSNs (e.g., [6–15]).Choosing an LP based analysis method has a number of advantages. One of them is the abstraction from a specific protocol which enables us to investigate energy cost in ideal conditions with optimal routing decisions. Secondly, due to global knowledge in the optimization problem solver, the results can be obtained in an efficient and consistent manner.In this study, we consider a WSN where nodes have sensitive data to be conveyed to the base station. Data is spread out on multiple paths to mitigate both active and passive attacks. Data flows on these paths are optimized to minimize the overall energy consumption throughout the network. Furthermore, to avoid premature death of any node within the network energy dissipation is evenly balanced throughout the network, hence, the network lifetime is optimized. Within an LP framework, we model the energy dissipation characteristics of route diversity countermeasures against node capture (NCO), eavesdropping (EAO), and both node capture and eavesdropping (NCE) attacks. Using the developed LP models, we evaluate the energy cost of these countermeasures by benchmarking against the energy requirements of unconstrained optimal case.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Related work is presented in Section 2. Security assumptions, threat model, system model, and LP formulations are presented in Section 3. Results of analysis based on LP models are presented in Section 4. The discussion of models, assumptions, analysis and implications of the results, and promising future directions are presented in Section 5. Concluding remarks are made in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
