@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An analysis of the factors determining software product quality: A comparative study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Individual character is the most relevant factor identified as determining of software products' quality.Competence, training, knowledge, and level of user involvement as well as resistance to change are items related to this factor.Technological aspects had the highest ratings compared to organizational aspects due to the strong relationship of the items.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Software quality,Survey,Factors determining quality,ISO/IEC 9126,ISO/IEC 25000,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There has been a great deal of research on software quality, but few studies have stressed the factors beyond the scope of software products that can influence the final product's quality. These factors can also determine project success.ObjectiveIn this paper, a comparative study is conducted of the determinants of software quality, based on a prior study that only explored U.S. CIOs' (Chief Information Officers) perceptions of factors that could affect the final quality of software products. The aim of this study is to explore the perceptions of different users involved in the software development cycle and generate results that can be generalized and employed as an aid in the management of software project resources.MethodThe study was conducted through an online survey to various users involved in the software development cycle in Brazil. The respondents analyzed the same 24 items proposed in the previous study, categorized into individual, technological, and organizational factors. Based on the 175 responses obtained, a factor analysis technique was applied, considering the statistical model of the main components in order to identify the factors determining the quality of software products.ResultsAfter the factor analysis, it was identified that all 24 analyzed items displayed factor loadings greater than 0.5. Nine factors (9 eigenvalues greater than 1.0) were extracted from this analysis, with the value of the total variance equal to 72%.ConclusionBased upon the comparison between the studies, it was concluded that the most relevant factor identified in both surveys presented an individual character. This factor related items such as competence, training, knowledge, and level of user involvement as well as resistance to change. It was also identified through factor analysis that technological aspects had the highest ratings due to the strong relationship of the items comprising these factors compared to organizational aspects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to the study conducted by Cap Gemini, Sogeti, and HP, disclosed in the “World Quality Report 2014–15” [1], investments in the area of quality assurance have increased in recent years. The percentage of budget invested in this area increased from 18% in 2012 to 23% in 2013, and reached 26% in 2014. However, even with this obvious growth of investment, only one group (1% to 3%) of executives surveyed in 2012 and 2013 reported that their companies used more than 40% of their IT budget for quality assurance. However, even with the increased investment in the area of quality assurance, there is still no guarantee of the quality of the developed products. It should be noted that much of the success of software projects relates to user satisfaction and, consequently, the quality of the generated products. To address these software quality issues, the ISO/IEC (International Standards Organization/International Electrotechnical Commission) published the 25,000 family of standards known as SQuaRE (Software Product Quality Requirements and Evaluation), which presents the Model of Software Product Quality [2]. This model is based on software product quality characteristics and sub-characteristics that can be used for both specifying software quality requirements as well as for their evaluation. Due to the importance of this topic, several studies have been developed in the area of quality that explore software product quality characteristics and sub-characteristics [3]. However, most of the studies address purely technological aspects such as: Metrics to assess the functional quality of the products generated [4], the quality of the generated code presented [5,6], and the number of errors found or aspects related to the product's usability [7,8]. Little research has focused primarily on the analysis of behavioral aspects that could affect the quality of software products, with Hoffman [9] and Acuña et al. [10] being among the few examples.After identifying this gap, a study was conducted in 2010 by Gorla and Lin [11], with the main objective of identifying the factors beyond the scope of the software product that could influence software quality in organizations. These factors could be organizational, technological, or individual. To conduct this study, the authors sent a survey to some American CIOs (Chief Information Officers). The choice of these respondents was motivated by a prior study [12] that indicated improved quality in information technology as one of the top five concerns of IT executives. At the end of the study, 112 responses were obtained, which were assessed using different methods of analysis such as factor analysis and logistic regression. The result of the first analysis was intended to derive the factors (individual, technological, and organizational) that influence the quality of software products. The result of the second analysis sought to measure the strength of the association between the factors and attributes of software quality. The results of these analyses could help CIOs and CEOs (Chief Executive Officers) in the development of quality improvement programs, enabling a suitable management of resources within an organization.In the study conducted by Gorla and Lin [11], it was possible to derive the factors determining software quality and to identify which of those identified factors were predominant. The authors identified the “Capacity of the users” as the most representative factor of the first analysis (factor analysis), i.e., a factor classified as individual. However, at the end of the second analysis (logistic regression), factors related to organizational aspects were identified as the most influential for software quality. This result is not surprising, given that the respondents were all CIOs who, in general, have a strategic view of the business, thereby considering organizational factors to be more relevant than technological ones.Due to the importance of identifying the factors determining software quality in order to ensure a better management of resources within organizations, this study aims to conduct a comparison with the results obtained in the first stage of analysis performed by Gorla and Lin, while using different profiles of respondents involved in the software development cycle. It will thus be possible to complement the prior study, which only explored the perceptions of American CIOs, by adding the perspectives of new respondents.The inclusion of new respondents when compiling the results is relevant because it will thus be possible to try to generalize the results and reduce the bias generated in the previous study. To this end, the same data collection method (survey) will be used and the same analysis (factor analysis) will be performed, as proposed by Gorla and Lin [11], but from the perspective of new respondents.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the literature review and an explanation of the ISO/IEC 9126 and ISO/IEC 25000 standards. Section 3 describes the model used in the research as well as the relationship between the variables. Section 4 presents the research method used and the statistical calculations in detail. Section 5 presents the analysis of the results and Section 6 discusses the results achieved. Section 7 concludes by presenting some limitations and possibilities for future work.According to the ISO/IEC 8402 standard [13], which is referenced in the ISO/IEC 9126 [3] and ISO/IEC 25000 [2] standards, software quality is the software product's ability to satisfy explicit and implicit needs under specific conditions. Since software quality is considered multidimensional, it is very important to establish which aspects are important to evaluate.Various software quality models have previously been proposed such as the McCall model in 1977 [14], followed by the Boehm model in 1978 [15], the FURPS model proposed by Robert Grady in 1987, and the Dromey model in 1995 [16].The model proposed by McCall [14] in 1977 is considered one of the forerunners, originally emerging as a product quality improvement project, developed by the US Air Force Electronic Systems Division (ESD), the Rome Air Development Center (RADC), and General Electric. Initially established with 55 characteristics, the model was reduced to only 11 factors: correctness, reliability, efficiency, integrity, usability, maintainability, testability, flexibility, portability, reusability, and interoperability. The model organizes the quality characteristics according to three different aspects: product operation, product review, and product transition. The major contribution of this model is the relationship between the quality factors and metric qualities of software.In the Boehm model [15], despite a close similarity to the McCall model, a hierarchical division of quality characteristics was proposed in order to further refine the model. As in the McCall model, Boehm also included the needs of users and added some other characteristics.The FURPS model [17] was proposed by Robert Grady and the Hewlett-Packard Company. The quality characteristics were divided into two groups: functional and non-functional; therefore, the first letter of the acronym FURPS represents the functional characteristics of the model. The rest of the acronym “URPS” represents non-functional characteristics (usability, reliability, performance, supportability). IBM Rational Software used this model and later transformed it into the FURPS+ model [18].The main objective of the model proposed by Dromey [16] was to be comprehensive enough to work with different systems. Dromey believed that quality evaluation differed for each product and, therefore, a dynamic process was necessary. The model focused on the relationship of characteristics and sub-characteristics of quality, proposing sub-levels of relationships. The main characteristics of quality proposed by this model were functionality, reliability, maintainability, reusability, and portability.In 2001, the ISO standardized the concept of software product quality and published the ISO/IEC 9126 standard. This standard is divided into four parts:a)ISO/IEC 9126-1 product quality model;ISO/IEC 9126-2 external metrics;ISO/IEC 9126-3 internal metrics;ISO/IEC 9126-4 quality in use.Through the standard, six characteristics were specified for the software product quality model: functionality, reliability, usability, efficiency, maintainability, and portability. According to the ISO/IEC 9126-1 standard, the quality of the process contributes to improving the quality of the product, and the product contributes to improving the quality in use, as shown in Fig. 1. The software product's quality can be assessed by measuring the internal attributes (typically, static measurements of intermediate products), external attributes (typically by measuring the behavior of the code when executed) and, finally, the attributes of quality in use [3].Due to the importance of these standards and the wide adoption of their use, they are constantly being reviewed. Subsequently, a new series of standards was created by the ISO/IEC, called SQuaRE (Software Product Quality Requirements and Evaluation), which became known as the ISO/IEC 25000 family of standards. This standard was divided into five parts:a)ISO/IEC 2500n — quality management;ISO/IEC 2501n — quality model division;ISO/IEC 2502n — quality measurement division;ISO/IEC 2503n — quality requirements division;ISO/IEC 2504n — quality assessment division.The overall objective of creating a set of SQuaRE standards was to obtain a logically organized, rich, and unified series covering two main processes: the specification of software quality requirements and the evaluation of software quality, supported by a process measuring software quality [2].This set of standards formed the conceptual basis used to guide the concepts of software product quality in the study conducted by Gorla and Lin [11] as well as this study.Factor analysis, one of the multivariate statistical methods, emerged in 1904 through a study by the American psychologist Charles Spearman concerning mental abilities [22,23]. As a result, he developed the technique of factor analysis, which tries to identify factors that explain the correlations among a set of variables. The purpose of applying factor analysis can be data reduction or structural simplification, classification and grouping of data, an investigation of the dependencies between variables, prediction, or the elaboration of hypotheses to then be tested. Factor analyses can achieve their goals through an exploratory or confirmatory perspective and to perform it is necessary to follow seven basic steps [19,20]. The first one collects measurements using a set of p variables, with n observations for each variable, in order to obtain the following arrangement of variables: [Xij] where (I=1,2, …, n) and (j=1,2, …, p).The factor analysis model assumes that each variable Xj, extracted from a population with mean vector μ and covariance matrix Σ, is linearly dependent on a few random unobserved variables, F1, F2, … Fm (m<p), called common factors, and p additional sources of variation ε1, ε2, …, εp, called errors or, sometimes, specific factors. The coefficient “l” is called the loading factor and represents the weight of the variable “ï” in the factor “j” [23]. Therefore, the factor model can be represented by: Xp=μp+lp1F1+lp2F2+…+lpmFm+εp.The second step obtains the correlation between the variables and for this correlation matrices or a covariance matrix can be used. It is also possible to extract other statistical data based upon the correlation and covariance matrices, as in the case of the eigenvalues. The purpose of calculating the eigenvalues is to obtain a set of independent vectors explaining the maximum data variability. The sum of all of the eigenvalues equals the total number of variables and indicates the total variance caused by each vector.Usually, the acceptable and recommended values in exploratory research for the total variance are those greater than 80%, but it is not uncommon that in the social sciences, a field in which factor analysis is heavily used, values that explain 60% of the total variance are considered [21]. Other statistical data that can be extracted are loading factors, which determine the correlations between the original variable and the factor, the higher the loading factor, the greater the correlation with the factor. Usually, the relevant loading factors are those with values above 0.5 [20]. The third step selects the number of factors for inclusion in the analysis. There are various criteria to determine the correct number of factors to be extracted from an analysis, but in this study, the data analyses will be based solely on the criterion of eigenvalues greater than 1.0, as presented by Kaiser–Guttman [20,21]. The fourth step is the extraction of factors. There are different methods to perform the extraction of factors from the correlation matrix, but this study will address the method of principal components. The purpose of factor extraction is to find a set of factors that form a linear combination of the original variables or of the correlation matrix. Thus, if the variables X1, X2, X3, …, Xn are highly correlated, they will be combined into one factor, and so on with the other variables of the correlation matrix. In other words, a linear combination of the variables X1, X2, …, Xn may be represented by the following formula: Fj=C1jX1+C2jX2+ …+CnjXn where Fj is called the main component. Then, the variance explained by the first factor is excluded from the correlation matrix, with the result of residual matrices. Repeating the same steps above, the second main factor will be found, and so on, until a very small variance remains with no explanation. The fifth step is the rotation of the factors to assist the data interpretation task. There are two ways to accomplish the rotation: Orthogonal rotation (varimax rotation), which keeps the factors non-related, and oblique rotation, which correlates the factors among themselves. In this study, orthogonal (varimax) rotation will be used in order to maintain the same methods used by Gorla and Lin [11], enabling a comparative study. The sixth step is the interpretation of the factors. This task is a very subjective and depends much more on the conceptual background of the analyzer (versus an empirical one) [20]. The most important results extracted from a factor analysis are the factors; how many they are and which original variables are parts of each factor. In addition, the eigenvalues associated with each factor, and the percentage of total variance explained by each, demonstrate the degree of importance of each factor in explaining the proposed problem. The seventh and last step is the construction of factors scores in case to perform additional analysis. These scores can be obtained as a result of a linear combination of all the measures, weighted by the correspondent factor loading [19].Once the steps and their respective details needed to promote the factor analysis are presented, in the next section, the basic structure of the research used by Gorla and Lin [11] will be presented, which will serve as a reference for this study.This section presents the basic structure of the research conducted by Gorla and Lin [11], also used in this study to make possible the comparative study. Fig. 2illustrates how the relationship of the organizational, technological, and individual factors with software quality was conceived.In the research conducted by Gorla and Lin [11], the software quality was represented by five characteristics, identified by: (1) reliability, (2) ease of use, (3) maintainability, (4) usefulness, and (5) relevance. According to the authors, the original characteristic of the ISO/IEC 9126 standard “functionality” was replaced by “relevance” and “usefulness,” because a system rich in functionality will provide information that is more appropriate (relevant and useful) to users.The characteristic of “usability,” since it is linked to the ease with which the user implements a tool, was renamed by the authors “ease of use,” based upon the assumption that in this way, the term would be clearer. The characteristics of reliability and maintainability were retained pursuant to the ISO/IEC 9126 standard.This model did not include the characteristics of portability and efficiency from ISO/IEC 9126, since it was considered that the former should only be applied to software products that need to be implemented on multiple platforms, and that the latter should be considered a characteristic of quality internal to the product, and therefore related to response time and the consumption of computing resources.The mapping between the characteristics of software product quality from ISO/IEC 9126 and those used by Gorla and Lin [11] is presented in Table 2.Through this basic structure, Gorla and Lin [11] proposed a relationship between the factors (technological, organizational, and individual) and software quality to analyze the existence of a relationship between them, along with mapping the intensity of the strength of these relationships. To conduct this analysis, Gorla and Lin used independent and dependent variables. Conceptually, independent variables are the variables to be manipulated, introduced purposefully in order to verify their behavioral relationship to the other variables. The dependent variables are only measured or recorded, since their behavior is verified in accordance with the dependent variables.Following this reasoning, the independent variables in the structure proposed by Gorla and Lin [11] are the organizational, technological, and individual factors. The dependent variables are the characteristics of software quality, represented here by reliability, ease of use, maintainability, relevance, and utility, with their behavior mapped according to the dependent variables.The relationship between the independent variables (organizational, technological, and individual factors) and the dependent variables (characteristics of software quality) was proposed by Gorla and Lin [11] through the hypotheses described below:Hypothesis 1Technological factors, such as the use of a specific database, a programming language, and an appropriate developmental method, can directly affect the quality of a software product. It is understood that the inclusion of a process by means of a suitable development method may facilitate the maintainability of the software product and reduce the likelihood of errors. The use of a suitable development tool, presenting facilities for building graphical user interfaces, may result in products with interfaces which are rich in resources, easier to use, and much more user-friendly.Individual factors, such as user training, competence, resistance, and involvement, can affect the quality of a software product. It is understood that users who are more involved with the project can be more collaborative and contribute more to the project requirements, just as competent and well-trained users can have a better understanding of the inputs and outputs of the system and, consequently, can collaborate in the survey of processes. The most resistant users tend to position themselves negatively with regard to change and hence become a problem. These users tend to request more and more changes to the system, increasing the chances of the tool becoming unreliable.Organizational factors, such as top management support regarding appropriate projects, and budget availability, can lead to the development of better products. The higher the management position, the greater the understanding of organizational needs and, therefore, the greater the likelihood of more relevant and pertinent information being added to the products.Since the goal of this study is to explore the perceptions of different users involved in the software development cycle to assess the factors determining software product quality and ensure better resource management within organizations, the above hypotheses exemplify how each of the factors (technological, organizational, and individual) can influence the final quality of the software products.A survey was conducted with three distinct stages: collection of personal identification data, collection of the characteristics of the organization where the respondent works, and the evaluation of 24 items that might or might not influence software product quality in the opinion of each respondent.The target audience was professionals involved in the software development cycle, but specifically those handling operational activities, with less involvement in management activities. This made it possible to compare the results with the research conducted by Gorla and Lin [11], which only involved CIOs who, in general, have a strategic view of the business.The first step was to conduct a pilot test with two respondents in order to evaluate response time and the quality of the questions as well as to identify any weaknesses. After the pilot test, changes to some questions were necessary. The surveys were then sent to a small contacts network by e-mail and attached to it a message was sent asking them to spread the link to get more contributors for this research. The survey was available for 20days and during this period this snowball technique was getting strength. A total of 175 responses were obtained from professionals of 62 different organizations in both public and private sectors, most of them from the southern of Brazil. These were then used in formulating this study's conclusions. During the execution of the survey some pre-defined options were offered for the respondents to be checked as a valid answer. One of these questions was about the role of the respondents in the software development cycle. In case the respondent did not find the answer there was an option called “Others” where the respondent should complete with an appropriate answer. Four out of 175 respondents complete this field with a different role as described here: Team Leader, Test Manager, Business and Commercial. Fig. 3shows the quantitative information describing the roles of the respondents involved in this study and Table 3presents the profiles of the respondents.Another important information provided by the respondents was the main activity of the organization where the respondents were working for at that moment. This information may be considered important as different types of companies have different characteristics, work with different scopes, have different kind of projects and consequently the employees get involved with it and focus their effort in different quality characteristics. Fig. 4shows the quantitative results gathered during the application of the survey.The 24 items to be evaluated were divided into categories: Individual, technological, and organizational (Table 4). To evaluate these, a Likert scale was used, asking the respondents to identify the degree of importance each entry had on the software product quality: “Very High,” “High,” “Medium,” “Little,” or “None.”In order to conduct a comparative study, taking into account the research conducted by Gorla and Lin [11], an exploratory factor analysis was performed regarding the set of answers to the 24 items in the questionnaire. The main components' model and the normalized varimax rotation were thus taken into consideration.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
