@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Developing SMASH: A set of SMArtphone's uSability Heuristics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Smartphones are very popular among people of all ages.General usability heuristics do not consider specific smartphones aspects.We proposed a set of 12 usability heuristics for smartphones (SMASH).SMASH was experimentally validated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Usability,Smartphones,Heuristic evaluation,Usability heuristics,Experimental validation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The smartphone market is nowadays highly competitive. When buying a new device, users focus on visual esthetics, ergonomics, performance, and user experience, among others. Assessing usability issues allows improving these aspects. One popular method for detecting usability problems is heuristic evaluation, in which evaluators employ a set of usability heuristics as guide. Using proper heuristics is highly relevant. In this paper we present SMASH, a set of 12 usability heuristics for smartphones and mobile applications, developed iteratively. SMASH (previously named TMD: Usability heuristics for Touchscreen-based Mobile Devices) was experimentally validated. The results support its utility and effectiveness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to Bevan [1], usability is the extent to which a user can easily interact with a product, and it measures how easy to operate, learn and (even) memorize such products are. Many authors consider usability a key requirement for the design of new products, and highly important to people when choosing a product [2,3,4]. In practice, usability goes beyond that. Usability depends on the task, the user's goals and the context of use. It is not necessarily related to ease of use, although the latter is one of its key aspects. In some cases users might be willing to learn how to use a product for months or even years if it supports their activities. In other cases, users do not want to spend more than a couple of minutes learning how to use a tool, and this is the case of mobile applications. The first impression and experience of use is critical and might determine the product's success [5].Usability evaluation provides developers with insights on the degree to which a product enables a user to achieve specific goals, the efficiency in achieving these goals, the easy to learn and satisfaction [6]. As stated by Lewis [7], there are two major concepts of usability, commonly referred to as summative and formative. While summative usability focuses on the use of metrics associated with meeting global task and product goals (i.e., measurement-based usability), the focus of formative usability is the detection of usability problems and the design of interventions to reduce or eliminate their impact. The latter is also the focus of this work.Heuristic evaluation is one of the most widely used usability evaluation methods. It normally requires the participation of 3 to 5 evaluators [8]. When selecting the set of heuristics to be used, there are (mainly) two choices: generic or specific heuristics. Specific heuristics may be comparatively difficult to understand and apply, but they can potentially detect more specific usability issues related to the application's domain. Generic heuristics are usually easy to understand and apply, but they can miss specific (domain-related) usability issues [9].In this paper we present SMASH, a set of 12 SMArtphone's uSability Heuristics that was developed through an iterative process. Our work builds on an early (abbreviated) version of SMASH, previously called TMD (usability heuristics for Touchscreen-based Mobile Devices) [9]. We have performed several additional validation experiments, such as heuristic evaluation and inquiry tests.This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces main concepts related to smartphones, usability, usability heuristics, and usability evaluation challenges. Section 3 describes the process of developing SMASH; a special emphasis is made on the last iteration, as the earlier ones were presented in previous publications. Section 4 presents the results of the latest experiments. We detail our proposed SMASH usability heuristics set in Section 5. Finally, conclusions and future work are presented in Section 6.A mobile device is a small electronic appliance, with some processing capabilities, with permanent or intermittent connection to a network [9]. There are several taxonomy proposals [10,11]. Schiefer and Decker [12] classify mobile devices according to the following criteria: (1) size and weight, (2) input modes, (3) output modes, (4) performance, (5) kind of usage, (6) communication capabilities, (7) type of operating system and (8) expandability. Smartphones are any mobile device that has a touch-sensitive display (touch-screen) and groups a large range of functionalities, including communication capabilities.One of the first authors who attempted to define usability was Miller [13]. In the early 1980s the term usability was used as substitute for the terms user friendliness and ease of use [14,15]. Shackel [16] defines usability of a product as “the capability to be used by humans easily and effectively”. Shackel and Richardson [17] define usability as: “the capability in human functional terms for a system to be used easily and effectively by the specified range of users, given specified training and user support, to fulfill the specified range of tasks, within the specified range of scenarios”.Bevan et al. [14] summarize four different perspectives that have influenced the way usability was defined: (i) a product-oriented perspective emphasizes that usability can be measured with regard to the ergonomic characteristics of a product. (ii) in a user-oriented perspective, usability is represented by means of the user's mental effort in product usage and his/her attitude towards the product. (iii) in a performance-oriented perspective, usability is described in terms of the interaction of the user with the product, while (iv) a context-oriented perspective emphasizes that usability is dependent on the user group that is studied, the tasks those users are performing, and the environment in which the tasks are completed [18].The requirements proposed by Bevan et al. [14] are satisfied by ISO 9241-210 [19] which defines usability as “extent to which a system, product or service can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use”.The ISO/IEC 25000 series of standards was developed to replace and extend ISO/IEC 9126 and ISO/IEC 14598. The main goal of the ISO/IEC 25000 SQuaRE (Systems and software Quality Requirements and Evaluation) standard is to organize, enhance and unify concepts relevant to two main processes: software quality requirements specification and systems and software quality evaluation, supported by a systems and software quality measurement process [20]. Usability is considered in the whole standard, but it is especially mentioned in ISO/IEC TR 25060:2010 (Common Industry Format (CIF) for Usability — General Framework for Usability-related Information) and ISO/IEC 25062:2006 (Common Industry Format (CIF) for usability test reports). The ISO 20282 is based on ISO 9241-11 [21]. It states that all interactive products will have a user interface, and the quality of the user interface can have significant effects on achieving the user's goal(s) [22]. On the other hand, Nielsen suggests that usability is composed of a set of paradigms, principles and attributes [23].From above it is apparent that usability is difficult to define. For more than 30years there has been a lack of a clear and generally accepted definition [24]. The measurement of usability is complex because usability is not a specific property of a person or thing. According to Lewis “you cannot measure usability with a simple ‘usability’ thermometer” [25]. Usability is an emergent property dependent on interactions among users, products, tasks, and environments.When evaluating usability in smartphones it is important to consider the challenging aspects of such products. According to Heo et al. [26], mobile devices are portable communication and information systems. Their design is influenced by three main aspects:•They are mainly used on the user's hands.They are operated in a wireless way.They support the addition of new applications and Internet connection.Lee et al. [27] introduce additional important aspects to consider:•They have small screen size to display huge amounts of information at the same time.Buttons usually have multiple functionalities.The devices have limited processing, power and memory capabilities.Considering the latest, the trend of mobile multimedia resources is to get “bigger” in size and consume more memory. Some smartphones do not even have external memory slots, making cloud-storage services very appealing.As we can see, usability evaluation in smartphones can be difficult if the inappropriate tools are used. Reviewing the literature, we did not find a specific usability heuristics set for smartphones.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Usability is a key differentiating factor for mobile products and applications. We try to satisfy the need of proper tools for detecting usability issues in smartphones by proposing a set of specific usability heuristics for these products.The methodology used in the development of the heuristics has allowed us to perform an iterative process [38]. Here we present results based on five iterations. The flexibility of the methodology has supported a reliable development and refinement process, resulting in a set of 12 heuristics named SMASH: SMArtphone's uSability Heuristics (previously referred to as TMD: usability heuristics for Touchscreen-based Mobile Devices). Compared to early versions, most of the heuristics definitions are shorter. Sometimes “less is more”, especially if evaluators have to deal with unfamiliar heuristics.Many usability heuristics sets have been proposed for specific software products; however, there is currently no clear protocol for heuristics' validation. The whole process of developing usability heuristics it is yet to be formalized. We have conducted several experiments, validating and refining the proposed set of heuristics iteratively. We have shown SMASH to be an effective and reliable tool, however further validation may still be performed.We have identified a large amount of usability problems through the experiments conducted while developing SMASH. We have used such problems in order to develop a (preliminary) set of design patterns for smartphones and mobile applications [44]. These patterns still require validation and refinement.