@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Understanding requirements of clinical data standards for developing interoperable knowledge-based DSS: A case study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identify and use 15 functional and non-functional criteria to evaluate standards.We define a methodology based on case-study analysis for the evaluation of the standards.Using a PHR as an intermediate system enables CDSS interoperability with data sources.An online appendix is provided to show the modeling of the case-study examples.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data standards,Personal Health Record,Decision Support Systems,Interoperability,Knowledge representation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Knowledge-based Clinical Decision Support Systems (KB-DSSs) promise to provide patient-specific recommendations, generated by matching the KB with electronic patient data from various sources. The challenge of making KB-DSSs interoperable can be simplified by including those data sources into an integrated Personal Health Record (PHR). This paper aims to identify relevant criteria to support the evaluation of data standards for the PHR, following a case-study approach. 15 functional and non- functional criteria were identified and used to evaluate selected standards (HL7 CDA, HL7 vMR and openEHR). Our evaluation identifies their main advantages and disadvantages to support the development of interoperable, data-integrated KB-DSSs

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Different KB-DSSs have been developed to support the care process of a patient, from differential diagnosis [1] to treatment management. During the last two decades, many KB-DSSs have been developed as Computer-interpretable Guidelines (CIGs) represented in formalisms such as Asbru [2], GLIF [3], PROforma[4], SAGE [5] or GLARE [6] and enacted using their respective execution engines [7]. These tools have been created in order to provide real-time, knowledge-based decision support and recommendations to clinicians, based on the best known scientific evidence provided by clinical guidelines [8].Despite the advances produced in this field, several barriers [9–11] have been identified for the adoption of KB-DSS as a supportive tool for physicians in their daily routine. Some of these barriers include (a) the lack of agreement on using the same standard controlled vocabulary for representing clinical concepts in healthcare information systems and (b) the difficulty of integrating KB-DSSs with the clinical workflow. Acknowledging the former barrier and focusing on aspects related to the latter, this paper investigates ways to represent and access patient data to support providing patient-specific KB-DSSs.To emphasize the dependency of the KB-DSS on integration of data from multiple types and sources, we call these systems data-integrated KB-DSSs. Furthermore, healthcare IT systems need to be interoperable. Interoperability goes beyond the technical problem of data integration, and it has been defined [12] as a broad business requirement of systems in the healthcare sector to enable information exchange in a way (e.g., using standards that maintain security and privacy of the patient, etc.) that other systems – like KB-DSSs – can access patient data.While data is stored in Electronic Health Records (EHRs)22We use the terms Electronic Health Records (EHRs) and Electronic Medical Records (EMRs) to express the same meaning along the paper.it is not always integrated in a way that supports KB-DSS; the most common use of EHR data is not for automatic decision-support but for record-keeping, billing, and for enabling physicians to look at a patient's current test results, clinical history, etc. in order to reach a diagnosis and evaluation of patient state and provide treatment not based on a DSS. For prospective DSS, the data has to be structured, rather than be stored as free text or imaging data, such that formalized decision-criteria could be compared against it by the KB-DSS. Moreover, automated KB-DSS may require data arriving from different sources: e.g., not only findings about the patient arriving from EHRs but also bio-signals from wearable monitoring devices attached to the patients, and temporal abstractions discovered automatically by intelligent data analysis algorithms, which are usually not found in EHRs. In addition to prospective DSS, when KB-DSSs are used for retrospective guideline compliance analysis, the actions that were recommended for the patient by the DSS serve as another data source. Integrating these various sources of data into a medical record with a uniform format simplifies its processing by KB-DSS.Some data-integrated KB-DSSs include the possibility to model patient data (e.g., GLIF [3], and SAGE [5]), but they do not present an integrative approach that guarantees independence from the ways in which EHRs store and exchange data with the KB-DSS. As pointed out by Sittig et al. [9], there is a need to “create a set of standards-based interfaces to externally maintained Clinical Decision Support services that any EHR could subscribe to”. The architectural idea proposed by Sittig et al. could be leveraged by introducing the correct interfaces between the different system components, thus separating the KB modeling step from the knowledge-to-data mapping, described in Section 2.1. Furthermore, one of the system components that may help making this architecture feasible is an integrated Personal Health Record (PHR), described in Section 2.2, which should have a standard data model suitable for the problems associated with the development of data-integrated KB-DSS.The objectives of this paper are to identify relevant criteria that need to be considered when representing data in a PHR in a way that would ease data integration and decision support, and to describe our findings didactically, through a case study using selected standards. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes background and related work. Section 3 describes the standards selected for evaluation, the case study examples, the evaluation criteria, and the evaluation process. Section 4 describes the evaluation results. Section 5 discusses limitations. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Finding suitable standards for representation of clinical data is a key aspect for achieving success in the promising area of Clinical Decision Support. The first contribution of this paper is the set of identified criteria that should be evaluated for this purpose, supporting a KB-DSS. The second contribution is the case-study based methodology described to evaluate such standards that could be applied in the same manner for projects that need to evaluate future standards. Finally, the results of the evaluation process carried out suggest the different alternatives existing in the market nowadays, and identify main advantages and disadvantages of the selected standards based on the selected criteria and our case study exploration. Showing our hands-on experience and discussing what we found beneficial as well as problematic have also raised driving items raised for innovators and entrepreneurs, opening possible doors of collaboration between standardization initiatives. The overarching aim of this study is to progress on the identification of challenges and possible solutions to make KB-DSS systems interoperable.