@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Perceived service quality discrepancies between telecommunication service provider and customer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Objectively evaluating the quality and the potential of TS is difficult.This is due to the different perceptions of providers and customers toward TS.This study measures the presence, magnitude and form of the perception discrepancy.This study shows that their different milieus correlate with the perception discrepancy.This study can help TS providers/customers shape their TS development strategies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Telecommunication service,Perception discrepancy,Service quality,IT construct,Organization characteristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The efficiency of telecommunication services (TS) has increased their popularity. However, objectively evaluating the quality and the potential of TS is difficult for the TS provider because its milieu differs from that of the customer. This obstructs the progression of TS development and usage. This study therefore provides a model for measuring the presence, magnitude, and form of the perception discrepancy regarding TS. This model can help the TS provider and the customer gauge the pros and cons of investment in TS and shape corresponding strategies by linking the developed model, short/long-term TS strategies, and business activities related to TS.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The deployment of fiber to the x (FTTX) and technological advancements in third generation (3G) and upcoming fourth generation (4G) mobile telecommunications have given birth to many new broadband, multimedia, and cloud computing services in the telecommunication service industry (TSI)11The definition of TSI includes network operators and service providers but not hardware suppliers and media industry.[1]. Because of the convenience of telecommunication services (TS), many companies in Taiwan are increasing their use of these services for business management and are demanding highly customized services that suit their business workflow [2,3]. Owing to the increasing popularity and the high efficiency of TS, the competitiveness of companies has strengthened and improved.Intuitively, after the telecommunication privatization policy was implemented by the Ministry of Transportation & Communications (MOTC) of Taiwan in 1996, the deregulated telecommunications B2B market quickly responded to customer requirements and expectations in order to maximize customer satisfaction. However, the development and usage of TS did not substantially progress [4] because TS providers had difficulty in objectively evaluating the quality and the potential of the designed TS based only on TS customer satisfaction. The reasons are twofold. First, from the TS provider perspective, the TS provider encounters a management dilemma when the Taiwan government attempts to maintain market competition according to the national policy for public resource management. For example, since the service fee of nation-wide TS is still regulated and limited by the Taiwan National Communication Committee, it does not reflect the actual market price.22The overall revenues for mobile business reported by Chunghwa Telecom in 2008 declined 1.9% year-over-year due to declining traffic and price cuts imposed by the National Communications Commission (NCC) [5].Therefore, unlike conventional services, the development of TS is affected not only by customer satisfaction, but also by government policy. Secondly, from the TS customer perspective, a TS is considered effective if the gap between customer expectations and actual services received is small, and the perception regarding the TS is determined by the IT and organization milieu of the customer [6]. Therefore, customer satisfaction toward the TS quality is a compound effect that varies according to the customer IT construct (e.g., IT infrastructure and training) and organization characteristics (e.g., centralization and formalization). Therefore, the different milieus of the TS provider and the customer result in different perceptions toward TS. Notably, this phenomenon has been observed not only in Taiwan but also in South Korea and Japan [7,8]. Therefore, according to the above discussion, the quality estimation/evaluation and short/long-term development scheme of the TS should depend not only on customer satisfaction, but also on the gap in perceptions of TS quality between the provider and customer. Hereafter, this perception discrepancy toward TS quality between the provider and the customer is referred to as PDSQ.Despite the robust theoretical literature, no studies have provided empirical evidence of the presence and magnitude of PDSQ. Some works have analyzed the impact of PDSQ on customer satisfaction without comparing its presence, magnitude, and form between the TS provider and the customer [9–12]. Therefore, this study contributes to the literature on electronic commerce measurement and information systems by providing a model to analyze the presence and magnitude of PDSQ, and in what form PDSQ exists using data commonly available in the TS industry. The impacts of the IT construct gap (ITG) and organization characteristic difference (OCD) between the TS provider and the customer on PDSQ are also analyzed to identify the conditions under which PDSQ occurs and to predict the direction of change. The proposed model applies analytical hierarchy process (AHP) to compare the preferences of the TS providers and the customers regarding TS quality. Multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) is used to compare the providers and the customers in terms of perceived TS quality. The Spearman correlation coefficient is also calculated to determine the relationship between “ITG/OCD” and “the perception variation toward TS quality”. The potential applications of the developed approach include (1) measuring PDSQ, (2) calculating ITG and OCD, and (3) estimating the relationship between (1) and (2). This measurement can help firms understand their service quality and to evaluate alternative methods for managing customer switching costs, retention, and acquisition by harmonizing the differences in IT/organization milieus between the provider and the customer, which can improve TS quality.The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses the literature on the information technology construct, organization characteristics, perception discrepancy, and telecommunication service industry. Section 3 introduces the hypotheses and methodology of this study. Section 4 presents the questionnaire results, analysis, and findings. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusions and implications of the study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
