@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mobility management solution for IPv6-based vehicular networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The architecture based on vehicle domains is proposed.Based on the architecture, the address configuration algorithm is proposed.Based on the address configuration algorithm, the routing algorithm is proposed.Based on the routing algorithm, the management algorithm is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
IPv6,Vehicular network,Vehicular domain,Routing,Mobility management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a mobility management solution for IPv6-based vehicular networks. First, the architecture based on vehicle domains is proposed in order to reduce the mobility handover frequency and delay. Based on the architecture, a distributed address configuration algorithm is proposed. Based on the address configuration algorithm, a vehicle can establish a routing path reaching the nearest AP (Access point) and achieve the multi-hop communication with the Internet through the routing path. Finally, based on the routing algorithm, the mobility management solution is proposed. The data results show that the solution shortens the mobility handover delay and lowers the packet loss.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As a new type of vehicle communication network, vehicular networks achieve multi-hop wireless communication between vehicles and between vehicles and roadside infrastructures. With the development of vehicular networks and the emergence of a variety of new applications, it is urgent to connect vehicular networks to the IPv6-based Internet in order to meet the increasing service demands [1,2].As a special type of mobile ad hoc network, a vehicular network has its own characteristics, such as high speed, a large number of nodes and a large coverage area, etc. [2,3]. The IPv6-based Internet has many advantages, such as mobility support, abundant address resources and good scalability, etc. [4]. Therefore, the IPv6-based vehicular networks become the ideal solution for satisfying the service demands [1,2].IEEE 1609 Working Group proposes the framework for the IPv6-based vehicular networks. Due to the differences between the architecture of the IPv6 network and the one of the vehicular network, this framework has the following limitations on achieving address configuration, routing and mobility management:1)In the address configuration, this framework does not support DAD.In the routing, the framework does not support multi-hop communication.During the mobility handover process, a vehicle must acquire a new care-of address. Since a vehicle moves in high speed, the frequent change of a vehicle's care-of address increases the packet loss rate and reduces the communication quality.In order to overcome these limitations, this paper proposes a mobility management solution which is based on address configuration and routing algorithm, and it has the following contributions:1)The architecture based on vehicle domains is proposed in order to reduce the mobility handover frequency and delay.Based on the architecture, a distributed address configuration algorithm is proposed. In the algorithm, a vehicle acquires a unique IPv6 address from a neighbor node without DAD.Based on the architecture and address configuration algorithm, a vehicle can establish a routing path reaching the nearest AP and achieve the multi-hop communication with the Internet through the routing path.Based on the address configuration algorithm and routing algorithm, the intra-VD (Vehicular domain) mobility management algorithm and inter-VD mobility management algorithm are proposed. During the mobility process, a vehicle is always identified by its home address, so the algorithm does not perform the care-of address configuration. Moreover, the handover process in the network layer (L3) is performed before the one in the link layer (L2), so both the handover delay and packet loss rate are reduced. Particularly, during the inter-VD handover is performed, a vehicle can receive data packets from the same AP. As a result, the packet loss rate is significantly reduced.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work is discussed. The address configuration algorithm is discussed in Section 3, the routing algorithm is presented in Section 4, and the mobility management algorithm is discussed in Section 5. The proposed solution is analyzed and evaluated in Section 6 and the paper concludes with a summary in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
