@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Systematic investigation of the effects of unidirectional links on the lifetime of wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Unidirectional links improve the network lifetime significantly in sparse networks.In dense networks unidirectional links does not prolong lifetime considerably.Utilization of unidirectional links is more important in P-model than D-model.The number of bidirectional links is higher than unidirectional links for D-model.Unidirectional links decrease disconnection probability in general for P-model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor networks,Unidirectional links,Linear programming,Energy efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Link unidirectionality is a commonly encountered phenomenon in wireless sensor networks (WSNs), which is a natural result of various properties of wireless transceivers as well as the environment. Transmission power heterogeneity and random irregularities are important factors that create unidirectional links. Majority of the inter-node data transfer mechanisms are designed to work on bidirectional links (i.e., due to the lack of a direct reverse path, handshaking cannot be performed between a transmitter and receiver) which render the use of unidirectional links infeasible. Yet, there are some data transfer mechanisms designed specifically to operate on unidirectional links which employ distributed handshaking mechanisms (i.e., instead of using a direct reverse path, a multi-hop reverse path is used for the handshake). In this study, we investigate the impact of both transmission power heterogeneity and random irregularities on the lifetime of WSNs through a novel linear programming (LP) framework both for networks that utilize only bidirectional links and for those that can use bidirectional links as well as unidirectional links.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In wireless communications electromagnetic propagation medium between a transceiver pair is, often, abstracted as a bidirectional link, which implies that both entities can transmit packets to and receive packets from each other. However, in many practical network deployments the assumption of link bidirectionality is questionable. In fact, it is shown on various wireless network testbeds that a significant portion of the links are unidirectional [1,2] (e.g., it is reported in [2] that more than 45.0% of the links are unidirectional in their testbed).The existence of unidirectional links can be attributed to several physical factors including transceiver characteristics as well as other environmental phenomena. Hardware components of wireless radios (e.g., antenna, RF circuits) determine the maximum transmission range of the radios [3]. Unavoidable variations in individual component characteristics lead to non-homogeneous maximum transmission ranges for different nodes [3–5]. Transmission power heterogeneity is an important paradigm that leads to unidirectionality (i.e., a high transmission power node can reach a low transmission power node, however, communication in the reverse direction is not possible) [6,3,7]. Random irregularities due to ambient factors (e.g., noise, interference) affecting the signal propagation path is another phenomena creating unidirectional links [1].Since most medium access control (MAC) layer protocols (e.g., IEEE 802.11 in unicast mode) are designed to operate on bidirectional links (e.g., handshaking mechanism dictates that data transmission by a transmitter should be replied back with an acknowledgment transmission by the receiver), any routing protocol utilizing such a MAC protocol has no other option but to use only bidirectional links in the routing operations [4]. However, if the MAC protocol is used in broadcast mode then, a node can transmit over a unidirectional link, hence, it is possible to employ a routing protocol that can use unidirectional links on top of a MAC protocol operating in broadcast mode [6]. Yet, it is highly desirable to have a MAC layer that can perform handshaking over unidirectional links in unicast flows both for performance optimization and for avoiding network partitioning (i.e., it is possible that some nodes can only be reached by unidirectional links). Indeed, there are several MAC protocols designed to perform handshaking over unidirectional links (i.e., acknowledgment packets are relayed back to the transmitter in a multi-hop fashion by using one or more relay nodes) [1,8,5,9].Lifetime optimization of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) is one of the most important design objectives because WSNs are envisioned to be operating in hostile and harsh environments where human intervention is risky or costly [10]. In such environments, battery replenishment is not possible or highly challenging. In WSNs, nodes share the burden of relaying data from sensor nodes to the base station. To avoid premature exhaustion of the any sensor nodes batteries relaying energy dissipation should be evenly shared throughout the network which can be achieved by optimally balancing the flows. Link unidirectionality limits the options available for balancing energy dissipation when compared to a network without unidirectionality.The impact of any relevant paradigm affecting the energy dissipation characteristics of WSNs is worth investigating [11,12], yet, a systematic characterization of the impact of link unidirectionality on WSN lifetime has not been performed, hence, our goal in this study is to investigate the energy dissipation characteristics of data transfer in WSNs with unidirectional links induced by both transmission power heterogeneity and random irregularities.Energy overhead due to unidirectional links in WSNs can be categorized into two main types: (i) energy overhead to establish and maintain routes in the presence of unidirectional links and (ii) energy overhead to route data in such a network. The latter is more significant because it is applicable not only for a limited period of network operation but also during the entire network lifetime (i.e., since WSNs generally exhibit stationary topology and connectivity behavior, route updates are infrequent). On the other hand, data transport is a continuous operation spanning the entire network lifetime.Although it is tempting to conjecture that the energy overhead due to unidirectionality is high, there is no systematic analysis to support such a conjecture. Given the fact that without a proper analysis it is not possible to quantify or even give a rough estimate on the energy cost of unidirectionality, in this study we perform an analysis on this subject by building a framework using linear programming (LP). In the context of WSNs, LP approach has previously been applied in many studies to model the unique characteristics of WSNs and to determine the optimal solutions to problems that are specific to WSNs [13–20]. Choosing an LP based analysis method has a number of advantages. One of them is the abstraction from a specific protocol which enables us to investigate energy cost in ideal conditions with optimal routing decisions. Secondly, due to global knowledge in the optimization problem solver, the results can be obtained in an efficient and consistent manner.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Related work is presented in Section 2. System model, and LP formulations are presented in Section 3. Analysis based on LP models are presented in Section 4. Concluding remarks are made in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
