@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal addressing-based routing for 6LoWPAN

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The addressing algorithm based on an address tree is proposed.The optimal routing algorithm based on an address tree is proposed.An address update algorithm is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
6LoWPAN,WSN,Addressing,Routing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The addressing-based routing solutions usually adopt a tree topology, but the routing paths along a tree are not optimal and the resources of nodes around a root are excessively consumed. Moreover, the descendants of a failed node need to rejoin a tree and reacquire addresses, and during this process they cannot perform communications. In order to overcome the above deficiencies, this paper proposes an optimal addressing-based routing scheme for 6LoWPAN. This scheme takes advantages of one-hop and two-hop neighbors to calculate optimal paths. Since a root is not involved in most of optimal paths, the excessive resource consumption is avoided. This scheme also proposes an address update algorithm and the descendants of a failed node can use this algorithm to update their addresses rather than reacquire the new addresses. During the address update process, the descendants can still use the original addresses to perform communications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the extensive use of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and the emergence of various new applications, it is necessary and urgent for WSNs to connect to the Internet in order to satisfy the demands for these applications. IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPAN) may be an ideal solution to achieving this objective. 6LoWPAN WSN is usually connected to the Internet via an access router (AR) and each 6LoWPAN sensor node can use the IPv6 protocol to achieve the communications with the Internet.Two important issues, namely addressing and routing, must be addressed before 6LoWPAN WSN can perform the proper communications. The 6LoWPAN standards [1–2] separately address these two issues. That is, 6LoWPAN first performs the standard [1] to achieve the address configuration. After the addressing process is complete, 6LoWPAN performs the standard [2] to establish the routing paths and achieve the communications. In order to improve the performances of addressing and routing, some addressing-based routing solutions [3–6] are proposed. In these solutions, via the addressing process, WSN is constructed in a special topology which is usually a tree. After the addressing process is complete, the routing can be achieved through this special topology without route discovery. Since the addressing and routing are achieved only via the addressing process, their performances are improved. In these addressing-based routing solutions, WSN is typically organized into a tree topology [3–6], and this might bring the following deficiencies:1.)The routing paths along a tree are not optimal sometimes. As shown in Fig. 1, nodes X1 and X2 are located in different branches, and the distance between them is 2-hop. However, the length of the routing path along a tree is 6-hop.The root in a tree usually deals with most of messages coming from the tree. As a result, the resources of both the root and the nodes around the root are excessively consumed and the failure probabilities grow. Meanwhile, the links around the root become congested and the network performance is degraded. In Fig. 1, root R has two branches. If node X1 located in one branch communicates with node X2 located in the other branch, then all the messages during this communication need to be forwarded by R.If a node in a tree becomes invalid, then its descendants need to rejoin a tree and reacquire addresses. During this process the descendants cannot communicate with other nodes. In Fig. 1, node X is X2's father. If X fails, then X2 must rejoin a tree and reacquire an address. Before X2 rejoins the tree, it cannot communicate because no routing path along the tree can reach X2.In order to overcome the above deficiencies, this paper proposes an optimal addressing-based routing scheme, and it has the following contributions:1)The addressing algorithm based on an address tree is proposed. Via the addressing algorithm, a node acquires a unique address from a neighbor and an address tree is constructed.The optimal routing algorithm based on an address tree is proposed, and one-hop and two-hop neighbors are used to optimize the routing paths. Since a root is not involved in most of these optimal paths, the excessive resource consumption and the link congestion are avoided.An address update algorithm is proposed. If a node in a tree fails, then its descendants can still maintain the tree and update the addresses instead of rejoining the tree and reacquiring the new addresses. During the address update process, the descendants can still use the original addresses to communicate with other nodes. As a result, even if a node fails, its descendants can still communicate with other nodes.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work on the addressing and routing schemes is discussed. The proposed scheme is presented in Sections 3 and 4, and the performance of this scheme is evaluated in Sections 5 and 6. This paper concludes with a summary in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we look into the addressing-based routing schemes. Based on the observations that the routing paths along a tree topology are not always optimal and the resources of nodes around a root are excessively consumed, we are motivated to utilize one-hop and two-hop neighbors to optimize routing paths. Based on this idea, we propose an optimal addressing-based routing scheme. This scheme is evaluated to justify its advantages. The data results show that one-hop and two-hop neighbors can effectively optimize routing paths and a root is not involved in most of optimal paths. As a result, the routing latency is reduced and the excessive resource consumption is avoided.In our future work, we are going to take advantage of AR's computing capabilities and storage resources to exploit its potential for assisting routing for 6LoWPAN.