@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Securing business processes using security risk-oriented patterns

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method to develop secure business processes.The method is based on collaboration between business and security analysts.We define a set of security risk-oriented patterns.We use the BPMN notation to present these patterns graphically.The proposal is tested within two industrial business models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Security engineering,Business process modelling,Security risk-oriented patterns,Security requirements,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Business process modelling and security engineering are two important concerns when developing information system. However current practices report that security is addressed at the later development stages (i.e. design and implementation). This raises a question whether the business processes are performed securely. In this paper, we propose a method to introduce security requirements to the business processes through the collaboration between business and security analysts. To support this collaboration we present a set of security risk-oriented patterns. We test our proposal in two industrial business models. The case findings characterise pattern performance when identifying business assets, risks, and countermeasures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Business process modelling (BPM) is an activity of representing enterprise processes, so that the current processes may be analysed and improved. Security engineering is concerned with lowering the risk of intentional unauthorised harm to valuable assets to a level that is acceptable to the system's stakeholders by preventing and reacting to malicious harm, misuse, threats and security risks [1]. Assuming that business analysts concentrate on improving the business performance, early security analysis could help in discovering and discarding system design alternatives that do not offer sufficient security levels. Although the importance of addressing security concerns is now acknowledged [2], the common practice is to consider security when the system is about to be implemented or deployed [3]. One of the reasons is that, business analysts are experts in business domain, they have limited or no expertise in security engineering; thus they depend on the practices, security standards [4,5], or security experts. Such a situation potentially contains several limitations. In this paper, we investigate the following research question: how to facilitate elicitation of security concerns during business process modelling? To answer it we introduce a seven-step method that describes how to integrate systematically the security requirements into a business process. Typically security engineering requires a close collaboration between the business analyst (i.e., the specialist of the business domain) and security analyst (i.e., the specialist of the security domain). Being experts in business domain, business analysts have limited or no expertise in security engineering. They have to rely on the best security practices, information security standards, or security experts. To improve, potentially, this situation we propose the use of security risk-oriented patterns to secure business processes. The idea is that majority of the problems often do not require new solutions. Developers reuse similar solutions already implemented independently, or elicit different aspects of similar problems, they already solved in other situations. By introducing the security risk-oriented pattern we potentially reduce the business analysts' need to ask for the help from the security analysts because patterns introduce both the security requirements and security rationale.According to Schumacher et al. “a security pattern describes a particular recurring security problem that arises in a specific security context and presents a well-proven generic scheme for a security solution [6]. Following this definition, we develop a set of security risk-oriented patterns (i.e., generic scheme). The patterns are based on understanding security risks (i.e., recurring security problems) that arise within business processes (i.e., specific security context). To mitigate the risks, the patterns recommend security requirements (i.e., security solution). Thus, our approach aligns business processes and security requirements elicited using security risk-oriented patterns. In order to understand the usefulness and performance of these patterns we apply them in business models. Our study, thus, results in the guidelines to elicit security assets, potential security risks and their countermeasures in the business processes.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we survey the security expressed using business modelling languages and overview some security risk management approaches. In Section 3 we present our proposal to secure business processes through collaboration between the business analyst and security analyst. To ease this collaboration we introduce a set of security risk-oriented patterns. In Section 4 we define guidelines for the pattern application and illustrate their performance in two case studies. Finally, in Section 5 we discuss and conclude our work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
