@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Continuance intention of E-portfolio system: A confirmatory and multigroup invariance analysis of technology acceptance model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study explains individuals’ intention of E-portfolio information platforms usage.This study performs the invariance analysis to understand the moderation of different subgroups in TAM.This study proposes an empirical case of verification process for TAM’s invariance testing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Technology Acceptance Model,E-portfolio,Invariance Analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The technology acceptance model (TAM) has been applied in various fields to study a wide range of information technologies. Although TAM has been developed in this research stream in Taiwan, TAM's issues of measurement have received scant attention. A robust model must perform measurement invariance across different respondent subgroups to ensure that various sample profiles have the same relationship. A survey of regarding E-portfolio system reuse intention was constructed, resulting in 360 valid responses across subgroups differing in gender, grade, and levels of willingness to share, to examine the measurement invariance of TAM. The results empirically support the validity of our TAM instrument for evaluating E-portfolio reuse intentions behavior. These findings suggest that men and women, differing grades, levels of willingness to share conceptualize the TAM construct in similarly. The implications of these results enable us to understand TAM's validity in E-portfolio acceptance research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently colleges and universities are facing lots of problems, including ill designed curricula that do not meet demands from the job market. There is also lots of pressure from society on colleges or universities to provide an education that results in guaranteed employment, especially given the soaring price of higher education. Currently, a number of academic institutions are facing the problem of grade inflation. Therefore, academic educational institutions are looking for alternative ways to provide an education that attracts students in a highly competitive world [49].In recent years, instructors have more interest in integrating Internet based technologies into their classroom as part of the learning environment. The electronic portfolio (E-portfolio) system has the potential to change the nature of learning environments and the ways in which student learning is promoted through different modes of learning [6]. E-portfolio allows information related to learning to be stored, accessed, updated, and presented in various electronic formats as a record or evidence of student learning and achievement [11,22]. E-portfolio also represents an assessment measure with strong potential for providing feedback about student performance to improve curricula and pedagogy, determining individual students' mastery of learning and providing feedback for improvement, and actively involving students in the assessment process. Knight et al. [31] examined the relationship between E-portfolio participation and student success. The results showed that undergraduate students with E-portfolio artifacts had significantly higher grade point averages, credit hours earned, and retention rates than a matched set of students without E-portfolio artifacts.Recording the various activities, in which students participate to establish E-portfolio can help graduates market themselves to employers and successfully join the workforce. Students benefit from performing career planning at earlier stages, which may become a crucial indicator of professional attitude and ability judgments in the future. More recently, universities and colleges in Taiwan have begun paying increased attention to the establishment and use of E-portfolio, integrating career portfolios and student career planning, learning development, and ability certification. These portfolios have been converted to electronic form and are stored in online school databases. However, whether E-portfolio platforms can reflect students' learning processes, help learners assess learning results, or facilitate learning to enhance their employability is determined by whether students consistently use these platforms to enrich their learning results.The application of E-portfolio to learning records establishes a novel category of information technology for students. Most theories related to IT behavior emphasize the acceptance, use, or continuing use of technology. Among these theories, the technology acceptance model (TAM), introduced by Davis in 1989, is the most commonly used (e.g. [5,27,32,54,12,13,43–45,47,51]). Compared to studies on other information systems, student users' behavior toward E-portfolios have not been assessed and thoroughly understood [44]. This study uses TAM to test the behavior intension of college students regarding the continued use of E-portfolio.In addition to focusing on the continuance use of E-portfolio, this study also measured the invariance of different groups. Lai & Li [32] stated that, although most studies related to TAM involve empirical investigations and have excellent explaining power, whether TAM is appropriate for a group depends on the invariance testing of the group. Shroff et al. [44] pointed out that the significance of the relationships among TAM variables might be affected by different demographic variables in the survey. Lu and Chiou [39] indicated that different demographic variables caused differences in e-learning satisfaction.Lai & Li [32] suggested that an ideal theoretical model consists of identical relationship structures in the observed data among the various groups. In addition to examining the application of TAM for the behavioral intention of university and college students regarding E-portfolio use, this study utilizes gender, grade level, and level of willingness to share as variables to measure invariance. Because gender and age are the most frequently used variables in invariance studies, they were included in this study. Willingness to share E-portfolio represents the attention that the participants gave to E-portfolio and their degree of self-confidence, which play crucial roles in students' use of E-portfolio. Thus, this study attempted to re-examine and use several moderators to understand the E-portfolio's adoption and related issues.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
For the past years, many studies using the TAM as a research framework have been conducted and many of these aforementioned researches included the samples across genders and ages. However, few have included multi-group invariance analysis to ensure that the measurement items used in their studies were equivalent so that the meaningful comparisons across different demographic variables could be made. Further, the few studies that have tested the TAM for invariance mainly focused on the single-sample studies that did not include samples from different demographic variables. By testing the measurement and structural invariance across three different samples, this study contributes to more understanding of the efficacy of ATT, PU, and PEOU in predicting the continuance intention of E-Portfolio. We found that the majority of the TAM studies proved to be reliable on the use of single samples and did not consider demographic variables differences.This study has proven that TAM has good predicting power in explaining continuance behavior of using E-portfolio system. It is consistent with most of the finding in the research in the IT and IS fields [42,58,33,44,47,48,50,51,57]. In addition, this study also verify whether TAM would be affected by gender, grade level, or willingness to share. This study result indicated that gender, grade level, and willingness to share have all passed the invariance tests and which is similar to previous research ([24,29,32,61]), but different from [25,44].The contribution of this study is to provide a verification process for model invariance testing. Through this process, it can be clarified that the relationships among variables would not be influenced by demographic variables in user behavior of E-portfolio system. Therefore, TAM could be applied in many different scenarios. The original scale for this study was a confirmatory model that included four latent factors. However, the original model had weak construct validity, necessitating modification. Following modification, the number of questions was reduced from 18 to 15. The corrected model had strong goodness-of-fit. The establishment of the base model was completed following confirmatory factor analysis, construct validity, and cross-validation testing. This study used the base model as an unconstrained model, after which an invariance analysis was performed for gender, grade level, and willingness to share.Among the six groups of invariance hypotheses, this study observed that the measurement models for the variable responses were equivalent regarding gender, grade level, and willingness to share. The results indicated that the same model could achieve a strong goodness-of-fit across various genders, grade levels, and levels of willingness to share. In addition, for the factor loading and structural weights, the factor loading invariance indicated that the relationships between the observed variables and latent variables enjoyed cross-group invariance. The structural path invariance indicated that PU, PEOU, and ATT had the same degrees of influence on continuance intention across various groups. That is, TAM had the same degree of validity across different groups.The invariance in the factor variance and covariance elucidated the relationships among the four TAM factors for various groups. To test for factor variance and covariance invariance, the variances and covariance of each of the four factors in TAM model were constrained to be equal. If the factor variances are invariance, this result means a homogeneity of latent variables may exist in the groups. On the other hand, if the factor covariances are invariance, it means that the same correlations between factors may exist in the groups. Variance congruence indicated that the groups were consistent in their ATTs regarding the four TAM variables. Invariance in the covariance indicated that the interrelations among PU, PEOU, ATT, and CI were consistent across groups.Finally, the three groups did not pass the stringent tests of structural residuals and measurement residuals, but did pass the practical testing standards. By performing a series of invariance analyses, this study produced results that demonstrated that a comparison of groups based on gender, grade level, and willingness to share can reveal whether the groupings can pass invariance testing for the factor loading and covariance of the latent variables. The stability of the relationships among the TAM variables, including PU, PEOU, ATT, and continued usage behavior, was not influenced by gender, age, and willingness to share. Test participants across the different groups did not differ regarding the measured questions, either conceptually or psychometrically. These results verify the appropriateness of applying TAM to E-portfolio information platforms and indicate that test participants do not need to be separated based gender, grade level, and willingness to share.Despite the careful study design, this research has certain limitations that may offer the possibilities for future research directions. First, this study used a single survey to collect the measures that may have the potentiality of common method bias (CMB). Although we adopted the Harman one-factor examination in the measurement model setting and the result confirmed that CMB is unlikely in the analyzed data, the CMB issue may still exist. We need more detailed evidence to evaluate the existence of CMB. Secondly, given the theoretical focus of this study on TAM, this study did not consider other constructs. Future researchers should try to ameliorate the theoretical imperfection of TAM by integrating other relevant variables for conducting further empirical examinations. Lastly, we conducted this study as the cross-sectional design. An individual's intention to use E-portfolio system may be deemed as the improving process, so longitudinal studies may be needed in this research area.