@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards the integration of reputation management in OpenID

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Definition of a reputation management solution integrated as part of the OpenID protocolKnow reliability before transferring users private informationEnhancing the users' experience when using OpenIDTests performed to validate the feasibility of the framework

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Single Sign-On,Reputation,OpenID,User-centric,Identity management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
OpenID is an open standard providing a decentralized authentication mechanism to end users. It is based on a unique URL (Uniform Resource Locator) or XRI (Extensible Resource Identifier) as identifier of the user. This fact of using a single identifier confers this approach an interesting added-value when users want to get access to different services in the Internet, since users do not need to create a new account on every website they are visiting. However, OpenID providers are normally used as a point to store certain personal attributes of the end users too, which might be of interest for any service provider willing to make profit from collecting that personal information. The definition of a reputation management solution integrated as part of the OpenID protocol can help users to determine whether a given service provider is more or less reliable before interacting with it and transferring their private information. This paper is providing the definition of a reputation framework that can be applied to the OpenID SSO (Single Sign-On) standard solution. It also defines how the protocol itself can be enhanced so OpenID providers can collect (and provide) recommendations from (to) users regarding different service providers and thus enhancing the users' experience when using OpenID. Besides the definition, a set of tests has been performed validating the feasibility of the framework.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Providing effective authentication solutions is a key part to successfully deploy any service provider nowadays. That implies, as a minimum, to identify individuals in such providers and to control the access to the different resources and services being provided by them.Even if these authentication approaches can be based on well-known technologies such as login/password, smart cards, digital certificates or biometric information, among others, it is usually the case that different service providers belonging to different companies or organizations are managing their own identifiers and mechanisms to authenticate their users [1–4]. This is leading to users creating new accounts on almost every website where they are required to do so and, in certain cases, even avoiding websites where they have to create yet another identifier (e.g., username and password) [5].OpenID [6,7] is an open technology standard that provides a solution to this problem. As such, it is defined as a mechanism allowing the use of a single account to sign in to different service providers. In this proposal, the user only has to enable her current existing account for OpenID access and then provide any OpenID-enabled service her unique OpenID identifier. With this identifier the service provider redirects the user to the OpenID provider where she can be authenticated and then get access (after successful authentication) to the service.The wide use of this approach as well as the information that certain service providers are requesting from the users are making OpenID providers the right place to store certain private attributes of the end user. Those attributes are also needed when taking certain decisions in the service provider so the access can be provided (or denied) to particular resources. Such access may depend on the role of the user, the domain where she is coming from, her age, etc.However, as this private information is directly exchanged between the OpenID provider and the service provider via a set of OpenID extensions and the user is not having direct control on this exchange under certain circumstances, there is a clear need to extend the OpenID standard to provide a tighter control over such exchange.Several approaches can be considered here, for instance deploying solutions based on pre-established agreements to regulate how the information is released [8], deploying white/black lists [9], or allowing the users to manually manage attribute release policies [10] to decide which entities have access to their attributes. However, due to the dynamic and decentralized nature of OpenID, trust and reputation management becomes a promising option [11,12]. It can provide end users with certain key information before starting an OpenID authentication process (and attribute release) with an unknown service. Users can then decide whether they are willing to exchange this personal information with that service or not, based on the interactions that other users had in the past, i.e., based on the reputation that this service provider is having among different users.This paper provides a detailed definition of a reputation framework designed to be integrated with OpenID. Moreover, it is describing how the OpenID protocol can be enhanced so the OpenID provider can collect recommendations from different users on a given service provider based on their interactions with it, although they belong to other OpenID providers. Our work also describes how these recommendations can be aggregated appropriately and provided to the user before she starts interacting with a service.This paper is a revised and extended version of a previous publication [13]. The paper at hand includes the description of several reputation computation engines, showing different ways of aggregating recommendations from different sources. In addition, we have defined a simulation environment in order to validate the feasibility of the framework. Not only the behavior of the framework, but also the advantages and disadvantages of different reputation computation engines, are analyzed and explained how they fit to different system conditions.The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the main references and related works. Section 3 provides a common nomenclature as well as the description of the particular problem being addressed as part of this research work. Then, in Section 4 we describe both the functional and non-functional requirements for developing a reputation framework, while in Section 5 the OpenID protocol enhancement needed to deal with this reputation framework is presented. Section 6 shows the reputation framework itself, which has been designed for enhancing the users' experience using the OpenID technology. Later, Section 7 explains different ways to aggregate the collected recommendations to compute the reputation value, while Section 8 presents the experiments conducted to validate the feasibility of the proposed framework. Finally, in Section 9 the main conclusions and lines of future work are identified.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the current Internet there are many service providers, most of them are being aimed to provide appropriate services while some others are not so well intended. In this context, it is interesting for any end user to have mechanisms to determine how trustworthy a particular service provider is, so she can decide if she wants to interact with it or not. It is particularly interesting if this service is requesting some of her personal information (email address, bank account, age, etc.) before granting access to any of the resources the service provider has.This is a problem that should be addressed before starting the interaction with the system, i.e., before sending the end user attributes to the service provider. To this end, IdM solutions need to be adapted and enhanced with particular mechanisms enabling the provisioning of certain meta-information to the user on the particular service provider being accessed.One of the SSO-enabled IdM solutions most widely developed nowadays is OpenID. A lot of service providers and certain key IdM providers are including this standard solution as part of the authentication and basic access control services provided to their end users. However, OpenID in its current definition can be used by a malicious service provider to gain access to the private attributes of users and make profit with them.To provide end users with valuable behavioral information on the different service providers, this paper is defining a reputation framework and how it can be applied to an extended version of the OpenID protocol. In this way, this paper is describing a solution helping to mitigate this problem. It is based on the idea that users can provide a recommendation level on a particular service and it is later being aggregated by the OpenID provider and provided to any other potential user that might be interested to interact with the same service provider in the future. With this help, authors are provided with a mechanism aimed to increase their level of satisfaction with the OpenID system.Performed experiments show that the reputation values are not determined by the honesty of the relying party. Furthermore, although the reputation values could be conditioned by the number of malicious users and OpenID providers, they can be avoided by certain reputation computation engines. We have analyzed different reputation computation engines, so the different pros and cons can be determined.As for future work, since there is not a perfect reputation computation engine, that is, suitable for each conditions, we are developing a mechanism to perform a dynamic and automatic selection of the most convenient reputation computation engine at each moment based on the current system conditions and the specified performance measurements. Finally, such mechanism will comprise a smooth transition between computation engines.