@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An investigation on Ribbon interface design guidelines for people with less computer literacy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ribbon interface usability is evaluated on amateur users by pre-test and post-test.Guidelines for optimizing Ribbon interface are presented.Decreasing the number of core tabs and arranging tools based on usage are essential.A common place for running different commands can decrease software complexity.Put a simultaneous help in application button is the best method for guiding users.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ribbon interface,Amateur and novice users,Software usability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the recent years, there is an intense competition between software development companies to design better interfaces. In this marketing rat race, Ribbon interface came to make software user interface easier. After the introduction of Ribbon by Microsoft, it was widely used by various software development companies. Ribbon is a replacement for menus and toolbars and it tends to organize tools in tabs based on their similarities. Although Ribbon interface has many advantages, previous researches have shown that there are serious usability issues that hinder usage of Ribbon interfaces for users with less computer literacy. In order to solve Ribbon interfaces usability issues, this study tried to introduce Ribbon interface design guidelines by focusing on the issues related to users with less computer literacy. In this study two separate sets of moderated (in-person) usability testing were used. The first set evaluated the usability issues of an experimental Ribbon interface software in terms of both visual and cognitive issues. The second set was used to evaluate the Ribbon interface prototype that was designed based on the discovered usability issues in the first usability test. In order to ensure the validity of the data, the researchers tried to triangulate the data collection process by collecting data from different sources, namely, quantitative measurement of participants' performance, direct observation, and interview. Based on the comparison of the usability tests results which points out the factors that have led to participants' performance improvement in the prototype version, a number of guidelines are extracted for Ribbon interfaces. These guidelines are applicable to Microsoft Office, Microsoft SharePoint and most of the software that can be developed with Ribbon interface. Putting these guidelines into action, self-learning would be promoted and learning issues of users with less computer literacy would be decreased.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Software development companies need to release a new version of their products periodically to ensure their survivability. However, whether there are any significant differences between the features of the newer version in comparison with the previous version. It can be said that in many software the most significant differences are in the interface rather than in features and user interface has an important role in software marketability. One of the best examples that could illustrate the influence of user interface on the product marketability is reflected on Microsoft (MS) Windows and Microsoft Office. Smith [1], compared Microsoft Office 2010 with its prior version and found no significant difference in their abilities and tools. In addition, Grabham's [2] study on Windows 7 with Windows 8 showed the same results. It can be said that designing user interface is one of the most important aspects in software marketability.Introduction of Ribbon by Microsoft in Office 2007 caused a significant change in user interface design. After the introduction of Ribbon, soon it became widely used by other software development companies such as Autodesk and Teach Smith. Ribbon interface is a replacement for menus and toolbars. In this kind of interface, tools are organized in tabs based on their similarities and only one menu, namely Application button, exists to present functions such as “New”, “Open”, “Save”, “Print” and “Options” [3]. MS Office and MS SharePoint are two widely used examples of Ribbon interface software. Fig. 1shows elements of Ribbon interface.Using Ribbon in software user interface has many advantages such as making the software interface organized by categorizing commands and tools in fixed-width tabs that just occupy a narrow strip of software working area. Another advantage is that it can shrink similar tools automatically based on the screen size. Furthermore, Ribbon interface shows minimum number of tabs at any given time since it has three different types of tab. These three types of tabs are a) core tabs that are always displayed, b) contextual tabs, which are displayed only when a particular object is selected and c) modal tabs that are displayed with a particular temporary mode [3]. Despite all the benefits of Ribbon, there are still research issues pertaining to the usage of Ribbons. Issues such as the existence of too many core tabs in every view [4] and organization of tools in the tabs that are not based on a specific structure [5]. These issues can cause difficulties for users with less computer literacy. These users are people in different ages who do not have computer background information.Since the new version of many useful software such as MS Office and AutoCAD is developed with the use of Ribbon interface, the researchers decided to conduct this study with the purpose of introducing user interface design guidelines for Ribbon interfaces. This will increase software usability and users learning ability by focusing on the issues related to users with less computer literacy in different ages.In Microsoft Developer Network [3] some guidelines are presented to increase usability of Ribbon interfaces. These guidelines cover topics such as: a) kinds of software that can be developed with the use of Ribbon interface b) the correct way of grouping the commands and tools in tabs, c) categorizing commands in application button and d) naming tabs and commands. Although developers use these guidelines in Ribbon interface design, there are still usability issues with Ribbon interface that current guidelines cannot solve. According to Keizer [6] after the release of Office 2010, enterprise IT professionals still think the Ribbon interface is confusing and in contrast with Microsoft's claim about solving its training issues, it still has usability issues. Wildam [5], as a software developer, believes that organization of tools in software tabs with Ribbon interface is not based on a specific rule. Kyd [4] found that since there are many tabs in every software and users have to learn all of them; they will never truly know the Ribbon structure and the place of tools. In line with Kyd, Tabrizi [7] mentioned that learning Ribbon interface seemed to be difficult for new users and also professional ones, since they had to memorize the hierarchy of tab names, group names and the commands. Furthermore, shrinking of Ribbon based on screen size and hiding some tools can make users confused.According to the mentioned researches, Ribbon interface structure needs fundamental changes to become usable for all users especially users with less computer literacy. The changes that decrease numbers of tabs and arrange tools in tabs in a more logical way.Users with less computer literacy are large group of users who do not have any computer background information and working experience with computer or other digital devices. This lack of computer background information can occur because of users' age, their life style or their mental and physical disorders. This kind of users cannot use computer easily and some of them get disappointed to use computer in their daily life. Therefore, finding their needs and designing software based on their background knowledge and preferences can help them overcome their lack of computer knowledge and use computer normally. According to Madiah and Hisham [8] to ensure that software can be used easily, it is important to know the user's preferences for user interface design. In the field of user interface design for users with less computer literacy many researches were done especially on elders and children. Reviewing these researches can help in discovering techniques that can be used in Ribbon interface design.Elder people cannot adapt themselves to every user interface design since they do not have any computer background from their childhood and young era, therefore, we should not expect them to learn software like young people with computer background [9,10]. Furthermore, in elder ages some human abilities decrease such as “Cognition (Attention, Memory), Motivation (Attitudes, Beliefs, Fears, Anxiety), Physical (Movement, Balance, Locomotion, Joints), and Perception (Vision and Audition)” [11,12]. These problems can hinder elder from learning and using the new technologies. According to Holzinger et al. [13] and Mukasa et al. [14] perfect software will not be accepted by elderly if it does not adapt to their abilities and needs. Ziefle and Bay [15] showed that elderly performance can be the same as younger users when using applications with low complexity. Furthermore, Demiris et al. (2004) mentioned that there is no evidence that elder people resist new technologies and do not like to use them. An appropriate software interface can encourage them to take advantage of computers more (cited in Goodman and Lundell [16]).In order to help elder people overcome their problems and use computer software easily, many guidelines are proposed for interface designers. Holzinger et al. [10], Holzinger et al. [17], Holzinger et al. [13], Melenhorst et al. [18], Hsu [19] and Mynatt et al. [20] suggested that finding elders' mental model and designing interface based on their requirements, preferences and thought can increase software acceptance, usability and decrease frustration. For designing based on elders' mental model, designers should put focus on users' communication methods, symbology and physical aspects of design such as size, manipulability, simplicity and clarity (Holzinger1 et al. [10]). Based on Holzinger et al. [11] to overcome elders' cognitive and memorization problems reducing the number of distracting components and consistency between interface elements is required. Consistency is defined as avoiding to use different words, situations and actions (Sambasivan and Jackson [21]). Furthermore, Holzinger et al. [11] suggested that using easy layout and large elements can help elders overcome the physical problems and use the software easily.According to Dickinson et al. [22] software can offer many benefits to the elderly people, however, it is impossible without an easy interface. He suggested that for increasing the tendency of elder users to use computers, our interfaces should have characteristics such as “simplified interface, reduced clutter on the screen, reduction of terminology, clear and simple navigation paths, and a particular type of help”. Sayago and Blat [23] approved Dickinson et al. [22] by suggesting designing techniques such as easy layout, using large font, proper icons and descriptive texts. Schröder and Ziefle [24] mentioned that using proper icons in interface can solve age-related issues for elderly. Icons should be designed based on familiar context and should be visually simple to be easily understood by both younger and older users. Based on Wirtz et al. [12] elder users need more descriptive texts to identify software components and correct mistakes. Furthermore, we should avoid using computer terminology, however, if terminology is needed to be used, the terms should be explained [10]. Stickel et al. [25] indicated that the degree of software esthetic has direct influence on software usability and user satisfaction. Software esthetic can be increased by decreasing visual complexity which is defined as the amount of elements and the diversity of these elements.Children, like adults, have tendency to use computer to perform their works [26]. However, an appropriate user interface design is needed to satisfy computer needs of children. Since children's cognition, attention and reasoning capabilities are limited to understand the complex concepts and logical thinking abilities are not fully developed; therefore, we should not design complex user interfaces for them [26]. According to Khanum and Trivedi [27] testing usability of applications which are developed for children is more challenging than the other applications. Since in usability test for children, it is important to consider their psychological and behavioral aspects, therefore, selected usability evaluation method should let the children to express emotion, thoughts, and opinions during usability test. It can be concluded that involving children in interface design including analysis, design and evaluation phases can increase software usability significantly [27,28,29,30].There are many techniques in order to design usable interface for children. Grammenos et al. [31] conducted a research on designing user interface for children. The study approved the following claims by previous researchers: It is necessary to a) use highly visual menus and icons for children to understand the software since young children cannot read (Wilson, 1988 cited in Grammenos et al. [31]), b) “create an open learning system which can be adapted to children preferences and cultural background” (Jonassen et al., 1993 cited in Grammenos et al. [31]), c) create interactive user interface by using animation, sound and message boxes (Norman 1988; Cooper, 1995 cited in Grammenos et al. [31]), d) create an environment which has many guidelines and can control their input to prevent errors and e) design software in a way that it does not need combination keys of mouse and keyboard. Wook and Salim [32], Wook et al. [33] and Wook and Salim [34] indicated that interface layout and terminologies should adapt to children abilities, otherwise they will get confused to work with software. Furthermore, designing easy interface and using elements such as avatar and 3D objects are practical solutions to increase children learnability [35]. Nielsen [36] indicates that children a) like animation and sound, b) prefer to see texts with 14 point font size, c) do not like to read text, and d) like to try many options. In line with Nielsen, Nam [37] gave some suggestions for designing user interface for children. He puts emphasis on a) reducing the amount of text, replacing it with a simple picture, icon or voice, b) reducing the number of components, and c) putting some brief tutorial for each tool.Reviewing the literature showed that to design interface for user with less computer literacy, it is important to consider their background knowledge, preferences and limitation including mental and physical. In order to help this kind of users to overcome their limitation and use computer normally, there are six major design techniques that user interface designers should take into account: a) reduce software complexity by reducing the number of features available at any given time, b) design an easy layout such that it does not need investigation for finding tools, c) avoid using computer terms and using names that are familiar to all of users, d) use enough descriptive texts to inform users about software features especially for elderly users, e) use appropriate graphical objects such as avatar or icons for increasing software attraction especially for children, and f) use large components, icons and fonts. Based on the literature, since the mentioned techniques can solve the software usability issues for users with less computer literacy, considering them in Ribbon interface design may enable us to increase the usability of these kinds of software for this group of users. Furthermore, the literature showed that by involving users in interface design process including analysis, design and evaluation phases, we can adapt Ribbon interfaces to users' abilities and increase usability significantly.In this study two separate sets of moderated (in-person) usability testing were used. Moderate usability testing methods are the methods that are performed face to face [38]. The first set evaluated the usability issues of experimental Ribbon interface software in terms of both visual and cognitive issues. The second set was used to evaluate the proposed Ribbon interface that was designed based on the discovered usability issues in the first usability test. In order to ensure the validity of the data, the researchers tried to triangulate the data collection process by collecting data from different sources, namely, quantitative measurement of participants' performance, direct observation, and interview.In the start of the first usability test, MS Outlook 2010 was selected as experimental software for data collection and seven tasks were assigned to ten participants. The purpose of the tasks was to recognize MS Outlook usability issues. The performance of each participant in performing the tasks was measured and written in separate forms. Furthermore, in order to collect participants' problems and design suggestions, direct observation and Interview were utilized. Based on the participants' major problems with the original interface and their suggestions, a proposed user interface was designed for MS Outlook as a prototype. The second usability test which was similar to the first usability test was performed to validate the prototype and measure participants' improvement. Based on the design solutions which could improve participants' performance, the design guidelines for Ribbon interfaces were extracted. Fig. 2shows the methodology of conducting this study.The methodology of the study tried to cover the concepts mentioned in ISO 9241-11 (1998) [39]. According to ISO 9241-11 (1998) usability is “the extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with ‘effectiveness’, ‘efficiency’ and ‘satisfaction’ in a specified context of use”. In the present study, “interface effectiveness” is measured by the percentage of participants who could complete each task, “interface efficiency” is measured by time duration and number of steps for each task, and the interview part measures the participants' satisfaction from the interface.This usability test contains five steps that are described below.The researchers intended to select software which participants can understand its usage, to understand the meaning of the tasks that will be assigned to them. Among the Ribbon interface software that were developed by Microsoft, working with MS Outlook, MS Word and MS PowerPoint does not need to know any scientific concept. For example in order to work with MS Excel, users should know concept of spreadsheet and should be familiar with calculation formulas. Therefore, MS Outlook 2010 was selected as experimental software, since every computer user is familiar with email concept and MS Outlook covers most of MS Word and MS PowerPoint features in “new email”.The participants of the study were ten students with less computer literacy, who were chosen from among 50 students of MAX English Institute in Kuala Lumpur with the use of a validated computer skill placement test adopted from Singh and Dyer [40]. The selected participants had the same characteristics such as: a) they did not have a good computer background knowledge, b) they do not work with computer a lot, c) they are not familiar with any professional software or programming languages, d) they are not good with MS Office and e) it is the first time that they see MS Outlook. Participants' ages can be seen in Table 1.Although according to Nielsen [41], Sauro [42] and Richards [43] carrying out a usability test is reliable with only five participants, the researchers decided to select twice the number to increase the reliability and validity of the study.Since the researchers wanted to measure how easy MS Outlook interface is for the participants to find and remember tools just by knowing the structure, they took part in an MS Outlook introductory class which took 45min. This class was held, because the participants did not have any experience with MS Outlook. Therefore, they could not have fulfilled any of the tasks unless they were taught the structure. In the class, it was tried to give the participants an overview of MS Outlook Ribbon and Application Menu structure.In order to evaluate MS Outlook interface effectiveness and efficiency, seven tasks were assigned to participants. The tasks are chosen in a way that can make participants work with different parts of MS Outlook completely. These tasks are: a) create a new email and print it (the ability of using File Menu), b) create a new email, draw a table in its content (the ability of remembering the place of tools in the tabs, beginner), c) create a new meeting, add a column chart into its content and add value label to its columns (the ability of remembering the place of tools in the tabs, advanced), d) create a new task and set a follow up for it (the ability of recognizing commands), e) create a new folder in MS Outlook and set a rule for emails with a specific characteristic to move to this folder automatically (the ability of recognizing sequence of commands in different tabs), f) create a new signature for using it frequently (the ability of using “MS Outlook Option”) and g) use MS Outlook “Help” to convert your email text to a table (the ability of adapting help to tools).In the process of data collection, for each participant, an evaluation form containing three parts was filled by the researchers. The first part was filled by quantitative data about tasks fulfillment, duration and number of clicks. The second part was filled based on researchers' direct observation about participant problems with the Ribbon structure. The third part had three questions that were asked from the participants as an interview. The first and second interview questions were about participants' main problems with the current interface and their suggestions for designing a new interface. The third question asked them if they can learn MS Outlook completely with just learning the structure.In the second section of the study an interface prototype was designed for MS Outlook and the second usability test similar to the first usability test was conducted to evaluate the prototype.According to the participants' major learning problems and their design suggestions that were collected from observations and, interviews, a proposed user interface prototype was designed for MS Outlook. Since the researchers wanted to create a dynamic prototype, IndigoRose AutoPlay Media Studio 8 was used. In the first step of the design, researchers created a list of all MS Outlook tools and commands. In the second step commands that belong on core tabs, contextual tabs and Modal tabs were listed. In the third step, the new tabs were created and were named. Finally, researchers organized the related tools and commands in groups and named them. Furthermore, in the design process, researchers considered general user interface design principles and Microsoft Ribbon interface design guidelines.Since the researchers wanted to compare the improvement of the participants, the same participants as the first usability test were used. In order to get reliable results from the participants' time interval between two sets of usability test was more than 2months. This was to minimize what participants remember from class which was held before the first usability test. Furthermore, the proposed interface structure was completely different from the MS Outlook original interface. Therefore, even if participants could remember the place of tools from the first usability test, they could not use that information in the proposed version.After designing the proposed interface prototype, the proposed structure of MS Outlook was taught to the participants. Class duration was about 15min and the only concepts that were taught to the participants were the proposed structure of Ribbon and Application Menu.In order to evaluate MS Outlook proposed interface effectiveness and efficiency, seven tasks similar to the tasks in the first usability test were assigned to the participants.Similar to participants' evaluation in the first usability test, an evaluation form containing three parts was filled by the researchers. The first part was filled by quantitative data about participants' performance in performing the tasks. The results of this measurement were used to evaluate the improvement of the participants in comparison with the MS Outlook original version. The second part was filled based on the researchers' direct observation about participants' problems with the proposed Ribbon structure. The third part had five questions that were asked from the participants as an interview. The first three questions were similar to the interview questions of the first usability test and, fourth and fifth questions evaluated participants' preferences in using proposed interface instead of the original version.The results of MS Outlook original interface evaluation form and MS Outlook proposed interface evaluation form were compared to measure the improvement of the participants. Ribbon interface design guidelines were extracted, based on the factors which increased participants' learnability and satisfaction in the proposed interface in comparison with the original version. These factors were the results of researchers' observations during participants performing the tasks and interviewing with them.As explained in the process of data collection, data was collected by quantitative measurement of performing tasks and qualitative approaches, namely, direct observation and interview with participants.The results of quantitative measurement of participants' tasks performance are presented in the following tables. Table 2shows percentage of participants who could complete each task, Table 3shows the average number of steps taken for each task and the average time duration spent on each task is presented in Table 4. The results for each participant are presented in Appendix A.Here you can see a brief analysis of participants' behavior during performing each task.Task 1Finding File Menu and print item was easy for most of participants. The different colors of File Menu from the tabs helped participants to find it easily.Creating new Email was easy for most of the participants, since new email button was the first button in the first tab of MS Outlook. However, in order to draw a table they searched all the tabs and it took time for them.Finding “New Meeting” was not as easy as “New Email” for the participants, since it was under “New Item” combo-box. In drawing a chart, four of the participants could find Chart tool since they happened to see it in “Insert” tab during performing task one. However, three of the participants searched all the tabs to find the Chart tool and most of them could not work with chart contextual tabs and add label to chart.Finding “New Task”, was not as difficult as “New Meeting”, since some of the participants saw that in task two. Furthermore, in order to set follow up for the new task all of them could perform it, since it was in the first tab of New Task.Performing this task was difficult for all of the participants. They could not guess which tabs are related to this task. Although some of them could perform a part of the task (creating a new folder), none of them could completely perform the task.Although researchers taught the place of Options and its structure to participants, none of them could complete the task. Some of them found the Option and Signature item, but they could not create a new signature.All the participants could run “Help” but some of them could not find the correct result. Furthermore, for those who could find the correct result, it was difficult to read the text and simultaneously perform the task. Consequently, just 30% of the participants could completely perform the task.Based on the direct observation and interview with participants, researchers concluded that the most significant problems participants face in performing the tasks are as the following:•They could not keep in mind the place of tools in the tabs and they were forced to read tools names from begging to the end of each tab.Participants were not satisfied with MS Outlook “Help” system. The difficulties that they had fall into three major issues. The first problem was that they did not know which word or sentence they should search for. Secondly, some of the participants could not find the correct result from among the list of results. The third problem was, some of them could not adapt “Help” text to practical work. The name of some tabs and tools were not clear for them. For example the tabs such as Insert, format text and tools such as Smart Art and Hyperlink.They said, MS Outlook working area is very crowded and confuses them when they want to find a specific tool. The part that they had the most problems was Outlook home screen. Furthermore, number of tabs, especially after adding an object, made them confused and they could not edit the object.They could not determine that they have to select the text to activate some tools. For example some of them found the place of “convert to table” but they could not activate it.They did not pay attention to tools tooltips and just tried to work with the tools by trial and error (especially younger participants).Based on the interviews there are some similar suggestions from the participants of the study which they believed can solve their learning issues with the current interface. These suggestions are:•Improving MS Outlook appearance and icons.Removing useless tools and unnecessary tabs and showing only the useful tabs at a given time.A better arrangement and naming of tools in tabs.Devising a visual step-by-step instruction while users are working with each tool.In order to answer the last question of the interview about participants ability to learn MS Outlook with the mere knowledge of its structure, except one of the participants (age=33, female), the rest believed that they cannot work with MS Outlook completely just with a short class or learning the structure.According to the mentioned participants' problems and design suggestions collected from observations and interviews, a proposed user interface prototype was designed for MS Outlook. The changes that are made on MS Outlook original interface can be categorized in two main groups.1.The changes that are made on File Menu.The changes that are made on Ribbon.In the original File Menu, just a few commands such as Open, Print, Help and Option existed. Researchers used File Menu in a more efficient way with using it as a master menu which includes main MS Outlook commands and tools. The name of the File Menu was changed to the Menu and tools were categorized in it with a specific categorization. Two different Menus were designed, the first one (Home Menu) was used to handle main MS Outlook features such as creating and viewing emails, meetings, contacts, tasks and the second one (New Email Menu) was used to handle the tools of new email such as chart, signature, attachment, table, etc. This proposed Menu structure has five advantages:1.Controlling the number of tabs shown at the same time: As mentioned in the observation results, number of tabs confused participants in finding tools. Therefore, in the new Menu, all the tools that could be used for creating new tasks or objects, such as new email and graphical objects, are removed from the tabs and are put into the Menu. These changes have two benefits:a.The tools of certain tabs, such as “Insert” are moved into the Menu, so some tabs are removed and they decreased in number.The only thing that has remained in the tabs is editing commands. Therefore, the Menu plays the role of a controller and by clicking on each tool in the Menu only the related contextual tabs are shown. It can be said that core tabs are replaced with contextual tabs.Simultaneous help to facilitate learning process: In order to solve the participants' problems with the classic Help system, a new help system was created. In Menu, commands and tools have a descriptive text and a step-by-step visual instruction with an easy English text. Therefore, users will no more click on an incorrect tool or command and they will not get confused about how to work with tools. Furthermore, users do not need to search the content of “Help” for getting instruction.Using avatars and more meaningful icons: In order to increase participants' attention, especially children, to the main features of the MS Outlook, researchers replaced classic icons with descriptive icons and used avatars to present MS Outlook main features.Dynamic message boxes: Since the participants could not understand the way of activating the tools that are deactivated, in the proposed Menu there is no deactivated tools or commands. When a user needs to use a tool that just works with selected text, a message box appears and asks the user if he/she had selected the text. After the user clicks on NO the message box takes him/her to the email content and after selecting text it automatically takes user back to the Menu.Replaces tools and commands names with descriptive sentences: Since the participants could not understand the function of some tools from their names, researchers replaced tools names with the description of their functions. Furthermore, they added subtitles that describe tools function in detail.Categorizations of tools: The categorizations of tools and commands in the Menus are based on their similarities and their usage. For example all the Email commands are placed in the “Emails” category or all the graphical tools are placed in the “Insert graphical objects” category. It can be said that each category in the Menu plays the role of a group in the classic Ribbon structure but with a better organization of tools and commands. Fig. 3shows the proposed “Home Menu” structure and Fig. 4shows the proposed “New Email Menu” structure.In order to facilitate working with Ribbon structure five changes were made as the following:1.Decreasing the number of tabs that are shown to users at any given time: The number of tabs shown at the same time is decreased for preventing participants from getting confused and for increasing their speed in finding tools. In the proposed prototype, the number of core and contextual tabs shown at the same time is between one and five but in the original version, it is between five and ten tabs. As explained before, all the tools for creating new tasks or objects put into the Menu. Therefore, the number of commands in the tabs was decreased and researchers could combine the tabs. For example, the tools of Insert tab were moved into the Menu and the rest of tools are combined with the Text tab. Another example is the tools of viewing emails. As it can be seen in Fig. 5, the related tools that were distributed in four tabs are combined into two tabs with a new arrangement and the rest are put into the Menu.Better naming for tabs and tools: One of the major problems of the participants was their lack of computer background which led to the fact that they were not familiar with some computer terms and they could not recognize the name of tabs and they searched in an incorrect tab for a specific tool. Therefore, researchers replaced the name of some tabs and tools, which seemed unfamiliar to participants with familiar names and put label for all the tabs' commands even famous ones. As it can be seen in Fig. 6the name of some commands changed and all of them have labels.Changing tools arrangement in tabs: Another major participants' problem was that they were forced to read all the tools names from beginning to the end of tabs. This problem was solved by arranging tools in the tabs from more useful to less useful. It means that the tools that user would need more frequently are put in the left side and the tools that user will need less often are put in the right side of the tab. For example as it can be seen in Fig. 7when a user inserts a picture, the first thing is adjusting size, therefore, in format picture tab the tools related to picture size are put at the begging of left side of the tab.New grouping of tools: In order to help the participants find tools and commands easily, grouping of most of the tools and commands in tabs was changed and new groups were created. One of the examples of new grouping is on the first tab of the new email. In this tab the tools related to changing text color was distributed in Basic Text and Clipboard groups. A new group with the name of “Text Coloring” was created and these tools are moved in this group. Fig. 8shows the comparison between the original and the proposed grouping.Changing the place of tools of different tabs with each other: One of the difficulties that participants faced was that they could not recognize the correct place of tools in tabs and they searched for a specific tool in an incorrect tab. This problem was solved by moving tools between tabs based on their relation. For example for drawing a table two tabs were engaged, the first one (Layout) handles the structure and text of the table and the second tab (Design) handles the appearance of the table. Researchers created two new tabs with the names of “Structure” and “Table Text”. As it is shown in Fig. 9all the tools that are related to layout and appearance of the table are arranged in Structure tab and the tools that are related to table text are arranged in Table Text tab.Similar to the participants' evaluation in the first usability test, an evaluation form was filled by the researchers.The results of quantitative measurement of performing tasks are presented in the following tables. Table 5shows percentage of participants who could complete each task in MS Outlook proposed version, Table 6shows average number of steps for each task and Table 7shows the average time duration for each task.Participants' performance in fulfilling the tasks improved significantly. It can be said since the methodology of performing all the tasks was the same, the only reason that participants could not perform some of the tasks was their inability to understand the Menu Help.Based on the researchers' direct observation and interviews most of participants did not have any serious problem with the proposed interface. However, a few number of them had problems in the following items:•They thought “Help” text is so much and some of them could not understand the meaning of Help text.They had problem in finding tools in crowded tabs.Based on the participants' interviews their suggestions are as the following:•Add more detail to the “Help” text.Put a search-box in the Menu which is able to find the tools by typing the name of the tools.Replace the “Help” text with an animated instruction.In order to answer the question about the participants who feel that the process of performing tasks is easier than the original version, 90% of participants gave a positive answer and the same percentage of them said that they prefer to use the proposed interface instead of the original version. Furthermore, in order to answer the last question about working with MS Outlook just by knowing the structure, 60% of the participants, thought that it could work with the proposed interface just by knowing the structure without the need to participate in any training class.The following figures show participants' improvement in task completion, duration and number of step they took in the proposed interface in comparison with the original version. As it can be seen from Fig. 10, in the original version participants could not fulfill the tasks whose tools and commands were not in the first tabs or they needed to work with contextual tabs. However, in the proposed version most of participants could successfully complete difficult tasks. As it can be seen, all of them could perform tasks 1, 2, 4 and 6. In addition, 80% of them could perform task 3 and 70% of them could perform tasks 5 and 7.As it can be seen in Fig. 11, the time duration of performing all the tasks in the proposed version decreased significantly. It can be said that the time duration of performing tasks in the proposed interface is half the original interface.As it can be seen in Fig. 12, the number of steps of performing all the tasks in the proposed version decreased. They did not decrease significantly but it shows that the proposed interface is optimized. We can say that the proposed interface is an optimized interface since, it enabled participants to fulfill the tasks that they could perform in the original version without increasing number of steps.These statistics showed that suggested user interface improved self-learning and helped participants in different areas:1.Enabled participants to do the tasks that they could not do in the original version.Increased the speed of participants in completing the given tasks.Decreased the number of steps that participants went through for performing their tasks.Observation and interview results showed that the problems that participants faced in the original interface were solved with the following solutions:1.Misunderstanding the usage of tools' and tabs was solved by:1.1.Changing difficult names of tools and tabs with easy names.Labeling all the tools and commands.Putting descriptive icons and avatars for introducing tools in the Menu.Confusion for finding the tools and losing in the software was reduced by:2.1.Controlling the number of tabs that are shown at the same time by the Menu.Arranging tools in the tabs according to their usage, from less useful to useful.Creating the same method for working with different commands with the use of Menu.Problem with using Outlook “Help” and forgetting the usage of tools was solved by simultaneous instruction in the Menu.Problem with tools and commands that are activated only when a block of text is selected was solved by dynamic message boxes.Based on the above-mentioned solutions that improved participants' performance, seven Ribbon interface design guidelines were extracted for users with less computer literacy. These guidelines are as the following:(1)Decrease the number of core tabs that are shown to users at one view to maximum three tabs:In order to achieve this purpose, designers should put the main tools of the software in a menu and just use tabs for putting editing tools related to the main tools. It means use contextual tabs instead of core tabs.(2)Arrange tools in tabs according to their sequence of usage:Put and categorize tools in tabs based on their priority and the steps that users normally take for using the tools. It means the tools which are frequently needed and those which are especially needed at the first steps of work should be put in the left side of the tab and those tools which are needed less often should be put in its right side.(3)Create a common place for running different commands of the software:Create a menu or other innovative way for handling software tools from a central point.(4)Put a simultaneous help system, without need to search the software “Help”:Create a help system that introduces the usage of each tool to users visually and shows the instruction of working with tools before user clicks on them. In order to enhance simultaneous help system, the best way is adding instruction to every tool in the menu.(5)Labeling all the commands and avoiding to use computer terms for naming tools and tabs:When software is designed for users with less computer literacy all the commands and tools need labels, even the tools and commands that are known for normal users. Furthermore, since most of amateur users are not familiar with computer terms and sometimes they misunderstand the meaning of tools' name, designers should try to use words that are familiar for all groups of people. The best way is using descriptive sentences instead of one-word names.(6)Use descriptive icons and avatars for introducing tools to users:Put descriptive icons for tools so that every user can understand the meaning of them without the need to read the tools' names. This is especially vital for children. Furthermore, using avatar or icons with different styles is suggested for increasing the attention of users to main functions of software in the Menu.(7)Avoid using deactivated tools or commands:Since when users with less computer literacy face a deactivated tool, they cannot understand how to activate it, the best way is keeping all the tools activated and putting dynamic message boxes to help the user. For example in the case that users should select the text to activate a tool, these kinds of message boxes can take the user to the text.These guidelines are in line with the usability guidelines that are introduced by researchers such as Holzinger et al. [10], Holzinger et al. [17], Holzinger et al. [13], Melenhorst et al. [18], Hsu [19], Mynatt et al. [20], Sayago and Blat [23], Dickinson et al. [22], Schröder and Ziefle [24], Wirtz et al. [12], Stickel et al. [25], Hourcade et al. [28], Theng et al. [29], Kaplan et al. [30], Khanum and Trivedi [27], Grammenos et al. [31], Wook and Salim [32], Wook et al. [33], Wook and Salim [34], Zhigang Fang et al. [35] and Nam [37].Furthermore, the research showed that there are some differences between the needs of users with less computer literacy and MSDN [3] Ribbon interface design guidelines:•The current method of showing tools and commands tooltip is not appropriate for users with less computer literacy. Since the tooltips are just shown when users hold the mouse on them, users will not pay attention to them and most of the time they cannot see tooltips. Furthermore, the tooltips' texts are not enough for the novice users and they cannot understand the usage of tools completely.In contrast with Microsoft guideline that says famous commands do not need label, when software is designed for users with less computer literacy all the commands and tools need label, even the tools and commands that are known for common users.Although Microsoft has suggested to put the tools groups that are important in the middle of the tabs, for users with less computer literacy the best way is arranging tools groups based on their usage and from left to right.Although Microsoft claimed that working with maximum seven core tabs is easy for users, this was not true for users with less computer literacy. For this group of users not more than three core tabs should be used.The regular tabs names are not understandable for users with less computer literacy.The proposed guidelines can help software producer companies especially Microsoft to have a framework which guides them on how they can increase the usability of Ribbon interface software for users with less computer literacy. Furthermore, they are applicable to Microsoft Office, Microsoft SharePoint, organizational software such as accounting and most of the software whose tools can be categorized in a menu based on a hierarchy. Putting these guidelines in action, self-learning would be promoted and learning issues of users with less computer literacy would decrease. In another word, it is possible to enhance self-learning for software whose nature lets designer to put its main features in one menu with hierarchy structure and simultaneous Help.In addition, as the potential contribution, using the proposed Menu structure can facilitate reading the software structure for screen reader and it therefore, can help visual impaired users. According to Giraud el al. [44], Baguma and Lubega [45] and Leuthold et al. [46] to make the software readable by screen readers, it should have text map for presenting features. Therefore, it can be concluded that the proposed menu is a text map and can be read easily by screen readers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study the researchers tried to increase the satisfaction level of Ribbon interface users with discovering usability problems of users with less computer literacy, and solving their problems with proposing a novel user interface framework for Ribbon interface software. The main phases of this research were: a) discovering the problems that users with less computer literacy face working with Ribbon interfaces software, b) formulating a new user interface framework for MS Outlook, c) developing a prototype and validating it, and d) proposing guidelines for Ribbon interfaces based on the factors that increased users' performance as the contribution of the study. The main contribution of the study is seven guidelines which could be used in designing user interface of Ribbon interface software for users with less computer literacy. These guidelines can help software producer companies, such as Microsoft, to have a framework which guides them in designing usable software for users who are not good in computer.