@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of virtualization on information security

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To investigates the post-virtualization business security landscapeImplementation of virtualization may be beneficial to information security.Virtualization may securely benefit certain industrial sectors.For the IT and automobile industries, virtualization also has a significant influence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtualization,Information security,ISO 27001,Information security management,Information technology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Virtualization provides the essential assistance to save energy & resources and also simplify the required information management. However, the information security issues have increasingly become a serious concern. This study investigates the post-virtualization business security landscape related to system security. A questionnaire is developed based on 133 control management principles of ISO/IEC 27001 standard and a sampling technique is employed to collect responses from IT professionals with an understanding of virtualization information environment. The obtained findings suggest that virtualization may be beneficial to certain industrial sectors in handling the issues of information security.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cloud computing is one of the critical topics in the IT domain in the 21st century. After years of rigorous and enthusiastic discussion, cloud computing has gradually evolved from concept introduction to application development and consequently become one of the promising fields in which enterprises and the IT industry start to invest massively. The features of cloud computing technology may include super-large scale, dynamic scalability and on-demand deployment and in which virtualization plays an important role. In addition, enterprises began to realize the importance of virtualization and invest heavily in its implementation [37]. According to a recent ESG's 2011 IT Spending Intentions Survey, more than 60% of surveyed organizations will increase their spending on virtualization software in 2011 [15].Apparently, the IT industry has already started to accept virtualization. The question — “how does/can virtualization benefit business?” is still an important one to be answered. Among the potential benefits, virtualization helps to centralize and integrate IT resources. Centralized data storage makes data easier to back up, prevents redundancy, and improves control. It also facilitates a better compliance to IT regulations and management. Secondly, virtualization helps to reduce the number of servers, and by doing so, it tends to reduce the usage of power and cooling facilities. The reduced number of servers and power usage can not only relieve the pressure of efficiency IT management, but also conform to the pervasive trend toward global green energy. With these aforementioned benefits, there are however many issues to be addressed and resolved regarding the implementation and/or adoption of virtualization. Namely, one of the most important issues may be the security concerns regarding virtual machines and virtualized environments. Recent researches and/or studies revealed both challenging and beneficial aspects of virtualization regarding information security [11,22,54,69]. Further, it is highly suggested that security measures shall be implemented and adopted as businesses move toward virtualization [42,66]. The implementation of security measures, however, requires specific regulations to support, audit and monitor. The ISO/IEC 27001 Standard [26] is currently one of the most widely accepted information security standards and therefore is highly suitable to serve as one guideline for the implementation and evaluation of different information security measures of virtualized systems.This study focuses on the impacts of a virtualized information environment on information security. A business may be exposed to threats and problems that occurred due to mismanagement and/or compromised security measures. To fully understand the influence of virtualization on information security, a questionnaire is designed based on ISO/IEC 27001 to collect responses from IT practitioners with experiences in the area of virtualization either in the specific enterprises or in the IT service industry. A combination of the ISO/IEC 27001-based questionnaire and viewpoints gathered from IT practitioners in fact provides a new direction for addressing and examining the issues of virtualization and information security. Results of the questionnaire survey are intended to reveal the post-virtualization business security landscape from the aspect of system security. In summary, this study would like to address the following research questions.(1)From the viewpoint of Physical and Environmental Security, does the implementation of virtualization in an enterprise significantly affect the resulting information security?From the viewpoint of communications and operations management, does the implementation of virtualization in an enterprise significantly affect the resulting information security?From the viewpoint of Access Control, does the implementation of virtualization in an enterprise significantly affect the resulting information security?From the viewpoint of Information System Acquisition, Development and Maintenance, does the implementation of virtualization in an enterprise significantly affect the resulting information security?This study consists of six parts. Section 1 introduces the background and the scope of this study. The next section reviews the relevant literatures related to information security and virtualization. Section 3 describes the research methodology including sampling and questionnaire design. Sections 4 and 5 provide the statistical analyses of the surveyed results and the discussion of the research questions, accordingly. Finally, the last section summarizes the findings, discusses the contributions of this study and provides some future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
