@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Standardization revisited: A critical literature review on standards and innovation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Reviews standardization policy in terms of the process and innovation.Draws implications for standardization strategies for innovation policy.Practical implications are drawn.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Technology standards,National standardization policy,Demand–supply framework,Innovation,Standard-based competition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Effective ICT standards enable different services to work together while promoting differentiation that facilitates competition and innovation. In order to ensure that the quality of ICT standards is well developed, it is important that these standards and standardization procedures meet certain requirements. This study reviews standardization research in terms of the process of standardization, innovation, and the demand-supply perspective. It draws implications that standards will be one of the important tools for national economic growth and for unconventional strategies of businesses. The analyses, based on the demand-supply framework, finally suggest promising opportunities for potential researchers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Technical standards are established norms or requirements applied to technical systems. They are a crucial aspect of almost all industries, and the success of firms may depend on the consequences of standard-based competition [50]. As a smart society is rapidly developing, the role and impact of standards have been increasing, especially in growing ICT industries [45]. The emergence of ICT paradigms, such as cloud computing, the Internet-of-Things, mobile traffic explosion, and ubiquitous connectivity, is driving what is arguably the most significant transformation of the architecture of mobile and wireless network systems. Simply put, ICT architectures need to evolve to support an exponentially more complex and diverse set of applications. This challenge has attracted ever-increasing attention from researchers in both academia and the industry, including ICT standard experts. As enablers of global systems' interoperability, standards are at the heart of the success of the ICT industry. Technology standard development organizations such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), and 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) have decade-long track records as drivers of real technological change across the industry.The process of standardizing both technology and ways of conducting business is complicated and time-consuming, but it is vitally important given the magnitude of its impact on the industry and society. In light of this importance, numerous studies have examined standardization literature from various perspectives such as economics, management, policy, and technology standpoints. David and Greenstein [18], one of the first-published literature review studies, analyze early standardization processes from an economic viewpoint. Following that, Stango [61] focuses on the economic studies concerning standards wars in reviewing competition and adoption processes of technology standards in the market. Grindley [33] conducts a case study on technology standards by exemplifying several ICT goods in order to provide business strategies and managerial insights. Tassey [63] provides basic information of standards such as the economic functions of standards, types of standards, and even negative impact of standardizations. Focusing specifically on one aspect of the technology-based market, the author proposes standardization policy recommendations, for example, a standard-associated research project, sequential investment of the government and private sector in infrastructure standardization, and government funding dealing with the negative effects of standardization. Standardization concerning ICT-related technologies and products such as data modems [65] and programming languages [20] is also reviewed in a case analysis.While a number of studies have been done in the area of standardization and its importance is drastically increasing, previous reviews of standard-related issues have not examined the topic in an extensive way. Although the existing standardization studies are well-reviewed from an economic perspective, attempts to categorize them into demand-side and supply-side literature are not easily found. Specifically, even though innovation activities for standardization in the ICT industry are becoming more important than ever, literature reviews on standardization issues from an innovation viewpoint are still way behind. While standard-based competition among firms, and even among countries, is getting more severe in the ICT industry, existing review studies do not sufficiently address this research gap. These gaps provide the research topic for this study.The current study attempts to bridge the aforementioned gap by reviewing standardization research using a demand and supply framework. In the demand-side perspective, the ways that standards are adopted and diffused by technology users are examined. In the supply-side perspective, on the contrary, the ways that standards are established and promoted by standard-setting organizations or technology-leading firms are explained. In addition, this study addresses the relationship between standards and innovation in order to highlight standardization policies for national economic growth and standard-based competition as an innovation tool. The findings draw insightful implications from the current literature by reorganizing and clarifying the economic implications of demand and supply roles. Furthermore, practical implications for new types of standard-based competition for innovation can be drawn from the discussion.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The origin of standardization research is first introduced in Section 2 for readers to understand this research field. Next, the demand-side and supply-side of standardization research are reviewed in Section 3 and Section 4, respectively. After the relationship between standards and innovation is examined in Section 5, several strategies for national standardization policy and new types of standard-based competition for innovation are discussed in Section 6 and Section 7, respectively. Finally, conclusions and a discussion of some remaining research opportunities follow in Section 8.In the conventional manufacturing industry, a standard generally refers to a common set of quality norms or criteria. Jakobs [38] defines a standard as “a publicly available definitive specification of procedures, rules and requirements, issued by a legitimate and recognized authority…” (p. 11). A standard defined in this way can be used as criteria for simple measurement, an objective for solving matching problems, a quality assurance policy for alleviating asymmetric information, or a reduction of information and transaction costs [19]. While such definitions have been similarly applied in general science and engineering fields [32], the concept of a standard differs slightly when it is applied to the ICT industry.The fact that the concept of a standard can be unique to the ICT industry is attributed to the characteristics of information goods, which are proposed by Shapiro and Varian [54]. First, the ICT industry depends heavily on technology systems. As a system consists of diverse parts or components manufactured by multiple firms, compatibility or interoperability between parts or components is essential for the survival of firms.Second, goods or services in the ICT industry involve high switching costs [57]. When a new system is introduced, a significant amount of money and time are required for learning until users become familiar with the system. Such expenses are referred to as switching costs, and firms seek to raise these costs in order to lock consumers into their products or services. Although governments attempt to decrease switching costs to relieve consumers of their financial burden, the efforts are not always effective and often end up failing. The issue of switching costs remains an unsolved question for both the academia and the industry.Third, network externality is a key factor in standard policy. In any ICT industry, network externalities play a substantial role in industry competition and market structure. Network externality means that a greater number of users adopting a technology result in greater user benefits while maintaining a positive feedback effect. ICT firms pay particular attention to such effects in order to promote their products. Therefore, firms competitively attempt to create sufficient demand to reach ‘critical mass,’ when the utility of information goods starts to be realized. Network externalities help the existing installed base reach a tipping point where a sufficient utility is maintained.In addition to the three aforementioned characteristics, the recent emergence of two-sided markets where information goods are mainly carried on transactions increases standard-based competition in the shape of the platform. Generally, a two-sided market is referred to as a market where values are created by interaction between two users or firms using a specific platform. Rochet and Tirole [51] define it as a market that can affect the amount of transactions by changing pricing structure. Evans and Schmalensee [22] categorize two-sided markets into exchange, advertiser-supported media, transaction devices, and software platforms. The reasons why two-sided markets have been issued recently in remarkable numbers are as follows: (1) indirect network externalities occur in two-sided markets such that as the size of a specific network increases, the benefits of another network increase, and (2) the platform mediating the relationship between the demand group and supply group can alter the transaction quantity by requiring a higher price of only one group. In other words, a firm preempting a platform standard can lead the two-sided markets. Android and iOS, which are de facto standards of smartphone operating systems leading a two-sided market in the mobile platform, are representative examples.Due to the aforementioned characteristics of the ICT industry, the concept of a standard is applied differently in various contexts. A winner-takes-all phenomenon can be described by these characteristics; capturing the first mover advantage would result in the greatest benefit in the initial stage of the market. Firms develop strategies to make their own technologies a standard in the market, and governments around the world are also committed to establishing standardization policies in order to gain international competitive advantages.There have been a number of studies looking at standardization strategies from managerial and economic viewpoints. The economic concept of a standard is suggested by David [17], addressing the QWERTY keyboard. The study investigates the reason why QWERTY has been a standard for keyboards for 100years despite its technological inferiority to the DVORAK keyboard. The study explains that only a historical accident can lead a specific standard to be dominant when a new technology is adopted, and in the long run the standard can be maintained by path dependency and lock-in effects. Similar to David [17], Arthur [2] explains the dynamics of a market under increasing returns. In other words, as increasing returns and lock-in occur, arising from network externalities, the choice of the standard is path-dependent, possibly to get people locked into an inferior standard.In contrast to economic perspectives, Besen and Farrell [6] focus on managerial strategies and tactics for the competition of individual firms. They describe different forms of competition using the game theoretic approach, named Tweedledum and Tweedledee, Battle of the Sexes, and Pesky Little Brother. In managerial perspectives, the term ‘dominant design’ is usually used instead of standard [27,29,64]. In addition, the positive feedback model proposed by Hill [37] and Gallagher and West [30] can be applied to examine various standard-based competing industries. Similarly Gallagher [28] examines corporate strategies for the next-generation DVD standard battle. While standardization strategies are also important in managerial perspectives, this study attempts to focus on standardization cases from economic perspectives to draw policy implications for innovation and competition purposes.In general, research on demand-side standardization examines whether and how adopters accept a technology standard or not. Consumers compare the benefits of the existing technology standard with those of the new technology standard to decide whether to stay in the existing technology standard or adopt the new technology standard. Previous literature reviews have commonly focused on sponsored and unsponsored standards. Farrell and Saloner [23] examine the demand response assuming that technology standards are unsponsored. The study argues that adoption decisions can be the most efficient if one is able to understand their utility under a complete information condition. On the contrary, with incomplete information, a bandwagon strategy can result in equilibrium, leading to market failure. In light of this market failure, Farrell and Saloner [24] analyze the competition between the existing technology standard with the installed base and the newly superior technology standard. Using the concepts of the installed base and quality of the new technology standard, the study explains the possibility of market failures, such as excess momentum and excess inertia. The study states that a firm sponsoring the existing technology standard may use pre-announcements or predatory pricing strategies to continue to lead the market.In contrast to the aforementioned literature concerning unsponsored technology standards, Katz and Shapiro [40] analyze the process of consumer decisions on adoption when a firm sponsors specific technology standards. The study considers network externalities more specifically in relation to the standardization process and introduces the concept of fulfilled expectation equilibrium in order to identify appropriate incentives for two competing firms to produce compatible products. Particularly, Katz and Shapiro [41] show various forms of technology adoption depending on the existence of a technology sponsor. For example, even an inferior but sponsored technology standard has a strategic advantage, as it can efficiently dominate the market in other ways. Consequently, the market reveals excess momentum or insufficient friction such that existing users are stranded. Additionally, Katz and Shapiro [42] emphasize the installed base in order to explain situations where new technology standards are adopted in the market where network externalities exist, and they provide conditions in which excess inertia and excess momentum occur. For example, the study explains that if private incentives exceed social incentives, a new technology standard will be adopted faster than expected, leading to socially undesirable outcomes.The review of the above literature suggests that demand-side standardization studies mainly argue for the adoption of a new technology standard by comparing private incentives for consumers with social incentives, rather than comparing sponsored and unsponsored technology standards. Again, this viewpoint deals with how innovation, namely in technology standards, is diffused throughout a society.Research from supply-side standardization generally considers how a technology in the market is established as a standard. Some technologies are chosen as de facto standards as a result of firms' continuous efforts and investment in R&D activities and innovation. A de facto standard is a product on the market that is adopted by so many consumers that it is practically recognized as a standard. The QWERTY keyboard, Windows OS in personal computers, and VHS in VCRs are typical examples of de facto standards [33]. Led by a specific organization, some technologies are developed from the beginning of research planning, resulting in a de jure standard. A de jure standard is a standard developed or established by a standard-setting organization. Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) and Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) are examples of de jure standards. In general, a de facto standard is diffused faster in the market, but antitrust issues can be a problem. A de jure standard typically involves higher quality technology, but political issues may be caused by the complicated interests of many stakeholders. For example, Simcoe [60] empirically observes that, due to interests derived by intellectual properties, delays in committee-based standardization can slow the diffusion of a technology standard.As there are pros and cons to each standardization process, researchers often compare the characteristics of the two processes. Farrell and Saloner [25] compare market-based standardization and committee-based standardization and conclude that, although the speed of the standardization process is slower, committee-based standardization is much more efficient in terms of coordination. Using a simulation model, Swann and Shurmer [62] examine the competition between a market-generated de facto standard and a government-led formal standard. Belleflamme [5] compares the competition between two standard-setting processes and a dynamic approach using the coordination mechanism of ‘Battle of the Sexes.’ However, the results of both studies are dependent on specific conditions, leading one to conclude that it is not possible to say that one standard-setting process is better than the other.Therefore, firms strive to find a new type of standard-setting process. For example, some firms are in favor of a consortium-led standard, a hybrid of these two processes. A number of firms collectively establish an organization in the form of a consortium and produce optimal technology standards through their own standard-setting process. Weiss and Cargill [66] categorize standard-setting consortia based on political and market theories with network externalities. Axelrod et al. [3] indicate the existence of incentives for firms to form a standard-setting alliance. Hawkins [35] explains the emergence, structure, and related policies of consortia, noting that firms participate in consortia not only because of efficiency rationales, but also because of the formation of business communities. Funk and Methe [26] examine the advantages of the hybrid approach in telecommunication, whereas Keil [43] applies the hybrid approach in the context of Bluetooth industries.Accordingly, additional research comparing de jure standardization and consortia-led standardization has been undertaken. Russell [52] discusses the Internet architecture standards war between the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model, promoted by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) model, supported by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), namely, a de jure standard versus consortium-led standard. The study explains that even though the U.S. government – National Bureau of Standards – supported the OSI model, the TCP/IP model was finally adopted as an Internet architecture standard, demonstrating that consortium-led standardization was successful at least in the Internet architecture. Meanwhile, Cohen-Meidan [16] examines the influence of standardization activities, consortium-led standardization and formal standardization, using an event study approach in the U.S. cable modem market. The study explains that not all consortium-led standardization processes increase competition between firms, and the performance of firms using consortium-led standardized products is much better. Meanwhile, Blind and Gauch [9] explain that both processes are complementary, and the number of consortia does not affect the distribution of technological fields or complementary relationships. Blind et al. [10] conduct a survey of stakeholders who are participants in standard development committees and explain that appropriate standard-setting methodologies are dependent on specific technological fields. Thus, standard-setting processes cannot be explained by the one-size-fits-all approach, as each process is heavily dependent on the specific context and conditions.In summary, supply-side standardization studies are the processes of technology standard setting, and comparisons are made in light of the conditions that the industry is faced with. Supply-side standardization is about how innovation, namely the technology standard, is promoted.Standards can make a significant difference in the success of innovation by creating a shared framework for innovation and establishing the rules of the game. Standards establish the framework by defining common vocabularies, setting the essential characteristics of a product or service, and by detecting the best practice within the ecosystems that will ensure fruitful results.Intellectual property (IP) and standards have been an intensely debated issue, as the two conflict each other. IP provides special challenges to standard developers. The objective of a standard is to distribute products or services to the market to help consumers use them more easily. On the other hand, the role of IP is to control indiscriminate use. In other words, a standard is a tool for diffusing innovation, and IP is a tool for securing innovation. Thus, prior to reviewing the effects of standards on innovation, the relationships between standards and IP should be addressed.Shurmer and Lea [59] provide a case for the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) and stress the need for reform of the IP system in order to resolve conflicts between standard-setting organizations (SSOs) and intellectual property rights (IPR) holders. Bekkers and West [4] compare policies between SSOs and firms in regard to patents in GSM and UMTS technologies and propose reform of IPR policies. In regard to the ETSI, the study explains that continuous efforts are not as effective as expected.Blind and Thumm [11] analyze the likelihood of standardization activities of firms holding IP such as patents and know-how. The study explains that firms holding more patents seek to avoid standardization activities in order to monopolize the market, and when such firms are not participating, there are fewer technologies available to be selected as standards. Therefore, the study suggests strong incentives for firms to participate in standardization activities. Gandal et al. [68] examine the interactions between standardization committee participation and patent activities in the U.S. modem industry. The study argues that while participation in standard setting can predict future patent activities, it does not guarantee that those who are involved in patent activities can predict the direction of standard settings. Chiao et al. [12] empirically analyze policy choices of standard-setting organizations regarding IP. They show a negative relationship between the orientation toward a technology sponsor and the concession level and a positive relationship between the sponsor friendliness and the quality of the standard.As discussed above, although the relationship between standards and intellectual property is not consistent with the way in which they contribute to innovation, many standardization studies have attempted to investigate the impacts on innovation. Blind [7] examines the driving forces behind standardization activities in terms of patents, R&D expenses, export activities, and service industries. Although ambivalent relationships between innovation and standards are sometimes observed, they represent a virtuous circle, not a vicious circle. Analyzing dynamics of standards, Blind [8] argues that standards that ‘have been amended’ have a long survival time, while standards that ‘will be amended’ or ‘have multiple amendments’ have a short survival time. Meanwhile, Kristiansen [44] shows that early product introduction for inducing technological innovation increases R&D costs and, therefore, socially undesirable outcomes occur. In order to increase social welfare, the study suggests delaying the introduction of a new standard while maintaining compatibility with existing standards.Although studies about the impacts of standards on innovation have conflicting views to some extent, they generally agree that standardization policies have positive effects on the national innovation policy for economic growth. Specifically, from the perspective of national technology policies, standardization activities are utilized as core tools for improvement of technological knowledge [49]. Therefore, one cannot overlook the role of standardization policy in stimulating national economic growth.Given that technology standardization can be strategically practical for national economic growth, governments have started to consider technology standardization policies more seriously. In South Korea, for example, standard-setting processes are used as a strategic instrument for technological catch-up, allowing the country to reach the level of technologically advanced countries [47]. As a result, some Korean ICT products such as semiconductors, mobile phones, and display panels have been taking the lead in world technology development. In order to maintain outstanding technology performance, the Korean government has consistently carried out standardization policies.South Korea's technology standardization policy is explained by the standard-setting process of the second generation mobile communication technology, CDMA. Europe has led the global mobile communication technology industry with its standards; however, as South Korea prepares to commercialize CDMA services for the first time, it could rapidly assume a leadership role in the ICT industry. A number of studies examine various viewpoints on how CDMA technology could be standardized, such as the indigenous technology policy of Seong [53], the actor network theory of Yoo et al. [67] and Shin and Venkatesh [58], the political and institutional context of Jho [39], and the catch-up strategy of Choung et al. [15].In addition, South Korean commitment to technology standardization is reviewed in several studies. Shin [56] and Lee et al. [46] both examine standard-setting activities for mobile communication after CDMA technology. Various technologies such as the multimedia technology MPEG-4 by Choi and Choung [13], mobile platform WIPI by Lee and Oh [48], and WiBro and T-DMB by Choung et al. [14] and Shin [55] are assessed.It is interesting to note that the cost or quality of development is not the only determinant when a country chooses a standard. Angulo et al. [1] analyze the standard-setting processes of national terrestrial digital technology in Latin America. The study explains that each country selects its standard based on multiple standardization strategies and several factors such as network externalities, industrial policy, technical and socio-economic features, and political relationships. Again, since the development of standardization policies involving national technology standard-setting efforts is not a simple decision-making process, these policies have to be analyzed from various perspectives.Meanwhile, as standardization strategies are utilized from a policy perspective, their role as regulators on the supply-side is also emphasized [7,33]. In Europe, standardization activities are considered to be regulatory governance [21]. Consequently, the role of government is extended, undermining private innovation and controlling the public domain. This explains why the ‘rise and fall’ of technology standards depends on standardization policies, highlighting the importance of government decisions.Standardization supports competition, either technology or market-based competition, so as to achieve objectives such as the interoperability of complementary products and services or to provide agreed-upon test methods and requirements for health, safety, and organizational and environmental performance. Standards are one of the many tools that can be used to help foster interoperability among products or services within a market, and when they are responsive to real marketplace needs they can help promote innovation, fuel market growth, and protect investments in new technologies. Standards can apply to various fields. They can catalyze innovation by encouraging companies to contribute their innovative technology to standard-setting activities and share their intellectual properties with others. When developed and implemented through open and transparent processes, successful standards help create opportunities for product differentiation and promote more choices for users. Open source software (OSS), a representative activity of open innovation [34], is a good example. Although Google was behind in the mobile platform, it formed an alliance with many associated firms for using Android as open source software [36]. Standing alongside Apple's iOS, as a consequence, Android is now one of the de facto standards in the mobile platform [31].The standard-setting activity in turn enhances competition and innovation among vendors. While formal standards play an important role, market-led customer-driven acceptance of technology and cross-industry support for popular ICT specifications also plays a crucial role in competition and innovation. The resulting situation is a dynamic coexistence of both formal standards and industry-developed specifications in the ICT marketplace. Together, these standards and specifications fuel innovation and economic development, while helping enable interoperability in ICT products and services to ultimately deliver better user experiences as well as provide ICT companies with a means for unconventional strategies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
As the importance of standards has increased, a large number of studies have examined technology standards. A growing body of studies includes different perspectives, and this is partially because many investigations have been conducted in a fragmentary way, thus resulting in fragmented research lacking integrated literature. Some studies have examined the economics of standardization or the impact and consequences of standardization. Similarly, some have adopted managerial, political, and technological approaches to examine various aspects of standardization. This review study sheds light on a wide variety of analyses and implies the importance of standardization strategies as an innovation tool using a demand and supply framework. The studies reviewed in this paper are summarized in Table 1.Although much has already been accomplished, many promising opportunities for future research still lie ahead. First, more empirical studies are needed about technology standardization research in the ICT industry. Although literature including technology standards as a single affecting factor for other research topics can be easily found, studies in which the technology standards themselves are selected as primary themes for an empirical analysis are still lacking. It is necessary to encourage empirical studies in order to analyze the innovation and competition of the ICT industry using standardization issues. Second, including a comparison of the standard-setting organizations, the most efficient process of standardization for each industry or specific product/service should be examined. Apart from political interests and issues, we need to find more productive ways of making standards for newly emerging technologies in order to maximize social welfare. Third, new types of standardization strategies should be examined. Particularly, the role of industry alliances and expert associations that are able to deal with intellectual property rights as well as standardization issues is a remarkable topic. The members of these organizations can be information sources for each other, and therefore relationships with them can be an important strategic activity. To be worthy of both the public and private sectors, therefore, further studies should cover the strategies, key factors, effectiveness, and efficiency of such organizations. Finally, to ensure that future research on this subject is heuristic and impactful in guiding scholarship and managerial action, it needs to incorporate interdisciplinary perspectives.