@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improved migration for mobile computing in distributed networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A secure, robust, and efficient hierarchical key management scheme is proposed for MANETs.Practical issues and solutions about dynamic key management are considered and proposed.It provides better security assurance and performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Key management,Mobile agent,Elliptic curve,Migration,Mobile computing,MANET,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A mobile ad hoc network (MANET) is a special type of wireless network in which a collection of mobile nodes with wireless network interfaces may form a temporary network, without the aids of any fixed infrastructure. Security has become a hot research topic in mobile ad hoc networks. In 1998, Volker and Mehrdad proposed a tree-based key management and access control scheme for the mobile agents to manage rights to access its own resources for the visited mobile nodes. Latter, Huang et al. showed that Volker and Mehrdad's scheme needs a large amount of storage and costs for managing and storing secret keys. Huang et al. further proposed a new and efficient scheme based on the elliptic curve cryptosystems to reduce costs and gain better efficiency. However, there is a security leak inherent in Huang et al.'s scheme that the malicious node can overstep his authority to access unauthorized information. This paper will propose a secure, robust, and efficient hierarchical key management scheme for MANETs. Some practical issues and solutions about dynamic key management are also considered and proposed. As compared with Huang et al.'s scheme, our proposed scheme can provide better security assurance, while requiring smaller key-size, lower computational complexities, and constant key management costs which is independent on the number of the confidential files and the visited nodes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A mobile ad hoc network (MANET) has caught the attention and provided anytime and anywhere networking services. It is a self-organized wireless network for mobile nodes without any fixed infrastructure. Such a network can be deployed rapidly and dynamically, and all mobile nodes are connected by wireless links. A group of mobile nodes can improve message delivery and save bandwidth effectively in a MANET. MANETs can provide self-organizing and infrastructure-less property, and hence they are widely used in varied applications such as military and commercial settings. In a MANET, each mobile node owns different resources and might allow the visited node to access them. A mobile node decides where to migrate and executes the tasks on the desired node. The mobile agent will return the result to the request node after it completes the intended tasks.In a MANET, a mobile agent might have some valuable resources or information to share with authorized visited mobile nodes. All sensitive information might be sent via a general tunnel or over the air without any protection. Hence, it might suffer from some potential security threats such as compromising, eavesdropping, impersonating attacks, etc. Security is a significant issue for protecting the transmitted messages and providing access control to resources in constructing the MANET. The mobile agent must establish suitable security mechanisms to protect the resources from being disclosed and accessed by unauthorized mobile nodes. It is a challenge to dynamically manage the access rights to the resources for mobile nodes and protect them from being disclosed. A key management scheme is a cryptographic technique to manage cryptographic keys used to protect the confidentiality of the sensitive resources [1–4]. It allows only authorized mobile agents to access authorized resources and information with its own cryptographic key(s). A key management scheme can improve security and reduce the memory storage of keys, as presented in MANETs [5–7].Recently, many scholars proposed various key management and access control schemes for MANETs [8–14]. In 1998, Volker and Mehrdad proposed a tree-based key management and access control scheme for the mobile agents to manage rights to access its own resources for the visited mobile nodes [8]. It allows that only the authorized visited mobile nodes can access some information according to the predetermined access control, while unauthorized visited mobile nodes cannot. Main drawback of their scheme is that it requires a large amount of storage and high computational complexities. To improve the performance of Volker and Mehrdad's scheme [8], Chang and Lin later proposed two key management schemes based on RSA cryptosystem, i.e. one is bottom-up approach and the other is top-down approach [11]. Chang and Lin's scheme requires less key management costs and fewer computational costs as compared with Volker and Mehrdad's scheme. However, their scheme is still inefficient from practical viewpoints since they require expensive exponential operations for key generation and derivation.In 2009, Huang et al. proposed a practical and efficient hierarchical mobile agent framework for MANETs to handle key management and access control problems based on elliptic curve cryptosystems, one-way hash function and interpolating polynomials [11]. In Huang et al.'s scheme, each mobile agent must maintain an access control hierarchy to manage the access rights for visited mobile nodes. Such a hierarchy is a POSET (partially ordered set) hierarchy. Each confidential file owned by the mobile agent has a pair of secret keys, a decryption key and a superkey. The decryption key is used to encrypt/decrypt the confidential file. Only the mobile node with the decryption key can access the content of the confidential file. The superkey is used for deriving the decryption key according to the predetermined access control policies. The mobile agent can determine and assign a distinct superkey to a visited mobile node for accessing the confidential file(s) according to the predetermined hierarchy of access control. The authorized mobile node can use its given superkey to derive the decryption key of the intended confidential file and then use it to obtain the content. Attractive contribution of Huang et al.'s scheme [15] is to achieve the same security level while requiring smaller key-size and lower computational costs as compared with Chang and Lin's scheme [11].There, however, is a security leak inherent in Huang et al.'s scheme [15] that the malicious node can overstep his authority to access unauthorized information, which violates the claimed security requirements. Moreover, Huang et al.'s scheme does not consider some practical dynamic key management problems. For example, it does not provide an access control updating mechanism for the mobile nodes leaved from the access control hierarchy. This paper will propose a secure, robust, and efficient hierarchical key management scheme for MANETs. Each node of the proposed scheme maintains only one secret key which is used to help the visited node to derive decryption key(s) of authorized confidential file(s). This will reduce the key management costs. Some practical issues and solutions about dynamic key management are also considered. We also provided practical and efficient solution to deal with dynamic key management problem for migration for mobile computing in MANETs.The rest of this paper is sketched as follows. In Section 2, we briefly reviewed MANET technologies, elliptic curve cryptosystem, and Huang et al.'s scheme [15]. Security leak inherent in Huang et al.'s scheme is also discussed in Section 2. In Section 3, we proposed a new key management and access control scheme based on a one-way hash function and discussed the solutions to dynamic access control problems. Security analysis and performance evaluations of the proposed scheme are given in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Finally, we gave conclusions in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Security is an important issue for mobile ad hoc networks. Key management and access control schemes are the central parts of the security of MANETs. In this paper, we demonstrated a security leak inherent in Huang et al.'s scheme [15] to show that their scheme violates the claimed security requirements. That is, the malicious node can overstep his authority to access the unauthorized information in the case of revoking an existing relationship. We further proposed a secure, robust and efficient key management and access control scheme to eliminate the pointed out security leak and satisfy all claimed security requirements. Some practical issues and solutions about dynamic key management are also considered and proposed. As compared with Huang et al.'s scheme, our proposed scheme can provide better security assurance, while requiring smaller key-size, lower computational complexities, and constant key management costs which is independent on the number of the confidential files and the visited nodes.