@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with reuse and product management: An add-on process reference model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Extension of ISO/IEC 15288 with system level reuse and product management processesProvision of process reference model conformant to requirements of ISO/IEC 15504Reference framework for process assessment and improvement in systems engineeringSupport for transformation of systems engineering towards use of ‘system products’

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Systems engineering,Product management,Reuse,Process reference model,ISO/IEC 15288,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To support the transformation of system engineering from the project-based development of highly customer-specific solutions to the reuse and customization of ‘system products’, we integrate a process reference model for reuse- and product-oriented industrial engineering and a process reference model extending ISO/IEC 12207 on software life cycle processes with software- and system-level product management. We synthesize the key process elements of both models to enhance ISO/IEC 15288 on system life cycle processes with product- and reuse-oriented engineering and product management practices as an integrated framework for process assessment and improvement in contexts where systems are developed and evolved as products.Industrial engineering (IE) as an engineering discipline and specialization of systems engineering is concerned with the engineering of industrial solutions, e.g. power plants, rail systems, chemical plants, or substantial parts thereof. It typically integrates a series of specialized disciplines, e.g. mechanics, electrics, or software, and is generally carried out in different phases ranging from acquisition, requirements analysis, etc., to operation and maintenance. IE as well as systems engineering have to enable the parallel and coordinated development work of different engineering disciplines, including ensuring the integrity of the various discipline-specific solution components. They typically develop highly customer-specific and complex systems and are confronted with increasing cost and productivity pressure, rising complexity, and ever demanding customers.The characteristics of IE and of the respective industrial solutions business (ISB) can be compiled from similar domains like industrial and investment goods [1] or complex products and systems [2,3]. They are identified in more detail in Stallinger et al. [4] and – beyond the criteria mentioned above – include, e.g. the provision of ready-to-use solutions and supporting services by a single provider; the carrying out of the development according to individual customer requirements; the high acquisition effort and lack of economies of scale; the long life-span of industrial solutions and the respective customer relationships; the lack of testability of the solutions as a whole prior to construction; and the operation of the providers on global markets, constrained by various regional conditions and differences.Due to the individuality of industrial solutions, their low degree of standardization, and the customer- and project-driven engineering approach, key success factors in the ISB include the controlling of project risks and complexity, the improvement of quality, and the adherence to schedules, while at the same time reducing costs, and building and maintaining solution expertise. Nevertheless, industrial solutions may share a sufficient amount of similarities which provide significant improvement potential through systematic reuse. Transforming the ISB from the highly customer-specific development work within projects to the customization of ‘system products’ and fostering reuse in general are thus judged highly rewarding to tackle these challenges and exploit reuse opportunities. In order to fully exploit the potentials of such product- and reuse-focused development approaches and to additionally allow offering system products on a market, mature product management practices need to be established, which properly link the systems and discipline-specific engineering activities with the economic and business goals of the organization.Generally, from an IE and systems engineering perspective, reuse and productization of industrial solutions or systems are not well established. In particular, ISO/IEC 15288 as the major international standard on system life cycle processes [5] does not provide specific processes or practices for reuse on system level nor for product management. On the other hand, the concept of reuse is well researched in the software engineering domain (cf. e.g. [6,7]) and respective reuse approaches like component-based software engineering [8], use of platforms, or software product line engineering [9,10] are effectively applied and at least with respect to component-oriented reuse, copy-and-modify at solution or project level, use of prefabricates, application of platforms, and the product line approach also applicable at system level [11]. Further, empirical research in the domain of software-intensive communication solutions has demonstrated that improving product management has a significant positive impact on key performance indicators like schedule predictability, product quality, and project duration [12]. In order to support the above described transformation of the ISB and of systems engineering in general towards the reuse-based customization of ‘system products’ that is linked with an organization's economic and business goals through effective product management, the extension and integration of ISO/IEC 15288 with appropriate reuse and product management processes appear highly beneficial in order to provide a standard-based reference for these processes that is at the same time compliant with assessment-based process improvement approaches as ISO/IEC 15504 [13].The work presented in this article builds firstly on the results of developing a process reference model for IE, integrating an ISO/IEC 15504 [13] conformant process reference model for reuse and a process model for product-oriented engineering of industrial systems, and its comparison against ISO/IEC 15288 [5] on system life cycle processes [4,14]. Secondly, we analyze and integrate the results of a second research strand on developing a process reference model for reuse and integrated software- and system-level product management targeted at the software engineering domain in systems engineering contexts [15]. Based on this, we synthesize the key processes and outcomes for enhancing the international standard ISO/IEC 15288 with product- and reuse-oriented engineering and system-level product management practices. The results are intended to serve as an integrated, consolidated, and standard conformant process reference framework for systems engineering contexts – in particular those, where systems or parts thereof are developed and evolved as products – which can be used as an add-on to ISO/IEC 15288 for process assessment and improvement.Enabling reuse across all engineering activities, levels of the system structure, and engineering disciplines is regarded an effective but nevertheless challenging means for reducing costs and development time and for increasing IE and systems engineering quality (cf. [16]). The basic reuse approaches applicable in IE (cf. [11]) comprise component-oriented reuse, systematic copy-and-modify at solution and project level, use of prefabricates, application of platforms, and the product line and system family approach (cf. e.g. [9]). While reuse is well understood in the software engineering domain (cf. e.g. [6–8]), reuse in IE and systems engineering is hardly systematized, often only applied in an ad-hoc manner, and its organization-wide potential often not even known.Fostering product-orientation by transforming IE and systems engineering towards the customization of an underlying ‘solution product’ or ‘system product’ that is developed and maintained independently from specific customers or customer projects, is judged a promising approach to tackle the challenges the respective businesses are faced with. Such product-oriented engineering enables the advantages of product development within solution and systems engineering. It is characterized by an order-independent development process providing a set of products with pre-defined variants. Ideally, resulting from such an approach, a customer order implies no further customization effort and cost-coverage and profit margins can be secured at lower risks.With advancing product-orientation and an evolving product landscape the need for systematic management of the system products arises. Such more sophisticated product management activities are generally expected to closely link and integrate the core engineering and system life cycle activities with business, economic, and product related goals and thus are considered a key element in the transition towards product-oriented systems engineering.Generally, product management is defined as the “planning, organising, executing, and controlling of all tasks, which aim at a successful conception, production, and marketing of the products offered by a company” [10]. The benefits of mature product management practices have been confirmed in various research studies. For the electronics industry domain e.g. Kairies [17] identified the following benefits compared to competitors: faster company growth and higher earnings; higher market and customer orientation in product development; more intensive dealing with customer problems and better knowledge of the needs and processes of customers; higher degree of innovation with respect to technical solutions, services, and market presence; better implementation of the innovation process phases and the capability to combine basic strategic developments with customer-specific adaptations; and the capability to launch more successful products in shorter time spans. In the software engineering domain empirical research (e.g. [12]) also confirms respective positive effects of empowering software product management on key software development performance indicators like schedule predictability, quality, or project duration.The international standard ISO/IEC 15288:2008 Systems and software engineering — system life cycle processes [6] describes “the processes that comprise the life cycle of any man-made system”, without regard to the kind, purpose, application domain, etc. of this system. Fig. 1shows the process structure of the standard. Each process of the reference model is provided with a description of the process purpose and the process outcomes. These outcomes represent the results that can be observed when the process purpose is successfully achieved. Additional and more detailed information is provided by descriptions of activities and tasks that have to be executed to achieve one or more of the process outcomes. In a recent and ongoing effort the standard has been harmonized with ISO/IEC 12207:2008 Systems and software engineering — software life cycle processes [18], which can be applied for the software elements of a system.The overall goal of the work presented here is to support the transition of systems engineering organizations towards product-oriented and reuse-based engineering approaches, including the tight integration of these engineering activities with core business, economic, and product related goals. The overall approach chosen is to synthesize key processes and outcomes that enhance the international standard ISO/IEC 15288 [5] with product- and reuse-oriented engineering and product management practices in order to serve as an integrated, consolidated, and standard conformant reference framework for process assessment and improvement in such contexts. ISO/IEC 15288 is an established systems engineering standard, covers the entire life cycle of a system and provides a suitable foundation for the envisioned integrated framework, but nevertheless lacks provision of reuse and product management practices.In order to reach the above goal, we build on and extend previous research. Firstly, an ISO/IEC 15504 conformant process reference model for the industrial solutions business (ISB-PRM) has been proposed in [4]. This model regards IE as a specialization of systems engineering and is based on the integration of the key concepts of reuse and product-orientation for industrial engineering and thus is considered suitable for integration into the envisioned framework. The ISB-PRM has further been compared against ISO/IEC 15288 with the objective to get an understanding of their relationship and to ensure the adherence of the ISB-PRM to the international standard. The results of this research are detailed in [14].Secondly, an ISO/IEC 15504 conformant process reference model for enhancing ISO/IEC 12207 on software life cycle processes [18] with software- and system-level product management has been proposed in [15]. This model aims to serve as a framework for process assessment and improvement in contexts, where software is developed and evolved as a product and at the same time is part of an overall software-intensive system product. This work builds on a process reference model developed for fostering software product management [19], which integrates best practices distilled from various frameworks for software product management and software product line engineering.In this article we analyze the results of both research strands – the comparison of the ISB-PRM against ISO/IEC 15288 and the proposed process model for software- and system-level product management and reuse – with respect to their transferability and integration into ISO/IEC 15288 and propose the key processes and process outcomes for an extension of ISO/IEC 15288 with practices for system-level reuse and system product management.The research and development methodology applied for this work is based on a two-step analysis and synthesis approach accompanied by appropriate evaluation and validation activities involving various process and process reference models that cover the aspects of reuse, product-oriented engineering and product management for the domains of software engineering and systems engineering.In the first analysis-focused step, two parallel analysis activities are performed: firstly, the ISB-PRM – supposed to cover the relevant practices for reuse and product-oriented engineering in the domain of systems engineering – is analyzed against ISO/IEC 15288, leading to the identification of process candidates for enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with practices for reuse- and product-oriented engineering of system products; secondly, a process reference model developed to enhance the system context processes of ISO/IEC 12207 with the concepts of integrated software- and system-level product management and reuse is analyzed, leading to the identification of process candidates for the enhancement of ISO/IEC 15288 with practices for system-level product management and reuse.In the second synthesis-focused step the process candidates identified in these two analysis-oriented activities are integrated, structured, and consolidated into an add-on process reference model to ISO/IEC 15288 – useable stand-alone – to cover reuse and product management at system level, as well as into a proposal for enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with these processes in an integrated way.The accompanying evaluation and validation of the results comprises three main pillars: firstly, the validation and evaluation through real-world industry application of the base models that are used as input to the analysis activities; secondly, the presentation of the model resulting from the synthesis step to domain as well as process experts in a systematic way in order to initially validate the goals, processes, and process outcomes of the model and incorporate the respective enhancements; thirdly, the real-world application of the model in industry settings, which, due to the complexity of the model itself, is foreseen to take place in multiple steps, involving initially only parts of the proposed model and their interaction with other parts and the core of ISO/IEC 15288.Details on these activities are provided in the respective Sections 4 to 8 below. This approach of unifying and integrating different reference models is also supported by other authors. Pardo et al. for example state, that “no matter which models are integrated, the union of two or more reference models allows the weaknesses of the models that an organization uses to be strengthened” and they believe “that the union of models enables a powerful formula to satisfy an organization's multiple needs” [20]. The same authors also propose a solution for harmonizing multiple reference models in a way as to satisfy the needs of companies, consisting of the framework-based definition of the elements needed to support the harmonization, a harmonization process and strategy, and respective methods [21]. In the domain of software intensive systems Larsson et al. [22] have studied the critical activity of integration of both software and hardware components and found that, although descriptions of best practices for product integration are available in various reference models, these practices are insufficiently used in industry and need to be merged into one set of practices.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides details on the targeted application scenario for the envisioned enhancements to ISO/IEC 15288; Section 3 presents preliminary observations and foundations with respect to the feasibility and validity of enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with elements of the above mentioned process models; Section 4 provides background on the work comparing the ISB-PRM with ISO/IEC 15288 and identifies the key processes for enhancing the standard with product-oriented and reuse activities; Section 5 presents background on the work of enhancing ISO/IEC 12207 with software and system-level product management and identifies the key processes for enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with product management activities; Section 6 gives an overview on the resulting extension to ISO/IEC 15288 covering both reuse and system product management, and details the process purpose and process outcome definitions of the suggested add-on processes; Section 7 discusses the integration of the resulting add-on process reference model with ISO/IEC 15288; Section 8 reports about the status of the validation of the model; Section 9, finally, summarizes the paper, draws conclusions, and provides an outlook on future work.Customer-specific systems or solutions are typically developed in a project context, due to the customer demand for fulfilling individual requirements, general system complexity, and long development times. Typical examples for such complex systems include – amongst many others – production plants, chemical plants, power plants, airport logistics systems, or railway systems. The respective projects are typically executed under high pressure for meeting cost, time, and quality goals. Reuse of existing engineering artifacts from similar past solutions and respective projects is typically performed in an ad-hoc manner and thus projects are vulnerable to errors, risks, etc. and strongly depend on the knowledge and experience of the involved project stakeholders and participants.In such contexts, there is potential for considerably increasing reuse, given the similarities the developed systems typically share e.g. with respect to functionality, features, or structure, but also with respect to engineering artifacts like requirements specification, architecture description, test specification, etc. These similarities are to some extent introduced by the application domain of the system.By transforming the organization from highly project- and customer-driven individual developments to product-orientation and reuse, this potential can be realized while still satisfying customer-specific needs. On the one hand, product-orientation means that pre-defined products – provided by internal or external suppliers – are made available for reuse in the development of a given family of systems. These products can be configured and adapted to customer-specific requirements, thus minimizing customer-specific effort in a project. In the context of production plants, for example, such pre-defined products can include drives, picker arms, camera systems, or feeding systems. On the other hand, if the overall system is built from customizable products, the system itself can be developed and managed as a product. The customer may choose from a set of such basic ‘system products’ which then are further customized. The characteristics of such a ‘system product’ are not determined individually and ‘from scratch’ as in a traditional project-oriented development approach, but are pre-defined to a certain degree. However, the overall customer-specific system will be developed in a project context.The organization may also choose to offer the pre-defined products, which are reused to provide customer-specific solutions, separately on a more or less anonymous market, typically with a reduced or standardized set of features. Thus, the reusable product itself may become a system product. In such contexts, the organization needs to ensure that the offered system products are properly managed and address the needs of their intended market as well as the organization's business goals.The enhancement of ISO/IEC 15288 presented here is based on the analyses and synthesis of the results of two research strands: firstly, the development and comparison against ISO/IEC 15288 of an ISO/IEC 15504 conformant process reference model for industrial engineering (ISB-PRM) that is based on the integration of the key concepts of reuse and product-oriented engineering; secondly, the extension of ISO/IEC 12207 on software life cycle processes with reference processes comprising the concepts of reuse and integrated software- and system-level product management.With respect to the first research strand, the ISB-PRM (cf. Section 4 below for details) shares the concept of the target scenario that customer-specific solutions are composed of products, that are developed independently of specific customers and that are reusable and adaptable for a variety of such solutions. The model is independent of discipline-specific aspects in the development of such products, i.e. similar to ISO/IEC 15288 there are no processes specific to the development of e.g. mechanical, electrical, or software products or system elements, respectively.In terms of ISO/IEC 15288 a system is composed of general system elements [5]. In the ISB-PRM, the term ‘product’ refers to these general system elements, thus both system meta-models can be considered compatible. The system meta-model of ISO/IEC 15288 features a system-of-interest and the decomposition into system elements, which again can be systems and may be further decomposed accordingly [5]. Similarly, the system-of-interest and any system element it is built of may be developed as a product and – in terms of the ISB-PRM meta-model – can be regarded as a system product, accordingly.With respect to the second research strand, the proposed process reference add-on model to ISO/IEC 12207 is also conformant with ISO/IEC 15288. It shares the same system meta-model and provides system-level product management, reuse, and support processes. Additionally, the meta-model regards discipline-specific system elements which eventually emerge at some point in the system decomposition. The proposed process model specifically focuses on software elements as one kind of such discipline-specific system elements and provides the respective processes.Finally, the life cycle processes provided by ISO/IEC 15288 can be applied recursively for all the system elements, if appropriate [5]. A similar recursion is envisioned in the enhancement to ISO/IEC 15288 presented here, if the overall system is developed and managed as a system product, and at the same time is built from a managed set of products. The product- and reuse-oriented processes provided in this article may thus also be applied recursively to system elements that are developed as products, if applicable.The work on developing the ISB-PRM as an ISO/IEC 15504 conformant process reference model for the industrial solutions business was based on the integration of the paradigms of reuse and product-orientation by unifying and integrating a process reference model for reuse in industrial engineering and a product-oriented process model for the engineering of industrial solutions, both developed in cooperation with Siemens AG Corporate Technology.Based on the understanding of the contents and relationships between both underlying models, which was supported by a detailed analysis of the individual process purposes and process outcomes, the ISB-PRM has been developed and proposed in [4], depicting and integrating the key contents of both base models. The proper construction of the ISB-PRM has been based on a bidirectional mapping of the two base models on process purpose level and a subsequent analysis of the mapping results. Basically, all processes of the two underlying base models were incorporated into the ISB-PRM. The product-oriented process model for the engineering of industrial solutions was selected as the leading model and its naming and terminology scheme was used for the resulting ISB-PRM and incorporating the base model's processes. Fig. 2shows the structure of the ISB-PRM.The analysis of the ISB-PRM against the international standard ISO/IEC 15288 was performed in a bidirectional way, i.e. for each process of each model it was identified through analysis of process purpose definitions and process outcomes to which degree it is thematically covered by processes of the other model using an NPLF-rating scale (None, Partially, Largely, Fully). The detailed results of this analysis are provided in [14]. The major results can be summarized as follows:•As project management was not in the focus of the ISB-PRM's base models, the ISB-PRM does not address the majority of the ISO/IEC 15288 project and project-enabling processes in a satisfactory manner, although ISO/IEC 15288's Risk Management Process and Measurement Process are already part of the ISB-PRM's support processes.While in ISO/IEC 15288 “the project has been chosen as the context for describing processes concerned with planning, execution, and assessment and control” [5], in the ISB-PRM, especially with product-orientation, there are continuous activities like the development or enhancement of reusable products, which are not necessarily part of a project.ISO/IEC 15288 processes Acquisition Process, Operation Process, and Disposal Process are not or just partially addressed in the ISB-PRM.ISO/IEC 15288 does not explicitly address processes for reuse and product-orientation, e.g. processes of the ISB-PRM's Strategic Product Planning category or its Asset Management Process.The ISB-PRM does not provide details on the realization of a solution, although the technical support of these activities is addressed, while ISO/IEC 15288 specifically distinguishes an Implementation Process, Integration Process, Verification Process, and Transition Process. The reasons for this lie in the engineering focused context in which the ISB-PRM and its base models were developed.An analysis of the detailed results of the comparison with respect to potential enhancements of ISO/IEC 15288 highlights the following issues (cf. [14] for details):•While the majority of the ISB-PRM processes which address typical customer acquisition, solution development, and support topics are well covered in ISO/IEC 15288, there is a clear lack of coverage and provision of detail of processes related to reuse and product-orientation.Currently unaddressed ISB-PRM processes could be added to ISO/IEC 15288 by means of two additional process groups — a ‘Reuse Processes’ group comprising the ISB-PRM's Domain Analysis Process, Asset Management Process, and Reuse Program Management Process, and a ‘Product Planning’ group comprising the Product Strategy Process, Commercialization Planning Process, and the Product Development Planning Process, addressing the development of reusable system elements or products, independently of an actual customer request or order.Non-conformances are addressed in ISO/IEC 15288 mostly on the task level, while in the ISB-context they imply high financial and project risks and require comprehensive management. Therefore, the Non-Conformance Costs Management Process could either be added to the ISO/IEC 15288 ‘Project Processes’ group, or integrated with its Risk Management Process.Generally, the underlying process meta-model of ISO/IEC 15288 aids the consistent integration of additional processes. From a structure and granularity perspective, the ISB-PRM in some cases provides more detailed processes than ISO/IEC 15288 that could serve as lower-level processes, similar to the concept applied in ISO/IEC 12207, where specific process activities are replaced by lower-level processes.Based on the results of the comparison of the ISB-PRM and ISO/IEC 15288, we can identify six key process candidates for enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with practices for reuse- and product-oriented engineering of system products. The following paragraphs shortly characterize these key processes, which are not covered by ISO/IEC 15288. The detailed proposal for the definition of the respective process purposes and process outcomes is provided in Section 6 below as part of the overall, integrated add-on process reference model. Moreover, initial process definitions for these processes can be found in [23].Firstly, a ‘System Reuse Processes’ group is suggested, based on the ISB-PRM's Domain Analysis Process, Reuse Program Management Process, and Asset Management Process (cf. Fig. 3).The Domain Analysis Process aims to describe and characterize an application area or domain for which one or more system products are provided in order to satisfy the requirements of the stakeholders in this domain. This includes the identification of domain-typical terms, objects, concepts, problems, and solutions that are understood by practitioners in the specific area and the knowledge how to build systems in this domain. Further, it comprises the analysis of the identified elements, their interrelationships, and the relationships to elements outside the domain as well as the definition of the domain borders. It is essential for the identification of appropriate system products and reusable assets to capture the domain commonalities and domain variability they have to realize.The Reuse Program Management Process aims to plan, initiate, and coordinate various reuse related efforts and projects throughout the organization in order to efficiently exploit reuse opportunities, establish reuse as a key concept and business driver in the organization, and support the achievement of the organization's business goals. An organization-wide reuse program is vital for ensuring focused, coordinated, effective, and efficient reuse activities.The Asset Management Process aims to establish the infrastructure for efficient administration and maintenance of an organization's catalog or library of reusable assets and to manage these assets over their entire life cycle. Making reusable assets and information about them available and easily accessible for potential users is a prerequisite for the acceptance and successful utilization of assets.Secondly, a ‘System Product Processes’ group is suggested, based on the ISB-PRM's Product Strategy Process, Product Development Planning Process, and Commercialization Planning Process. These processes operate independently of specific projects and therefore are suggested to be added as a separate group (cf. Fig. 3).The Product Strategy Process aims to define the business goals and major characteristics and features of the overall system product as well as those kinds of system elements that are intended to be developed project-independently as reusable products. The respective basic reuse approaches to be applied for these products are also determined. The product strategy has to be in line with the business strategy and the requirements of the markets that are addressed with the system product. Thus, the process fosters long-term strategic thinking about products which is vital for efficient product development and business success.The Product Development Planning Process aims to roughly define the system product and which products it is built from and to determine a plan with defined milestones and the major features to be implemented in the long-term in form of a roadmap for the system product. Due to potentially manifold interdependencies between products, foresighted planning is required to coordinate development and enhancement of the individual products.The Commercialization Planning Process determines how the system product will be introduced into the market by means of market positioning, pricing models, advertisements, etc. These aspects have to be analyzed early in the system product's life cycle because they may impact realization-related processes, activities, or early design decisions (e.g. by setting a maximum limit for production costs, or setting time constraints based on market or competitor information). This process aims to prevent a misalignment of products with market needs and to ensure product success.Further, the addition of the ISB-PRM's Non-conformance Costs Management Process was suggested in [14]. The Non-conformance Costs Management Process aims to manage the risks and reduce tangible and intangible costs induced by non-conformances of the product to internal and external requirements. In the ISB-PRM the process served as a support process due to the potentially high impact such costs might have in the ISB. Nevertheless, this may not be the general case in a systems engineering context. Therefore, this process is not suggested for inclusion in the extension of ISO/IEC 15288 as proposed here, but if required may be used as part of the ISO/IEC 15288 Risk Management Process, since non-conformances basically are a special kind of risk and thus in principal are covered by this process.With advancing product-orientation a product landscape emerges that requires systematic management of the system products in order to sustain successful product-oriented development. Therefore, more sophisticated product management practices are needed that go beyond the basic system product processes as identified in Section 4 above.Taking advantage of the fact that ISO/IEC 12207 foresees a ‘system context’ for the software life cycle processes in the focus of the standard, we analyze preliminary research results on a process reference model that enhances ISO/IEC 12207 with the concepts of integrated software- and system-level product management and reuse, and identify the key process candidates for the envisioned enhancement of ISO/IEC 15288 with product management.In an effort to support organizations which develop software and software-intensive systems in the transition from project-oriented to product-oriented engineering, we proposed an ISO/IEC 15504 conformant process reference model for use in process assessment and improvement [15]. The model (cf. Fig. 4) can be used as an add-on to ISO/IEC 12207 and aims to support the exploitation of improvement potentials by pursuing an integrated view on productization and reuse on both the software as well as the system level, and from an organizational and business as well as an engineering perspective.The development of the model was based on previous research on developing a process reference model specifically for software product management [19], which aims to support establishing software product management as the key intermediary between business and core software engineering activities. The model resulted from the identification of essential software product management activities through analyses of selected frameworks for software product management [24] and software product line engineering [10,25], and of software process models [26]. The resulting process reference model and its integration with ISO/IEC 12207 on software life cycle processes is described in detail in [19]. The respective software-specific processes were used (with some adaptations) for the system-level reuse and product management processes of the integrated model as depicted in Fig. 4.The identification of the system-level processes, i.e. processes of the System Product Management Processes and System Reuse Processes group in Fig. 4, was on the one hand based on the analysis of software-specific product management and reuse processes and their applicability for the system context of software engineering. On the other hand, the synthesized key processes for enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with reuse and product-orientation as described in Section 4.2 were also integrated. The key decisions and rationales that lead to the integration of the system context processes as shown in Fig. 4 can be found in detail in [15].From the integrated process reference model for software- and system-level reuse and product management (cf. Fig. 4) key process candidates for enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with product management practices for system products can be identified. Fig. 5depicts the respective process candidates. The following paragraphs shortly characterize these processes.The System Product Portfolio Planning Process is a lightweight adaptation of the respective Software Product Portfolio Management Process and addresses portfolio and life cycle management in combination. It focuses on the basic analysis, strategic alignment, and resource requirements of system products, which typically are long living products that do not change as frequently as respective software products.The System Product Roadmapping Process aims at the long-term planning of system products, future features, technologies, and schedules for implementation.The System Product Controlling Process addresses the specific system product goals, the development of respective measurements, and the constant monitoring of their achievement. It also provides the basic controlling of the use of assets within system products.The System Requirements Engineering and Management Process aims to capture the requirements of the various external and internal stakeholders involved with the systems developed by the organization, and to appropriately map these requirements onto the system products and reusable assets.The System Product Strategy Process aims to define the strategy for the system products, i.e. strategic product goals, objectives, and unique product characteristics and has to ensure that the system product strategy is aligned with the overall business strategy and communicated to all relevant stakeholders.The System Product Development Planning Process addresses the technical planning of the development efforts for a system product. This includes, among others, to define the basic product structure, the products or assets it is built from, but also to lay out a schedule with milestones for the realization of the system product.The System Product Commercialization Planning Process addresses the planning of the activities required for a successful market introduction of a system product and respective marketing, pricing, or advertisement strategies. Such tasks should be addressed in system product development as early as possible.The System Product Management Support Processes depicted in Fig. 5 were originally developed to support the software specific processes for product management (cf. [19]), but are equally important and appropriate to support the system-level product management processes in the integrated model. The characterizations given in [19] basically also apply here, with only slight adaptations with regard to the extended system context:•The Market Monitoring Process comprises the observation and analysis of the external factors that determine the success of a product in the marketplace.The Customer Interface Management Process comprises the understanding and management of commitments between an organization's producers and its customers.The Funding Process covers the activities to plan and establish adequate financing of product development efforts undertaken in the organization. It includes the identification of appropriate funding sources and the definition of funding requirements and models. The funds must be sufficient with respect to the desired quality of results.The Product Innovation Process aims at the extension of the product portfolio with new or enhanced products that satisfy customer needs. Various strategies and sources for idea generation can be utilized.Based on the identified process candidates for enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with basic product-orientation and reuse (cf. Section 4.2) and product management (cf. Section 5.2), we propose the following integrated add-on process reference model to ISO/IEC 15288 (cf. Fig. 6). The additional processes are structured into three process groups – System Product Management Processes, System Reuse Processes, and Product Management Support Processes – which are described in detail in the following sub-sections.Some of the System Product Management Processes (namely the System Product Strategy Process, the System Product Development Planning Process, and the System Product Commercialization Planning Process) overlap or are similar with parts of both identified sets of candidate processes (cf. Figs. 3 and 5). The reason for this is, that the results presented in Section 4 on enhancing ISO/IEC 15288 with reuse and product-orientation were also used as an input in the second research strand (cf. Section 5) on enhancing ISO/IEC 12207 with system- and software-level reuse and product management. The initial purpose and outcome descriptions of the respective candidate processes from Section 4.2 are provided in [23] and are adapted for the integrated ISO/IEC 15288 add-on model.Table 1provides the purpose and outcome definitions for the processes of the System Product Management Processes group. The definitions of the System Product Strategy Process, System Product Development Planning Process, and the System Product Commercialization Planning Process are based on the process descriptions for the respective processes provided in [23] and adapted where required. The definitions of the remaining processes in the System Product Management Processes group are adaptations of the respective software-specific process descriptions provided in [19].Table 2provides the purpose and outcome definitions for the processes of the System Product Management Support Processes group. The definitions are adapted from the respective software-specific process descriptions as provided in [19].Table 3provides the purpose and outcome definitions for the processes of the System Reuse Processes group. The definitions are based on the respective process descriptions provided in [23] and adapted where required.Fig. 7shows the proposed structure of ISO/IEC 15288 including the proposed enhancements to cover reuse and product management at system level. The three process groups for system product management, system reuse, and product management support are integrated into the standard's process structure as separate process groups in order to emphasize the project-independent character of product- and reuse-related processes.The System Requirements Engineering and Management Process (cf. System Product Management Processes group) is not required to be added as a separate process. It is partly covered by the Stakeholder Requirements Definition Process and Requirements Analysis Process of ISO/IEC 15288. Missing process outcomes, i.e. those which address system products specifically, are foreseen for integration there.As outlined in the introductory section, the validation of the results of this work is based on three pillars: the validation of the base models that have been used as input to the analysis activities, the presentation of the resulting model to domain and process experts, and the real-world application of the model in industry settings.With respect to validation of the base models, for the processes of the add-on System Product Management Processes group, the Product Management Support Processes group, and the System Reuse Processes group, the corresponding processes from the software and software-intensive engineering domain (cf. Fig. 4) have been applied successfully in a real-world scenario for assessing the engineering and management of two complex software products [27]. It was confirmed by the participants of the assessed organization that the descriptions of the processes and their elements had a satisfactory level of clarity and were easy to understand. The model was considered complete and well applicable to support understanding and evaluation of product management practices (cf. [27]). Although we still have to show that these properties are also valid for the corresponding add-on processes within the system engineering context, these results provide us with confidence to successfully achieve this goal. Additionally, the base models underlying the development of the ISB-PRM (cf. Fig. 2), i.e. a process reference model for reuse in industrial engineering and a product-oriented process model for the engineering of industrial solutions, were both successfully applied within Siemens AG Corporate Technology [15,28].With respect to the presentation of the resulting model to domain and process experts, the model has on the one side been presented to and discussed with domain experts from the group of our partner companies, primarily involved in the industrial engineering and manufacturing domain; on the other side it has been presented and discussed with process and – partly – domain experts from the academic and research community. Both activities focused on validating the models goals and process definitions and confirmed a principal fit of these model elements with industry needs and reference process modeling requirements and constraints.The final model as depicted in Fig. 7, i.e. ISO/IEC 15288 enhanced with reuse and product management processes, has not yet been validated through real-world application. Nevertheless, the positive response to the search for organizations that are suited and willing to participate in a real-world application of the model again indicates a high compliance of the models overall goals with industry needs. Due to the complexity of the model it is foreseen here to undertake this validation in multiple steps, involving at the beginning only parts of the proposed add-on model and their interaction with other parts and in particular the original processes of ISO/IEC 15288.The article presented the background, underlying models and preceding work that provided the foundation for synthesizing the key processes and process outcomes for enhancing the international standard ISO/IEC 15288 on system life cycle processes with product- and reuse-oriented as well as product management practices.Based on the analysis of the results of the comparison of a process reference model for the industrial solutions business (ISB-PRM), covering the concepts of product-oriented reuse at system level, against ISO/IEC 15288, and the analysis of a proposal for a process reference model extending ISO/IEC 12207 with software- and system-level product management and reuse, an outline for the extension of ISO/IEC 15288 was proposed that includes the addition of a ‘System Product Management Processes’, a ‘System Reuse Processes’ and a ‘Product Management Support Processes’ group.The addition of product management and reuse-oriented processes that inherently cross the life cycle of systems and that are independent of specific projects was appropriately supported by the continuous architecture of ISO/IEC 15288 and the suggested enhancements appear considerably suitable.The initial validation of the work, covering validation through real-world application of the analyzed base models and discussion of the proposed model with domain and process experts indicates a satisfactory state of model development and fit of the model's goals with industry and standardization needs. Nevertheless, further refinement, validation, and probably consolidation of the purposes and outcomes of the additional processes have to be performed, in particular with respect to their detailed interfaces and interplay with the existing ISO/IEC 15288 system life cycle processes.As outlined in Section 5.1, in a related research strand a software product management process reference model was proposed together with its integration with ISO/IEC 12207 on software life cycle processes (cf. [19]). Considering the ongoing endeavors at the level of international standardization towards harmonization of ISO/IEC 12207 and ISO/IEC 15288 and the resulting alignment of their system context processes, it seems reasonable to examine the possibilities for integrating the proposed enhancements to both standards in order to provide an integrated framework for product management and reuse on the overall system level but also on the level of discipline-specific system elements. The results presented here – together with the results derived in [19] on extending ISO/IEC 12207 with software product management practices – can be judged a solid basis and starting point for such an undertaking. Such integration for contexts where software – as a discipline-specific system element – is developed as product but also is part of a software-intensive system or system product, was the aim of the work presented in [15].Since industrial systems are often comprised of mechanical, electrical, or other discipline-specific products or are integrated mechatronic products, investigations on the applicability of the proposed enhancements to such discipline-specific contexts are considered useful and promising.When aiming towards customer-specific but at the same time product-oriented development, variability management and the traceability of requirements to the different customers and product variants are key issues (cf. [29]). It remains to be analyzed whether and how these issues have to be addressed on process level within the context of the enhancements suggested in this article.Further, it should be evaluated how the proposed enhancements to ISO/IEC 15288 support the handling of multiple system families or multiple system product lines that share common assets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
