@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Information technology service management models applied to medium and small organizations: A systematic literature review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A systematic literature review was performed to gather experiences in the applications of ITSM models in small companies.We found primary studies apply to IT areas from some large and medium companies and a few in small companies.The principal difficulty was the lack of knowledge its personnel and consultants have, for adopting a model.Some benefits reported were processes improvement, higher user satisfaction, and service cost and time reduction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Service process model,ITIL,ISO/IEC 20000,CMMI-SVC,Small organization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
(ANTECEDENT) The main responsibility of the Information Technology Service Management (ITSM) as an organization is to provide services in high level quality. That implies that the services will be an appropriate service and it will ensure continuity. In this context, the organization needs to adopt the best practices in service management to be more efficient and competitive. Some ITSM models collect the best practices of recognized organizations. These models are mainly applied by large organizations. (OBJECTIVE) The objective of this study is to gather experiences in the application of ITSM models in small organizations. (METHODS) To achieve this objective a systematic literature review was performed. (RESULTS) We found primary studies applied to IT areas from some large and medium companies but there is a few in small companies' context. (CONCLUSION) During the SLR we have identified some improvements and difficulties in many organizations, we have founded when applying ITSM models. The principal difficulty was the lack of knowledge of its personnel and consultants have, for adopting a model. On the other hand, companies who succeeded in the application of an ITSM model, had founded some benefits, such as processes improvement, higher user satisfaction, and service cost and time reduction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the last decades – since the early 80s to the present – the use of Information Technology (IT) became the most important support for business, regardless of the company size or sector it belongs [1].In pursuit of return on investment and the use of IT in business, the measurement of the services provides managers with strategic information to make a decision [11]. The mass use of IT systems and the increasing reliance of enterprises on these systems, result in the need for greater quality, reliability and safety. Large organizations created internal complex structures for operations and some activities were outsourced. On the other hand, small and medium organizations cannot maintain a similar infrastructure because it's expensive.In recent years, opportunities for IT providers have grown. In this context, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) become an important element to offer IT services [42], the same situation happens in very small organization (e.g., IT area).There are many definitions of the size of enterprises. A very small organization and a very small entity “is defined as a company, unit, area, department or project up to 25 people” [17]. In addition to this, the European Union is defined as a small business, including a software company, that has “less than 20 employees” and the medium-sized software company count is “between 20 and 100 employees” [40].Some studies of service management in SMEs mention that there is a gap between the knowledge of ITSM frameworks and their implementation [12] [23] [30]. Kuller's study mentions that 52% of European SMEs know ITSM frameworks but only 10% applies a model. For some authors [12] [15] [23] [29] [30] the main problems are: the complexity of the models and the lack of knowledge and guidelines for the adoption of models.The ITSM claims to align IT efforts with business needs and manage provision of IT services with effectiveness [5]. In recent years, process models for ITSM and their application in organizations have grown significantly. There are several models and standards that represent the best practices for ITSM, like the IT Infrastructure Library® (ITIL®2011) [37], CMMI® for Services Version 1.3 (CMMI-SVC) [6], COBIT®5 (Control Objectives for Information and related Technology) [2], Microsoft® Operations Framework 4.0 (MOF 4.0) [36], HP Service Management Framework [2], and among others; but according to Mesquida [33] in his systematic review only ISO/IEC 20000, ITIL®2011 and CMMI-SVC are the most used.This article presents a systematic literature review (SLR) on IT service models that have been applied to small organizations. The article is organized as follows: in Section 2 the service process models are presented; in Section 3 the method of SLR and its activities are described; Section 4 summarizes the results obtained; Section 5 includes an analysis of the results by answering the research questions and Section 6 final discussion and recommendations for future works are shown.In the eighties, reflecting the growing complexity of IT in organizations, standards were developed based on concepts of IT management. Those standards, that collect the best practices, afford to guide and manage IT services with efficacy [1] [2]. Some of the models are:•ITIL is a collection of guidelines for help to conduct IT services [1]. This model is focused on ITSM lifecycle [37].ISO/IEC 20000 is an international standard for ITSM, promotes the best practices for planning, implementing, and improving a service management system [16].CMMI-SVC provides best practices in a service provider organization; these practices are focused on activities for providing quality IT services [6].COBIT5 is a framework for governance and management of IT organization; it provides the elements to help increase the value from information systems [7].MOF is a framework that includes ITSM lifecycle, combines business goals and IT goals; it permits to establish and implement reliable and cost effective IT services [36].In Ref. [35] we find a comparison table between the process models: ITIL, ISO/IEC 20000 and COBIT5, see Table 1.The SLR is widely used in medicine due to the study of evidence and development of empirical research, more rigorous research than software engineering, according to Keele [21]. However Kitchenham et al. [49] found out that the SRL is being used more and more in the field of software engineering, being considered as a good research methodology for software engineering topics. Kitchenham [22] shows us a framework for a reliable, rigorous and auditable software engineering research. This framework has three phases: planning review, implementation review and reporting review [10,22], which can be seen in Fig. 1. Then we will proceed with the development of activities for each phase.The SLR was performed in order to answer the question: What experiences have been developed in ITSM for medium and small organizations? The following activities are described:One of the first elements to be defined in the review protocol refers to the research questions [22]:•Kitchenham [22] considered a research question from three viewpoints (see Table 2).Therefore, we define the general question in Table 3and research questions in Table 4.As part of the strategy to search for primary studies, some exclusion and inclusion criteria were defined to use in the selection process, as shown in Table 5. To obtain a subset of relevant primary studies, the selection process was performed described in Table 6.Then, to evaluate the quality of the last subset of studies the following questions were considered:•Has the selected study been published in journals, conferences, meetings or any workshops?Does the selected study allows for answering the research questions?Finally, as strategy for data extraction and data synthesis, we create dimensions and categories to classify data (Table 7). It was important for classifying data, comparing and contrasting evidences to generate answers to the research questions.The dimension “Proposals” consider the following definitions:•Framework. — A design of a model or code that would be reusable, refined or extended to provide support for many applications [18,46].Model. — A representation of relevant aspects about the entity under study [18,46].Method. — A usual or regular way to do something [48].Methodology. — A group of practices, techniques or procedures organized in a systematic way and used by practitioners [18,47].The activities described in the previous section were performed by the following protocol review to solve the research questions.To build a search string we followed a strategy defined in Section 3.1.1. The group of logical sentences for the search string is listed below.•Population: (“CMMI-SVC” OR “20000” OR “ITIL” OR “model” OR “framework”) AND (“service process” OR “service processes” OR “service management system”)Intervention: (“small setting” OR “small entities” OR “medium company” OR “SME”) AND (“enterprise” OR “organization”)Results: (“lesson learned” OR “case study” OR “action research” OR “experience” OR “implementation” OR “adoption” OR “critical factors”)Final judgment: Population AND Intervention AND ResultsThese sentences are shown as a structure in Table 8, and they were adapted for each digital library used. Digital libraries that are used in this SLR are shown in Table 9. An evaluation is performed over the search results based on the selection criteria.The results of the research in digital libraries produced a total of 1103 studies, but the exclusion criteria were applied in the first stage of selection, achieving a subset of 380 studies. Then, the inclusion criteria were applied in the following steps producing the results as shown in Table 10.During the review of abstracts, we found relevant information about models and service management processes. However, at the end of the fourth stage, we could notice that some of these articles can answer the first research question; they are not related to model implementation experiences in organizations. Finally, a subset of 21 primary studies were obtained, which were analyzed by the researchers (See Table 11).To assess the quality of primary studies we checked if the publications were subjected to a rigorous review process. It was found that 17 items were presented at scientific conferences and the remaining in indexed journals (See Table 12).Additionally, Fig. 2shows a progressive evolution of research on processes of ITSM, therefore, a clear concern to develop the ITSM topic. The largest numbers of studies were found between 2010 and 2013, coinciding with periods of publications of international models for IT services. For example, the updated version of ITIL was released in 2011; ISO/IEC 20000 standard had updates in some series in 2010 and 2011, and also CMMI-SVC in 2010.Based on the strategy of extraction and synthesis of data we notice the following:The majority (90.5%) of the studies choose an empirical research. From those empirical researches were case studies (16), in which some elaboration and application of models or processes for IT services. Some of these articles also conducted surveys (see Table 13).We notice that the studies about the process models for IT services are the most important topic in researches (38.1%) as shown in Table 14.Primary studies were based on IT service models recognized internationality. These models are shown in Table 11. We remark that ITIL®2011 was the primary framework (85.7%) within the research followed by COBIT5, CMMI-SVC and ISO/IEC 20000. In Table 15it is important to note that ITIL®2011 is the most referred framework and the oldest one used in the studies (Table 14).For the preparation of proposals, the primary research focused in the needs of their organizations to work some processes of IT services (see Table 16). The names of the processes indicated in Table 16 correspond to the names used in the organizations mentioned in the primary studies. Some studies [9,15,23,29,38] do not mention process adoptions therefore they were not considered. Incident management (47.1%), service level agreements management (29.4%) and problem management (29.4%) were the most worked service processes. It does not perform 100% because some references describe more than one process.Based on the types of organization defined in Table 7 we can see that there are more studies on companies (76.2%) than the units or areas of a company (23.8%). More studies were found in the largest companies (23.8%), in SMEs (14.3%) and business units (23.8%) as shown in Table 17.From previous results, we notice that there is a concern for defining and evaluating service processes, because there have been efforts to create and adopt process models to improve service management process. Additionally, these applications have been made in large IT work environments, as well as business units or areas. There are few studies about the adoption of process models in small organizations (9.5%).With the data and information obtained in the previous section we can answer the research questions.According to the results of the reviewed, we found that, in most cases, proposal or models, they were created in accordance with the needs and problems of the organizations. These proposal or models were based on most recognized frameworks. Table 18presents articles describing the created models.Most of the proposals founded were created for processes as service management and incident management. We did not find any model or proposal that has worked or applied all the processes of international models for ITSM. Additionally, these proposal or models were mostly applied in organizations such as: large companies, small–medium enterprises and units or areas of a company (See Table 17).Any of the models found cannot be generalized because they are in accordance with a very particular need of the organization that implemented them.However, due to the creation and implementation of these models, it can be identified: improvements that organizations achieved, recommendations and difficulties.As a result of the implementation of models, the organizations achieved better performance in key activities. In most cases, the concern was to improve service management and incident management, among other processes. Improvements in communication with users and better understanding for the service are provided (see Table 19).Following the recommendations proposed in various investigations (Table 20), we can mention that to implement the process models it must be determined: the problem to be solved and be clear about the business goals. The application of the model should not only solve the problems or needs, but have a positive impact on business objectives.Training is an essential task before the creation or adoption of a model and then in the model application stage. Responsible for creating a model or adopting one must have knowledge of existing good practices, models or international standards. When you have created the model for the organization and guidelines for adoption, it is important to plan a training phase where all members of the organization have knowledge of the processes and activities to be performed.Research suggests defining the IT service catalog and service level agreements as part of service management improvement of the organization. This helps to describe better the processes or strategy to adopt an existing model. Some authors [12] [23] mentioned that ITSM frameworks are complex, for example: Kuller, in his research, did not consider complete models but he combined several models based on requirements and needs of small and medium enterprises.Some additional recommendations are: to achieve the involvement, through the participation and commitment of heads of organizations, to include experts in the field, to define a plan for improvement work.Finally, as additional experience, we can discuss the difficulties (see Table 21) what researchers found. One of these difficulties for organizations is to select an existing model and processes to develop; we can state that this is related to the recommendation about training. Additionally, there are very complex frameworks, which added to the lack of motivation, that make it difficult to the development of a process improvement project.We can state that there are a few studies on the application process model for IT services in small organizations. Bartolini [3] wrote that the interest in IT process management has a few years so there are few studies in academic literature [3].Studies found that organizations are becoming aware of the importance of service process model implementation. Some organizations know about best practices or the models like ITIL®2011 and ISO/IEC 20000; however, the problem is how these organizations apply these models. For that, we suggest that organizations need to define a strategy to adopt a model such as ISO/EC 20000, but also they have to be sure about improvement needs to apply good practices.In accordance with the aforementioned, we need a theme to develop in future work that is to define a roadmap or a base model or combined frameworks with low complexity for organizations. This can facilitate the processes improvement for IT services in the SME.As we can check, there are particular initiatives for large or medium-sized organizations but not for small organizations. If we consider that some authors mentioned: (a) the complexity of some models and (b) that small organizations with fewer resources and their processes are less complex than large organizations; therefore, a low-complexity model could be more helpful for these organizations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
