@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Social4all: Definition of specific adaptations in Web applications to improve accessibility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automatic detection of accessibility problems in websitesAssistant to generate solutions to accessibility problems in websitesApproach to generate accessible versions of websites without modifying the original codeNew approach to improve the web accessibilityExpert system to improve the web accessibility

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web accessibility,Accessibility evaluation,Automatic evaluation tools,Web adaptation,Web application,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Web accessibility guidelines help developers to create websites which can more easily be used by people with different limitations. The principles and techniques of accessibility focus on the suitable use of standard Web components, alternative methods to present information, and alternatives to facilitate user interaction. Currently, the biggest part in creating accessible websites is played by Web developers, because they manage the page code. Unfortunately, there are millions of websites which do not follow accessibility guidelines, as this usually requires great effort and knowledge of accessibility issues. This research aims to create a platform, based on a novel approach, which allows a set of accessibility problems to be solved without modifying the original page code. The proposed platform is able to analyse websites and detect many accessibility problems automatically; after this, a guided assistant is used to offer adequate solutions to each detected problem. The assistant tries to abstract references to Web implementation issues and to explain every accessibility problem in an understandable way for non-technical people. This new approach could be useful to improve the level of accessibility of many websites for people besides Web developers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Web accessibility is a key issue to ensure that people with different disabilities can use the Web. Some people with disabilities have a lot of problems perceiving and interacting with Web applications [1]. Web accessibility principles and techniques focus on the suitable use of standard Web components, the use of alternative methods to present information, and alternative systems to facilitate user interaction. Web accessibility includes recommendations related to text size and style, presentation of multimedia information, description of links, use of mouse events, navigation systems, page organization, colours and contrast, forms, pop-ups, and many other Web elements. (See Table 1.)These accessibility measures are very useful because some people with disabilities could find the use of some features of websites very complex. Therefore, the main aim is to facilitate the use of websites for persons with low vision, deafness, speech disabilities, cognitive limitations or neurological disabilities. Millions of people in the world have these kinds of problems and must still be able to use the Web [2]. According to European Union data, between 10% and 15% of the population of the European Union 27 have some type of disability [3].There are some important guidelines in existence which can help developers to create websites with good accessibility. One of the most extensive sets is WCAG 2.0, which covers a wide range of recommendations for developing accessible Web content. WCAG 2.0 is an evolution of WCAG, which was published in May 1999. W3C recommends compliance with this guide. According to WCAG criteria it is possible that some websites require a greater level of accessibility than others; for this reason WCAG proposes three different accessibility levels from lowest to highest [4] Level A, Level AA and Level AAA.The Section 508 1194.22 Standards Guide is another popular set of guidelines [5,6], which provides recommendations on many of the issues also covered in WCAG 2.0.Unfortunately, millions of websites do not follow accessibility guidelines, as this can require great effort and knowledge about accessibility on the part of the Web developer. It is a very complex task to estimate how many websites have accessibility problems. There are millions of sites on the Web and accessibility reports encompass only an insignificant part of them: most accessibility reports focus on popular networks, or networks which provide institutional services, e.g., for hospitals, universities, and governments. In many countries accessibility guidelines must complement government or public websites as a legal obligation. Many reports and academic studies have focused on an analysis of the fulfilment of accessibility guidelines in some specific areas such as education [7,8] or government services [9].The most part of the responsibility for Web accessibility falls upon Web developers, who need to apply the recommended techniques during implementation and maintenance processes [10,11]. They need to make extra efforts to ensure that websites are suitable for different types of users, including users who may be unable to perceive information and navigation systems in the same way as others. Accessibility has to be analysed and tested like other website requirements [12].The team involved in the development of a website has to know the accessibility guidelines inside out, and to be aware how to present information in the right way, along with alternatives for people with disabilities. Developers also have to know how to properly use HTML, CSS and JavaScript elements. To evaluate the accessibility of a website, developers can carry out a set of validations and checks throughout the development process or during the testing phase.There are different methods to evaluate accessibility issues; the most effective is the use of accessibility experts to examine all the website and evaluate whether the code and user interfaces meet all the requirements specified by an accessibility guideline, for example WCAG Level AA. Guidelines outline all the issues that developers have to check in websites; many of these need to be interpreted carefully as they can be expressed in an ambiguous way. For example, developers should check whether alternative descriptions of an image describe the image correctly or not.The team in charge of checking website accessibility can use certain defined tests [13,14]. Some research works have proposed specific tests, surveys or procedures to assist developers in responding to accessibility issues [15,16].Some tools can detect certain accessibility problems automatically. These tools can also offer some assistance in human evaluation, for example searching a website for potential errors, which must then be evaluated manually later [17–19]. These tools are not enough to automate solutions of accessibility problems but are a great help to save time in the process of finding such problems [20].Web accessibility faces important challenges, including in particular the following: 1) There are a lot of websites on the Web which do not meet accessibility guidelines; 2) Many elements of accessibility techniques are highly subjective, for example alternative descriptions may be suitable for people with certain limitations, but not for others.These two problems have no unique and direct solution, because they are motivated by a wide range of different factors. Websites might not follow accessibility guidelines due to various reasons: sometimes the Web developers are not committed to accessibility; in other cases they do not have enough time to check all accessibility issues, or may even not be familiar with the accessibility concept. The creation of automatic tools to assist developers in accessibility evaluations could help in accessibility adoption in many websites.Many problems related to the subjectivity of some accessibility issues can be solved if the website has more than one version. It could be very useful for example for a website to have a version with alternative descriptions for people with limited vision and another version for people with cognitive limitations; probably, the information needed in order to understand the content will not be the same for people with different limitations [21].Another measure to improve the accessibility level of websites is the promotion of the implication of more people in the accessibility adoption. Currently, a lot of organizations and old people assistants are interested in Web accessibility but they cannot choose to make their websites accessible because website developers are the only people with the necessary expertise. Organizations need the collaboration of website developers, and this commitment can be very difficult to obtain in many cases. Also another other profiles related to technology could be interested in use this kind of services like SEO consultants and industries 4.0 experts.The main objective of this research is to create a novel platform which allows a set of accessibility problems to be solved for any website, without the need to modify the original code of the website, as sometimes it is difficult to include the original developers in tasks related to Web accessibility. The proposal intends to enable the detection of different types of non-accessible content, and to provide an adequate mechanism to fix these accessibility issues. The mechanism to fix the problems has to be suitable for people without programming skills. The platform must try to abstract references to Web technologies, and must explain every problem in an understandable way that is accessible to people without technical expertise. In many cases people who belong to organizations know how to explain the concepts for people with limitations — but perhaps these people do not have technical knowledge. For example: a person may be able to define an alternative description for a picture and provide a good summary of a table of data in a specific way for people with cognitive limitations, but the same person may not have Web development knowledge. Finally, one version of a website may be inadequate for people with different limitations to use the website in a comfortable way. Therefore, a dynamic solution must allow the creation of different accessible versions of the same pages and resources, this multiple-version system offering new opportunities to adapt the Web content for different situations and profiles.The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents related works. Section 3 provides a description of the proposed platform. Section 4 presents a use study of the platform. Section 5 presents an evaluation of the results. Finally, Section 6 presents conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This research work aims to create a novel platform which allows a set of accessibility problems to be solved for any website, without the need of modifying the original code.The proposal allows the detection of part of the non-accessible content of a website; after this, the proposed assistant can be used to offer an adequate solution to each detected problem. This assistant has been devised to be suitable for people without experience of Web development. The assistant tries to abstract the references to Web technologies, and explain every problem in an understandable way for non-technical people. During the evaluation process we tested the proposal with a set of users with no Web development knowledge and the results were satisfactory. The users agreed with the usefulness of the proposal.The research has therefore achieved its objectives. The novel approach presented in this platform could provide a useful tool to improve the accessibility of many websites, and allow the resolution of accessibility problems for people with different profiles.There are still issues to be addressed in the proposal, and some commercial accessibility validators are still able to detect more accessibility problems. As next steps, we are going to include new algorithms to detect more accessibility problems and the corresponding mechanisms to solve these problems. Another future research line will seek to include a social network in the platform, to offer the possibility of sharing or commenting on profiles and adaptations.