@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design and comparative evaluation of an iterative contact point estimation method for static stability estimation of mobile actively reconfigurable robots

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a new robot pose prediction method for static stability estimation.The method approximates the terrain by least-squares planes to reduce the runtime.A stochastic version accounts for noise in the robot state and the terrain model.We systematically compared it with a physics simulation in many distinct scenarios.The new method is significantly faster and competitive in realistic situations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Contact point estimation,Static stability,Reconfigurable robots,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to the advancements of robotic systems, they are able to be employed in more unstructured outdoor environments. In such environments the robot–terrain interaction becomes a highly non-linear function. Several methods were proposed to estimate the robot–terrain interaction: machine learning methods, iterative geometric methods, quasi-static and fully dynamic physics simulations. However, to the best of our knowledge there has been no systematic evaluation comparing those methods.In this paper, we present a newly developed iterative contact point estimation method for static stability estimation of actively reconfigurable robots. This new method is systematically compared to a physics simulation in a comprehensive evaluation. Both interaction models determine the contact points between robot and terrain and facilitate a subsequent static stability prediction. Hence, they can be used in our state space global planner for rough terrain to evaluate the robot’s pose and stability. The analysis also compares deterministic versions of both methods to stochastic versions which account for uncertainty in the robot configuration and the terrain model. The results of this analysis show that the new iterative method is a valid and fast approximate method. It is significantly faster compared to a physics simulation while providing good results in realistic robotic scenarios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As the mobility capabilities of robots continue to evolve, they are employed in more challenging terrains. New applications arise and require the adaption of previous methods and the development of new algorithms to be able to navigate safely through cluttered, uneven and rough environments.The space robotics community is investigating advancements in rough terrain traversal to enhance the supervisory control of planetary rovers. Avoiding hazardous situations and predicting the robot mobility are of special concern. Failure to do so could jeopardize an entire multi-billion dollar mission. Rescue robotics also depends on the navigation of mobile robots in rough and unstructured environments. The situations at disaster sites usually require robots with enhanced mobility capabilities. The robots are typically deployed to assist first responders in areas where it is too dangerous for humans.A recent catastrophic event of this kind is the Tohoku earthquake in Japan in 2011 which led to a nuclear meltdown at the nuclear power plant of Fukushima Daiichi. Instead of deploying humans, several different reconfigurable robots, among others iRobot Packbots, were teleoperated to assess the situation in contaminated areas  [1,2]. In an other incident in May 2012 two major earthquakes in northern Italy caused many casualties and severe damage to a large number of historical buildings. In a human–robot teaming project, reconfigurable mobile robots were used to assess the structural integrity of the buildings  [3] since it was too risky for human rescue personnel to enter those sites.As traversing rough terrain requires robots with enhanced mobility capabilities, usually reconfigurable robots are employed in such applications. Field reports point out that the operators are quickly exhausted by the demanding task of teleoperating reconfigurable robots in rugged environments  [4]. A possible solution is to assist operators through suggesting suitable paths in order to increase their situation awareness and reduce mental workload  [5].Safe and efficient motion planning in rough terrain needs a sound analysis of the robot mobility and the terrain traversability. Inclined surfaces increase the risk of tip-over and perturb the motion dynamics. The system’s safety in terms of stability may be estimated by evaluating the geometric shape of the terrain, while identifying roughness and mechanical properties of the terrain may assist in providing dynamically stable paths. In any case, modeling the robot–terrain interaction and determining the 6D robot position and the robot stability given its configuration and the terrain geometry is an essential part in rough terrain navigation. While during navigation sensor readings, e.g. from an inertial measurement unit (IMU), can be used to estimate the robot dynamics as well as its position and attitude, a robot–terrain interaction model is required for an offline global planner in order to provide suitable and feasible plans.In this paper, we present a new iterative method to estimate the contact points of actively reconfigurable robots (Fig. 1). The method requires the robot’s actuator configuration and an approximate terrain model. It determines the robot’s contact points which are used to estimate the static stability of the system. Further, we present a systematic comparison with a quasi-static physics simulation with respect to accuracy and run-time. This analysis involves a deterministic and a stochastic version of both approaches. The stochastic versions account for the uncertainties in the robot configuration and the terrain model. The evaluation provides insight in the performance of these approaches in a variety of different conditions. The experiment series show that the new method provides competitive estimates compared to a physics simulation in many scenarios, especially and more importantly in realistic situations. It is also significantly faster than a physics simulation. Since, the stability of the robot must be evaluated numerous times during planning, a fast robot–terrain interaction model is essential to provide safe paths in a reasonable amount of time.This paper is organized as follows: first, a review of related work provides an overview of the previous work in the area of robot–terrain interaction and stability analysis (Section  2). Section  3 describes the quasi-static physics simulation using the Open Dynamics Engine (ODE) and the newly developed iterative geometric pose estimation method for actively reconfigurable robots. Subsequent sections discuss the stability criterion (Section  4) and the stochastic framework (Section  5). The experimental results are shown in Section  6. We conclude in Section  7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
