@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enabling policy making processes by unifying and reconciling corporate names in public procurement data. The CORFU technique

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We outline the problem and necessity of unifying corporate names in public procurement meta-data.We design and implement a stepwise method, CORFU, to unify corporate names using NLP techniques.We present the Public Spending initiative as a client of the CORFU technique.We evaluate the precision, recall and robustness of the CORFU technique using datasets of corporate names coming from Australia, United States, United Kingdom and the CrocTail project.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Name disambiguation,Public spending,Linked Data,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces the design, implementation and evaluation of the CORFU technique to deal with corporate name ambiguities and heterogeneities in the context of public procurement meta-data. This technique is applied to the “PublicSpending.net” initiative to show how the unification of corporate names is the cornerstone to provide a visualization service that can serve policy-makers to detect and prevent upcoming necessities. Furthermore, a research study to evaluate the precision, recall and robustness of the proposed technique is conducted using more than 40 million of names extracted from public procurement datasets (Australia, United States and United Kingdom) and the CrocTail project.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Public bodies are continuously publishing procurement opportunities in which valuable meta-data is available. Depending on the stage of the process, new data pieces such as the supplier name that has been rewarded with the public contract arise. In this context, the extraction of statistics on how many contracts have been rewarded to the same company is a relevant indicator to evaluate the transparency of the whole process. Although companies that want to tender for a public contract must be officially registered and have a unique identification number, the reality is that in most of rewarded contracts the supplier is only identified by a name or a string literal typed by a civil-servant. In this sense, there is not usually a connection between the official company registry and the process of rewarding contracts implying different interoperability issues [14] such as naming problems and data inconsistencies that are spread to further stages hindering future activities such as reporting.In the case of the type of contract and location, there are already standardized product scheme classifications [[48,47]] such as the Common Procurement Vocabulary (2003 and 2008), the Combined Nomenclature (2012), the Central Product Classification by the European Union, the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (Rev. 4) by the United Nations or the North American Industry Classification System (2007 and 2012) by the Government of United States that are currently used with different objectives such as statistics, tagging or information retrieval. Geo-located information can be also found in different common datasets and nomenclatures such as the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS) by the European Union, the Geonames dataset,11http://www.geonames.org/.the GeoLinkedData initiative [[28,16]] or the traditional list of countries and ISO-codes.However, corporate, organization, firm, company or institution names (hereafter, these names will be used to refer to the same entity) and structure are not yet standardized at global scope and only some classifications of economic activities or company identifiers such as the TARIC database (On-line customs tariff database) can be found. Thus, the simple task of grouping contracts by a supplier is not a mere process of searching by the same literal. Technical issues such as hyphenation, use of abbreviations or acronyms and transliteration are common problems that must be addressed in order to provide a final corporate name. Existing works in the field of Name Entity Recognition [[38,20,31]] (NER) or name entity disambiguation [[49,22,12]] have already addressed these issues. Nevertheless, the problem that is being tackled in these approaches lies in the identification of organization names in a raw text while in the e-Procurement sector the string literal identifying a supplier is already known.In the particular case of the Australian e-Procurement domain, the supplier name seems to be introduced by typing a string literal without any assistance or auto-complete method. Obviously, a variety of errors and variants for the same company, see Table 6 in the Appendix I, can be found: misspelling errors [[40,25]], name and acronym mismatches [[53,45]] or context-aware data that is already known when the dataset is processed, e.g. country or year. Furthermore, it is also well-known that a large company can be divided into several divisions or departments but from a statistical point of view grouping data by a supplier name should take into account all rewarded contracts regardless the structure of the company.On the other hand, the application of semantic technologies and the Linking Open Data initiative (hereafter LOD) [[4,15]] in several fields like e-Government (e.g. the Open Government Data effort) tries to improve the knowledge about a specific area providing common data models and formats to share information and data between agents. More specifically, in the European e-Procurement context [8], there is an increasing commitment to boost the use of electronic communications and transactions processing by government institutions and other public sector organizations in order to provide added-value services [44] with special focus on SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises).In this context, the LOD initiative seeks for creating a public and open data repository in which one of the principles of this initiative that lies in the unique identification or resources through URIs can become real. Thus, entity reconciliation techniques [[3,29]] coming from the ontology mapping and alignment areas or algorithms based on Natural Language Processing (hereafter NLP) have been designed to link similar resources already available in different vocabularies, datasets or databases such as DBPedia or Freebase.Nevertheless, the issue of unifying supplier names as a human would do faces new problems that have been tackled in other research works [10] to extract statistics of performance in bibliographic databases. The main objective is not just a mere reconciliation process to link to existing resources but to create a unique name or link (n string literals→1 company→1 URI). For instance, the string literals “Oracle” and “Oracle University” could be respectively aligned to the entity<Oracle_Corporation>and<Oracle_University>but the problem of grouping by an unique (Big) name, identifier or resource still remains. That is why, a context-aware method based on NLP techniques combined with semantics has been designed, customized and implemented trying to exploit the naming convention of a specific dataset with the aim of grouping n string literals→1 company and, thus, easing the next natural process of entity reconciliation.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review. Next section outlines main mismatches in corporate names and presents the CORFU approach to unify corporate names. Afterwards the possibilities of using public procurement data as policy-making tool and, more specifically the Public Spending initiative, are presented as a client of the CORFU technique. Last section exposes and discusses the experimentation carried out to test the presented approach using as a dataset the rewarded contracts of Australia in the period 2004–2012. Finally the main outcomes of this work, conclusions and some open issues are also outlined.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A technique for unifying corporate names in the e-Procurement sector has been presented as a step towards the unique identification of organizations with the aim of accomplishing one of the most important LOD principles and easing the execution of reconciliation processes. The main conclusion of this work lies in the design of a stepwise method to prepare raw corporate names in a specific context, e.g. Australia supplier names, before performing a reconciliation process. Although the percentage of potential right links to existing datasets has been dramatically improved, it is clear that human-validation is also required to ensure the correct unification of names. As a consequence, the main application of CORFU can be found when reporting or tracking activity of organizations is required. However, this first effort has also implied, on the one hand, the validation of the stepwise method and, on the other hand, the creation of a sample dataset that can serve as input for more advanced algorithms based on machine learning techniques such as classifiers. Although the precision of the CORFU technique decreases when processing large datasets, it has been demonstrated to be creditable in a broad scope. From public administrations' point of view, this technique also enables a greater transparency providing a simple way to unify corporate names and boosting the comparison of rewarded contracts.Finally, further steps in this work consist in the extension of the stop-words sets for corporate names, a better acronym detection and expansion algorithm, other techniques to make string comparisons such as n−grams[51] and the creation of a new final step to enhance the current implementation with a classifier that can automatically learn new classes of corporate names or automatically infer grammars for representing any type of corporate name. Furthermore, the technique must be reported to the international “Public Spending” initiative, as supporting tool, to be applied over other datasets to correlate and exploit public contracts meta-data.