@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Patching by automatically tending to hub nodes based on social trust

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A distributed patching scheme which can improve the security of the InternetThe patch can tend to hub nodes automatically.A sender pushes the patch to its buddies according to their degree in social network.The receivers accept the patch according to trust value to the sender.Automatic patches propagate rapidly in social network and patch nodes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social trust,Social computing,Automatic patching,Hub nodes,Vulnerability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Malicious code can propagate rapidly via software vulnerabilities. In order to prevent the explosion of malicious codes on the Internet, a distributed patching mechanism is proposed in which the patch can tend to hub nodes automatically based on social computing in social networks. A server in social network generates automatic patches and then selects those nodes with maximum degree to push automatic patches to. Those hub nodes then send the patch to their buddies according to their degree in social network. Automatic patches propagate rapidly through hub nodes and patch nodes in social network, which will improve the security of the whole social network. Those receivers accept the patch according to trust value to the sender, which can avoid some malicious codes exploit our scheme to propagate themselves. Experiments show this mechanism is more efficient than other patching mechanisms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to the “2013 National Information Security, Computer and Mobile Terminal Virus Epidemic Survey Analysis Report,” published by National Computer Virus Emergency Response Center, 76.4% network security incidents were caused primarily by malicious codes, and vulnerabilities in system and network without patching are still serious [1].Malicious codes generally propagate by three kinds of methods: software vulnerability, users, or a combination of the two methods. Some malicious codes can start automatically without user involvement, such as worm, embedded script, etc. In order to propagate more effectively, most worms do not destroy their host during the propagation. The host may not realize it has been infected in general. For those host systems and applications with vulnerabilities, patching the system or the application is very effective. That is to say, those hosts which are vulnerable or have already been infected can download and install corresponding patches against the worms.Here is an example of vulnerability.Vulnerability MS06-014 is a logical vulnerability [2]. There is a vulnerability in RDS.Dataspace ActiveX, which binds with Microsoft Data Access Components (MDAC), leading to remote code execution vulnerability because it may not guarantee security interaction in certain conditions. An attacker who successfully exploits this vulnerability can take complete control of the host system.Exploiting vulnerability MS06-014 will not occupy a lot of system memory and will not lead to browser crash and implement anti-antivirus easily, which makes it is one of the most influential vulnerability. There are lots of web trojan generators exploiting this vulnerability with a high success rate.Exploit.MS06014.c is a script virus, which propagate itself by exploiting the vulnerability MS06-014. It generally propagates by web malicious codes. If the patch corresponding to MS06-014 has not been installed in a host, the host will be infected by this code when the user browses the webpage containing this malicious codes. Then the user host is under remote control by an attacker in all probably.According to statistics from China National Vulnerability Database of Information Security (CNNVD), the number of vulnerabilities is always on the uptrend. Installing the security patches in OS and application program is an effective implement to patch network hosts. However, many users are unwilling install patches, or they forget or ignore to install the patches. Thus, the automatic patching mechanism is very necessary to protect user hosts. In this paper, we proposed a patching scheme in which automatic patch propagates in social network and patch the vulnerable hosts on the Internet to improve the security of hosts and the Internet.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related work. In Section 3, we explicate the motivation for automatic patching. The patching mechanism automatically tending to hub nodes based on social computing is explicated in Section 4. We presents security analyses and experimental evaluation in Sections 5 and 6. We conclude and present some future work in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
