@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Smart Ubiquitous Networks for future telecommunication environments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identifies future telecommunication environmentsPresents framework of SUN with requirements, capabilities, functional architecturesProposes methodologies to support context awareness and fine granularity of trafficIllustrates a use case of SUN considering a smart city

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Smart Ubiquitous Networks,Future networks,Context-awareness,Smart resource management,Fine granularity of traffic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this article, future communication environments have been derived from the analysis of impacts of information communication technology and social service aspects. From the concepts of “Smart Ubiquitous Networks (SUN)” as a short-term realization of Future Networks in ITU-T, this article presents frameworks of the SUN with context awareness and smart resource management. As challenges, we propose methodologies and operational processes to support context awareness and new fine granularity of traffic for smart resource management. Finally we illustrate a use case of SUN considering a smart city to show how SUN capabilities contribute to build smart and ubiquitous communication environments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Telecommunication infrastructures have been changed significantly during the last two decades, vastly impacted by the use of IP, the development of mobile and the deployment of broadband. IP has been used for realizing a connected world by providing end-to-end connectivity over any transport networks. Mobile technologies provide connectivity to anyone at any place over the air, using wireless accesses. Broadband development is providing transport pipes for the delivery of information, over fixed or mobile networks. Combining these three developments is becoming the most important elements for building today's communication infrastructures, which form the basis of the information society.Today, people live in the fully connected environment: most people are connected using mobile as well as fixed devices, without restriction from time, place and devices; most information available on-line, and therefore accessible over the networks also at any time and any place with any devices [1,2]. Combining these with mass deployment on broadband over fixed and mobile networks, the quality of on-line information is being developed in diverse ways: higher quality multimedia with higher resolution of videos (including 3D), personalization to fit individual's requirements and preferences, and finally information formed as knowledge and provided to the consumer. In addition, higher quality multimedia information over the huge number of fixed and mobile devices with various networking technologies such as broadcasting and peer to peer places requirements for operation of networks as well as effective and efficient delivery of services considering investments to the telecommunication infrastructures.The information society resulting from Information Communication Technology (ICT) developments places demands for better features of information infrastructures, especially considering the diversity of various services, applications, end user devices through personalization with knowledge rather than just delivery of information. Recently “Smartness” by smart devices, smart networks and smart services is becoming an important subject for further enhancement of the information society.ITU-T Study Group (SG) 13 [3] is developing global standards for telecommunication network infrastructures of the information society with a title “Future Networks (FNs) including cloud computing, mobile and Next Generation Networks (NGN)”. SG13 has been involved with the developments of standards on various telecommunication networks and services such as IP-based networks, NGN [4], fixed mobile convergence and IPTV [5]. One of the main subjects in SG13 has been NGN since 2004 initiated by the first ITU-T Focus Group on NGN (FG-NGN) [6]. While NGN kept a major stream until the 2010, new initiatives have come to SG13, such as “FNs [7–11]”, “Internet of Things (IoT) [12–14]” and “Cloud Computing [15]”.Considering emerging trends and requirements for smart telecommunication networks, this article introduces the key concepts of “Smart Ubiquitous Networks (SUN)” and provides a high-level architecture of the SUN with relevant capabilities. SUN is a new initiative being developed by ITU-T SG13 since 2011 covering limited parts of FNs but those expect to be realized soon. This article highlights on context awareness and smart resource management for smart telecommunications networks. As challenges for SUN development, we propose methodologies and operational processes to support context awareness with other networking capabilities and new fine granularity of traffic for smart resource management. Finally we illustrate a use case of SUN considering traffic accident management in a smart city to show how SUN capabilities contributed to build smart and ubiquitous communication environments.The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 identifies future telecommunication environments impacted from ICT developments and telecommunications operations. Section 3 introduces SUN as a telecommunication infrastructure for providing a solution for the environments identified in Section 2. Thus, Section 3 presents a framework of SUN covering requirements, capabilities, functional architectures and relevant key functions. In Section 4, we present further challenges for smart telecommunications networks in the course of SUN developments focusing on new fine granularity of traffic for smart resource management. Section 5 introduces how SUN capabilities are applied to telecommunications through a use case. Section 6 provides a conclusion.The feature-rich capabilities provided to customers are the result of end-user devices, networks and services benefiting from ICT developments. To maintain the pace of technological change, telecommunication infrastructures have been continuously improved to extend capabilities and functions. In this section, we show that impacts of ICT developments featured “Smart and Ubiquity” which is an important phenomena in emerging trends.An important emerging trend of end user devices can be represented by “Smart capabilities using ubiquitous connectivity”. Devices labeled “smart” are examples of such trends and many of them are already available. As the first example, Smart Phones are very popular and widely available today, providing an integrated personal communication and service platform taking advantage of connections over mobile and other wireless accesses utilizing separate as well as integrated manner (i.e., the multiple-connection capability). Recently, Smart TV equipped with smart capabilities to provide bi-directional service features such as receiving TV programs and content from servers as well as providing content. It is expected that Smart TV will evolve into a smart home gateway to communicate with various devices inside the home. Finally, Smart Small Devices (e.g., sensors and actuators) enable connections to all manner of consumer devices to provide status information.Smart end user devices require more complicated, sensitive and differentiated treatment of communication requirements. For example, a specific content would be delivered to the Smart Phone in abstracted resolution but delivered in very high resolution to the Smart TV in the case of supporting seamless mobility. For proper delivery of service, several issues should be considered.First consideration should be given to various types of media (e.g., video, audio, different codecs) with different Quality of Service (QoS) and Quality of Experience (QoE). The differentiated delivery of content according to the delivery policy should be considered as well as taking into account seamless handover among different devices. Finally another important issue for networking capability is processing of data traffic, from tiny bits to large volumes and from short to very long connection time. While handling various different types of traffic, network operators are seeking to find solutions for efficient and effective management of resources and to provide fair treatment of end user service requirements for all users — including avoiding heavy users monopolizing network resources.Telecommunication networks and services are essential infrastructures for the operation and evolution of the information society. Information society will evolve and update through further evolution of ICT such as over “Smart City”. This would direct a highly advanced information society, characterized by two key features, “High security” and “Advanced convenience”.High security provides more than traditional security with its on-line vulnerabilities such as spam, viruses, hacking etc. High security should be extended to protect human life, for example, Child Online Protection (COP) [16] from inappropriate on-line content. Information regarding content will be used to protect children from in-appropriate on-line content with minimum intervention. Information regarding the context of the end user will be used to identify the situation of that child to monitor, warn and identify any incident.Advanced convenience will be based on the knowledge about the communication environment. Smart end user devices allow collection of personal preferences or habits of service usage to facilitate advanced convenience for communication taking into account economic considerations such as the price of communications and services. In addition, networks and service-related functions should have capabilities to monitor the status of resources already assigned and reserved. Consequently they provide best connections with proper QoS/QoE to the end users and prevent traffic congestion or network failure by automation of networks and service operations.The roles and responsibility of telecommunications networks in terms of information infrastructure have been continuously increasing. Concerns are on the remaining security and extending effective and efficient operation of the networks to include fair provision of services. “Network neutrality”, “Investments to the networks versus revenue sharing of the business” and “Fairness of the services” are critical examples which require different roles and responsibility of the telecommunication networks. This section presents impacts of ICT developments into network operations and vice versa.Many new emerging services such as Smart TV, HDTV, 3DTV, video streaming, etc., require networks to allocate more resources to support more bandwidth and various service features such as real-time, non-real-time, store-forward and others. This shall require additional network resources needing huge investments. A few zealots (users and providers) for specific services/applications generate quite large amounts of traffic at specific time, which has the potential to monopolize large amounts of network resources [17]. As shown in Fig. 1, this monopolization of network resources (bandwidth and number of sessions etc.) by few users (10–20% of subscribers occupying more than 95% of traffic) prevents proper usage of relevant network resources by other users. This monopolization of resources (including data explosion) potentially may degrade service quality and, in addition, prevent further development of smart devices and their services. In the case of mobile (wireless) environments, also the developments of smart end user devices such as Smart Phones are made available through various broadband multimedia services previously used in fixed environments. Examples are Web-TV, multimedia services including mobile networked games, video-phone and others. The trend of mobile (wireless) services usage of bandwidth is causing issues of traffic congestion, reducing number of users in mobile (wireless) access networks. In general, most of service traffic (from servers) are transported over fixed environments and are delivered to the end user devices over mobile (and wireless) access which are constructed with quite limited resources comparing with fixed access in terms of bandwidth, number of users, etc. Therefore it is noted that incoming traffics from fixed network environments to the mobile (wireless) access environments should be coordinated and harmonized for better operation of mobile (wireless) resources as well as to maintain services to users as much as possible.Network resources (whether fixed and/or mobile including wireless) are not dedicated for a specific user but common infrastructures for all users. Therefore, to protect general users' QoS/QoE requirements from such network resource monopolization, smart traffic control as well as network resource management should be carried out by transparent means and reasonable mechanisms. To solve the problems above, smartness in traffic control and resource management is envisioned into the telecommunication networks and their operations.Understanding the relationship among different factors, especially bandwidth, latency, satisfaction of network performances as well as complexity of operations, is essential for better operation of networks and services. Following Fig. 2shows three different areas of network operations based on identifying the relationships of those factors. Their characteristics are the following:Area 1Identify as under usage (or over provisioned) situation with too much network resources (and capacity), while quality of services and bandwidth usage are very low. Consequently, the complexity of network operation is low and satisfaction of network performance is high. Thus all users in this area should not have any difficulty to use networks but may have not enough satisfaction of services and convenience to use the services. However, network capacities are greatly over provisioned, and the network operator needs more users and high quality contents for better, effective and economic usage of network resources.Identify as optimized usage situation with a proper balance between network resources (and capacity) and QoS including number of users. There is sufficient support of network resources for satisfaction of services (i.e., QoS/QoE) and convenience to use the services without any difficulties in terms of delay, jitter and loss. Consequently, complexity of network operation is moderate and satisfaction of network performance is good. It is noted that this is a recommended situation for the proper operation of networks.Identify over usage (or congested) situations with a very high quality of services, but without sufficient network resources (and capacity). There are congested situations caused by insufficient network resources (and capacities), even though various services (contents) with very high quality are available and new services are emerging. Thus many users in this area may have experience difficulty to connect to networks and/or use services. This situation worsens in the case of mobile (wireless) network environments which have more real-time related services with low latency. Consequently complexity of network operation is very high but satisfaction of network performance is very low. Addition of more network resources (capacities) is one of the ways, but not considered as the best because it costs a lot and quickly reaches limit of the capacity again. It is recommended that network and service (content) providers in this area needed collaboration and harmonization for better service delivery and usage of network resources. Thus, smartness in traffic control and resource management should take an important role to enhance the situation of network operation close to Area 2.For smart operation of telecommunications networks, knowing the characteristics of services and applications is essential. Techniques for modeling applications allow for the identification of applications that satisfy specific functional requirements as well as necessary non-functional requirements. This method also allows applications to be described in terms of their overall purposes. The process can be linked to its larger objectives in the organization including its priority and consequences of failure. Context awareness allows a network design for customization and application creation while at the same time ensuring that application operation is compatible not just with the preferences of the individual user but also with the expressed preferences of the enterprise or other collectivity, which owns the network.The context aware network can use these descriptions in its function to handle conflict between incompatible applications in the accessing of resources or in the violation of higher-level constraints. The context aware network monitors application operation to ensure that they are compatible with higher-level requirements and constraints and these conflicts are resolved in their light as well. Context awareness provides the following characteristics:•Distributed control and management of context sources: ICT systems are naturally distributed and interlinked. Multiple systems often behave as and appear as a single system to the user, i.e., multiple systems are transparent or hidden from the user. Individual systems may be heterogeneous and may be able to be attached and detached from the ICT system infrastructure at any time. Therefore, context sources are highly distributed, thus smartness of telecom networks should include distributed control and management systems for awareness of context.The reduction of complexity: IP networks are increasingly becoming larger and more complex to monitor or fully manage in a cost-effective way. However, to gather information of diverse network components in order to manage the network and ensure advanced services such as QoS, security, mobility and reliability for critical applications is a complex, error-prone and daunting task for humans. Context-awareness can contribute towards the reduction of complexity in the management of multiple mechanisms in the operation of telecommunication networks. Sharing context-based information can be realized through dissemination of specific data among different nodes or through cross layer messages inside the same node.The incorporation of autonomics: This feature helps communications systems make necessary development of extensible context models. These enable the efficient representation of available information, needed for handling and distributing it.-Ontology engineering can reduce the complexity of managing the information needed in network management and autonomic systems, and increase the portability of the services across homogeneous and heterogeneous networks.Learning and reasoning techniques have to be used to support intelligent interactions among the specified entities.To support the above identified telecommunication environments, telecommunications infrastructures should be enhanced for better utilization of knowledge about networks, services, end users and their devices without limitation (or minimum limitation) of various access connection use. SUN, proposed by ITU-T SG13, tries to meet these requirements with the following definition [8]: Smart Ubiquitous Networks (SUN) are IP-based packet networks that can provide transport and delivery of a wide range of existing and emerging services to people and things. The services provided by the SUN can cover aspects such as control, processing and storage. The networks are smart in the sense that they are knowledgeable, context aware, adaptable, autonomous, programmable and can effect services effectively and securely. The networks are ubiquitous in the sense that they allow access anytime anywhere through varied access technologies, access devices including end user devices, and human-machine interfaces.As shown in the definition, the SUN uses IP-based environments, but more capabilities to support services in smart ways taking into account knowledge resulting from a set of awareness. A key objective of SUN is an enhancement of networking capabilities of IP-based networks by optimized and efficient use of various resources (e.g., resources for networks, services and end user devices), not only for human beings but also for things and objects. With this, SUN supports various services and applications taking into account the context of end user, network and service provisions.We have noted that the collection of information from end user devices, relevant communication access capabilities, network status, end users and his/her services is essential to identify knowledge about the communications situation. Thus the fundamental part of requirements for SUN should be focused on how to collect such information whatever the situation is, identify the situation and finally deliver the proper services. Accordingly, requirements of SUN should be classified by the nature of information.First is the context related requirements which collect context information from various context sources such as end user devices, network systems, service systems, etc. The information should be stored and updated in a proper database that deals with frequent changes and reuse of the context. The SUN should provide the capability to analyze and interpret the captured information in order to identify or discover what content and services should be provided to users. Importantly, SUN should prohibit illegal usage of collected context information.Second is the content related requirements which identify and deliver the contents independently of location optimized through content caching at a nearer node. For this, nodes should be distributed in the network to keep a lot of content in a distributed manner; retrieving and storing them by managing content metadata. In addition, SUN should provide the capability to aggregate traffic and control paths for optimizing the content traffic in the network.Third is the connectivity related requirements which provide various connection capabilities sufficient to support ubiquitous communications. These ensure that a specific service is available among different access technologies, physical objects (e.g., devices, sensors) and logical objects (e.g., content) without being restricted to location due to seamless interconnection.The last one is the control and management related requirements which support open programmable interfaces providing rapid creation and deployment of new network services. This interface is useful to interconnect among inter-domain networks for supporting groups of users. SUN should support capabilities for smart resource management in terms of monitoring, control and management of resources in order to meet multiple users' different QoS/QoE requirements. In addition, SUN should provide the capability for autonomic network management including the monitoring of network components to be continuously adapted and efficiently sensing the changes of network conditions and the level of provided services.To meet such requirements, SUN identifies the following six capabilities [18]:First, “Context Awareness Capability” is an ability to detect changes in the physical status of devices. Monitoring systems using sensors and location-based services are example technologies to support context awareness. This capability enables networks to dynamically capture context information, monitor the context change in order to be adaptive based on user characteristics and environment. The information for context awareness can be used for other capabilities such as context aware content delivery [19].•Context gathering: Collecting context information from distributed entities (e.g., end-users, end-devices, network entities, time)Context repository: Store the generated contexts as well as retrieve those contexts whenever necessaryContext analysis: Analyze context information, provide statistical analysis, changes it to the available format in order to properly use the informationContext prediction: Preparation of upcoming situation by analyzing informationContext sharing: Secure delivery and update of context information to the entities which request the context informationSecond, “Content Awareness Capability” is an ability to identify, retrieve and deliver contents efficiently based on the content-related information considering location and/or user. This capability provides personalized content delivery services based on each user's situation and optimized content delivery services. The information for content awareness can be used for other capabilities such as content aware smart resource management by considering explosively increasing the number of location dependent contents forcing great overload to the hosts and delivery inefficiency of current networks caused by just re-sending without knowledge of the content [20].•Content discovery: Discover the best-fit content and content storages according to the content metadata or the location of usersContent cashing: Store and cache the content in a local storageDynamic content distribution: Dynamically distribute contents, which are in caches and storages in the network according to traffic load and usage, user location considering QoS and traffic optimizationThird, “Programmable Capability” is an ability that can change software, behavior and functions of the network by changing the network's program. This capability allows development and deployment of new, simple network services and enables networks to build up virtualized networks using associated resources to support the services via open interfaces. Close collaboration between service and transport functions is required by considering large capacity of transporting, delivering and processing of services in terms of exchanging resource level information and building up virtualized networks using associated resources [21].•Open service/network APIs: Support development and deployment of services as well as relevant monitoring and control capabilities in terms of services and/or networks according to the requestsVirtualization: Enable abstraction of physical resources and logically isolated resource partitions over shared physical network infrastructures and the aggregation of multiple resourcesFederation: Interconnect among inter-domain networks through defining and providing interfaces for control, service routing, logging, accounting and metadata among networksFourth, “Smart Resource Management Capability” is an ability to provide fair usage of resources through more transparent and accurate arrangement of various types of resources (e.g., bandwidth, storage and computing power) and their management in a network. Emerging services require networks to allocate more bandwidth with multiple TCP flows or UDP causing problems of fair usage of resources by hosts or applications such as service degradation and even service failures due to the lack of affordable resources.•Smart resource monitoring: Check resources of the network entity and interface to optimally allocate resourcesSmart resource analysis: Determine an appropriate resource for each user and service based on monitoring data and policiesSmart resource control: Allocate resource for each flow, user and serviceFifth, “Autonomic Network Management Capability” is ability for dynamic adaptation (i.e., self-adaptive, reorganization and re-configuration) of the network and related systems according to the network running conditions, and the state including the economical and societal needs of the users. In an autonomic environment, the network itself can monitor, detect, diagnose and repair failures and adapt its behavior according to the network policies [22–24].•Self-configuration: Automatic configuration of network components without manual interventionSelf-optimization: Automatic monitoring and reallocation of resources to ensure the optimal functioning with respect to the defined requirements (e.g., predefined policy for energy consumption)Self-protection: Proactive identification of arbitrary attacks such as withholding, modifying and disclosing the private information and protection against themSelf-healing: Automatic detection, diagnosis and recovery from failures due to out of energy or malfunctions because of some software bugsSelf-organization: Automatically re-establishing connectivity according to topology and position, and allowing data to be disseminated and aggregatedFinally, “Ubiquity Capability” is an ability to provide seamless communications between persons, between objects including between persons and objects while they move from one location to another. For providing anywhere anytime services, this capability supports handovers and roaming in networks, no service interruption during device changing and recognition through the interactivity between humans and objects in ubiquitous environment [25,26].•Adaptedness: Support of dynamic changes of environments with the help of context awarenessSeamlessness: Mobility supported at different domains and layers (e.g., user/device mobility, network mobility, service mobility, content mobility)Multiple-objects connectivity: Various types of communications among objects as well as humansUbiquitous access: Accessing networks with heterogeneous/multiple interfaces as well as contents independent of location in fixed/mobile environmentIn ITU-T SG13, details of each capability have been developed as separate recommendations [27–29].Here, we introduce the high-level architectural view of the SUN showing the arrangement of the six capabilities. The SUN architecture in Fig. 3consists of three domains: transport networks, service networks and end-users.SUN transport networks have capabilities to handle traffic and relevant resources by smart resource management and autonomic network management. In addition, some of transport nodes will be equipped with network caches for helping the effective and efficient contents delivery.SUN service networks form an overlay network for each specific case of services and application (e.g., smart city service network, content delivery network and e-health network). The service networks also have capabilities to help better operation of services and applications by autonomic network management and smart resource management. In addition, SUN service networks should have smart capability to manage contents through the analysis of content related information. Finally SUN service networks should provide open programmable capability to help creation and deployment of services and applications.The end user domain of the SUN has the capability for ubiquitous connectivity which allows communications anywhere with any devices including sensor networks for specific application (e.g., smart city/smart building/smart home network and e-health sensor network). To realize this practically, end user devices need to be equipped with the capability to report their context status for context awareness of the SUN and keep ontology repository for better provision of the connections and delivery of services. As a result, end users under the SUN environment reduce significant amount of their intervention when they use services and applications benefitting from SUN context awareness and content awareness capabilities.Finally SUN should support smartness by context awareness based on a result of collecting state of static and dynamic information in each domain, which produces and varies statistics to build a network and/or provide services. Each domain has its own repository for context information. Relevant information should be transported and collected into the context repository for the analysis in order to take appropriate actions for supporting key capabilities of SUN.In SUN, context awareness should be a vital process for providing “smartness” because it allows SUN components to assess their own state and the overall network condition. Networking capabilities with context awareness are enabling advanced convenience of communications such as customization and application creation. As shown in Fig. 4, the centralized context management systems of SUN shall support various networking capabilities using context awareness from distributed context sources as follows:•Context aware content delivery: Delivering related content according to knowing the user's current situation, for this, collecting evidence of a context, matching it with other contexts, and searching and integrating the content, which is to be delivered;Context aware programmability: On demand programming for service configuration according to context and policy information dynamically updated from the underlying network and individual service, with this, more scalable and manageable operation including more efficient and flexible use of the network should be supported;Context aware smart resource management: Smart allocation of network resources by exchanging context aware information with other network entities in order to identify changes in the network conditions considering the QoS aspects in various services (including platforms) depending on policies and service scenarios;Context aware autonomic network management: Detect, diagnose and repair failures and adapt networks' behavior through context awareness to monitor or fully manage in a cost-effective way without human intervention;Context aware ubiquity (mobility): Dynamically capture and use contextual information about mobile entities and determine the most appropriate connection option at any given time for allowing automatic and seamless switching between different access technologies and services.We expect that autonomic feature dealing with context awareness should help necessary development of extensible context models because this will enable the efficient representation, handling and distribution of available information. For this, ontology engineering can reduce the complexity of managing the information needed in a network as well as increase the portability of the services across networks. Learning and reasoning techniques have to be used to support intelligent interactions among the entities. Therefore, context awareness is a key subject between standard and research community for further study and then will be an enabler to realize four objectives of FNs: service awareness, data awareness, environmental awareness, and social and economic awareness [9].For context awareness in SUN, context awareness functions are performed between context sources and context users such as network elements (e.g., related functional entities of routers and switches) in a network. The gathering information from context sources is analyzed and predicted based on context repository and knowledge base for network control and management for context users. Fig. 5shows the functional architecture to support context awareness in SUN. In this architecture, detailed functional entities for context gathering, context management and analysis, context request and delivery including repositories are included.•Context Gathering Function (CGF): The CGF performs the gathering of context information dynamically or periodically changed from different context sources (e.g., user, user device, network, service and content) distributed in the network, and sends the data to the Context Management and Analysis Functions. The CGF includes five functional entities depending on different context sources as follows:-User Context Gathering Functional Entity (UCG-FE) for the gathering of user context (e.g., human user identity, personal preferences);User Device Context Gathering Functional Entity (DCG-FE) for the gathering of context information from user device context such as environment context (e.g., time, location and physical phenomena);Network Context Gathering Functional Entity (NCG-FE) for the gathering of context information from network (e.g., resource status of network);Service Context Gathering Functional Entity (SCG-FE) for the gathering of service related context information (e.g., service types);Content Context Gathering Functional Entity (CCG-FE) for the gathering of content related context information (e.g., content types, codec) from content server.Context Management and Analysis Function (CMAF): The CMAF performs the filtering of context information, analyzes the raw data for context awareness and provides predicted information based on context repository and knowledge base.-Context Filtering Functional Entity (CF-FE): The CF-FE classifies the raw data gathered from context sources and changes them to the available format used for context analysis, context prediction. In addition the CF-FE sends them to the CA-FE for context analysis or appropriate repositories for future use.Context Analysis Functional Entity (CA-FE): The CA-FE manipulates raw context information to create more composite and semantically rich information in support of context repository and knowledge base. Then, the created data become meaningful contextual knowledge desired by context users.Context Prediction Functional Entity (CP-FE): The CP-FE tries to predict the future context for context users based on the result of context analysis and provides preventive approach to prepare for upcoming situation.Context Repository: For making decisions based on historical observations, context repository provides history data. A distributed design for context repository in order to achieve scalability is considered: centralized context repository in a centralized context awareness system and locally distributed context repositories from various context sources.Knowledge Base: It is an information repository that provides a means for information to be collected, organized, shared and utilized for context awareness. It contains a set of data including the information of Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and policies, often in the form of rules that describe the knowledge in a logically consistent manner. An ontology can define the structure of stored data — what types of entities are recorded and what their relationships are.Context Request and Context Delivery Functions (CR&DF): The CR&DF collects requests for context information by the network elements and provides the required context information to these entities.-Context Request Functional Entity (CR-FE): The CR-FE performs the processing of requests received from functional entities requiring context awareness information in a network and requests the context information to the CA-FE for performing SUN networking capabilities.Context Delivery Functional Entity (CD-FE): The CD-FE reports and shares the predicted context information to related network elements with functional entities to perform networking capabilities for network control and management using context awareness of SUN.Traffic monitoring and analysis are performed at the interfaces of Content Providers (CPs), users and mobile (wireless) access networks in order to check the uploading and downloading traffic volumes. Resource monitoring and analysis are also performed at the links of entire networks in order to check the bandwidth usage of individual users or flows. Using the context aware capabilities of the SUN, and the result of traffic or resource monitoring/analysis, the smart resource management can manage the heavy traffic and the monopolized users/flows.Detailed functional architecture should include the Traffic Monitoring and Analysis Function (TMAF), the Resource Monitoring and Analysis Function (RMAF) and the Smart Traffic Control and Resource Control Function (STCRCF) as illustrated in Fig. 6. Interworking reference points are provided between each functional entity. The Smart Traffic Control and Resource Management Functions (STCRMF) provide interworking with the Context Awareness Functions to get the context aware information. This information includes user related, device related, service related, and content related data.The TMAF performs monitoring of uploading/downloading traffic from/to CPs and users. And, it also performs analysis of these traffic flows. The TMAF includes the Traffic Monitoring Functional Entity (TM-FE) and the Traffic Analysis Functional Entity (TA-FE).•The TM-FE monitors the uploading and downloading traffic volume of individual services, users and flows at the links in order to identify which CP generates huge traffic volumes, which users or flows attract huge traffic volumes. Also it collects service context information of individual users/flows at the links in order to identify which user or flow receives/generates unnecessary traffic volumes.The TA-FE classifies monitored traffic under the predefined criteria (e.g., threshold) according to user, service, content provider, etc. And it generates statistics of classified traffic based on time (e.g., hour, day, month) and analyzes the monitored traffic volume information using the predefined threshold and traffic history log.The RMAF performs monitoring of network resources (bandwidth usage) and also performs analysis of each flows or users. The RMAF includes the Resource Monitoring Functional Entity (RM-FE) and the Resource Analysis Functional Entity (RA-FE).•The RM-FE monitors the bandwidth usage amounts of individual users or flows through the links in order to identify which user or flow monopolizes the network bandwidth.The RA-FE classifies monitored resource usage under the predefined criteria (e.g., threshold) according to user, service, content provider, etc. And it analyzes the monitored network bandwidth information using the predefined methods and bandwidth usage history log.The STCRCF performs the smart traffic control to the heavy traffic and performs the resource enforcement to the monopolized users or flows. The STCRCF includes the Smart Management Decision Functional Entity (SMD-FE), the Smart Traffic Control Functional Entity (STC-FE) and the Smart Resource Control Functional Entity (SRC-FE).•The SMD-FE receives the context aware information (e.g., user behavior, device type, service type, location, content type and time, etc.) from the Context Awareness Functions. And it determines which CPs or users generate or receive the heavy traffic and which user or flow monopolizes the network resource and which user or flows are affected by degradation of their service quality and SLA.The STC-FE controls the uploading/downloading traffic from/to CPs or users which generates/receives the heavy traffic. It provides direct traffic control methods (e.g., the packet filtering, flow blocking, pacing and transcoding, etc.) for the heavy traffic. It also sends the backward signal to the CP or user to provide a warning message for the indirect traffic control.The SRC-FE controls the usage bandwidth and resource enforcement. It provides bandwidth reallocation mechanism to make fair arrangements and proper usage of relevant network resources for every user.We recognize that providing smartness is an important challenge for the SUN development. Now we identify that context awareness and a new fine traffic classification are urgent issues between standard and research community.There are many parameters to specify traffic. Traditionally three key parameters are used to specify traffic types; time related (real-time and non-real-time), bandwidth related (narrowband (smaller than 2Mb/s), broadband (above 2Mb/s)) and delivery related (guaranteed and not-guaranteed). However considering current usage of services jointly with various smart devices, the situation of classifying traffic types becomes more complex and needs fine granularity considerations of various other aspects. Therefore we believe it is a right time to refine the classification of traffic.The first observation is raised by bandwidth. Considering various types of services and media, classification of bandwidth should have fine granularity such as vertical indexes of Table 1.Another important factor is occupation time. Since the introduction of broadband with always-on and fixed rate of provision, people have more occupation time, either practically used or not. Various on-line applications (e.g., IPTV, network-gaming) require longer connection time, far beyond the level of occupation time in legacy telecommunications (typically 3min). In addition, ad-hoc applications (e.g., peer-to-peer, on-line downloading) allow people to use connected environments without concern about the bandwidth. Traffic of these cases has more than 1h of connection occupation time with big- and/or huge-bandwidth such as horizontal indexes of Table 1.Considering all the above rationale, SUN is now challenged to develop enhanced capabilities for smart traffic control and resource management with new fine-tuning of traffic and their classifications in Table 1. We propose four user types of traffic (i.e., sensitive, popular, rich & heavy and super heavy traffic) to provide better solutions for resolving Big Data, Data Explosion and fairness of services, etc.All the details of each type should be candidates for further enhancements, but at this stage, the following is a brief summary of features above traffic types [29]:•Sensitive Traffic: Small amount of data with very short time period but having high significance of delivered data (e.g., in the cases of emergency and disaster related);Popular Traffic: Normalized data in terms of volume and occupation time as a major part of traffic used by most end users;Rich & Heavy Traffic: Huge amount of data (as a result of multiplying volume by occupation time), which would use many emerging services with advanced multimedia capabilities;Super Heavy Traffic: Designated connectivity with both volume and occupation time, thus seriously impacting telecommunication operation or service providers' aspects.To realize this, it is necessary to collaborate with research institutes analyzing the impacts on networks, especially for resource management to seek proper solutions.Here, we introduce a basic operational process of context aware smart resource management. As shown in Fig. 7, SUN considers context information from different sources: user context, device context, content context, network context and service context. In addition, knowledge base which contains the information for business rules, SLAs and polices is used for giving input information for context aware capabilities. Then, SUN creates context knowledge through context analysis and context prediction using context repository and the previous input information (i.e., context and policies). The created context knowledge can be used for supporting networking capabilities of SUN [30]. For smart resource management capabilities, context aware capabilities send the information on dynamic changes of network resources and traffic as context knowledge. After that, smart resource management capabilities perform key functionalities such as traffic monitoring/analysis, resource monitoring/analysis as well as smart resource management based on context knowledge. Therefore, SUN can support context aware smart resource management capabilities which combine context awareness and smart resource management.As an aid to better understanding of SUN, an analysis with use cases is provided. There are various cases, which need smart communications supported over various different connections, for example, e-health, COP, smart city and others. This article explains how SUN works in the case of smart city (see Fig. 8for further details):(1)Configuration of smart city service networks: A user can request emerging services on the existing networking environment. To support flexible service provisioning, SUN builds up an overlay network for service deployment using programmable capability from user's on-demand request for smart city service. Then, a content delivery network is newly created as a service network on top of transport networks in SUN so that a user can access contents from content provider for social networking services or multimedia services through content upload and retrieval.Accident reports by cameras and sensors: In case that an earthquake happens in a smart city, the accident is automatically reported to Network Management Center by cameras and sensors on the street which are connected to Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) as well as by vehicles equipped with ITS capability. Users on the spot can directly disseminate this accident via telecommunication networks by smart phones to their friends or relatives to order to inform emergency situation.Make a decision to emergency situation: Network Management Center analyzes collected information coming from the accident and identifies the situation as an emergency without human intervention. Network Management Center automatically informs the emergency situation to Smart City Control Center. For making decision accurately at any time, Network Management Center updates the information from context sources dynamically or periodically and has rules considering SLAs and polices.Notification to network entities for performing networking capabilities: Smart City Control Center notifies the emergency situation to relevant organizations (e.g., police station, hospital and broadcasting station). Target organizations for notification are changed according to different types of emergency situation. Simultaneously Network Management Center also notifies this situation to relevant network elements for network control and management. In case of failure detection of network nodes from the earthquake, Network Management Center notifies this situation to network elements with autonomic network management capability.Perform SUN's key networking capabilities: Based on context awareness information from Network Management Center, each network element performs networking capabilities of SUN as follows.-Ubiquitous capability for seamless location tracking of users and vehicles in emergency.Autonomic network management capability for rapid diagnosis and recovery without human intervention after automatically detecting failures.Content awareness capability for urgently disseminating the real-time video for the current situation through social networking service.Smart resource management capability for secure and high priority transferring of high quality video for emergency situation.Applying those six capabilities of the SUN into the use case, various capabilities should be used in each step of procedure. Fig. 8 shows what capabilities should apply into what procedure of communication in the SUN.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
