@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An international analysis of the extensions to the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyzed 44 works using the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard and found 15 types of extensions made to it.Due to Mexico interoperability difficulties, we compared its extensions with the rest of the world.We found that local extensions do not help to increase the system's interoperability ability.We found the action most important after implementing extensions is to publish them.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metadata,Learning Objects,Interoperability,Extensions,IEEE LOMv1.0 standard,Metadata application profiles,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Metadata is an important element for achieving interoperability between Learning Objects systems; it facilitates the process of describing, searching, selecting and recovering of Learning Objects. The IEEE LOMv1.0 is a metadata standard for describing Learning Objects. Recently found evidence shows that the standard does not fulfill all requirements of its users, therefore they have extended it. In order to know the impact that extensions have into the interoperability, we made an international study where the use of the LOMv1.0 standard in forty-four works was analyzed. As a result we found fifteen types of extensions implemented to the standard.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Metadata itself is information about an object, service or resource, whether it is physical or digital. In the e-Learning context metadata is used for describing the features of digital resources, such as aspects about its content, learning objectives, type of resource, size, among others. This information allows deciding whether an information resource is recovered or not for its use. When it comes to e-Learning, digital resources are commonly known as Learning Objects, which are defined as independent and self-standing units of learning content that are predisposed to be reused in multiple instructional contexts [41]. Learning Objects are stored in repositories (LORs), or in a specific module of learning environment (LE). In this paper LOR and LE will be referenced as Learning Objects environments (LOEs).Reusability is an inherent property of Learning Objects, according to its definition, reusability is the property that allows Learning Objects to be used more than once in multiple instructional contexts, whether to be part of a larger Learning Object, or to be part of a course. In order to enable the reusability of Learning Objects it is necessary to achieve the interoperability, which Geraci [18] define as the ability of two or more systems or components to exchange information and to use the information that has been exchanged. The above applied into the e-Learning context is translated as the ability of two or more LOE to exchange Learning Object and reuse them.Learning Objects and LOE are the fundamental elements that organizations should have when attempting to reach the interoperability. On the other hand, in [31] it is mentioned that adopting the use of technologies, specifications and standards for the interoperability is an essential practice to increase the chances of achieving this characteristic. The adoption is recommended in the development of LOE, development of Learning Objects, description of Learning Objects, packaging of Learning Objects, communication among heterogeneous systems, and content search.Using common technologies, specifications and standards in each one of these activities is very important due to the fact that it represents an agreement on how to develop, communicate and share resources, models and systems, with the objective of achieving the interoperability between at least two organizations. Therefore it is important to analyze very closely indeed the scope and limitations of technologies, specifications and standards intended for supporting these activities. On this paper we will focus on the usage of standards for describing Learning Objects, specifically using the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard. We decided to take this approach for the following four reasons:1.We are interested on the interoperability between LOE topic, and as mentioned above, metadata represents an important element for reaching this characteristic.The IEEE LOMv1.0 standard is the most used model for describing Learning Objects on the educational field [4].Despite the fact that the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard is the most referenced in the literature, the recent amount of work done on extensions of the standard in the form of metadata profiles shows evidence that the standard does not cover all requirements of its users. Therefore users have decided to use the standard differently to what's been previously established by it. In other words, they have implemented extensions to the LOMv1.0 standard in order to fulfill their requirements in metadata terms.Derived from the previous point, for us it is important to identify the different ways in which the standard has been used, and of course, their impact on interoperability.The objective of this paper is to present an analysis of the extensions made to the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard which have been reported in specialized literature of works from around the world. We will describe each extension, its justification and its main characteristics. Also as a case of study, we will present a comparative analysis of the extensions made in Mexican works and the ones implemented on works from the rest of the world. All of the above intend to highlight the implications of the extensions for achieving the interoperability.It is important to mention that we decided to take Mexico as a case of study because of its difficulties to successfully achieve the interoperability between its LOE. Nevertheless we believe that these problems could be present on any other country with comparable circumstances to Mexico from Latin American region, in such things like language, culture, education, science and technology, economy, social organization and politics.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In the rest of Section 1 the importance of using metadata in order to achieve the interoperability is presented, afterwards the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard is described. After that the topics of metadata application profiles and the mechanisms for extending the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard are described. As a last point in Section 1, the necessity of extending the LOMv1.0 standard is stressed. In Section 2 the analysis of the extensions made to the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard is presented. In Section 3 the case of study is presented. In Section 4 a summary of the extensions implemented is presented. In Section 5 some recommendations are described, and at the end in Section 6 the conclusions reached are exhibited.National Information Standards Organization (NISO) defines metadata as structured information that describes, explains, locates, or otherwise makes it easier to retrieve, use and manage an information resource [37]. Barker and Campbell [5] argue that this definition highlights two important parts, the first one distinguishes metadata from unstructured textual descriptions and the second one highlights that metadata exists to facilitate a range of activities among these discovery information stresses.Describing Learning Objects with metadata is suitable, since it actually facilitates the discovery of relevant information. In addition to that, metadata can help to organize electronic resources, facilitate interoperability and legacy resource integration, provide digital identification, and support archiving and preservation of the resources [37].Metadata becomes an essential element for interoperability between LOE because it represents the first approach towards the reusability of Learning Objects, since metadata facilitates searching, selecting, and recovering of resources. The reusability process begins by searching metadata that describe the resources. Once the attributes of Learning Objects and the physical location of the resources are known, it is possible to decide whether the Learning Objects are recovered or not for its use and its possible reuse. The first part of the reusability process is only possible in a scenario where a common metadata model is presented, so that metadata of a LOE “A” can be interoperate with a LOE “B” [35].The above scenario stresses the importance of the use of a common metadata schema between LOEs for searching for learning objects that will generate useful results to show the characteristics of learning objects stored in the LOEs. The counterpart of the above takes place when the metadata schemas known by LOEs are different. In this case the LOEs do not share the search parameters and consequently the chances of retrieving the information describing Learning Objects, when a search is done, are few. This is because the search response could be empty, null, or wrong. A scenario of the previous situation is the following: “A” and “B” are two LORs which work with different metadata schemas. “A” launches a query for searching Learning Objects into “B”, the query is received but as mentioned before this LOR does not use the same metadata schema as “A”, therefore it is not able to interpret the query and its response to the request is empty (in the best case scenario). In this case “A” does not retrieve metadata describing the Learning Objects from “B”, hence it does not know the Learning Objects features then the possibility of “A” retrieving resources from “B” decreases.Metadata schemas are sets of metadata elements designed for a specific purpose, such as describing a particular type of information [37]. IEEE LOMv1.0 is a multi-part standard that specifies a conceptual data schema that defines the structure of a metadata instance for a Learning Object, to describe the characteristic of Learning Object which applies [20]. IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata schema is divided into nine categories: General, Lifecycle, Meta-metadata, Technical, Educational, Rights, Relation, Annotation and Classification. These categories of grouped elements allow storing the attributes that characterize a Learning Object (e.g. title, description, learning resource level, size, etc).Bourda and Delestre [6] exposes that IEEE LOMv1.0 is not the only standard used to describe Learning Objects. Nevertheless Al-Khalifa and Davis [4] cite that it is the most used model since it is the first technical e-Learning standard and it's widely accepted in the e-Learning communities. As mentioned previously we will focus on the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard and the different ways in which it has been used.In Duval, Smith and Coillie [14] it is mentioned that the goal of standardization is for producing an acceptable specification that does not impose restrictions that could limit its general adoption. Likewise, it is mentioned that nature of standards dictated that they must cover every conceivable circumstance. Thus standard implementers focus on the needs of their particular interest and therefore choose subsets of possible options and interpretations while conforming to the underlying standards, may limit potential for interoperability in future. For example, a standard might have provisions for multi-languages but if a specific community uses a common language they may be able to simplify their implementation considerably.“The application profile itself is best expressed as a conceptual data model. This should take the form of a text document or table, and should include an explanation of the overall structure, coverage and target audience for the application profile along with an exhaustive listing of all the data elements included. Each data element should be described using one or more attributes. A simple textual representation such as this makes the application profile accessible to as wide a constituency as possible”.Rachel and Manjula [43] argue that a profile application is defined as data elements drawn from one or more namespace schemas combined together by implementers and optimized for a particular local application. Duval et al. [14] expose that defining application profiles represents the normal way of addressing the needs for interoperability between systems and organizations, because it fulfills specific requirements of a particular community of practice while retaining interoperability with the base schema and they defined new needs openly.The general underlying principle when producing an application profile is that it should either be based on one or more standards, or on one or more existing application profiles of those standards and it should not compromise interoperability by breaking conformance with the existing standards. The general steps for defining an application profile according to Duval et al. [14] and Manouselis et al. [34] are the following:1.Start from your own requirements. The basic goal of an application profile is to support specific requirements of a particular context through a profile of a generic standard. In order to bootstrap this process, it is important to have an explicit understanding of those specific requirements.Select data elements that will be part of profile. Once the requirements are clarified, a first important decision in the actual development of metadata application profiles is the selection of data elements that the application profile will be built from.Deal size and smallest permitted maximum. Values for some data elements may be allowed to be present multiple times in one metadata instance. LOM defines the cardinality of data elements through the size of the data element. Defining the size of data elements consists on establishing how many instances of each element are allowed.Add local data elements. Besides mixing and matching data elements from several base standards, an application profile may also include local data elements.Specify the use of data element. Once the full set of metadata elements to be included in the application profile has been decided upon, the status of these data elements can be defined. Typical values for the status are mandatory, conditional, recommended, and optional.Define value space of data elements. In parallel with, or after the last step, the data elements' value space must be defined. The value space defines the set of values where the data element defines its value. The application profile could be more restrictive about the value space of a data element than the base standard, however it cannot be less restrictive.Establish relationships and dependencies between data elements. More complex inter-relationships and dependencies between data elements can also be defined in an application profile. The application profile could be more restrictive about such inter-relationships than the base standard, however it cannot be less restrictive.Profile data type. In the LOM standard, the data type “indicates whether the values are LangString, DateTime, Duration, Vocabulary, CharacterString, or Undefined”. In effect, the data type in LOM is a metadata schema in its own right. All the rules defined above for application profiles of metadata schemas are thus also applicable to data types.Define application profile binding. The general rule on the level of a binding of an application profile (e.g. in XML or RDF) is to make sure that any instance that conforms to the relevant binding of the base standard also conforms to the binding of the application profile. For instance, in XML bindings it is important to make sure that application profile data element names are either the names from the corresponding data elements in the base standard, or declared explicitly as subclasses of these data elements.The IEEE LOMv1.0 specification document [20] and guidelines for producing metadata application profiles [14] identified the following four allowed mechanisms for implementing extensions to the LOM standard.1.Using the Classification category. The IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard provides the Classification category as an extension mechanism, which allows referencing local classification systems without breaking the standard schema. This makes it possible to access additional information that does not have a place on the IEEE LOMv1.0 structure (due to convenience or limitations of the standard) via relation of Learning Object to other metadata structures. When this mechanism is used, it is important to keep in mind that if an external consumer system does not have access to the classification systems, then it cannot search Learning Objects through metadata from alternative systems.Adding New Metadata Elements. Adding metadata elements to the original standard metadata schema is another way of associating information of a Learning Object. This extension mechanism of the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard has the characteristic that metadata elements added just have local scope, since the elements only have value for the organization that implements the extension. As such, the possibility that elements added may be shared with an external system is limited since as mentioned before, the elements have a local scope and it is not possible to launch searches on them.Extending the value list of the vocabulary. This mechanism is similar to the last one, the difference is that instead of adding metadata elements, values to the vocabulary list are added.Specifying the usage of metadata elements. All metadata elements of LOM are optional, e.g. the users can decide whether they are used or not when a Learning Object is labeled. Using these extensions mechanism allows to set the order of use of the metadata elements, indicating whether the use of metadata elements is necessary, recommended, or optional.The adoption of the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard ensures in part, that if a common conceptual data schema is specified, then the consumer systems of Learning Object metadata should have a high degree of semantic interoperability [20]. Despite this promise several situations that limit the system's interoperation ability have been detected. The most common case takes place when a user of LOMv1.0 identifies that it does not have necessary elements for describing Learning Objects according to its requirements thus he decided to modify it. This situation has led LOM's users to use it on a different way than the originally established, creating a customized version of the standard, in other words the user is extending the standard.Implementing extensions is an action entirely valid, justifiable and beneficial, since it allows meeting specific needs of the standard users. Nevertheless, there are four troublesome situations that may be presented when a LOR that uses the IEEE LOMv1.0 original schema, sends to another one a search for retrieving the metadata describing a Learning Object that was labeled with a LOM extended metadata schema:1.Impossibility for retrieving the additional information describing Learning Objects. In this case extra data are added to the search results because of the extended schema.Impossibility for retrieving the metadata of a Learning Object due to incompatibility between search parameters.Lack of mechanisms for understanding and interpreting the metadata that are not part of LOM.Difficulty for displaying the requested resources in the external LOR.The first situation occurs when the extensions are fully implemented according to the IEEE LOMv1.0 specification document and guidelines for producing metadata application profiles. In this case, all information added to the standard schema, such as metadata elements, value list vocabulary, and local classification systems, are available only on an internal or local ambit. Therefore it is no possible to an external LOR to search Learning Objects using this information.The other three problematic situations are presented when extensions are implemented in a different way as stipulated by both IEEE LOM specification document and its guidelines for producing metadata application profiles. The extensions will be described in the next section.The study of the extensions made to the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard covers from 2009 to 2011. We analyzed the use of the standard on forty-four reported works from around the world (see Table 1), where some of these are technical reports of metadata application profiles and other ones are works reporting the use of LOMv1.0 standard for labeling Learning Objects. We were looking for differences with the LOMv1.0 schema, extensions, as well as any other use of LOM standard for profiling according to the guidelines and recommendations for defining metadata application profiles cited on Duval et al. [14].In Table 1 the first column lists an identifier assigned to each work, the second one contains the work's names, the third one contains the publishing year, the fourth column contains the country or region names which the work is intended, and the last one contains the citations.As a result of reviewing the works listed in Table 1, we found fifteen types of extensions made to the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard (see Table 2). As a note, we believe it is important to mention that while we were working on the research for getting the extensions, two interesting documents were also published. The first document is a recent study about implementations of metadata standards in agricultural learning repositories around the world [34]. This study was of special interest to us, because it reports several extensions of the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard. The above indicates that the topic of metadata implementations, specially using LOM standard continues being a topic of great interest in academic community. It also indicates that the LOMv1.0 standard does not cover all the requirements of its users, therefore they choose to extend it. The second document is the Corrigenda for 1484.12.1 LOM [21]. This document presents some changes to the base of LOMv1.0, therefore, we reviewed it with the purpose of determining if the results found (extensions) were still valid. We found that although the LOMv1.0 standard changes are very important, these did not solve the situations that originated the implementation of the extensions found. For example the addition of metadata elements kept the restriction that elements added only have a local scope.According to characteristics of the extensions, they can be classified into five categories: Addition of Elements (C1), Exclusion of Elements (C2), Modification to Standard Schema (C3), Reference to Additional Classification Systems (C4), and Miscellaneous (C5). The extensions are presented in Table 2. The first column contains an identifier associated to the categories, the second one the categories' name, the third one the extension identifier, and the last column contains the extension's names.This category groups extensions that involve adding elements to the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard, elements that obviously are not part of it, such as metadata elements, metadata categories, vocabulary values, among others. The general objective of defining the extensions grouped in this category is to add elements to describe Learning Object features that cannot be described with the standard ones.This extension implies the creation and addition of new metadata elements into the categories of the standard in order to store Learning Objects' attributes that are not referred by the LOM standard. The addition of metadata elements is an action allowed by both the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard and the rules for defining application profiles, provided elements added remain internally.The above has the problem that metadata elements added have only a local scope, therefore they cannot be shared with external systems because these not necessarily share the same information structure. In order to solve this problem, the organizations have decided to define metadata application profiles for placing the new metadata elements, and the most important, have made public and available the profiles. Thus organization's members can use the application profile data model for describing Learning Objects according to their requirements, and with a common structure. In this case, adding metadata elements makes sense because the Learning Objects described with the application profile will have a high degree of semantic interoperability, and the possibility that an organization's member retrieves a resource for reusing is high. The LOMv1.0 categories more extended are Educational and Rights, which are described below.1.Educational category: this category describes the educational and pedagogic characteristics of a Learning Object [20]; this category groups the information of educational environment. Despite that the above and the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard is intended specially for the education field, the educational category's metadata elements are the least used [16].Rights category: this category groups the intellectual property rights and conditions of use for Learning Objects [20]. We consider that the reason why organizations have added metadata elements in this category is because it is desirable that Learning Object's metadata elements indicate whether special permissions or making a payment for using a Learning Object is necessary. The lack of this kind of information becomes an issue that affects directly interoperability, for example if a Learning Object is found but it lacks of permissions for retrieving, then it will not be possible to reuse it. This affects directly to interoperability because this ability has the basic principle of interchange and uses the information that has been interchanged.As mentioned in previous paragraphs, the C1.E1 extension implies an action allowed by IEEE LOMv1.0, provided the elements remain in a local ambit because if they are published, the syntactical interoperability may be affected. Despite this possible issue, in more than half of the works analyzed in this study the extension C1.E1 has been implemented and added metadata elements are not local, and are part of LOM extended schemas, and the schemas are published into metadata application profiles. From this action we can conclude that while an extension is known at least into the context where it is implemented, even breaking standard's guidelines, the extension is valuable within the local context because the interoperability is maximized, however the interoperability with external repositories is minimized.Examples of works that implement C1.E1 are KEM (w2), AICC LOM Profile (w3), LOM-ES (w12), The Intergeo Metadata Specification (w21) and CobÁ-LOM (w38) (see all works where C1.E1 has been implemented in Table 3).The C1.E2 extension consists on adding new metadata categories to the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard data model. The reason why C1.E2 extension has been implemented is because there are some Learning Objects with particular features, obeying a specific sector or context, which is not referred by the actual metadata categories of LOM. Implementing C1.E2 allows having a category with its respective metadata elements for describing widely the characteristics of a certain kind of Learning Object. The implementation of the C1.E2 extension has the same implications of the C1.E1 extension. This extension only has been implemented in the AICC LOM Profile (w3).This extension refers to the addition of new values to the lists provided by the LOMv1.0 standard, or creating new ones. A vocabulary is a recommended list of appropriate values, which helps to describe Learning Object characteristics [20].The reason why some organizations implement the C1.E3 extension is because the list values provided by the LOM standard are not enough for describing particular attributes of some Learning Objects. The failure is because the list values only were taken from the projects' context that participated in the definition of the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard. Implementing C1.E3 extension implies to extend the standard, however unlike the C1.E1 extension, C1.E3 extension does not break the standard structure. Thus implementing C1.E3 extension does not imply to lose syntactic interoperability, on the contrary, semantic interoperability is maximized since the Learning Objects will have a high degree of description.This extension is the third most implemented, some of the works where the C1.E3 extension is implemented are: CLEO Lab LOM Profile (w6), RU LOM Core (w11), LOM-ES (w12), TOIA-COLA Application Profile (w19) and UV works (w43) (see all works where C1.E3 has been implemented in Table 3).This extension consists on adding vocabulary values from another metadata schemas or application profiles to the list of the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard when an application profile is defined, and the C1.E3 extension is included in it (when new vocabulary values are added). The objective of including vocabularies to the list provided by LOM, regardless of their origin is for describing Learning Objects aspects either in a specific field or just certain attributes that are not covered by the list values.The reason why the organizations have opted for the inclusion of vocabularies from other schemas is because the availability of well-known lists describing a specific field is not necessary to define new values. The best option in this case is to take the vocabulary list that has already been included in other application profiles.Examples of works where the C1.E4 extension has been implemented are: MELT Metadata Application Profile (w8), Organic.Edunet Application Profile (w24), ANZ-LOM Metadata Application Profile (w28), CG LOM CORE (w35) and ICOPER LOM Application Profile (w37) (see all the works where C1.E4 has been implemented in Table 3).The C1.E5 extension consists on the inclusion of a date type different from the data types specified in the standard. The reason why some organizations have implemented the C1.E5 extension is because they have a need to store information with features that do not correspond to the data types provided by the LOMv1.0 standard. The works where the C1.E5 extension has been included are KEM (w2), LOM Application Profile for a Smart Space for Learning (w10) and JORUM Application Profile (w18).This category refers to excluding elements of the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard. These elements are metadata elements, metadata categories and vocabulary values. The general objective of implementing the extensions grouped in this category is to remove elements that are not used for describing Learning Objects from a specific context.The C2.E1 extension implies to perform an action opposite to the C1.E1 extension (Adding New Metadata Elements to Standard Schema). The C2.E1 extension consists on restricting the use of some metadata elements of IEEE LOMv1.0 schema, and the mandatory use of other ones in order to fulfill the coverage requirements from a particular organization. It is common to see that some application profile schemas have fewer metadata elements than the original schema. Nevertheless the remaining elements meet the requirements of the organization that define the profile. The implementation of C2.E1 implies to make an action allowed in the profile application definition according to Duval et al. [14].Friesen [16] argues that only about 50 and 75% of the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard metadata elements are used, likewise it suggests that LOM schema should have less metadata elements, but they were defined in a better way. The main reason why some organizations have implemented the C2.E1 extension is because the LOM metadata schema has elements that are not applicable into specific contexts, therefore it is better not to allow their use. Some of the works where C2.E1 has been implemented are KEM (w2), AICC LOM Profile (w3), Metadata: MoodleCore (w33), ReGov LOM Application Profile (w34) and UAEMex works (w44).On the contrary to the C1.E2 extension (Adding New Metadata Categories), the C2.E2 extension consists on not to include some metadata categories from the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard when an application profile is defined. The implementation of the C2.E2 extension, as in the C2.E1, implies actions allowed in the definition of application profiles according to Duval et al. [14].The explanation why some organizations have implemented C2.E2 in their data model obeys to the same reasons that C2.E1 is implemented, that is, because some metadata elements do not describe Learning Objects features or simply because the information that can be stored in the metadata elements is not present in the learning resources characteristics. Implementing this extension takes place when the totality of elements of a category complies with the above, so the organizations decide to exclude it.Friesen [16] argues that Relation and Annotation categories are the lesser used categories by the LOM's users from around the world. On the analyzed works in this study, we found that Life Cycle, Technical, Relation, Annotation and Classification categories have been excluded. It can be observed that the occurrence number of the C2.E2 extension is 10.The most excluded categories are both Relation and Annotation (7 works), while Life Cycle, Technical and Classification categories are excluded each one on one work (work1, work2, work3, respectively).In contrast to the C1.E3 extension where new values are defined, the C2.E3 extension restricts the use of only some vocabulary values. Both C1.E3 and C2.E3 extensions have been implemented by the same reasons; because the lists of values provided by the LOM standard are not enough for describing particular attributes of some Learning Objects, and in some cases where the values clearly do not apply to contexts it is better to restrict its use. Friesen [16] argues that some vocabulary lists of LOM standard are scarce used, also that if the number of values on the list is short but well defined, then the systems based on the LOMv1.0 standard may increase their ability for interoperating with others.Examples of works where the C2.E3 extension has been implemented are: MELT Metadata Application Profile (w8), LOM Application Profile for a Smart Space for Learning (w10), RDN/LTSN LOM Application Profile (w17), SingCore (w20) and Eleonet Metadata Application Profile (w25) (see all the works where C2.E3 has been implemented in Table 3).This category groups extensions that involve modifying the scheme of the standard. These actions are Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements and Modifying Data Types. In this case it is not possible to generalize the aim of the category action since each one obeys to a specific necessity.The specification of using metadata elements is to indicate their use, in other words it consists on establishing that only some data elements of a schema are mandatory, other elements are recommended, and the rest can be used or not when a Learning Object is being labeled. The types of uses for metadata found in the analysis are: mandatory, required, essential, recommended, recommended optional, not recommended, conditional, optional and not used.We consider that there are three reasons why the C3.E1 extension is implemented. The first one is because the C3.E1 extension is allowed on defining application profiles according to Duval et al. [14]. The second one is because all of the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata elements are optional which leads to the Learning Objects to be labeled with non-uniform set of metadata. The third reason is because indicating the use of metadata elements, such as mandatory or required, ensures that Learning Objects will be described with a base set elements. The advantage of implementing the C3.E1 extension is that opportunities are created for discovering information, since it is possible to search for Learning Objects in a base set of metadata.This extension implies, as its name suggests, modifying the data types. In the performed analysis one implementation of the C3.E2 extension was found, which has been implemented on LOM Application Profile for a Smart Space for Learning (w10). The extension included on this work consists on restricting some elements of vCard (file format standard for electronic business cards) data type.The reason for implementing C3.E2 is because using vCard elements increases the complexity for parsing the metadata file (manifest.xml, file where the metadata are stored) [16]. In Manouselis et al. [34] it is reported that on ReGov LOM (w34), CG LOM Core (w35) and BIOAGRO LOM application profile (w36) the data types have also been modified; the modification consists on changing the LangString data type to Vocabulary type for some metadata elements. Also reporting that on the w36 work the LangString has changed to CharacterString for some metadata elements.This category groups extensions that involve referencing external classification systems using the standard's classification category. The general objective of referencing additional classification systems is to enlarge the information that describe the Learning Objects' attributes with information elements that do not have coverage on the standard's data model.The classification category allows classifying a Learning Object according to a structure of arbitrary classification, either local system, or any classification system. The IEEE LOMv1.0 standard provides this category as an extension mechanism. It is possible to add local metadata elements by using this mechanism but they cannot be shared with external systems since these not necessarily share the same information structure. It was found that organizations have implemented two types of extensions in Classification category in the analysis made.1.Implementing the extension proposed by the LOM standard. It consists on creating a taxonomic path of Learning Object's location, which is composed of taxons and these for terms while the terms are forming the path indicating the place where a resource is located into an arbitrary classification system. The implementation of this extension avoids breaking the standard structure also keeping syntactic interoperability. On the other hand, it allows including local metadata elements, however, these are only valid for the organization system that implements the extension. The above limits semantic interoperability because the information stored into the local metadata elements does not have possibility to be discovered into the global environment. In order to solve this limitation several organizations have opted to implement the second option.Implementing another extension. It refers to implementing some of the extensions described before into the classification category. Extensions that organizations have implemented are C1.E3 (Defining New Vocabulary Values), C2.E1 (Excluding Metadata Elements of Standard Schema), C2.E3 (Restricting the Use of Vocabulary Values) and C3.E1 (Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements). The implementation of each of these has the same implications like if they were included on any other category. The C4.E1 extension has been implemented in most of the works analyzed in this study, in fact the extension C4.E1 is the most implemented. The BIOAGRO LOM application profile (w36) and CUIB-UNAM (w41) works are the only ones that have not implemented this extension.The C4.E2 extension establishes to create specific resources associated to the manifest file (file where the metadata are stored), by directly creating a taxonomy. This allows creating generic taxonomies as deep and complex as required. These taxonomies can be managed using visual and interactive hierarchical components, afterwards the taxonomy can be stored in a XML file, which will be referred by the manifest file as a resource file of a Learning Object. This extension only has been implemented on the MD2 project (w14).The reason why the C4.E2 extension was implemented in w14 is because the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard does not supply labels for the semantic classification of non-educational information [55]. C4.E2 is considered an interesting extension since, the C4.E1 extension proposes to reference local classification systems in order to retrieve the extended vocabularies and the additional information that describes a Learning Object. However, this approach could be ineffective when the local classification system is not available when searching a Learning Object. Therefore it will not be possible to discover all of the Learning Object's attributes. Because of the above, it seems beneficial to include additional information that totally describes a Learning Object into the same package where all Learning Object elements are stored.This extension consists of adding information to the metadata string (string containing Learning Objects' attributes). The purpose of concatenating information is to describe specific features of Learning Objects. This extension has been exclusively implemented on EDUMAT-TI works (w39).The reason why EDUMAT-TI organization implemented the C4.E3 extension is because this organization requires storing, as part of Learning Object, information related with learning styles, which is not possible to describe with metadata elements from the LOMv1.0 standard. The EDUMAT-TI requirements in terms of metadata are similar to the ones of other organizations, which have covered their requirements implementing C1.E1 (Adding New Metadata Elements to standard schema) or C4.E1 (Using Classification Category) extensions.It is allowed to implement the C1.E1 and C4.E1 extensions, however the added elements only have a local scope and it is not possible to use them to search Learning Objects. In order to avoid this limitation, EDUMAT-TI organization chooses to concatenate information to the metadata string, maintaining interoperability with systems working with IEEE LOMv1.0 base also allowing search Learning Objects through metadata elements with learning styles information. Despite the C4.E3 extension advantages, only systems implementing the mechanism for recovering the concatenated information may understand the extension.Unlike the previous categories, this category includes extensions that are not interrelated.The purpose of developing guidelines for filling metadata elements is to provide details about the kind of information that must be stored in each metadata element. CanCore guidelines [17] is the most expanded example of the C5.E1 extension. CanCore guidelines in addition to expanding information that IEEE LOMv1.0 given each metadata element, provide recommendations about formulating and using vocabulary values and also furnish examples to fill each metadata element.The reason why the organizations have implemented the C5.E1 extension is because the information that the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard supplies about data that each metadata element can store is extremely flexible. The lack of guides like CanCore may originate unnecessary extensions such as Adding New Metadata Elements, Defining New Vocabulary Values, or that Learning Objects' developers stored wrong information into data elements. The above may cause that the information retrieved as a result of searching Learning Objects may be insignificant or incongruent. The C5.E1 extension is among the most extended (see Fig. 3), actually twenty-five of the forty-four organizations (57%) have implemented it (for knowing the organizations name, see the reference of each work name in Table 1).Examples of works where the C5.E1 extension has been implemented are: UK LOM Core (w4), Vetadata (w5), RU LOM Core (w11), Organic.Edunet (w24), EDUMAT-TI woks (w39), UDG works (w42), among others.This extension could work as a mechanism for recovering Learning Objects' information which may be used when the C1.E3 or C1.E4 extensions are implemented, that is, when new values are added to the vocabulary lists provided by the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard. The C5.E2 extension consists of repeating metadata elements implementing the C1.E3 one. Fig. 1shows an example of C3.E2 extension's implementation.The example of Fig. 1 shows that for describing a Learning Object type two metadata iterations are used, the first one for describing the resource as a “narrative text” (vocabulary's value provides by LOM) and the second one for specifying that the resource also is a “learner resource” (vocabulary's value adds by VET community). As mentioned above, the C5.E2 extension could become a mechanism implementing the C1.E3 or C1.E4 ones, therefore the reason why the C5.E2 extension is implemented is because the list of values provided by the standard does not allow describing Learning Objects according to organization requirements. The Vet metadata application profile (w5) is the only work where the C5.E2 is implemented.The extensions that organizations from around the world have made to the IEEE LOMv1.0 are shown in Table 3. The first column of the table contains the extension's identifier, the second one the extension's name and the third one contains the work's identifier where the extensions have been implemented (the works' names can be viewed in Table 1).With the intention of illustrating the more popular extensions, Fig. 2shows a matrix with the frequency use. The first column of the matrix contains the extensions id, and the rest contains the works' id where the extensions are implemented. The solid intersection between rows and columns indicates that the extension is implemented in a determinate work. The black cell color corresponds to extensions implemented on Mexican works, and the gray cell color corresponds to extensions implemented on the rest of the works. The extensions are according to its popularity.According to the occurrence of solid colors into the matrix on Fig. 2, as well as, the occurrence of id works in the third column in Table 3, it can be noted that the extensions more implemented are C4.E1, C3.E1, C1.E3, C2.E1 and C5.E1. In order to show the distribution of the extensions, Fig. 3shows a bar graph with the frequency of extensions.With the data shown in Fig. 3, it can corroborated that the extensions C4.E1, C3.E1, C1.E3, C2.E1 and C5.E1 are the most implemented, their frequency is 42, 39, 35, 26 and 25, respectively. Also, it can be seen that the extensions fewer implemented are C1.E2, C5.E2, C3.E3, C4.E2 and C4.E3, with only one occurrence on each one.In general terms, we consider that the C4.E1, C3.E1, C1.E3, C2.E1 and C5.E1 extensions are the most implemented because the actions that those imply are allowed by IEEE LOMv1.0 and guidelines for defining metadata application profiles, likewise, do not break the standard structure. In the case of the extensions with less number of occurrences, most of them are not allowed; nevertheless they are implemented in order to cover specific needs in metadata terms.In this section we will discuss some similarities about the extensions more implemented to IEEE LOMv1.0. According to the occurrence of id works in the third column in Table 3, those extensions are C4.E1, C3.E1, C1.E3, C2.E1 and C5.E1.We consider that popularity of the extension Using Classification Category (95%) is because it is in the first place an extension mechanism provided by the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard, and in the second place because this extension allows associating information that describes the Learning Objects without violating the standard.The differences found with respect to the implementation of this extension is that in some metadata application profiles the Classification category is used for referencing external classification systems, while in others the category is used for implementing other extensions such as C1.E3 (Defining New Vocabulary Values), C2.E1 (Excluding Metadata Elements of Standard Schema), C2.E3 (Restricting the Use of Vocabulary Values) and C3.E1 (Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements).Regarding the extension Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements (C3.E1) we did not find marked differences among the 38 implementations made of this extension. The common specification uses of metadata elements are: optional, recommended and required. Most of the works have a set of required elements which must be filled with information when a Learning Object is labeled. The fact of establishing a set of elements is very beneficial due to the fact that it ensures that Learning Object will be described using a basic set of metadata elements. The above creates opportunities for discovering information process, because it is possible to search Learning Objects in a base set of metadata.Regarding the extension Defining New Vocabulary Values (C1.E3) we did find many similarities. The extension has been implemented into 35 works (corresponding to 80%). The extension has presence into the following categories: General, Life Cycle, Meta-metadata, Technical, Educational, Relation and Classification. The more extended categories are Educational, Relation and Classification. Into these categories, the metadata elements more extended are 5.2 Learning Resource Type, 7.1 — Kind, and 9.1 — Purpose, with a frequency of 23, 7 and 6, respectively.In regards to the extension Excluding Metadata Elements of Standard Schema (C2.E1), we also found many similarities. This extension has been implemented into 26 works (corresponding to 59%). This extension has presence in all LOMv1.0 metadata categories, with 14 occurrences in the General category (54%), 7 in Life-Cycle category (27%), 8 in Meta-metadata category (31%), 17 in Technical category (65%), 19 in Educational category (73%), 3 in Rights category (11%), 4 in Relation category (15%), 2 in Annotation category (8%), and 11 in Classification category (42%). As can be noted the categories where more metadata elements have been excluded from this extension are General, Technical, Educational and Classification.Guidelines for filling metadata indicate the kind of information that should store each metadata element when a Learning Object is described. A common practice found on the implementations of this extension is that some organizations such as CETIS, Rhodes University and University of Bath [8,15,42] expose that the guidelines for filling metadata elements included in their metadata application profiles are based on existent guidelines. The UK LOM Core guidelines (included in w4) property of CETIS are based on the CanCore guidelines, the RU LOM Core guides (included in w11) property of Rhodes University are based on UK LOM Core guidelines, and RDN/LTSN LOM application profile guides (included in w17) property of University of Bath are based in UK LOM CORE (w4) and RDN Cataloging Guidelines. From above we can conclude that once that an extension has resolved an issue more institutions can adopt it.Some similarities about the implementation of the extensions C4.E1, C3.E1, C1.E3, C2.E1 and C5.E1, the more implemented extensions, are mentioned above. With the purpose of highlighting one more similarity, it is important to mention that these extensions were quantified as separated extensions, i.e. not considering whether they are implemented on a specific work or not; taking in account this feature the extension group is reduced a little. As a result, it can be observed that the more implemented extensions are C4.E1, C3.E1 and C1.E3. This group of extensions has been implemented on 32 different works (73%). The matrix on Fig. 4shows the works implementing the extensions C4.E1, C3.E1 and C1.E3. In order to highlight the works implementing these three extensions, the intersection between rows and cols indicating that all of those extensions are implemented, has a striped filling.Just as seen in the previous case, we consider that the reason why the extensions C4.E3, C3.E1 and C1.E3 are the most implemented is because they are extensions allowed by both IEEE LOMv1.0 specification document and guidelines for defining metadata application profiles.For the comparative analysis between the international extensions and a case of study, we have selected Mexico for two main reasons: the first one because we have first hand information about Mexican works, and the second one is because Mexico is an example of a country that has shown problems to achieve interoperability between LOE. Nevertheless, it could have been possible to choose any other country with similar features to Mexico, such as, educational technology advances, technologic development, and economic factors, among others.Thus, here we present the extensions implemented on the case of study (Mexican works) represented as black color intersections in the matrix of Fig. 2, along with the implemented extensions from the rest of the world showed as gray color intersections in the matrix of Fig. 2. The purpose of making this comparison is to highlight the impact that the extensions have into the interoperability.In Table 4the implementation's percentage of each extension is presented. The fist column of the table contains the extension identifier, the second one includes the extension names, the third one comes with the implementation percentages of extensions implemented on the case of study, and the last one contains the implementation percentages of the extensions made on the rest of the works analyzed. The table data are sorted in descending order according to the implementation percent of the case of study's works. In order to differentiate the rest of the implementations from implementations from our case of study, we will appoint them as “international implementations”.Earlier, it has been mentioned that according to the information presented in Table 3 and shown in Fig. 3, the extensions more implemented are C4.E1, C3.E1, C1.E3, C2.E1 and C5.E1. Nevertheless percentages shown in Table 4 indicate that the extensions more implemented are C3.E1, C4.E1, C1.E3, C5.E1, C2.E1 and C1.E1. In these two extension groups it can be noted that the popularity order of some extensions changed, for example Fig. 3 shows that E4.E1 extension is the most implemented. However, data of Table 4 indicate that the most implemented is the C3.E1 extension. The explanation of this apparent difference is because as mentioned previously, Table 4 is sorted in descending order according to the implementation percent of the works from our Mexican case of study.Comparisons between extensions are described in the next paragraphs in accordance of its degree of popularity and are shown in Table 4.The extension Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements (C3.E1), has 100% of occurrence in Mexican implementations and 86% in international ones. The works where the C3.E1 extension is not implemented are MD2 project, Arabic LOM application profile, The Intergeo Metadata Specification and MCORE application profile. Implementing the C3.E1 extension ensures that Learning Objects will be labeled with a basic set of elements. The implementation of the C3.E1 extension is common in Mexican and international contexts.The implementation percentages of the extension Using Classification Category (C4.E1) indicate that international implementation is greater than in the case of study. The main reason why this extension has a high grade of implementation is because C4.E1 represents the extension mechanism proposed by the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard.In the case of the implementations of our case of study we consider that the C4.E1 extension is common because the Mexican organizations have not defined application profiles yet; they leverage this mechanism for adding metadata elements and referring local classification system in order to describe Learning Objects according to their requirements. This extension mechanism is not a bad option; nevertheless implementing the C4.E1 extension as stipulated in the LOMv1.0 standard, has the problem that added elements only have a local scope, therefore it is not possible to search Learning Objects through them. On the other hand if the local classification system is not available when a Learning Object is being searched, then it will be not possible to retrieve all its descriptions and therefore there are less possibilities to discover the Learning Objects.The data in Table 4 show that implementation percentage of the extension Defining New Vocabulary Values (C1.E3) corresponding to international implementations is greater than corresponding to the implementation percentage of works from our case of study. The international percentage is 84% and the Mexican case is 57%. This extension consists of adding values to the vocabulary lists supplied by the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard. Both LOMv1.0 standard and guidelines for defining metadata application profiles allow implementing this extension whenever values have local scope because if these are published, then semantic interoperability may decrease. Despite that these several international organizations have opted by defining application profiles in order to set and publish new list values (C1.E3 extension) and new metadata elements (C1.E1 extension), and instead of minimizing semantic interoperability, it is maximized into the context where application profile is used.The implementation percentage of the C1.E3 extension on the works from our case of study is considerable, 57% of the works implement it, but unlike international implementations, values added in works from our case of study as a result of the extensions are kept at a local level. In this case there are not possibilities of losing semantic interoperability but there are not possibilities of interoperating with external systems even from the same organizations, because they cannot search Learning Objects through the values added even though they cannot retrieve all the attributes of the resources.The implementation percentage of the extension Developing Guidelines for Filling Metadata Elements (C5.E1) indicates that a little more than half of the works, both internationals and from case of study, have implemented this extension.One finding that we can highlight about the implementations of C5.E1 made on the works of the case of study and on the international works is that in some international works such as UK-LOM Core (w4) and RU LOM Core (w11) it is mentioned that the guidelines for filling metadata elements included in this works are based on CanCore guidelines (w1). This is possible due to the fact that CanCore work is a public document and any organization can have free access to it. In the case of the study's works we did not find nothing like the above, this is because the Mexican guidelines for any extension to the standard are not public.Regarding the extension Excluding Metadata Elements of Standard Schema (C2.E1), the data in Table 4 indicates that 65% of the international works (twenty-four works) and 29% of case of the study works (two works) implement this extension. In this case there is not much to discuss with respect to the difference. Therefore simply it is remembered the reason why the C2.E1 is implemented. The C2.E1 extension is implemented because some metadata elements from IEEE LOMv1.0 schema are not applicable in specific contexts, hence it is better to exclude their use.Regarding the extension Adding New Metadata Elements to Standard Schema (C1.E1), the data in Table 4 indicate that 43% of the international works (sixteen works) and 29% of case of the study works (two works) implement this extension. The reason why there is this difference is because on the case of the study works it has opted to implement the C4.E1 extension for adding metadata elements instead of using the C1.E1 extension.Regarding the extension Excluding Metadata Categories of Standard Schema (C2.E2), the data in Table 4 indicates that 24% of the international works (nine works) and 14% of case of the study works (one work) implement this extension. As in the previous extension, there is not much to discuss regarding the implementation percentage difference on this extension. Therefore, the reason why the C2.E2 is implemented is simply remembered. The C2.E2 extension is implemented because the totality of metadata elements from one category of the IEEE LOMv1.0 schema is not applicable in specific contexts, hence it is better to exclude its use.The extension Concatenating Information to the Metadata String (C4.E3) only has one implementation in our case of study and none in the international context. We consider that the action that implies the C4.E3 extension is an adequate practice to add information to the standard in order to describe all the attributes of a Learning Object, since it is not necessary to modify the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard, and interoperability with learning systems working with the LOMv1.0 standard structure is preserved. The disadvantage of this extension is that only systems that implement the mechanism for recovering the concatenated information can understand the extension. In order to solve this situation, it is advised that this extension will be published in an application profile and thus it can be used by other organizations.Finally, the data in Table 4 indicate that the implementations of the case of study do not have occurrences in the extensions C1.E4, C2.E3, C1.E5, C1.E2, C5.E2, C3.E3 and C4.E2.From the extension analysis for our case of study, it can be observed that in the Mexican case the institutions have implemented a notorious fewer extensions (26%) compared against the extensions implemented by the international community (37%). We cannot say the international community acts as a homogeneous block implementing the same quantity and type of extensions. In fact, in many cases the behavior of many countries can be named as similar to the Mexican case. However there is an important difference that distinguishes the Mexican case from the rest of the world, and it is the lack of definition of metadata application profiles. A very important action since it represents the formal way of letting the modifications made to the standard schema be known.Regarding the most implemented extensions on the Mexican case of study (with more of 50% of occurrence), the extensions C3.E1 (Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements), C4.E1 (Using Classification Category), C1.E3 (Defining New Vocabulary Values) and C5.E1 (Development Guidelines for Filling Metadata) have two main characteristics, they coincided with some of the more implemented on the international works and also they are extensions allowed by both IEEE LOMv1.0 and guidelines for defining metadata application profiles. Nevertheless, unlike the international implementations, the Mexican ones are not published through a metadata application profile.The above becomes a problem affecting directly interoperability because it is not possible to take advantage of the benefits offered by the implemented extensions. To make this problem more evident we will discuss the implications to avoid making the extensions public in the Mexican case of study.•C3.E1 extension: The goal of the extension Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements, is to ensure that Learning Objects will be described with a specific set of elements. However if the mandatory metadata set is not public then it is not possible to take advantage of the C3.E1 extension benefits.C4.E1 extension: The Classification category is used for adding local metadata elements and referring local classification systems for describing Learning Objects according to specific requirements. As mentioned above, this extension has the issue that added elements only have local scope. Therefore if an external system does not know these new elements then interoperability between systems for searching Learning Objects across them cannot be completed. On the other hand, the C4.E1 extension has the problem that local classification systems may be not available when a search is started, and in this case the information of local systems describing Learning Objects cannot be recovered. In order to solve these issues we recommend considering the possibility of implementing another extension such as Adding New Metadata Elements to Standard Schema (C1.E1), or Defining New Vocabulary Values (C1.E3). We also recommend the publication of the extensions by means of a metadata profile definition.C1.E3 extension: As it has been mentioned, the Defining New Vocabulary Values extension allows the possibility of improving the search for learning objects, due to the increased search space through the added items.C5.E1 extension: Failure to publish the guidelines for filling metadata elements prevents third parties to exploit the information posted in the guidelines. For example, the guidelines for completing metadata elements developed by EDUMAT-IT are based on a system that contains information on learning styles added to the standard, however, the rules for the extension are not public. If these guidelines are posted on a public profile they could then be adopted and included in the related metadata profiles working with learning styles in order to match the elements of the appropriate standard to interoperate.C4.E3 extension: The extension Concatenating Information to the Metadata String is perhaps the less implemented extension. However, it is worth discussing its implementation made on Mexican context by EDUMAT-TI organization. This extension was implemented with the purpose of storing information related with learning styles, information that cannot be described with metadata elements from the LOMv1.0 standard. EDUMAT-TI requirements for implementing the C4.E3 extension are similar to the ones of another organization about the necessity of including information to the LOMv1.0 standard in order to describe in more detail their Learning Objects. However, other organizations have solved this by implementing the C1.E1, C4.E1 or C4.E2 extensions. Implementing the C4.E3 extension does not break the standard structure of IEEE LOMv1.0 standard and the interoperability with systems working with the structure base of standard is maintained. Nevertheless, like the rest of the extensions implemented on the works of our case of study, C4.E3 extension is only known by the organization that defined it, therefore only the members of the EDUMAT-TI organization can search Learning Objects across metadata elements with learning styles information. Because of this, it is recommended again that Mexican organizations publish their extensions of the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard through the creation of metadata application profiles. Taking into account the EDUMAT-TI particular case, the development of metadata application profiles could result in increasing the odds that their Learning Objects could be discovered by third parties and eventually recovering for its reuse.In general, we believe that the recommendations presented here could be useful to any country interested in the development of Learning Objects at regional or national scale and in the implementation of interoperable repositories. This is especially true for those countries which have similar characteristics to the Mexican case and have shown problematic scenarios such as scattered groups of research and development on LOM and LOE having dissimilar experiences and interests on these topics, problematic interoperability issues between learning platforms caused mostly by a lack of adoption of the best practices observed on the international practice about sharing educational resources following the Learning Objects paradigm, as well as the lack of free access to the extensions made to the standard.In this paper we described the extensions that several organizations from around the world have made to the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard. The extensions were obtained as a product of reviewing and analyzing forty-four works about using the standard. As a result of the above, fifteen types of extensions were found (see Table 2). According to their characteristics, the extensions were classified into five categories, Addition of Elements, Exclusion of Elements, Modification to Standard Schema, Reference to Additional Classification, and Miscellaneous.The most implemented extensions on all the works reviewed, including those from the case of study, listed from high to low occurrence are, Using Classification Category (C4.E1), Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements (C3.E1), Defining New Vocabulary Values (C1.E3), Excluding Metadata Elements of Standard Schema (C2.E1) and Development Guidelines for Filling Metadata (C5.E1) (see Figs. 2 and 3).The more implemented extensions on the Mexican case of study's works from high to low occurrence are, Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements (C3.E1), Using Classification Category (C4.E1), Defining New Vocabulary Values (C1.E3) and Development Guidelines for Filling Metadata (C5.E1). In turn, the more implemented extensions on the works from the rest of the world are Using Classification Category (C4.E1), Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements (C3.E1), Defining New Vocabulary Values (C1.E3), Excluding Metadata Elements of Standard Schema (C2.E1), and Development Guidelines for Filling Metadata (C5.E1) (see Table 4).From a total of fifteen extensions identified in the analysis of this study, the works from our case of study have implemented only half of it which are, Specifying the Use of Metadata Elements (C3.E1), Using Classification Category (C4.E1), Defining New Vocabulary Values (C1.E3), Development Guidelines for Filling Metadata (C5.E1), Adding New Metadata Elements to Standard Schema (C1.E1), Excluding Metadata Elements of Standard Schema (C2.E1), Excluding Metadata Categories (C2.E2) and Concatenating Information to the Metadata String (C4.E3). The percentage of occurrence of each extension is C3.E1 (100%), C4.E1 (86%), C1.E3 (57%), C5.E1 (57%), C1.E1 (29%), C2.E1 (29%), C2.E2 (14%) and C4.E3 (14%). The most implemented extensions are C3.E1, C4.E1, C1.E3 and C5.E1, followed by the C1.E1 and C2.E1 ones as can be appreciated above. In spite of the implementation of these extensions, it is allowed to define application profiles, none of the Mexican organizations considered in the study has defined profiles, unlike the 97% from the rest of the organizations.The main difference between the implementations made on the Mexican case of study and the rest of the extensions analyzed is that on all the cases of the first one no metadata application profiles were made. The importance of this difference is stressed by the scope of the extensions, because if the extension is not published in the form of profile then the extensions have a limited area of influence restricted only to local ambits. This situation situates the scope of an extension to be as important as the implementation of the extension itself.In this section we will present some recommendations we reached after making the study presented in this paper.Considering that the original requirements included into the metadata application profile may change over time and considering that organizations adopt application profiles as their fact standards, we recommend that when an extension is defined the promoters also should define its lifetime. When it ends, the organization should verify if the extension is still valid, that is, if it still covers the original requirements which the extension was defined under. Then make any modifications to the extension, or even if it is necessary define a complete new extension in order to fulfill the new necessities. After that, the promoters should set a new lifetime of the extension. We believe that these actions could help to guarantee the maintenance of the extensions, and even that these actions should be part of any guideline for defining application profiles.As mentioned in previous paragraphs, defining a metadata application profile represents the normal way of addressing the needs for interoperability between systems and groups, since the specific requirements of a particular community of practice are achieved by doing so, while retaining interoperability with the base schema, and defining new needs openly. Defining application profiles is the action that allows to be widely known the changes that a metadata schema has regarding standard schema. By the above, it is advised that once the requirements and needs from a community of practice be identified and addressed implementing extensions, the extensions should be published through an application profile. Thus at least the organization members defining the profile will know the metadata schema extended and may take advantage of the extensions implemented to the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard, and of course they may use a metadata schema according with their requirements for describing Learning Objects.As can be appreciated, most of the advise and recommendations given in this paper are intended to maximize the interoperability, in metadata terms, of the communities implementing extensions to the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard (inward interoperability). Some of the recommendations most prominent are, if there is need extending the standard then to select the more suitable extension and to publish it through an application profile.We consider that one way for increasing the opportunities for the interoperability with repositories that are not implementing any given extensions (external interoperability) is setting some IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata elements as mandatory (making actions to the C3.E1 extension) and updating the standard. These actions could ensure that Learning Objects will be described with a minimum of set elements. The last proposal could seem to be as an action violating the standard principles since nowadays all metadata elements are optional. In order to provide a solution to this situation we consider that a second version of the standard where some metadata elements were mandatory could be defined. On this manner, the Learning Object developer community could have a strict and non-strict version of the standard. The strict version of the standard defining a minimum set of mandatory metadata elements, in this case the use of mandatory metadata elements will ensure that Learning Objects are described with a common metadata set. In this way, the non-strict version of the standard could follow the actual “all the elements are optional” spirit of the standard.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Metadata is a key element for achieving interoperability between LOE, it facilitates the actions of searching, selecting, and recovering of Learning Objects. Also metadata represents the first approach towards reusability of these resources because metadata Learning Object's attributes are known and from these it may decide whether the resources are not retrievable for their use. Therefore, it is important that LOE exchange resources work with a common metadata schema and thus the processes of search, selecting and recovering Learning Objects can be made successful.The use of the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard partially ensures that if a common conceptual data schema is specified, then Learning Objects' metadata consumer systems will have a high degree of semantic interoperability among systems that implement the same standard. Taking into account the findings from the analysis presented in this paper we conclude that working with a common metadata schema does not necessarily imply to adopt the exclusive use of an international metadata standard, instead of metadata application profiles based on international standards (such as IEEE LOMv1.0) can be defined. Through application profiles several organizations have met their requirements while retaining interoperability with organizations' systems that implement the base schema of the standard.In this paper we described fifteen types of extensions that several organizations from around the world have made to the IEEE LOMv1.0 metadata standard. According to their characteristics the extensions were classified into the categories Addition of Elements, Exclusion of Elements, Modification of the Standard Schema, Reference to Additional Classification, and Miscellaneous. Overall, the extensions are caused by two main reasons, the first, because the standard does not meet all the requirements of the user, and second, because the rule does not apply on the entire context in which it is intended to be used. The latter occurs when a rule is defined and includes the requirements of a community of interest and even the size of the community can be large and consider all your needs, these can change over time.Some extensions such as C1.E1 (Inclusion of Metadata Elements) and C1.E3 (Definition of New Vocabularies) are allowed by both LOM standard and guidelines for defining metadata application profiles, whenever new elements keep a local scope due to other cases the semantic interoperability with systems working with the IEEE LOMv1.0 original structure may be lost. Despite this recommendation, we found that several international organizations have implemented these extensions and have made them public through an application profile. From this action we conclude that while an extension is known in the context where it is implemented, it is relegated to a second place of importance to break standard's guidelines. This is because in effect, interoperability with implementers of LOMv1.0's original standard metadata schema is minimized; nevertheless it is maximized within scope where the extension is implemented.Considering that 97% of the international works have defined metadata application profiles in order to make public the extensions implemented to the IEEE LOMv1.0 standard, and considering that it has maximized the interoperating ability of organization's members and LOE, we strongly advise that when there is a need for implementing extensions, the extension that fulfills the requirement must be chosen, and published into an application profile after that the profile must be released. Once a profile is released, it will allow situating the extensions into the context that is intended, as well as exploiting the benefits of the extension.