@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Standards for enabling heterogeneous IaaS cloud federations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We will describe the main challenges regarding cloud federation and in–teroperability.We will showcase and review the existing and emerging standards that can be use to tackle the gaps in cloud federations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud computing,Standards,Interoperability,Federation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Technology market is continuing a rapid growth phase where different resource providers and Cloud Management Frameworks are positioning to provide ad-hoc solutions–as management interfaces, information discovery or billing–trying to differentiate from competitors resulting in incompatibilites between them when addressing more complex scenarios like federated clouds.Therefore, grasping interoperability problems present in current infrastructures by studying how existing and emerging standards could enhance the cloud user experience.In this paper we will review the current open challenges in Infrastructure as a Service cloud interoperability and federation, as well as point to the potential standards that should alleviate these problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cloud computing is still considered as an emerging technology,now leaving its infancy phase. Standardization in the cloud was notconsidered as an urgent topic by the industry [1], as it is often associated to rigidity, not leaving much room for the innovation needed on the early stages of the technology [2].Over the last years, a large number of commercial cloud providers have emerged in the market. Each of those vendors tries to differentiate their infrastructure from their competitors offering added value features on their resources. This has led to a situation where several closed and proprietary interfaces have evolved over the time, some being claimed as de-facto standards by the industry, even if they cannot be considered a proper standard at all. The resulting scenario is formed by infrastructures using different solutions that are incompatible and not interoperable, constricting users inside a single provider. These vendor lock-ins are often considered a desirable feature by commercial providers, as a way of engaging users on their resources and services, but it is perceived negatively by cloud users and customers [3].More recently, several open source Cloud Management Frameworks (CMFs) have appeared in the cloud ecosystem. Some of them decided to adopt the most popular commercial and proprietary interface, implement a compatibility layer that tries to deliver the same functionality; whereas others have built their own interface. Both decisions are contributing to adding more entropy and heterogeneity into the cloud ecosystem. Users willing to exploit several infrastructures face a discouraging panorama, with strong industrial actors driving the developments that have promoted a situation where proprietary and industry-driven interfaces and protocols have dominated the cloud landscape for years [4].As the cloud computing paradigm is maturing and its heterogeneity is growing, cloud interoperability and federation are becoming areas of concern [5,6]. Federation and interoperability are nowadays considered as one of the main pressing issues towards cloud computing adoption [7]. The vendor lock-ins that currently exist are perceived negatively by users, therefore building and defining frameworks for cloud interoperability is becoming a topic with growing interest [8,9,10,11,12,13]. Moreover, political and government bodies such as the European Commission have stated their position towards the promotion of Open Standards for ensuring interoperability in clouds for science and public administration [14,15].Nevertheless, cloud federation goes beyond just making several clouds interoperable [16]. A federation should enable the collaboration and cooperation of different providers, delivering resources to the users when a single resource provider is not able to satisfy the user demands, in a collaborative way. Therefore, on top of the interoperability and portability issues, there are several challenges that any federation must tackle.In this paper we will review the open challenges when building an interoperable cloud federation. We will review the existing enabling standards that can be used to leverage the construction of such a federation of Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) providers based on them. We will focus on a horizontal federation between different IaaS providers, Therefore a vertical federation spanning several layers is out of the scope of this paper.In Section 2 we will present the related work in the area. In Section 3 we will present the biggest challenges that an interoperable cloud federation must assess. In Section 4 we focus on the existing and raising standards and how they can be used to tackle the problems presented in Section 3. Finally we present our conclusions in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
As we explained, cloud federation involves a lot of different areas and challenges — management, authentication, accounting, interoperability, etc.—, therefore there is not a unique standard for it. However, there is a set of settled and emerging standards that can cover all the federation aspects and their problematics, as summarized in Table 1.The European Commission is encouraging the usage of Open Standards in its “European Interoperability Framework for pan-European eGovernment Services” [14]. The United Kingdom Government provided a similar set of principles, adopted 2014 [61]. Similarly, the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has recommended that national agencies should specify cloud computing standards in their procurements [18]. Moreover, there are some European initiatives, such as the Open Science Cloud [30], promoting the usage of Open Standards as one of the success factors for open clouds.In this document we have presented the existing challenges that need to be tackled for building an interoperable federation of cloud providers and we have surveyed the existing and arising standards that can be used to solve those problems. Current Cloud Management Frameworks should adopt these existing standards for the functionality they are offering, so as to avoid vendor lock-in issues and to ensure a that proper interoperability is delivered to the users. Moreover, cloud federations must take into account the existing recommendations and they should promote its usage as the path to a successful federation and interoperability.