@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cloud computing: A value creation model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identify the benefits and value of cloud computing operation.Identify the risks of cloud computing operation.Investigate the components of value creation process in cloud computing practice.Study the relationship between cloud computing and sustainable information technology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud computing,Value creation model,Risk analysis,IT auditing standards,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cloud computing has gained vast attention due to its technological advancement and availability. Possible benefits of adopting cloud computing in organizations are ease-of-use, convenience, on-demand access, flexibility, and least management from the users. This paper analyzes the risk and value components inside cloud computing practice through a value creation model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cloud computing is a newly developed computing area that has been adopted by a large number of organizations in the world for information technology practices. Organizations move to cloud computing practice may gain benefits such as cost saving, efficiency improving, agility enhancing, flexibility and scalability of services, and environmental sustainability. Cloud computing gained its popularity because it changed the physiognomies of the IT industry through the exercise of virtualization. In the meantime, some major concerns to cloud computing practice, such as security and privacy breaches are originated from its virtualized setting. The cloud computing operation is similar to the practice of information technology (IT) outsourcing. The complexity of outsourcing makes cloud computing's quality control a challengeable job.This paper intends to discover the value creation and challenges confronted by cloud computing's practice. Since cloud computing may become the next wave of IT innovation, many more organizations may adopt this technology into their business processes. Therefore, a clear examination to the value realization of cloud computing may contribute to the IT field dramatically.The discovery of value creation is an essential and challengeable task in every business process. In order to pursue sustainable business continuity in organizations, they must maintain and strengthen the outcome of value creation activities. For example, Michael Porter [21] proposed “value chain analysis”, in which every step in business process has been investigated to manage its value. However, individual business process and technology may also be examined before it to be adopted in organizations. For this vibrant thought, cloud computing's practice may also be examined through the value creation analysis.This study aims to identify a set of components that assist organizations to assess the value creation of cloud computing. We introduce a value creation model to describe the content of each component and the relationship among components in the value creation model. Various effects of implementing cloud computing in organizations will be discussed. This value creation model provides guidance to the IT industry for their future development in cloud computing. Since cloud computing heavily depends on Internet infrastructure and technology, security will be a major concern to cloud computing operation. These risk factors are identified in the value model. The auditing practice is stipulated by law. In order to comply with legal requirement, auditing must be exercised in cloud computing operation. All of these concerns and requirements are included and discussed in the value creation model.The paper is structured as follows. The next section provides a background analysis to cloud computing technology, including its benefits and inherent risks. After that, the concept and the theoretical foundation of IT value are explained. The cloud computing value creation model is introduced and illustrated in the next section. A conclusion is provided in the last section of the paper.More and more companies adopted cloud computing services recently. Gartner Inc. forecasted that the sale for cloud services will increase from US $46.4 billion in 2008 to US $150.1 billion in 2013 [14]. Cloud computing is a recently developed information technology (IT) that utilizes resources virtualization approach to deliver IT services through Internet technology and on-demand mode. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) defined cloud computing, on its web page, as “a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction” [18]. NIST classified the cloud deployment into the following four categories: private cloud, community cloud, public cloud, and hybrid cloud [18].Private cloud is operated solely for an organization, on which hardware, networking, storage, applications, interfaces, and infrastructure do not share with other companies. Private cloud provides internal services to the organization and employees through corporate intranet or data center. This cloud service can offer desired fault tolerance and security capabilities (such as firewall) to guard the safety of internal IT operations and processes. Therefore, private cloud can be implemented in a highly secured and manageable environment. The main disadvantage of running private cloud computing is its high cost for hiring staff and maintaining infrastructure and data center.Community cloud is “shared by several organizations and supports a specific community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements, policy, and compliance considerations).” [15, p. 5]. Community cloud can be created inside or outside the organization. Since its shared characteristics, cloud security control becomes a major concern. For example, a school district in a city may create a community cloud for regional schools' access and usage. These schools must agree to and follow a common policy of cloud computing practice.Public cloud is the most common type of cloud computing. Within this model, the service provider (such as Google or Amazon.com) offers its cloud infrastructure for general public use on a self-service, on-demand, and pay-per-use basis. Public cloud service providers must create an extremely scalable data center and flexible infrastructure for clients' needs. Since client's computing and storage needs are unpredictable, cloud service providers must be well prepared for these uncertain demands. Public cloud may serve a large amount of customers in the market; its security functionality must be well protected.Hybrid cloud is the cloud service that syndicates public cloud, private cloud, and community cloud options. Based on corporate needs (such as strategic, security and/or confidentiality concerns), company can allocate workloads into separate cloud infrastructures. For example, a company may use a public platform to send data to a private cloud would be a hybrid cloud environment. A new way of conducting corporate computing process is to combine public services with private clouds and data center together. This is a typical hybrid cloud implementation.Based on the package offered by the vendors, cloud computing contains three different types of service models: software-as-a-service (SaaS), platform-as-a-service (PaaS), and infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS). SaaS allows clients to use providers' applications that run on a cloud infrastructure, which can be accessed through a web browser. All needed cloud infrastructure (such as network, servers, operating systems, and application software) is hosted in vendor's house. PaaS accommodates to developers' need by offering the entire computing platform and solutions set for an application needed at client's house. PaaS allows the client to control the application software (analysis and design), however, the developer must know how to work with vendors' programming languages, interfaces and database systems. IaaS offers clients the capabilities of processing, storage, networks, and other computing resources so they can run selective software (operating systems and applications) in house. Its only tradeoff is that cloud providers manage the infrastructure in use.Cloud computing providers offer active and convenient accessibility to clients, such as on-demand and pay-per-use services. Cloud computing users save IT cost since they only pay for what they used; they do not need to invest in hardware, software, networking, and hiring IT staff inside organizations. Security service is handled by cloud computing providers, however, the user organizations are the major concern of security breach. Another important benefit of moving to the cloud is the scalability and flexibility of IT that are offered by cloud computing vendors. Cloud computing users can enjoy the suppleness of workload changes, especially handling growing business transactions during the hot season. Users moving to cloud computing just are like outsourcing their IT operations to the vendors. For this reason, users do not need to handle IT management tasks in the organization. Another benefit of moving to the cloud is the enhancement of mobility, that is, clients can have access to the software at any place they go to, as long as the Internet access is feasible.The main risks on cloud computing technology are related to the following areas: authentication, data security and privacy, interfacing with internal systems, system availability, business continuity, and ownership of content and other legal requirements [22]. Among these risk factors, security and privacy are the most concerned area since cloud computing data are stored outside corporate premises [19].In cloud computing practices, the clients (or user companies) outsource servers, server applications, data storage, and software programs to a cloud service provider (or vendor) for receiving on-demand and pay-per-use service [20]. Most of cloud providers offer metered service— it means they charge customers for the processing capacity that customers have actually used. This special arrangement makes cloud computing's audit work different from that of traditional IT audit.We recognize the fact that information technology delivers value to user organizations and businesses. Any new breed of information technology should add new and supplementary value to the existing IT capability or functionality to survive. Cloud computing has been introduced to the IT field and gained sufficient acceptance from the users in the business community. It is likely that cloud computing has created substantial value in many user organizations. We would discuss the implication of IT value creation and its relevance to cloud computing in the next section.Cloud computing, just like SaaS, is an operation of outsourcing internal IT services into external vendors for meeting company's needs. Chou [4] indicated that SaaS practice should be fitted into an outsourcing model, its main advantages are cost saving, better resources utilization, more application access scalability, and global outsourcing possibility. The theoretical foundation behind outsourcing practice is ample, for example, production cost economics [28], transaction cost theory [7], resource-based theory [8], competitive advantage and value chain [21], and economies of scale [4]. The production cost economics theory supports the argument that outsourcing decision of the firm is to pursue a low-cost production process [4,5]. The transaction cost theory reflected that organizations intend to consider outsourcing while transaction cost is low for business activities, including time and cost for negotiation, and writing and enforcing contract between two sites [4,5]. The resource-based theory indicates that firms center on deployment and combination of specific input rather than avoidance of opportunities [8]. For this reason, an outsourcing decision is based on seeking external resources or capability for meeting company's purposes such as saving expenses or improving capability [4,5]. Cloud computing practice, similarly, allows user companies to consume a subset of resources from a pool of IT hardware and software that are managed within the company (i.e., for private cloud operation) or by external providers (i.e., for public cloud operation).Porter [21] proposed a competitive forces model to show the principle of competitive advantage. The value chain is based on the process view of organizations, that is, it sees an organization as a series of processes and each process adds value to the product or service for their customers. A main strategy in competitive advantage is to target high value-adding process within an organization for enhancing their final value [21]. Mohammed et al. [17] applied Porter's value chain theory into a reference model for the cloud value chains.Economies of scale and division of labor are also theoretical foundation of creating outsourcing practice [4]. The outsourcing vendor exposes economies of scale since their average cost declines through the provision of a mass amount of IT services in the marketplace [4,5]. Cloud computing vendors perform the similar capability for gaining the advantage of economies of scale.In summary, theoretical foundation of outsourcing and cloud computing is similar to each other, they are cost economy, resource sharing, competitive advantage, value chain, and economies of scale. Their main principle of cloud computing is to have individual vendors who can offer high quality, mass capability, and low cost service to enter the marketplace. The final objective of cloud computing process is to create value to the society. We will discuss the value of cloud computing next.Valuation is an economic process that identifies the value of actions in an organization. Value plays an important role while organizations are determining an action-taking arrangement. While business executives intend to invest in a vital project, they must measure the possible outcome of satisfaction in that venture. Value is therefore a foundation of decision-making. Cronk and Fitzgerald [9] indicated that value is the worth or desirability of a thing. Porter [21] proposed a well-known “value chain analysis”. This value chain analysis conducts ‘a systematic way of examining all the activities a firm performs and how they interact is necessary for analyzing the sources of competitive advantage.’ (Porter, p. 33).Without a doubt, IT delivers value to organizations. IT generates value by utilizing computing power in the work place, in there time saving, cost deduction, and decision-support function can be achieved is a vivid indication of IT value realization. Whereas applying value analysis into IT practice, Smith and McKeen [25] constituted three components of developing an IT value in business processes, including identification, conversion, and realization. Identification component implies that those potential opportunities for adding value should be identified at the beginning of the process. Conversion component is the step to show that those opportunities must be converted into effective applications of technology for the process. Realization component is the final step that states applications must be realized by organizations for generating IT value [25].One example of value realization process model was done by Chou and Chou [3]. They utilized a value model to illustrate the process of realizing green IT. Their green IT value model consists of four components/stages, including awareness, translation, comprehension, and green IT value realization. In order to achieve the goal of adopting green IT, the awareness stage indicates that organizations must identify and recognize the value of green IT. The translation stage specifies that organizations must convert the idea of green IT into actions. The comprehension stage demands organizations to fully support the practice of green IT by developing metrics and methods for evaluating and monitoring the implementation outcomes of green IT. The final stage, green IT value, reveals the performance result and the value of realizing green IT. As indicated by Chou and Chou [3], the value of green IT is achieved through the satisfactions of enterprises and society.Thethi [26, p. 2] made a cloud value proposition as “reduction of total cost of ownership, translation of fixed to variable cost, and improvement of business agility and ability to build systems of a global class.” Based on his cloud value proposition, Thethi [26] proposed a four-step cloud adoption strategy, which includes assess, validate, prepare, and execute.Another cloud computing value study was delivered by Mohammed et al. [17]. They proposed a cloud computing value chain model that is based on Porter's value chain theory. This model incorporated three individual segments, they are primary services, business-oriented support services, and cloud-oriented support services. Cloud computing value is to be delivered based on constant process implementation within above mentioned services [17].Since cloud computing is an emergent technology in the IT industry, it is worth of discovering its process of value realization. This paper proposes a cloud computing value creation model that is based on the theoretical foundation of cost economies, resource-based theory, competitive advantage, value chain theory, and economies of scale. These theories support the innovative application of cloud computing in the IT industry. The IT industry observed the needs and opportunities of cost reduction, resourcing sharing, value creation and economies of scale that exist in the marketplace; therefore, cloud computing has been formed and developed. However, cloud computing technology needs to go through a few steps to create its value. Based on the above discussion, a cloud computing value creation model may possess a four-step process, including awareness, translation, comprehension, and cloud computing value creation. The final objective of implementing cloud computing is to reach a sustainable cloud computing technology. The details of this model are discussed in the next section.Cloud computing value realization process can be identified and illustrated through a value creation model. As illustrated in Fig. 1, cloud computing value creation model consists of four components: awareness, translation, comprehension, and cloud computing value creation. The combined outcomes of the framework, including awareness, translation, comprehension, and cloud computing value creation can reach to the status of cloud computing sustainability. The individual components of the framework are discussed below.The expected benefits of adopting cloud computing service can be anticipated by prospective organizations. Logically, organizations may create their own wish list or expectations for the cloud computing service. An ideal cloud computing service should offer a client organization needed IT capability through on-demand and pay-per-use service from provider's provisioning of application software, platform, infrastructure, and data center, so the client company could focus on its core business strategies, such as innovation, economic of scale, competitiveness, and efficiency and effectiveness, just to name a few of them.The prospective cloud computing adopters should understand the types of cloud computing (public, private, community, and hybrid) and then determine the one that may fit into their business environment. They should also understand the cloud computing service models, including software-as-a-service (SaaS), infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS), and platform-as-a-service (PaaS). Picking a suitable service model is essential since such cloud computing practice must meet organizational need and IT setting.Another important decision factor now is cost determination. The client company must figure out the cost and benefits of moving to the cloud environment. Moving to the cloud is similar to pursuing IT outsourcing practice. SaaS, for example, can be characterized as an outsourcing model [5]. The benefit of moving to the cloud is to save a large portion of current IT expenses such as hardware, software, networking, data storage, technical support, and staff management and training. The cost of receiving cloud computing service is based on the amount of IT services received from the vendors. To most organizations, the result of cost/benefit analysis must be positive. Gartner Inc. reported its investigation to the economics, or cost/benefit analysis, of cloud computing and found that economic advantage of cloud computing is higher than on-site computing practice [12]. In the meantime, organizations must recognize possible risks of moving to the cloud. Risk factors such as security breach and system unavailability may cause a vital damage to the organization.After awareness, the value creation model moves to the translation component. A vital objective of the translation component is to convert cloud computing desire and interest into a series of tactics. During this phase, organizations must perform profound studies before adopting cloud computing practice, especially to the area of risk identification.Risk identification can be done through a detailed examination to possible security breach during data transmission in cloud computing practice. Also, moving to the cloud implies the existence of uncertain situations such as loss of control to IT operation and data management. Many cases have been reported about service interruption from cloud computing providers. On April 21, 2011, Amazon's cloud computing platform stopped working, which brought down a number of websites such as Reddit and Quora [27]. Essers [11] reported the cloud failures as “A total of 568h of downtime at 13 well-known cloud services since 2007 had an economic impact of more than $71.7 million dollars, said the International Working Group on Cloud Computing Resiliency (IWGCR) …. Their research is based on press reports of cloud outages at services like Twitter, Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft, Google, Yahoo, and Paypal, among others.”Cloud computing is based on virtualization scheme and it processes information through the Internet. There are many risk areas inside cloud computing practice. Armbrust et al. [2] indicated “top 10 obstacles and opportunities” for cloud computing: business continuity and service availability, data lock-in, data confidentiality and auditability, data transfer bottlenecks, performance unpredictability, scalable storage, bugs in large-scale distributed systems, scaling quickly, reputation fate sharing, and software licensing. Within these risk factors, data security is a growing concern in cloud computing operation. As indicated earlier, client's data are stored in cloud computing vendor's data center and also shared with other client's data (i.e., memory virtualization) without controlling capability, which could create ‘trust’ concern. However, most of security breaches exist in end-users' systems or storage practice. The user organizations should pay close attention to these areas since any security breach may cause damage to companies.Another important risk is regarding contracting issue. Cloud computing vendors and clients must agree upon their service items and guaranteed quality levels. These details must be included as the service level agreements (SLAs) in the service contract.The cloud computing practitioners must fully understand the issues discussed above, and then the translation stage can be completed. The next component in the cloud computing value creation model is comprehension.The third component in the value creation model is comprehension. During this stage, organizations must fully understand the characteristics of cloud computing, cost function of subscribing cloud computing service, risk factors and legal compliance (such as cloud computing auditing). It is then moving to the cloud comprehension phase.During cloud comprehension, organizations must create measurement to assess the outcome of cloud computing operations. The current IT assessment method is commonly handled by the auditing process. Cloud computing should also apply IT auditing process to monitor its operations.Organizations that adopt cloud computing service imply the action of outsourcing its IT functions to external vendors. Under SOX regulation, the client company cannot surrender its management responsibilities of IT internal control to vendor organizations. The Auditing Standard No. 2 (stipulated by Public Company Accounting Oversight Board) states that:“The use of a service organization does not reduce management's responsibility to maintain effective internal control over financial reporting. Rather, user management should evaluate controls at the service organization, as well as related controls at the user company, when making its assessment about internal control over financial reporting.”The above standard stipulates that cloud computing adopters must conduct an evaluation of vendor organization's control over IT environment. The SAS 70 (Statement on Auditing Standard No. 70) states that auditor's report from vendor's site will meet the goal of this stipulation, although this auditor's report is prepared by vendor's auditor. Since there are two types of SAS 70 reports — type-1 and type-2 audit reports. Type-1 audit focuses on the fairness of the presentation of service organization's controls. Type-2 audit focuses on whether the specific controls were operating effectively. Since cloud computing technology is more complicated than regular outsourcing practice, and conducting type-2 audit may show more detailed controlling information from the vendor's site [10].The rise of cloud computing attracted IT auditor's attention, especially on possible risks associated with such technology. Under such circumstance, IT auditors must understand the details of cloud computing and follow a specific auditing method/approach that can comply with regulations set by auditing authority for conducting auditing work. However, risks on cloud computing implementation are the major focus in cloud computing auditing.Since cloud computing involves external vendor's support and control to needed information technologies, the auditing work should be more complicated than the regular IT auditing work [13,22–24]. Risk-based IT auditing is one of the important auditing methods. This approach requests IT auditors to follow an effective risk assessment method to conduct IT audit.An alternate way of conducting cloud computing audit is the value-added approach. Auditors should clearly understand the value of cloud computing to be assumed by the client organization. The auditing then focuses on those targeted value propositions. Possible value aims for cloud computing practice comprise of budget solution, increased flexibility, better resource utilization, improved efficiency and greater agility, access to new technology, improved security, cost avoidance, new cost model, and improved collaboration [6]. Value-added cloud computing can be easier if these targeted value components can be identified and checked by the IT auditor.Cloud computing auditing is a complicated task, in which various technological aspects need to be examined and reported. For example, organizations may adopt public cloud, private cloud, community cloud, or hybrid cloud for their cloud practices. The complexity within these cloud categories may cost IT auditors tremendous amount of energy to filtering out the details of network connectivity, systems and software interfaces, database storage methods, platform differences, and infrastructure designs.Security is the most significant concern to cloud computing practice. Since user organization's data are stored in provider's remote site, it raises privacy and confidentiality concerns. Also, any data transformation in cloud operation must pass through the Internet infrastructure. Unless the providers offering absolute security programs to guard the data source and to prevent data breach during transmission, trust relationship between vendors and clients may not be easily established. Other than data security, there are plenty of risk components that need to be identified before an IT auditor starts his/her work. Therefore, a well preparation is essential to the success of cloud computing audit process.Since cloud computing is a relatively new computing technology, its technological weaknesses and immaturity may exist. In order to conduct a complete audit process, these technological drawbacks need to be discovered and published. This way allows IT auditors to find the right areas to examine. Therefore, cloud computing's audit effectiveness can be achieved rapidly.A variety of IT auditing standards have been used, they are COBIT (Control Objectives for Information and related Technology), ISACA's IT Assurance Framework, ITIL (Information Technology Infrastructure Library), ISO reporting standard ISAE 3402, and SAS 70 [1,10,19,24]. The auditor may select one acceptable standard for auditing practice. Most of these standards are applicable to IT auditing, however, it lacks a standard for implementing cloud computing audit.A non-technical challenge to cloud computing is the contractual issue, that is, service level agreements (SLAs) disputing among clients and vendors. Since clients depend heavily on vendor's technology to run business and process data, a fully agreeable contract (including SLA) must be created and signed. For example, the SLA must include performance measurement, security provisions, service charge amount and metering method, exit strategy (how to terminate contract), etc. Therefore, SLA is a key object to be audited.Finally, cloud computing auditors need to be knowledgeable to all related information of cloud computing practice. As we mentioned above, there are a number of challenges face to the future of cloud computing audit. An auditing firm must offer their IT auditors sound educational and training programs. A better way to develop their auditors is the creation of a knowledge management system (KMS) for cloud computing audit. All experienced cloud computing auditors' knowledge, solutions to problems, and work experience can be stored in the KMS for corporate access.Combining the effects of cloud computing's awareness, translation, and comprehension could result in a predictable cloud computing value. Specifically, the user organizations place the full trust into the vendors. All risks and security breaches can be fully controlled by vendors. Auditing practice can be independently implemented by the cloud computing auditor. The targeted value set by user organization can be assessed and verified at this stage.Value can be identified as the worth of desirability of a thing [9]. Value can be measured through the satisfaction of doing things. It can be inferred that the value of cloud computing can reveal the degree of satisfaction in the IT industry. A measurement device will be used to measure the value of cloud computing practice.Cloud computing can generate additional value on enhancing environmental sustainability. Moving to the cloud means the reduction of acquiring computer hardware and network devices. Most importantly, the use of electricity in organizations will be diminished. In the meantime, the result of e-waste generation will also be shortened. These environmental protection activities create the social value in our society. This value effect contributes to the green IT movement and finally reaches to the goal of environmental sustainability. It could be the best scenario to the development of cloud computing technology.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
