@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A process reference model for managing living labs for ICT innovation: A proposal based on ISO/IEC 15504

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ISO/IEC 15504 philosophy helps to formalize effective practices to manage living labs.The PRM covers the absence of a formalized approach to guide living lab management.The reference model contributes to facilitating benchmarking among living labs.The maturity levels provide a feasible path to create and evolve a living lab.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Living lab,Open innovation,User-driven innovation,Evaluation,Case study,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Living Labs are innovation infrastructures where software companies and research organizations collaborate with lead users to design and develop new products and services. There is not any reference model related to the processes or practices to manage a living lab. This article presents a reference model to manage effectively the synergies of software companies with the other stakeholders participating in a living lab.The article describes the approach used to create the reference model through the analysis of a multiple case study considering six living labs and discusses the lessons learned during the creation of the process reference model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, most successful software products were developed by “lead users” collaborating with technology and software providers in the development of innovative products. The active involvement of end-users in the innovation lifecycle is an important asset for competitiveness in software companies [1]. These practices would support the development of products of high quality which must evolve if they are to adapt to new demands and scenarios [2] as they seek to make these companies become more competitive.The living lab concept originates from Prof. William Mitchell, MediaLab and School of Architecture and City Planning of MIT [3]. Originally, Prof. William Mitchell used living labs to analyze how people use IT buildings. The information of these experiments was used to design more comfortable and useful buildings. Later, this living lab concept was used to define real life environments for involving end-users in the validation and co-design of new technological products promoted by IT companies and research organizations [4].Living labs are open innovation infrastructures shared by several stakeholders. The stakeholders involved in a living lab include companies of the software industry, communities of end-users, computer science research organizations and public administrations supporting innovation policies.The resources that a living lab provides are physical facilities for co-design, test-beds, collaboration tools supporting the interaction among the stakeholders of an innovation initiative, knowledge management platforms and human resources supporting the living lab services.Examples of the services provided by the living lab to their stakeholders are: the incubation of ideas of new ICT products and services to improve the socio-economic conditions of end-user communities, validation of technological solutions by different targets of end-users, support to wide-scale roll-out of innovative ICT products, etc.Living labs are complex innovation organizations, requiring not just physical facilities but also careful development of key relationships and networks. There is currently no model for developing or managing living labs.Companies considering developing a living lab will find little guidance, and no concurrence on best practices, for managing it or integrating it with existing innovation programs. A reference model is required to provide living lab managers and practitioners the tools to create and evolve a living lab following a continuous improvement and evolution approach [5,6].To address this gap, this article presents a process reference model that includes processes and practices to manage the living labs and facilitate the collaboration of software companies with users and other stakeholders for the creation of new software products or services.The Living Lab Process Reference Model was defined through the implementation of a multiple case study approach that was carried out considering six living labs: Cudillero (Spain) [7], Åboland (Finland) [8], Frascati (Italy) [9], Homokhátság (Hungary) [10], Wireless-info (Czech Republic) [11] and Sekhukhune (South Africa) [12]. Section 3 describes the strategy to develop the process reference model.To formalize the living lab process reference model, the authors decided to adapt the philosophy and structure proposed by ISO/IEC 15504 [13–15] because: 1) The structured approach to define and catalog effective practices helps the living lab stakeholders to adopt effective practices following a process improvement approach; 2) ISO/IEC 15504 provides a framework for benchmarking among different living labs; 3) It is feasible to integrate open and user driven innovation practices in software process improvement programs already started in software development and service provision organizations; 4) it is possible to integrate open innovation initiatives with other process improvement projects taking advantage of harmonization of multiple standards [16]. Section 4 presents a living lab process model including effective practices to manage a living lab for ICT innovation.Finally, the paper discusses the results obtained during the definition of the process model proposed in this paper. This discussion includes a description of the difficulties on the implementation of the effective practices presented in the model and their appropriateness to guide the living lab stakeholders in the implementation of this approach. Section 5 discusses the lessons learned during the creation of the process reference model.Living labs, in which users' experiences lead the future directions of the products, are increasingly being used and successful service innovation development depends on understanding both existing and user needs [17]. In analyzing the literature available on living labs, two categories can be identified [18]:1)Living labs as open innovation platforms. The living lab is created as a network of stakeholders for creating new software products and services through the active involvement of end-users through all the phases of the innovation lifecycle. There are several examples of this kind of living lab for promoting innovation in rural areas, smart cities or inclusion of disabled people.Living labs exposing testbed applications to the users. The living lab is considered an open testbed of ICT products and services where applications are exposed to end-users for validation. Nowadays, there are several examples of this kind of living lab: mobile computing, ubiquitous computing, collaborative working environments and cognitive systems engineering.As the living lab concept is strongly related to the user driven innovation principles, it is essential to address user involvement during the whole innovation lifecycle in the projects managed in a living lab. User community building, participative design, and using the tools in new work and business practice are key activities of user involvement [4]. Practical constraints hinder continuous and active engagement of end-users in an innovation process [19,20].During the incubation of ideas and projects, the focus is on identifying innovation opportunities. Relevant user involvement techniques in this phase engage community members in exploratory dialogs: focus groups, storytelling, idea generation with lead users, etc. (see Fig. 1).In the conceptual design stage, the user communities collaborate to specify the requirements to be satisfied by a new product or service.During the prototyping and technical development stage, user involvement techniques are focused on validating functional prototypes of new products or services. In many cases, these techniques are focused on capturing the emotions users experience while using a new product or service. Examples of these techniques include several types of feedback observations.In the wide-scale deployment phase, techniques are used to track users' behavior as they adopt the product or service; these may include questionnaires, background logs to gather usage information, or refined observation techniques.In order to be effective infrastructures that enhance open and participative innovation in the software industry, a living lab has to provide several services to its stakeholders. These services are oriented to support the organizational and operational dimensions of a living lab [21]. The organizational services are focussed on the creation and management of a self-sustainable infrastructure for networked innovation. The operational services include all the activities to carry out each innovation initiative considered in the scope of the living lab innovation organization. The specific services considered for each dimension are presented in Table 1.The literature describes several techniques and practices for implementing and managing a living lab. However, as Schaffers et al. state in [21], there is little detailed discussion of strategies for creating, evolving, and continuously improving a living lab or of models to support those strategies. Living lab practitioners would benefit from a model that provides guidance for developing an effective living lab. Such a model should include: 1) The provision of a framework for cataloging and disseminating the effective practices for enabling the management and participation of living labs; 2) The provision of a framework to support the implementation of continuous improvement initiatives in a living lab; and 3) The provision of mechanisms to let Living Lab stakeholders and sponsors evaluate the performance and effectiveness of a living lab.ISO/IEC 15504 provides a useful framework for creating such a model. This reference model is composed of a formalized structure for organizing processes and effective practices for software development and service provision activities; it is used in IT companies to guide continuous process improvement initiatives for providing better products and services.The philosophy and structure of the ISO/IEC 15504 can be adapted to define the Living Lab Process Reference Model [22]. This philosophy and structure was considered appropriate to fulfill several elements required by the community of practitioners for living labs continuous improvement initiatives:•A framework to catalog and disseminate the effective living lab practices,A framework to support the implementation of continuous improvement initiatives in a living lab based on maturity level characterization, andMechanisms to let stakeholders and sponsors evaluate the performance and effectiveness of a living lab.The context of the continuous improvement where the living lab process reference model was implemented is summarized in Fig. 2. The input for each improvement cycle is the purpose of the initiative, the contextual situation of the Living Lab and the user driven innovation services it provides. The process reference model guides the improvement activities to be considered in each cycle that include diagnosis of the current situation, definition and implementation of an action plan to increase the maturity of the living lab.In order to apply an ISO/IEC 15504 based approach to create a process reference model of effective practices to create and manage living labs, a multiple case study approach was implemented according to Yin in [23].This multiple case study was carried out in several living labs dealing with the problems of introducing innovations based on ICT collaborative services in rural areas to improve current business process, productivity that aims to increase economic growth, and the quality of life. Rural living is characterized by widely distributed work and life activities. These living labs are located in Spain, Italy, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Finland and South Africa.Fig. 3summarizes the innovation areas of the living labs considered in the multiple case study. More details can be found in [7–12].The multiple case study considered for creating the Process Reference Model was executed during three years.The first year of the case study execution, the living labs methodological support team characterized the considered living labs and proposed a set of effective practices to the living lab managers. This first set of practices was based on the application of IT action research approaches proposed by Baskerville in [24]. Among others, these practices included: a) phasing of living lab launch and development; b) building local communities to establish a stakeholder support base and involve users; c) agreeing on a business model for open innovation partnerships; d) creation of multi-disciplinary groups to implement the living lab innovation initiatives; e) running cyclic series of living lab experiments, using spiral development approaches; and f) monitoring the living lab processes on a continuous basis during cycles.This initial set of practices was used to guide participants in implementing user-driven innovation principles in each living lab. The implementation of these practices contributed to creating the living labs since a very early stage.From the second year till the end of the data-gathering phase of the case study, the adoption of effective practices was evaluated periodically each three months. Living lab managers indicated if they were able to implement a practice, how, the difficulties found and their opinion on the practices that contributed most to the creation of the living lab. At the end of each period, the living lab managers delivered a document reporting the practices adopted.Each of these reports was reviewed by the researchers in charge of giving methodological support to the living labs considered in the case study. The reviews were done to look for incomplete or inconsistent information according to the actual situation of each living lab. Finally; periodic and individual meetings with the living lab managers were carried out to clarify the information in each report requiring further details. Also, objective evidences that support the implementation of processes to operate and manage a living labs beyond the information included in the periodic reports were e-mails, minutes of the meetings and logs of the supporting tools used to manage the living labs.Participant observation method was applied to assure the validity of the data included in the periodic report. This method was used to observe how living labs were created and worked, the problems they faced and the actions taken to overcome them. Interviews were used to collect information and the opinions of living lab members on their personal experiences, degree of satisfaction, problems and other issues related to working in a living lab.At the end of each year, the team analyzed the degree of adoption of the proposed practices in each participating living lab according to a three-point verification scale:•Rating of 2: Practice was applied completely, attending to the aspects specified in the process reference model documentation and guidance meetings.Rating of 1: Practice was applied only partially, attending to the aspects specified in the process reference model documentation and guidance meetings.Rating of 0: Practice was not applied at all.Once the case study was finished, the information on effective practices to implement a living lab were analyzed, cataloged and documented to formalize the process reference model.The reference model describes a set of processes in terms of goals and practices required to achieve each specific goal. They are called “generic” because the same practice applies to multiple process areas. The generic practices included in the process reference model are related to get the stakeholders' commitment to implement the proposed practices and the provision of training, resources, techniques and tools to implement practices. These generic practices came from the analysis of the enablers facilitating the adoption of practices that were identified through the interviews carried out with the living lab managers during the case study.A general view of the process reference model is provided in Fig. 4. As the reference model includes 90 specific and generic practices, the figure includes only the specific goals stated for each process, the number of practices per objective and the degree of adoption (DoA) calculated at the end of the case study according to the following formula:DoA=∑foreachlivinglab∑i#practicesperobjectiveratingvaluemaxratevalue∗#ofpracticesperobjective∗#oflivinglabs∗100.Next, the process categories are summarized.A)Innovation initiatives management (IIM)This category includes only one process that defines the living lab's essential practices and includes specific techniques to involve end-user communities throughout the phases of innovation lifecycle as introduced in Fig. 1. The specific practices considered in this process concern the generation and incubation of new ideas and projects. After the feasibility of a specific initiative is determined, requirements and restrictions are identified, leading to a conceptual prototype of the solution proposed. Technical development is implemented following iterative and incremental development principles. The user communities evaluate the different prototypes and final products, identifying areas for further improvement and additional projects to be considered.Organizational managementOrganizational management is focused on creating and managing the partnership between user communities, innovation and research organizations, and technology providers that drives the living lab. The processes in this category implement the physical and logic infrastructure that supports user-driven innovation practices and techniques. In the Strategy Management and Government process, users participate in identifying priority innovation areas and selecting the most relevant projects for living lab support. In the Technology Infrastructure Management process, users are involved through their participation in defining the needs and problems of the infrastructure and the operation of resources already deployed. The Knowledge Management process governs knowledge gathering and distribution of information about ideas for new products and services and works to identify lead users and stakeholders with the assets and capability to develop the ideas and contribute to the identification of useful technological solutions. The stakeholder management process manages the involvement of the user community and its collaboration with research organizations and software industry stakeholders.Technical developmentTechnical development processes are customized and adapted to allow lead users to participate in considering issues, assessing differences in problem resolution methods, and providing specific skills. The processes included in this category are Innovation Projects Management, Requirements Management and Technological Solution Development. End users participate in these processes by leading the development of specification requirements and restrictions for new products and services, developing their own ideas, and validating products generated by other stakeholders.DeploymentThis category contains only one process that includes the activities for the deployment and operation of the technological solutions developed in a living lab.Monitoring and evaluationMonitoring and evaluation include processes to analyze the innovation practices carried out in the living lab and the mechanisms to determine the success of the results obtained. The degree of adoption values indicate that these practices were introduced in the living labs considered to some degree, but the relatively low rate of adoption indicates that more specific or more locally relevant evaluations of the effectiveness of the living lab infrastructure were needed.In general terms, according to the results obtained, the processes defined in the reference model were applied and developed largely in each living lab. Those practices that were not applied completely or not were initiated prove the variability in their execution due to the different nature of each living lab, considering the internal and external situations such as availability of resources, availability of social communities participating in the innovation process, conditions in the development and disclosure of technological solutions and political situations.Although the model has provided approaches related to governance activities, knowledge management, guidelines to trace the innovation strategic objectives, projects portfolio, mechanism as support to determine the appropriateness of the end-user involvement methods and tools, and other activities that have demonstrated empirically their effectiveness, it requires defining indicators to obtain more precise information about the value of implementing a specific practice to improve the capability and the results provided by a living lab.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The living lab approach is still emerging, but the software industry is demanding models that include effective practices to guide this kind of shared innovation infrastructure.The process reference model presented in this article covers the absence of a formalized approach to carry out a holistic view to facilitate the effective participation of software companies in living labs. The model proposed demonstrated its adaptability to different living labs considering the specific characteristics of each living lab and the availability of resources to implement user-driven ICT innovation approach. The formalization of the framework contributes to facilitating benchmarking activities, comparing the current processes of a living lab against the efficient practices recognized by the Living Lab community.The model proposed in this article can be considered an initial step in developing a repository of effective practices for managing living labs. This proposal needs to be refined and evolved, bearing in mind several issues not addressed in this work:•Considering the multi-model approach that should guide improvement initiatives in the software industry [16], the harmonization of the structure, processes, practices and implementation path proposed in this model with other process reference models relevant for the software approach.Following the path drawn by Colomo-Palacios et al. in [33], authors aim to develop process implementation guides for living labs. In many cases, living lab participants and managers do not have a user innovation culture or the required competences and it is very difficult for them to start participating and managing this kind of user innovation infrastructure. These implementation guides are aimed to develop the required competences needed to implement the process reference model practices along with the management compendia to pilot the process.Although validation was carried out in a few living labs, the findings represent a significant contribution to the domain in which this research is framed. The approach selected to develop the process reference model was the parallel application of similar multiple case studies in order to obtain a wide representation of contextual environments. This approach was useful to obtain qualitative evidences on the factors that contribute to the implementation of effective practices to manage a living lab. Nevertheless, it would be necessary to conduct research in a large number of living labs representing a significant sample to provide a greater representation of results.The evidences gathered were not able to correlate the stages to implement the practices with a successful living lab due to the lack of quantitative indicators measuring the outcomes and impact of a living lab. Several living labs in this case study implemented an added-value evaluation framework defined in [19], but the evidences gathered in this work did not permit the calculation of this kind of correlation.