@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Scalable risk assessment method for cloud computing using game theory (CCRAM)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cloud computing model and systems has ben used extensively in recent years.Security risks have become important topic for cloud systems.We have proposed a game theory model to assess security risks on cloud systems.Model has been evaluated using sample players named as attacker and defender.Proposed model is a novel approach in this field.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud computing security,Scalable security using cloud service models,Game theory security modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cloud computing is one of the most popular information processing concepts of today's IT world. The security of the cloud computing is complicated because each service model uses different infrastructure elements. Current security risk assessment models generally cannot be applied to cloud computing systems that change their states very rapidly. In this work, a scalable security risk assessment model has been proposed for cloud computing as a solution of this problem using game theory. Using this method, we can evaluate whether the risk in the system should be fixed by cloud provider or tenant of the system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cloud computing has been increasingly used in recent years by organizations to deliver new services, enter new markets, get closer to customers and decrease IT operation costs. Generally, cloud computing is defined as usage of another computer's resources as a service that is delivered using a network. Technological advances in broadband connections made it possible to use for normal users of the Internet for cloud computing.Since more than one entity uses these computer resources, its security becomes more important than normal IT resources that are used by one entity. By the definition of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), typically there are three different service models presented as follows for cloud computing [1].•Software as a Service (SaaS): Software delivery model using cloud infrastructure. Since there is no need to install anything extra, users can access to this service from anywhere where they have Internet. Some examples are mail services, office applications, Customer Relationship Management (CRM) and collaboration, etc.Platform as a Service (PaaS): In this service model, tenant gets a platform where he/she can develop and run their application on. Cloud provider provides complementary services and required technological infrastructure to develop and run the application. Google AppEngine, Force.com and Microsoft Azure are known PaaS providers.Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): In IaaS, cloud vendors provide the infrastructure to the tenant in the form of computing power or storage. Infrastructure comes from the data centers which are used virtualization to divide and distribute its resources. Rackspace Cloud, Google Computing Engine and Amazon EC2 are some examples for IaaS service model.In each service model, different layers are needed to execute the service stack. Since each service model requires different computing resources, security measures which are used for each of these service models may be varied. Some security measures in some service models must be implemented by the cloud provider. However, the other security implementations are not necessarily needed to be done by cloud provider; instead, they must be implemented by the tenants. These security precautions can be different depending on Service-level Agreement (SLA) which is a negotiated agreement between tenant and the cloud provider.Security requirements for the service models that are defined by NIST [1] are given in Table 1. However, a point to be made here is that cloud computing does not consist of only three models. Apart from the NIST defined models SaaS, PaaS and IaaS, there are other models currently used by providers such as:•Storage as a Service (STaaS or SaaS): In this model, the service provider rents space in its infrastructure to another party or individual.Desktop as a Service (DaaS): Delivers a “virtualized” desktop to the user; thus, all the programs, applications, processes and data are kept on centralized server.Network as a Service (NaaS): This model includes application accelerating, security measures or mobile device management, etc.Data a Service (DaaS): Providing data on demand to the tenant regardless of geographic or organizational separation of the provider or tenant.Security measures for these service models are different than each other because of the requirements for different resources. For example, availability requirement for NaaS is more important than the other requirements. Because, it is the elementary need for that service to provide bandwidth and the network. The cloud provider is not responsible for ensuring confidentiality and integrity of the passing data. But, since all computation is done by the provider in SaaS model, all the security properties presented in Table 1 must be implemented by the SaaS provider.Network attackers are generally known as intelligent and rational human beings. They consider the cost and profit of their attacks. Defenders profit when a harmful attack is blocked by their security systems. But, if such an attack doesn't happen, they can lose money because of the unnecessary security measures. These properties make it possible to model this behavior in game theory [14,15]. Like in network security, there is an important game connection between attackers and defenders in the cloud computing. Ideal defensive strategy and ideal offensive strategy may be changed depending on each other.Game theory techniques are used in economy, biology, mathematics, psychology and other social and behavioral sciences. In computer science, many works used game theory have been realized on intrusion detection systems (IDS) [2], security scheduling [3] and network/cyber security [4,15–20]. In the recent years, studies between game theory, economic theory and computer science have given way to a new field, Algorithmic Game Theory [5].In this work, a model has been proposed to determine defensive and offensive ideal strategies using properties of defender and attackers that are mentioned above and considered the security measures taken. Strategies increasing gain or reducing damage are presented to the corresponding players using this model. As a result, cloud computing security staff can determine which security measures should be taken depending on their gain or loss. The proposed model is a novel solution for security of cloud computing. Evaluated security risks using proposed method in the cloud computing system should be mitigated by a cloud provider or a tenant of the system.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 includes related works. Section 3 introduces the proposed model. Section 4 gives a brief practical example and discussion. Section 5 presents our conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
