@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards harmonized data interchange in food consumption data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Data interchange format for food consumption dataDefinition of the key concepts used with food consumption dataA generic data model for food consumption dataLinking food consumption data with food composition data

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Food consumption,XML,Data interchange,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Food consumption data are collected and used in several fields of science. The data are often combined from various sources and interchanged between different systems. There is, however, no harmonized and widely used data interchange format. In addition, food consumption data are often combined with other data such as food composition data. In the field of food composition, successful harmonization has recently been achieved by the European Food Information Resource Network, which is now the basis of a standard draft by the European Committee for Standardization. We present an XML-based data interchange format for food consumption based on work and experiences related to food composition.The aim is that the data interchange format will provide a basis for wider harmonization in the future.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Food consumption data are collected for a variety of purposes. They are used, for example, for clinical studies that analyze the diets of patients, for epidemiological research, public health studies, and in food-oriented risk assessment [1–4].Food consumption data can be collected by paper questionnaires, interviews, use of computers, and sometimes over the Internet. In most cases, the collected data are stored in electronic format for further analysis. Food consumption datasets are often used with datasets of other kinds, such as with food composition data, medical records or other information relating to the study participant. Sometimes these datasets are stored in a dedicated data management system, although it is quite common that food consumption data are linked with data from other information systems or stored within other information systems. In some cases, the food consumption data are collected decentrally or in multiple study centers, and sometimes this information is collected with slightly different methods or software. In addition, it is common to link the same food consumption data for example with food composition datasets from different countries, from different years, or with datasets from different areas of science. These are just a few examples to illustrate how food consumption datasets are commonly linked, split, combined and transferred. One may even find that important consumption data are underutilized for other purposes than collected due to the apparent cumbersome processes involved in merging data from different non-comparable formats; for example, food risk assessment could benefit significantly from harmonized intake of data that has been collected for nutritional analysis. To summarize: there is a constant need for food consumption data interchange. However, there is no harmonized interchange format publicly available that is supported by the food consumption community. The data interchange is often carried out by ad hoc procedures using spreadsheets, leading to manual work that is tedious, cumbersome, error prone and expensive.Since 2005, harmonization efforts in the field of food composition have been intensified through the European Food Information Resource Network (EuroFIR) [5]. Currently, it seems that EuroFIR has managed to achieve a critical momentum that has enabled a breakthrough in harmonizing food composition data and food composition databases and their maintenance [6–10]. In addition, an international food data interchange standard has been developed together with the food industry [11]. As food composition data are commonly used with food consumption data, perhaps a similar harmonization scheme could be adopted for the harmonization of food consumption data — especially in the data interchange. There are also other standards regarding food information, but they are focused on food production [12], food manufacturing and trade [13], and recipes used for cooking [14]. Moreover, there are several existing food description and classification systems available [15]. However, in the area of food consumption there are no commonly used data interchange formats. The existing formats have been created by separate institutes (such as by the European Food Safety Agency [16]) or the formats are used within specific information systems (such as EPIC-Soft in Europe [17] and the system of the Nutrition Coordinating Center in U.S.A [18]). There have already been some efforts [19–21] towards increasing harmonization of food consumption data, but to date they have not led to wider action.The aim of this paper is to present a general structure for a transfer package that could be used for the data interchange of food consumption data. The aim is to be very general: the transfer format should be versatile and it should be suitable for many different tasks, while the format should not limit the purpose of use. This means that we are trying to harmonize only the structure and format — not the content itself or the rules needed to create the content or interpret it. The making of these content rules is outside the scope of this paper. Moreover, this paper does not define or take a stand on which classifications and descriptions were needed — the interchange format should not be limited to any specific classification system or description scheme. We will make use of some classifications, however, to illustrate the usage of the transfer package. We do acknowledge that harmonizing at least some of the classifications would make the data interchange even more effective when taken together with the transfer package, but again, this is beyond the scope of this paper.The starting point for the harmonized food consumption data transfer package was that it should be as general as possible and it would be possible to use it for all kinds of food consumption data, i.e. it should be generic. Moreover, the transport package should be based on existing standards and concepts.The main methods used for the collection of the food consumption data are 24-Hour Dietary Recall, Dietary Record, the Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), and the Food Propensity Questionnaire (FPQ) [22,23]. The different data collection methods produce data of different kinds and structures. The data structures needed for storing and transporting dietary recalls and dietary records are rather similar. In addition, the structures for the data from FFQ and FPQ are almost identical. Thus, the transport format may be reduced to handling two main structures: Dietary recall/record and FFQ/FPQ. In addition, it is possible to use more than one method for collecting food consumption data and across multiple days, or to make use of personal interviews, postal questionnaires or web queries. Consequently, the interchanged data should be applicable with the different methods and their requirements should be taken into account. To summarize, the aim of the transport format is to include all information and documentation needed for the interpretation of the data (without any additional information) but not to include unnecessary information, such as the layout of the questionnaires.Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a general-purpose markup language that is commonly used in sharing structured data, especially over the Internet [24]; for example, the EuroFIR Food Data Transport Package was built using XML [10]. Consequently, XML was chosen as the markup language for the food consumption data transport package.The key concepts are presented in Table 1, while the data model is presented with the help of a Class diagram using the Unified Modeling Language (UML) [25] in Fig. 1. A class is a concept of object-oriented modeling and it can be used for presenting the main concepts. In addition, the associations between the classes define the concept and its relation to other concepts. The Class diagram is a schema of associations between classes. The lines between the classes present the associations.These two should be interpreted together. The data model is quite simplified and consists of only the main elements. A black lozenge with the association is used to describe composition. The multiplicities of the associations are presented with numbers and symbols — the most common cases are 0 (zero, optional), 1 (exactly one) and * (zero or more, many). In Fig. 1, for example, every Record/Recall is described by exactly one Method (such as 24h-recall). Moreover, a Record/Recall consists of zero or more Days. Consequently, every Day belongs to exactly one Record/Recall. It should be emphasized that the Class diagram is a rather abstract modeling construct. In the data model, we describe that every Record/Recall has zero or more days. However, in real life the number of days (per study person) was defined as part of the method, and so recall without any interviews would mean a failed interview.The data model has three major classes: Study Person, Record/Recall and Questionnaire. The Study-class simply keeps the Study Persons together and every Study Person may have Records/Recalls or Questionnaires. The Record/Recall has an inner structure (from Day to Entry) and consequently the Questionnaire–Question Set–Question forms another main structure.The XML implementation of the data transport package follows the data model (Fig. 2). In addition, it has a section (Sender Information) that includes information about the dataset provided, such as the name of the organization and the contact information.Fig. 3shows an example of the XML schemata, the XML schema for Meal. The XML schema has its own grammar for defining the elements, their order and data types. Moreover, it is possible to define whether some element is mandatory or not and whether it can occur several times and these features can be used for the validation of the XML data file (it is validated against the XML schema). The example from the Meal shows that Time is mandatory and the Meal can include several Entries. In addition, it is possible to give information about the type of meal and the place of consumption.Food consumption information is often used with other kinds of information such as food composition and health records or other background information from the study person (Fig. 4). Even if these datasets are outside the scope when focusing on the transport package for food consumption, the (potential) linking has to be taken into account in the design. The main concepts used in the linking are Study Person and Food. For successful linking, it is essential that the common concepts are defined and modeled in the same way. The concept of the Study Person is rather unambiguous. The Food concept is, however, quite complex. In some cases, both datasets may have the same unambiguous food identifiers, but this is not true in all cases. Especially if food consumption data has been collected with an open-ended method, the linking may actually require a fairly laborious matching process. Thus, an adequate food description is essential and the data model should facilitate using not only a plain food identifier but also multifaceted and adequate food descriptions.There are two different ways to provide food composition information together with food consumption. In the first solution, the food item linked with an Entry would provide a link to a separate dataset where the food composition was compiled per food item. This information was presented per harmonized 100g edible portion using the EuroFIR Food Data Transport Package [9] or some future implementation of the CEN Food Data Standard [11]. As the same foods are often used in several Entries, this solution would minimize the amount of data in the interchange. However, this would mean that the food composition information should be recalculated for every Entry before intake analysis. The alternative solution would be calculating the food consumption per Entry using the portion size. The harmonized structures from the EuroFIR Food Data Transport Package could be utilized also in this solution.In both cases the food items used in the food consumption information should be first matched with food items with food composition information and the previous dataset should provide suitable food identification and food description so as to enable the linking of these two datasets.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Given the increasing need to combine food consumption information with other datasets on food consumption information, food composition, and information from other fields of science, it is clear that achieving a harmonization of food consumption information becomes more and more necessary. This would facilitate using automated processing and more effective tools. Food consumption is used for various purposes in the different fields of science. This means that slightly different methods will always be used and different classification and software systems will be used for data collection — and new requirements and methods will likewise emerge in the future. This means that harmonization using a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach will probably not be particularly fruitful. The harmonization approach used by the EuroFIR project was rather different: the key issues were the harmonization of the main concepts and the documentation requirements of the food composition data. This made it possible to harmonize – and even to standardize in the strict sense [30] – the data interchange format as opposed to the content. In addition, this has widened the user base (e.g. to the food industry) and has made it possible to use the harmonized concepts (and standards) as stepping stones for other analytical aspects, such as food consumption. Yet, it is evident that rules and guidelines will still be needed to ensure compatibility [17,20] though these could be constructed using harmonized concepts or standards. Harmonization is a never ending issue and the format for the food consumption transfer package presented in this paper is not meant to be a final solution, but rather a starting point for further harmonization work.