@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A technique for sharing a digital image

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A true color secret image can be concealed into two meaningful cover images.5 algorithms are proposed to share a secret color image.Our schemes can achieve both the benefits of smaller share size and good visual quality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual cryptography,Secret image sharing,Color image,Information hiding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new information hiding scheme for color images based on the concept of visual cryptography and the Boolean exclusive-or (XOR) operation is proposed. Three different schemes with noise-like, meaningful and binary shares are presented. Meaningful shares may reduce suspicion that something is concealed there. Binary shares can achieve both the benefits of smaller share size and good visual quality. Our model can be easily extended from 256 colors to 65,536 or true color images simply by expanding the block size from 3×3 to 4×4 or 5×5, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The combination of computer and communication technology has led to the rapid development and maturity of digital media usage. More and more digital data (text, voice, and image) are transmitted and exchanged over the Internet. It is now very easy to spread, duplicate, capture and modify multimedia data. However, the convenience of sharing digital data over the Internet has produced problems such as misappropriation of data, illegal data usage and other problems regarding intellectual property rights. How to protect important data from attacks becomes a very critical issue. A secure information sharing technique to protect transmitted data from illegal interceptors is needed. Recently, a number of intellectual property protection schemes have been proposed. In all of them, encryption is still the fundamental method used to protect important data files for the purpose of copyright protection, integrity checking and captioning. However, the computation needed for the encryption and decryption processes is quite complex and noise-like encrypted results may tempt an interceptor to break it. To avoid these problems, researchers have developed information hiding techniques to conceal the secret image in a cover image. The result is the so called stego image. The secret image can be delivered with the help of the stego image where the hidden information is not immediately apparent, which enhances the security of the secret information being transmitted. Even if the stego image is captured by illegal interceptors, there is still a good chance to avoid giving rise to suspicions that some secret information may be hidden inside.Generally speaking, the research studies related to information hiding can be categorized into two schools — the spatial domain [1–6] and the frequency domain [7–12]. The spatial domain methods employ the property where a tiny change of pixels cannot be detected by the human eye; therefore, secret information is embedded by directly modifying the pixel's gray value. The Least Significant Bit (LSB) [1] is the simplest and the most commonly used of the spatial domain techniques. In the frequency domain methods, the host image is mainly turned into frequency space; the secret information is embedded by modifying the coefficients of the frequency space, and then transformed back to form a watermarked image. The main transformation techniques include the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT), and Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) techniques.Cryptography is a technology that transforms plaintext into meaningless or disordered messages through mass and complicated computing. As a result, ciphertext is produced. Without knowing the correct key, this transformation process cannot be reversed under confined resources (e.g., time) to ensure the safety of the secret data. In conventional cryptography, the encryption/decryption algorithms require complex computations, which mean that they are not suitable for an environment without computers. Naor and Shamir [13] introduced a perfectly secure method called visual cryptography (VC) for protecting the secret images. Compared with other traditional encryption/decryption processes, the visual secret sharing (VSS) scheme possesses the advantages of needing only human visual perception to decrypt the secret images, without the need of any complex mathematical operations. The basic model of VC consists of “splitting” the image or watermark into two transparencies (shares). One share can be regarded as the ciphertext and the other one as the secret key (called the key share). Each share looks like random noise, without any clue disclosing the outlines of the secret image. The original image can be revealed simply by superimposing these two shares. Due to its simplicity, the model can be used by anyone, even those without knowledge of cryptography and without the help of a computer to perform any complex computations.The basic operation used to restore the secret image in VC is by stacking the shares [14–21]. The action of stacking transparencies works like a logical “OR” operation, in which 0 stands for a white pixel and 1 stands for a black pixel. When a black pixel appears in the corresponding position of any share of the stacked images, the result of stacking those pixels will be black. Only when the pixels of all shares for the corresponding position are white, will the result be white. Therefore, as long as the shares are arranged so that the stacked blocks corresponding to white pixels in the secret image remain half black and half white, and those corresponding to black pixels remain all black, the stacked blocks will provide enough contrast for the human eye to identify the secret image without the aid of a computer.However, the OR operation is the main reason that the white pixels will be reconstructed as half-white-and-half-black blocks. The contrast in the stacked image is reduced to 50%. Therefore, some researchers [10,12,22–24] tried to change the default OR operation of VC into another operation, such as “XOR” to perfectly reconstruct the secret image during the decoding phase if a light-weight device is available. However such VC-like method can only handle pictures with limited colors.In this study, a new VC-like scheme for digital color images based on XOR is proposed. Our scheme improves upon the drawbacks of [10,12,22–24], i.e., it can handle true color images, using only one operator (XOR) and a mask share is not needed to help in the generation of secured shares. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we offer a concise introduction of related works. In Section 3, three different information hiding schemes with noise-like, meaningful and binary shares are presented. The experimental results are discussed in Section 4. Finally, a discussion and some conclusions are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, information hiding techniques are used to conceal a color secret image within two meaningful cover images. Every pixel is expanded into a 3×3 block. The binary index code of the secret pixel and 1 bit of the palette data are randomly dispatched to the shares. The only criterion is to make the results of the XOR operation on the corresponding block equal to the binary color code of the secret pixel. Every block in the shares contains 4 white and 5 black sub-pixels, meaning that regardless of the color of the secret image, the probability to appear 1 on each share is 5/9, which gives no clue to the content of the secret image from the shares alone. This indistinguishable property ensures the security of the shares.In addition, all 1s in share 1 and share 2 can be filled with the corresponding color of the cover pixel at that location. This makes the shares meaningful. If the shares are noise-like, even though interceptors will not be able to obtain any information about the secret image from any single share, they will suspect that something might be concealed there, which increases the risk of attack. Therefore, having meaningful content on the shares provides a double layer of protection. Our model can easily extend a 256 colors image to 65,536 or true color images, simply by expanding the block size from 3×3 to 4×4 or 5×5, respectively.Visually pleasing shares are generated using color images as the cover image (Algorithm 3) which may reduce suspicion that something is concealed there. However, the storage requirements for these shares will be large. To solve this problem, Algorithm 4 is proposed, using a binary image as the cover image. This can achieve both the benefits of smaller share size and good visual quality.Our secret image sharing scheme can be applied to cover the transmission of confidential images. Therefore, it can be used as a confidential transmission means in the area of key exchange, key predistribution, or group key distribution for existing standards. For example, as a supplementary aid to existing symmetric cryptography standards like DES which require a preshared key, our secret image sharing scheme remains a safe and less risky means for key distribution. In the future, we will pay more attention to applications of our scheme in secret protection and transmission.