@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An address configuration protocol for 6LoWPAN wireless sensor networks based on PDAD

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The network architecture based on location information is proposed.Based on this architecture, the address initialization algorithm is proposed.Based on this architecture, the address maintenance algorithm is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
6LoWPAN,Wireless sensor network,Address configuration,Passive duplicate address detection,Location information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In a wireless sensor network (WSN), data collected by a sensor node need to be associated with location information in order to support real-world applications. Taking the WSN characteristics into account, this paper proposes an address configuration scheme based on location information and passive duplicate address detection (PDAD). In this scheme, the network architecture based on location information is presented, and based on this architecture the address initialization algorithm and address maintenance algorithm are proposed. The address initialization algorithm is performed once the network starts, and it is made up of the initialization address configuration sub-algorithm (IAC) and the initialization location PDAD sub-algorithm (ILPDAD). The address maintenance algorithm is performed after the initialization algorithm is complete, and it is composed of the maintenance address configuration sub-algorithm (MAC) and the maintenance location PDAD sub-algorithm (MLPDAD). During the address initialization process (address maintenance process), a new node first uses IAC (MAC) to obtain an address and then performs ILPDAD (MLPDAD) to ensure the address uniqueness. Since beacon frames are employed to achieve IAC (MAC) and ILPDAD (MLPDAD), the address configuration cost and delay are reduced. Moreover, IAC (MAC) is based on location information and ILPDAD (MLPDAD) is based on PDAD, so there are always the sufficient address resources for address configuration without address reclamation. In this way, the extra cost and delay caused by both the address reclamation and the address configuration failure are avoided. This paper evaluates the performance of this scheme, and the data results show that this scheme effectively reduces the address configuration delay and cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently, a wireless sensor network (WSN) has attracted much attention due to the proliferation of mobile computing devices. With the dramatic growth of the WSN applications as well as the continuous emergence of the new WSN services, it is urgent to demand a communication mechanism with high scalability and good stability to support the point-to-point communication between WSN and the Internet. WSN is made up of a large number of nodes which can move freely while IPv6 (Internet protocol version 6) has the abundant addresses and supports the mobility very well. Therefore, IPv6 over low-power Wireless Personal Area Network (6LoWPAN) WSN is proposed. In 6LoWPAN WSN, each sensor node has a globally unique IPv6 address, supports the IPv6 protocol, and is able to use the IPv6 protocol to achieve the point-to-point communication with nodes in IPv6 networks [1].Obviously, in 6LoWPAN WSN a node must be configured with a globally unique IPv6 address before it can perform the proper communications [2,3]. In general, data collected by a sensor node need to be associated with its location information in order to support real-world applications. Moreover, if a sensor node's address implies its location information, then it becomes easy to manage 6LoWPAN WSN and perform the efficient communication.Taking into account the WSN characteristics, such as limited resources, this paper proposes an address configuration scheme based on location information and passive duplicate address detection (PDAD), and it has the following contributions:1)The network architecture based on location information is proposed, and based on this architecture the IPv6 address structure is presented.Based on this architecture, the address initialization algorithm is proposed. The address initialization algorithm is performed once the network starts, and it is made up of the initialization address configuration sub-algorithm (IAC) and the initialization location PDAD sub-algorithm (ILPDAD). During the address initialization process, a new node first uses IAC to obtain an address and then performs ILPDAD to ensure the address uniqueness. Since beacon frames are employed to achieve IAC and ILPDAD, the address configuration cost and delay are reduced.Based on this architecture, the address maintenance algorithm is proposed, and it is performed after the initialization algorithm is complete. The maintenance algorithm includes the maintenance address configuration sub-algorithm (MAC) and the maintenance location PDAD sub-algorithm (MLPDAD). During the address maintenance process, a new node first uses MAC to obtain an address and then performs MLPDAD to ensure the address uniqueness. Since beacon frames are employed to achieve both MAC and MLPDAD, the address configuration cost and delay are reduced.IAC or MAC is based on location information and ILPDAD or MLPDAD is based on PDAD, so there are always the sufficient address resources for address configuration without address reclamation. As a result, the extra cost and delay caused by the address reclamation and the address configuration failure are avoided.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related works on the address configuration are discussed. In Section 3 the network architecture based on location information is presented and the IPv6 address structure is proposed. Based on this architecture and address structure, the address initialization algorithm and the address maintenance algorithm are presented in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. The performance of this scheme is evaluated in Sections 6 and 7, and this paper concludes with a summary in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
