@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An empirical framework for evaluating interoperability of data exchange standards based on their actual usage: A case study on XLIFF

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A framework that can evaluate practitioners' usage of data-exchange standards.Specific usage-analyses to identify possible refinements of such standards.An illustrative application of the framework on the XLIFF data-exchange standard.Results indicating core features/candidates for deprecation/modularization in XLIFF.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Empirical framework,Data interoperability,Lacalization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Data exchange formats play a prominent role in facilitating interoperability. Standardization of data exchange formats is therefore extremely important. In this paper, we present two contributions: an empirical framework called XML-DIUE, for evaluating data exchange format standards in terms of their usage and an illustration of this framework, demonstrating its ability to inform on these standards from their usage in practice. This illustration is derived from the localization domain and focuses on identifying interoperability issues associated with the usage of XML Localization Interchange File Format (XLIFF), an open standard data exchange format.The initial results from this illustrative XLIFF study suggest the utility of the XML-DIUE approach. Specifically they suggest that there is prevalent ambiguity in the standard's usage, and that there are validation errors across 85% of the XLIFF files studied. The study also suggests several features for deprecation/modularization of the standard, in line with the XLIFF Technical Committee's deliberations, and successfully identifies the core features of XLIFF.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The most widely used definition for interoperability is the definition by the IEEE [1]:“Interoperability is the ability of two or more systems or components to exchange information and to use the information that has been exchanged.”Interoperability is becoming increasingly important in heterogeneous environments as it facilitates the integration of different entities such as tools, businesses, technologies and processes. Data exchange formats play a prominent role in facilitating interoperability by providing agreed or standardized notations for storage and exchange of data. Data exchange formats that are based on the Extensible Markup Language (XML) are becoming ever-more pervasive [2,3] and they can be categorized as either open or proprietary. Examples of popular XML-based open data exchange standards (also known as open file formats) include: XHTML, DOCBOOK, and Office Open XML (OOXML). However, the definition of such standards is an arduous time-consuming process due to the constantly evolving nature of the technologies, businesses, and tools in question [4]. That is, standards need to be constantly reviewed and updated to cope with the changing requirements, typically across multiple organizations.In this paper, we propose a novel empirical framework that can be used as a tool to evaluate the usage of data-exchange, XML-based standards and thus inform on the development, maintenance and evolution of those standards. The utility of this framework is illustrated by applying it to the XML Localization Interchange File Format (XLIFF), an open standard for the exchange of localization data.The XLIFF standard has been developed and is being maintained by a Technical Committee (TC) of OASIS and is an important standard for enabling interoperability in the localization domain (see Section 2.2.1 for more details on the XLIFF standard). It aims to enable the loss-less exchange of localization-relevant data and metadata between different tools and technologies across the localization process. XLIFF is gaining increased acceptance within the localization community [5], and is increasingly being used not just as an exchange format, but also as a container for the storage and transport of data [6,7].XLIFF version 2 was released on the 5th of August 2014 to provide solutions to various significant issues relating to the previous version of the XLIFF standard (version 1.2). However problems remain with respect to adoption, as confirmed by a study conducted in 2011, which revealed that lack of interoperability could cost language service providers more than 20% of their total translation budget. According to this study, the main cause for lack of interoperability is the “lack of compliance to interchange format standards” [8], a finding that suggests the standard may still be immature with respect to adopters' needs.We aim to evaluate this potential immaturity issue by reporting on experiments where the usage of the XLIFF schema is assessed by our analytical framework. The framework will provide empirical evidence and statistics related to the actual usage of different elements, attributes and attribute values of this standard in-vivo.More generically, this illustration demonstrates that the XML-DIUE framework proposed can also serve to address similar issues in XML based file format standards in other domains. The empirical results generated by the framework seem useful for identifying important criteria for standard development such as the most frequently used features, the least frequently used features11Hereafter, we use the term “features” throughout the paper to refer to XML elements, attributes and prede_ned element values as well as attribute values., usage patterns and formats. The findings will also be helpful in identifying compliance issues associated with implementations supporting the standard under study. Furthermore, the results will be helpful for the development of interoperability test suites that target prevalent compliance issues, from a usage perspective. Thus, we believe that this framework will ultimately contribute to improved interoperability among tools and technologies in many verticals.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses related work in standards and localization, culminating in a section devoted to XLIFF. This provides a context for the XLIFF running example used in this paper. Section 3 describes the methodology underlying our framework, illustrating it by detailing the data collection performed in our XLIFF study, and the data analysis performed. Section 4 presents the experimental results derived from our illustration which are then discussed in Section 5. This section also outlines some more general limitations of evaluating standards in this fashion. Finally, the paper concludes with a summary and pointers to future work in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
