@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Linking from Schema.org microdata to the Web of Linked Data: An empirical assessment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We mapped classes and properties of Schema.org with classes and properties of the vocabularies in LOV.We have retrieved instances in the Web of Linked Data using the mapped terms previously.We have presented to uses cases in order to take benefits of the mappings giving real quantitative results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ontologies,Microformats,Schema.org,Linked Data,LOV,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The increase of Linked Open Data (LOD) usage has grown in the last few years, and the number of datasets available is considerably higher. Taking this into account, another way to make data available is microdata, whose aim is to make information more understandable for search engines to give better results. The Schema.org vocabulary was created for the enrichment of microdata as a way to give more accurate results for user searches. As Schema.org is a kind of ontology, it has the potential to become a bridge to the Web of Linked Data. In this paper we analyze the potential of mapping Schema.org and the Web of Linked Data. Concretely, we have obtained mappings between Schema.org terms and the terms provided by the Linked Open Vocabularies (LOV) collection. In order to measure the limitations of our mappings we have compared the results of our script with some matching tools. Finally, an analysis of the usability of interlinking Schema.org to vocabularies in LOV has been carried out. For this purpose, two studies in which we have been presented aggregated information. Results show that new information has been added a substantial number of times.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
On June 2, 2011, Bing, Google, and Yahoo! announced the joint effort Schema.org.11http://www.schema.orgSchema.org ontologies are intended for the creation of microcontents targeted to improving indexing and search systems [20]. It consists of a set of tags introduced by HTML522http://www.w3org/TR/html5//defining a vocabulary that lets webmasters to mark up Web sites with microdata. The purpose of microdata is to help search engines and other tools working with Web sites to better understand the information contained in them. This will eventually help the users to do more precise searches when they are looking for information on the Web. Mika and Potter [15] reported some statistics about the importance of using Schema.org. The increase of microdata used is also shown in Muhleisen and Bizer [16], demonstrating that it has increased among the different formats to embed structured data. The Schema.org initiative has supported the use of microdata, choosing it as its favorite syntax. Taking into account the information given by BuiltWith,33http://builtwith.com/which is tool providing technology adoption, ecommerce data and usage analytics for the Internet, the usage of Microdata has increased from 750,000 Websites at the end of 2013 to 1,500,000 nowadays.There are other initiatives aimed at making data and content more accessible for machine consumption, notably Linked Open Data (LOD). LOD has the objective of publishing open datasets using Resource Description Framework (RDF)44http://www.w3.org/RDF/format and interlinking these datasets using RDF links. The way these datasets are published follows the well-known Linked Data principles [4]. Sometimes Linked Data is confused with microformats,55http://www.microformats.orgbut the latter is another way to extend the Web completely differently that does not use the principles of Linked Data.One of the characteristics of both Schema.org and LOD is that of bringing structure and vocabularies to the Web, so it appears to be promising to create links between them. One way to do this is to map the classes and properties from Schema.org with the principal vocabularies used in the Web of Linked Data. In LOD, there are no mandatory vocabularies; the communities using them are the ones that could make a vocabulary more popular at any time. Regardless, we need a way to measure the popularity of a vocabulary used in LOD. The Linked Open Vocabulary (LOV)66http://lov.okfn.orginitiative quantifies the use of classes and properties. LOV consists of various vocabularies used in different fields. The objective of this initiative is to give access to the vocabularies, describe the relations between them and how they are linked with the Linked Data Cloud.In previous work, Nogales et al. [17], we did a mapping between the classes and properties of Schema.org with LOV. Then using the statistics provided by the project LODStats we measured the impact of Schema.org in the LOD. Finally we exposed a use case to retrieve information from datasets that could be aggregated to Webpages enriching its information.In this paper, we report an assessment of the potential of linking microcontent and Linked Open Data through the mapping of Schema.org with Linked Open Vocabularies. We have developed a new mapping at a semantic level using synonyms of the Schema.org terms. Results show that only the third part of the vocabularies in LOV provides a class mapping between Schema.org and LOD. With regard to properties, just around the percentage can be mapped using our approach. Furthermore, in LOD it is easier to find particular values for Schema.org properties than for classes. Taking this into account, we can conclude that the reachability in properties is higher than in classes. Once we have demonstrated that there is an important amount of mappings between Schema.org and LOD, we are taking it into account in two studies. The first case will use the value of the classes and properties from Schema.org embedded in Web sites to aggregate new information retrieved from a dataset. The second case involves extending an ontology with properties that are used by a vocabulary from LOV, taking into account the mappings between classes that we have obtained previously. For both cases we have presented some real examples demonstrating its usage. We will get some conclusions about it, giving users a measure of LOD data in pages that are using Schema.org vocabularies. We will also present some example of software that could take advantages of our achievements.The rest of this paper is structured as follows: in the second section, we present a background of papers using Schema.org and LOV. Then we have a section describing the materials and the methods used to obtain the results. The fourth section shows the results obtained and discusses them. The following section relates the potential use of the mappings. Finally, the last section offers some conclusions about the paper and the implications of future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
