@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A cloud-based platform to develop context-aware mobile applications by domain experts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We implement a cloud-based platform to obtain and manage context dataThe platform is designed for people with no programming skills in order to develop context-aware mobile appsThe reasoning process of the platform has been optimized using the “conditions as facts” rule patternThe context data gathering process has been optimized using an algorithm that detects the activity of the user

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
End-user development,Domain expert,Context-awareness,Mobile,Middleware,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Context-awareness enables the personalization of computer systems according to the users' needs and their particular situation at a given time. The personalization capabilities are usually implemented by programmers due to the complex processes that are involved. However, an important trend in software development is that more and more software systems are being implemented not only by programmers but also by people with expertise in other domains. Since most of the existing context-aware development toolkits are designed for programmers, non-technical users cannot develop these kinds of systems. The design of tools to create context-aware systems by users that do not have programming skills but are experts in the domain where the system is going to be deployed, will contribute to speed up the adoption of these kinds of services by the society. This paper presents a cloud-based platform to ease the development of context-aware mobile applications by people without programming skills. The platform has been designed to be used in a tourism domain. This way, tourism experts can send tourist information to mobile users according to their context data (indoor/outdoor location, language, and date and time range). An energy-efficient mobile app has been developed in order to obtain context data from the user's device and to receive personalized information in real time based on these data. The architecture and implementation details of the system are presented and the evaluation of the platform by tourism domain experts is discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The recent advances in mobile technologies and their increasing popularity are speeding up the achievement of the ubiquitous computing vision [1]. For the first time ever there are more gadgets in the world than there are people [2]. Smartphone sales surpassed one billion units in 2014 [3] and it is expected that over half of mobile phone users globally will have smartphones in 2018 [4]. In addition to this, global mobile data traffic grew 69% in 2014 [5]. It is a fact that these devices are replacing cameras, music players and Global Positioning System (GPS) tools. Definitely, they have become an open window to information and services at any time and place. This computing scenario requires the development of new technologies in order to provide mobile users with the correct information and services on the move. This way, a personalization layer is needed in order to filter and adapt all the information that is consumed by mobile users.In this sense, context data is essential in order to carry out this personalization process. In the last decade, location has been widely used as one of the key parameters in order to be able to personalize mobile applications. For instance, in the tourism domain [6] Location Based Services (LBS) [7] have been widely used in order to filter the results of mobile searches. In this manner, the information about the nearest points of interest can be automatically adapted, providing tourists with a better search experience. But there are other relevant context data, like the time and date, the user's device characteristics or the environment [8].The development of context-aware mobile applications and services is usually carried out by experimented programmers that implement the personalization layer of the business logic according to the end-user requirements. But computer programming is becoming a widespread practice. Indeed, one important trend in software technology is that more and more applications and services are being written not only by professional software developers but also by people with expertise in other domains. End-User Development (EUD) [9] emerges as a key ingredient for ensuring the acceptability of context-aware systems by end-users and has accordingly been identified as a key future challenge for research in technological visions of ubiquitous and pervasive computing [10]. EUD can contribute to empower users as active citizens of the information society, improving the user experience and the effectiveness of context-aware systems.Several middleware and programming frameworks have been proposed in order to simplify the development of context-aware applications and services [11]. However, most of them offer high level application programming interfaces (APIs) for skilled programmers. This makes the involvement of non-technical domain experts almost impossible. The design and configuration of context-aware applications by domain experts can speed up and improve the quality of these kinds of services, promoting the widespread adoption of context-awareness.This work presents a cloud-based development platform in order to configure the behavior of context-aware mobile applications by people that do not have technical skills. More precisely, the design of the platform has been focused in the tourism domain, in order to provide tourism domain experts with the tools to create personalized tourism mobile services. The personalization process is based on the configuration of logical rules that trigger the delivery of tourist information based on the mobile users' context data (indoor/outdoor location, language, and date and time range). The platform provides a web front-end where all the features involved in the configuration of context-aware systems can be easily managed without coding any programming line.The article is organized as follows: in Section 2, the related work is presented. In Section 3, the implemented context-aware platform is described. Section 4 analyzes the performance of the platform. Section 5 discusses the platform user evaluation. Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusions of this research work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a platform in order to configure context-aware mobile services and applications using a web platform that has been designed for people with no programming skills. The architecture of the platform follows the design guidelines of the reviewed context-aware toolkits, with a user interface that has been adapted in order to allow the configuration of all the needed context conditions and parameters with no programming code.As the results of the user evaluation evidence, the designed platform is able to empower end-users in the development of context-aware mobile applications. The participants of the user evaluation found that the platform was usable and they were able to configure it in order to develop a context-aware mobile application. This brings new opportunities to the context-aware computing research field and the mobile industry.One of the main disadvantages of these kinds of systems is that the location of the mobile user has to be continuously acquired in order to personalize the behavior of the system. This has a negative impact in the battery of the mobile device as it drains very quickly. An algorithm has been implemented in order to improve the efficiency of the location gathering process from the mobile device.Most of the reviewed works are laboratory prototypes, with no commercial usage. The implementation of systems like the one presented in this research work, can enhance the early adoption of context-aware systems by users with no technical skills. The widespread adoption of these technologies will provide people with a better user experience and a higher personalization of services.