@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The optimal generalized Byzantine Agreement in Cluster-based Wireless Sensor Networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The Byzantine Agreement problem in a CWSN is revisited.The proposed protocol achieves agreement with a minimal number of rounds.The proposed protocol can tolerate a maximal number of allowable faulty components.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless Sensor Network,Cluster-based Wireless Sensor Network,Byzantine Agreement,Distributed system,Internet of Things,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is a wireless network consisting of spatially distributed autonomous devices using sensor nodes in a wide range of applications in various domains. In the future, WSNs are expected to be integrated into the “Internet of Things” (IoT), where sensor nodes join the Internet dynamically, and use them to collaborate and accomplish their tasks. Because of the communications of WSN will produce a broadcast storm, the Cluster-based Wireless Sensor Network (CWSN) was proposed to ameliorate the broadcast storm. However, the capability of the fault-tolerance and reliability of CWSNs must be carefully investigated and analyzed. To cope with the influence of faulty components, reaching a common agreement in the presence of faults before performing certain tasks is essential. Byzantine Agreement (BA) problem is a fundamental problem in fault-tolerant distributed systems. To enhance fault-tolerance and reliability of CWSN, the BA problem in CWSN is revisited in this paper. In this paper, a new BA protocol is proposed that adapts to the CWSN and derives its limit of allowable faulty components, while maintaining the minimum number of message exchanges.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One new concept associated with the “Future Internet” is that of the so-called “Internet of Things” (IoT). The “Internet of Things” describes a vision where objects become part of the Internet, where every object is uniquely identified, and accessible to the network, its position and status known, and where services and intelligence are added to this expanded Internet, fusing the digital and physical world, ultimately impacting our professional, personal and social environments [4]. The IoT is a technological revolution that represents the future of computing and communications; its development depends on dynamic technical innovation in a number of important fields, such as wireless sensors. The purpose of the IoT consists in the facilitation of information exchanges about, among other things or goods in global supply chain networks, i.e., the IT-infrastructure should provide information about “things” in a secure and reliable manner. Extending the initial application scope, the IoT might also serve as the backbone for ubiquitous computing, enabling smart environments to recognize and identify objects, and retrieve information from the Internet to facilitate their adaptive functionality [8].Through the study of the IoT technology, the idea of combining IoT with Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is proposed, which demonstrates the integration feasibility of the RFID and WSN technology [4]. In order to improve the efficiency of logistics enterprises, all aspects in the transport process should be monitored, which requires applying the IoT technology into the logistics management system [10]. WSN is a wireless network consisting of spatially distributed autonomous devices using sensor nodes to monitor physical or environmental conditions cooperatively [1]. However, the sensor node is limited by the energy resource, memory, computation, communication capability, etc. [5]. Therefore, the topology of a Cluster-based Wireless Sensor Network (CWSN) has been proposed to prolong the lifetime of WSNs by decreasing the energy consumption of nodes [7].The reliability of the node is one of the most important requirements of a successful CWSN. In order to provide a reliable environment in CWSN, a mechanism to allow a set of nodes to agree on an agreement value is required. The Byzantine Agreement (BA) problem [6,9] is one of the most fundamental problems in which an agreement value is reached in a distributed system. Some examples of such applications are the commitment problem in a distributed database system, the clock synchronization problem, and the landing task controlled by a flight path finding system [12].The traditional BA problem first defined by Lamport et al. [9] makes the following assumptions.(1)There are n nodes in a synchronous distributed system where n is a constant and n≥4.Each node can communicate with the others through a reliable fully connected network.One or more of the nodes might fail, so the faulty nodes may transmit incorrect message(s) to other nodes.After message exchange, all fault-free nodes should reach a common agreement, if and only if the number of faulty nodes fnis less than one-third of the total number of nodes in the network (fn≤⌊(n−1)/3⌋).Only the faulty nodes are considered.Based on these assumptions, the BA requirement can be satisfied when the following constraints are met:Agreement: All fault-free nodes agree on a common decision value.Validity: If the source node is fault-free, then all fault-free nodes agree on the initial value sent by the source node.Previous researches on the BA problem were solved in a well-defined network environment, such as fully connected network, broadcast network and so on [2,7,9]. In other words, all nodes reside in a wired network environment. However, the technology of networks continues to grow at a high speed and the applications in wireless mobile networks have reached an astonishing achievement level in the last year, so it is important to solve the BA problem in the wireless mobile networks. Thus, this research will focus on the wireless mobile networks and propose a protocol to make all fault-free nodes reach an agreement in the CWSN. In this study, the BA problem in CWSN is revised. The proposed protocol is referred to as the Optimal Generalized Byzantine Agreement protocol in CWSN (OGBA), which can lead to an agreement between each fault-free node in the topology of CWSN. However, the proposed protocol OGBA is the only protocol to make all fault-free nodes reach BA in the case of CWSN with both node and transmission medium (TM) fallibility.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the CWSN. Then, the proposed protocol OGBA is introduced and illustrated in detail in Section 3. In Section 4, an example of the execution of the proposed protocols is given. Section 5 demonstrates the fault-freeness and complexity of our new protocol. Section 6 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The changes in network topology developed in recent years have demonstrated a trend towards increasingly mobile features. The proposed protocol, OGBA, can solve the BA problem in dual failure mode on fallible nodes and transmission media in the topology of CWSN. The proposed protocol, OGBA, can tolerate the most fallible types of nodes taking the minimum number of required rounds to reach an agreement, and tolerating the maximum number of faulty components.Moreover, reaching an agreement is insufficient for the highly reliable distributed system in the topology of CWSN. A closely related problem is called the Fault Diagnosis Agreement (FDA) problem [3]. The objective of solving the FDA problem is to make each fault-free node able to detect or locate the common set of faulty components in the distributed system. Therefore, solving the FDA problem for the highly reliable CWSN will be included in our future work.