@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the impact of mobile node radio architectures on heterogeneous wireless network standards: A performance analysis of LTE–eHRPD mobility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the impact of mobile node radio architectures on achievable performance of mobility standards in wireless heterogeneous networks.We provide a first energy consumption analysis on LTE to eHRPD mobility.We discuss a first consideration for advanced flow-precision mobility supportability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heterogeneous wireless standards,Multi-radio architecture,LTE,eHRPD,Handover,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the availability of various heterogeneous radio access technology standards, how to support multiple heterogeneous radio interfaces in a single device and provide seamless mobility between them is one of key issues in the design and implementation of modern multi-radio mobile devices (like smartphones). The radio architectures of such multi-radio mobile devices can have great impacts on achievable mobility performance. This paper presents a case study that investigates into the impacts of radio architecture design on mobility performance achievable in wireless standard implementation, with a particular focus on heterogeneous radio access mobility between Long Term Evolution (LTE) and enhanced High Rate Packet Data (eHRPD). We present an in-depth overview of handover procedures in standards and their achievable performance enhancements from the perspective of device radio architectures. We consider three radio architectures (single transmission/reception, single transmission dual reception, and dual transmission/reception architectures) and provide a performance analysis to compare the three architectures in terms of handover delay and energy consumption. We also discuss supportability for advanced flow-precision mobility under the different radio architectures, and present a comparison with another vertical handover technology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Long Term Evolution (LTE) and LTE-Advanced by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) have become a dominant 4th-generation cellular network standard since major operators world-wide (Telia Sonera, Verizon Wireless, AT&T, SK Telecom, NTT DoCoMo, TMobile, Vodafone, etc.) have launched the initial roll-out of LTE and have nation-wide deployment plans in the coming years [1]. Along with the evolution towards higher spectral efficiency and bit rates in the radio network part (both mobile nodes and base stations), the core network part has been redesigned for radical evolution as well, which is referred to as System Architecture Evolution (SAE) or Evolved Packet Core (EPC) [2,3]. One of the crucial points with the deployment of LTE/SAE as new radio network and core network standards is how they can be seamlessly integrated into the legacy 3rd generation (3G) or 2nd generation (2G) cellular networks without introducing any disruption in service experiences to mobile users. More specifically, for the 3rd Generation Partnership Project 2 (3GPP2) network operators [4], interworking between LTE and eHRPD (or 1xRTT) is of utmost interest [3,5]. Here, eHRPD and 1xRTT are the legacy 3G standards, enhanced High Rate Packet Data and single-carrier Radio Transmission Technology [6]. Meanwhile, for 3GPP network operators, interworking between LTE and UTRAN/GERAN is a key enabler for seamless deployment of the new LTE technology [2,7]. Here, UTRAN is the legacy 3G standard, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) Terrestrial Radio Access Network, and GERAN is the legacy 2G standard, General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) and Enhanced Data Rates for Global Evolution (EDGE) radio access network.Since the initial deployment of LTE/LTE-Advanced networks and the proliferation of data-consuming mobile user devices (e.g., smartphones and tablets), cellular network operators have met the explosive increase of mobile data traffic [8]. To resolve the challenge, next-generation technologies are envisioned to adopt smaller cell sites [9] and tight integration with non-3GPP technologies like Wi-Fi [10,11], and hence, interworking between different wireless network technologies is expected to more frequently happen in denser heterogeneous wireless networks [12,13]. As the 3GPP technologies will evolve in future, interworking between 3GPP and non-3GPP technologies will need to be newly studied and specified to provide performance experience and seamless operation for mobile users.In general, interworking between heterogeneous wireless network technologies, e.g., for 4G LTE/LTE-Advanced and the legacy 3G/2G cellular technologies, has many technical aspects to be considered, including system selection, inter-RAT (radio access technology) mobility such as handover and cell reselection, authentication, and quality of service [2,3]. The extant standards and researches on inter-RAT mobility generally tend to focus on message procedures, and functional and performance evaluation from the protocol perspectives [14]. However, we believe that such aspects can be more carefully and thoroughly investigated from the radio architectural points of view for both mobile nodes, i.e., user equipments (UEs) in the 4G terminology, and core network entities. For example, basic interworking procedures for both active-state handover [3,6] and idle-state cell reselection [6,15,16], and possible enhancements to the procedures depend heavily on mobile node radio architectures and the degree of functional support from core network parts. For this reason, from the early stage of specifying interworking standards between heterogeneous wireless technologies, the radio architecture of mobile nodes should be thoroughly considered in the specifications from both functionality and performance points of view.In this paper, we present a case study to investigate into the impacts of mobile node radio architectures on heterogeneous LTE and eHRPD interworking standards. The standards have a significant importance in that they have recently enabled the successful incremental deployment of the new LTE technology in several countries including the US, South Korea, and Japan. We perform an in-depth analysis, in terms of handover delay and energy consumption, to examine LTE and eHRPD interworking scenarios [5] from the perspectives of mobile node radio architectural design. Particularly, we are interested in the way how mobile node radio architectures can support various LTE and eHRPD handover scenarios and what differences they can potentially make in terms of handover performance per handover scenario.To provide background information about LTE and eHRPD interworking, we first present, in Section 2, an overview of the network architecture and describe the basic LTE to eHRPD handover procedure from the mobile node radio architectural points, which serves as the baseline for various enhanced handover scenarios. Considering the incremental deployment of LTE cells and possible radio link failure events of deployed LTE cells, handover to more prevalent eHRPD cells of a larger coverage is a key enabler of service continuity to the successful transition from 3G networks to 4G LTE networks. Thus we focus on LTE to eHRPD mobility from the service continuity and performance point of view in this paper although eHRPD to LTE mobility procedure may be important for more advanced data traffic management and load balancing in future. Then in Section 3, we present the details on three different radio architectures that are implementable radio models for state-of-the-art LTE and eHRPD multi-radio mobile devices and how handover enhancements can be realized on top of those radio architectures. Based on the ways of radio architectural design, in Section 4, we conduct performance analysis in terms of handover delay and energy consumption for the combination of radio architectures and handover enhancement scenarios. In Section 5.1, we also discuss supportability of IP flow mobility [17–19], which is a more advanced selective mobility procedure in the precision of individual IP flows rather than the conventional mobility procedure for the whole set of IP flows existing in a mobile node, from the perspectives of mobile node radio architectures. Finally in Section 6, we articulate the main contributions of the paper.The network architecture for LTE and eHRPD interworking is illustrated in Fig. 1where LTE is also called evolved UTRAN (E-UTRAN) [3]. The name eHRPD comes from legacy High Rata Packet Data (HRPD) and it enhances 3GPP interworking functions on top of 3GPP2 network of HRPD access networks (ANs). The Packet Data Network Gateway (PDN Gateway or PGW) [2] works as an ingress/egress point between a mobile network and the external public Internet or the mobile network operator's IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) network [20]. The Mobility Management Entity (MME) is in charge of keeping track of a UE's current location at different granularity depending on the UE state (either active state or idle state) and plays a key role in the control plane to coordinate data transmission on the user plane or data plane for the UE by executing Non-Access Stratum (NAS) protocol with the UE [21]. The UE, though simplified in Fig. 1, is equipped with multi-radio interfaces (an LTE modem and an eHRPD modem) and thus should be able to access the LTE radio network (eNB: evolved Node B) and the eHRPD radio network (BTS: base transceiver station). We will investigate in detail into how required components in this dual-mode UE are architecturally designed such as baseband chips, radio frequency (RF) chips, RF front-end modules, and antenna for dual bands, and their implications to mobility in the interworking architecture.An important principle for LTE and eHRPD interworking is that 3GPP and 3GPP2 should share the same 3GPP Authentication Authorization Accounting (AAA) server, Policy and Charging Rule Function (PCRF) [22], and PGW. In this design rationale, a key entity to connect the legacy HRPD network to LTE/EPC is HRPD Serving Gateway (HSGW) which is enhanced from the legacy packet data service network (PDSN) function. An HSGW has reference points (i.e., interfaces defining protocols between network entities) with 3GPP PGW, PCRF, and AAA server. Among them, a reference point named S2a defines protocols between HSGW and PGW to serve as a PMIP tunnel when a UE camps on an eHRPD cell. In the user plane, a Proxy Mobile IP (PMIP) [23] tunnel between HSGW and PGW is used in the 3GPP2 domain to carry data packets between the UE and the corresponding node whereas a GPRS Tunneling Protocol (GTP) tunnel or a PMIP tunnel between Serving Gateway (SGW) and PGW may serve the same purpose in the 3GPP domain.We briefly describe the basic handover procedure defined in 3GPP TS23.402 [3] and 3GPP2 X.S0057 [6] in Fig. 2. In the basic handover procedure which in essence corresponds to LTE to eHRPD non-optimized handover, we detail and highlight the UE behavior in terms of radio interface states since the present article focuses more on mobile node radio architectures. Initially, the UE is in LTE Connected state and thus uses a pair of the radio bearer over the radio resource control (RRC) connection [16] and the evolved packet system (EPS) bearer to transmit and receive data packets with the gateway (PGW). Once the quality of the LTE signal becomes below a certain threshold, the UE starts the measurement of CDMA signals of nearby eHRPD cells if directed by the eNB. For LTE signal quality, reference signal received power (RSRP) is normally used, which is measured as the average received power over the resource elements that carry cell-specific reference signals within certain frequency bandwidths [24]. Details of how to perform the inter-RAT signal quality measurement depends on the mobile node radio architecture, but in all cases Ec/Io value of CDMA signals is measured and specified measurement reports are sent back to the LTE eNB. The LTE RRC protocol delivers necessary information to facilitate the inter-RAT measurement from the eNB to the UE, for example, the target eHRPD cell id is announced a priori in RRC measurement configuration information, and B2 event (where source LTE RSRP is below a certain threshold and target CDMA Ec/Io is above a certain threshold) or B1 event (where target CDMA Ec/Io is above a certain threshold) is specified which will act as measurement trigger [16]. Upon receiving the events, the eNB may decide handover from LTE to eHRPD and transmit a handover command message to the UE at Step (A.2). Receiving this command, the UE tries the acquisition of CDMA pilots to synchronize with the target eHRPD cell at Step (A.3). Then it performs random access to be able to transmit and transit to the eHRPD Active state, and establishes an eHRPD session with eHRPD eAN at Step (A.4). At Step (A.5) and (A.6) of Fig. 2, the UE establishes a Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) session with the HSGW and authenticates itself with the home subscriber server (HSS) and AAA by using the EAP-AKA' authentication protocol [25]. Once authenticated, the UE establishes a packet data network (PDN) with the PGW and gets assigned IP addresses by using the PPP vendor-specific network control protocol (VSNCP) and the PMIP binding procedure at Step (A.6) through (A.11). Finally at Step (A.12), the PMIP tunnel on eHRPD instead of the GTP tunnel on LTE is used to transmit and receive data packets between the UE and the PGW. If the UE further moves out of overlapping areas with LTE, it can make the LTE modem go into a low power mode to save the battery power.In Fig. 2, Step (B.1) through (B.6) illustrates the basic eHRPD to LTE handover procedure. The eHRPD eAN sends a measurement request message (OtherRATMeasurementRequest) [26] to assess the signals of nearby LTE cells. The UE performs the measurement LTE RSRP and reports the results. The eHRPD eAN makes a decision of handover and sends a message (InterRATRedirect) that triggers the UE to make a transition to the LTE Connected state. First an RRC connection is established together with the attach procedure of handover type. After completion of the attach procedure, the UE has an RRC connection and the GTP tunnel is used instead of the PMIP tunnel to transmit and receive data packets between the UE and the PGW.The basic LTE to eHRPD handover procedure can be improved with introduction of additional reference points, i.e., S101 tunneling in the control plane and S103 tunneling in the user plane, in the core network part as in Fig. 1. In order to reduce latency during eHRPD session establishment, PPP session establishment, and authentication, the UE and the eHRPD eAN can perform these steps by exchanging the new Signaling Adaptation Protocol (SAP) packets [26] encapsulated in the LTE air interface formats and forwarding them through an S101 tunnel before actual handover takes place. The phase is called preregistration through S101 tunneling, and the target performance is interruption time of 200 to 300ms. Later in the handover phase, the UE first accesses the eHRPD radio network and then directly performs the establishment of a PDN to complete handover. In the user plane, packet loss during handover can be repaired by data forwarding through S103 tunneling from the SGW to the HSGW. Note that the optimized handover procedure requires upgrades on several entities, i.e., UE, MME, SGW, eAN/PCF, and HSGW functions, which may be obstacles to easy deployment.In this paper, we focus only on the LTE to eHRPD handover case, but do not consider the eHRPD to LTE handover case in the evaluation of mobile node radio architectures. The reason is two-fold. First, the former type of handover is crucial for maintaining IP session continuity because the LTE coverage is smaller than the eHRPD coverage in usual incremental deployment whereas the latter type of handover is not essential for IP session continuity in the larger eHRPD coverage. For this reason, the initial roll-out of LTE in major mobile network operators has only supported the former type of handover. Second, the impact of radio architectures is more critical and diverse in the former case while in the latter case only measurement details can be impacted differently by radio architectures. Therefore, to investigate the impact of different radio architectures with a terse but adequate degree of complexity of the paper, we use the LTE to eHRPD handover scenario only.The radio architecture of mobile nodes with multi-radio interfaces, in particular LTE and eHRPD interfaces, is categorized into three architectural options as illustrated in Fig. 3. First, the single TRX (transmission and reception) architecture allows uplink transmission and downlink reception operation with only one RAT at a given time. Second, the single TX (transmission) dual RX (reception) architecture allows simultaneous downlink reception with dual RAT interfaces while still limiting one RAT for uplink transmission. Finally, the dual TRX architecture allows simultaneous transmission and reception with dual RAT interfaces at any time.A mobile node is equipped with the primary antenna and the secondary antenna to support multiple input multiple output (MIMO) antenna operation in LTE and receiver diversity in CDMA2000 Evolution-Data Optimized (EVDO). The RF front-end module, between the antenna and the RF chips, makes a separate TX path and a separate RX path for LTE and eHRPD, respectively. It uses various components, e.g., switches, power amplifiers for a TX path, duplexers that separate a TX signal and a RX signal, diplexers that divide a signal to different frequency band signals, and filters that select specific frequency bands of a signal. The particular design of the RF front-end module should depend on the mobile node radio architecture chosen, and also on the operating frequency bands (LTE RX band flte,dl, LTE TX band flte,ul, HRPD RX band fhrpd,dl, and HRPD TX band fhrpd,ul). Particulary, how far the frequency bands are separated each other may impact the design of the RF front-end module but details of the exact design are left out of the scope of this article. In the single TRX architecture, which radio's RF TX path and an RX path are chosen is controlled by a switch module and the primary antenna is used for TX and RX0 path whereas the secondary antenna is used for RX1 path. In the single TX dual RX architecture, which TX path to LTE or to eHRPD is controlled by a switch, but simultaneous RX paths to LTE and eHRPD are made feasible by using diplexer modules. In the dual TRX architecture, simultaneous TX paths to LTE and eHRPD, and simultaneous RX paths to LTE and eHRPD can all be enabled by using a more complex combination of diplexers, duplexers, and filters. The architecture has been adopted by the first LTE smartphones for CDMA operators in North America. Note that in Fig. 3 separate RF transceiver chips (or baseband chips) for LTE and eHRPD are not mandatory for implementation, but parallel operation of the two radios' RF functions (or baseband functions) can also be implemented in a single RF (or baseband) chip.In what follows, we present three enhancements to the basic LTE–eHRPD handover procedure in the previous section and discuss the way how they can be realized in the three different radio architectures.The inter-RAT measurement in Step (A.1) refers to the UE measuring the Ec/Io values of CDMA pilots while in LTE Connected state. The measured values are reported back to the eNB which decides handover to appropriate HRPD cells, and thus the handover success probability can be improved. Another benefit is reduced handover delay since the inter-RAT measurement puts the CDMA modem into the acquisition state prior to handover so that Step (A.3) can be omitted at the handover execution phase.For both the single TX dual RX architecture and the dual TRX architecture, the CDMA pilot signal at frequency band fhrpd,dlcan be acquired and measured on the separate RF path concurrently while the LTE signal is transmitted at frequency flte,uland received at frequency flte,dlon the separate LTE RF path. Note that the pilot acquisition and measurement functions of the legacy CDMA RF and baseband modem implementation can be easily exploited for realization. In the single TRX architecture where only a single RF path is enabled at a time, the UE should measure the Ec/Io of CDMA pilots during the measurement gap of 6ms which is allocated by the eNB every 20 or 40ms period in LTE Connected state. The new additional functional requirements are imposed on both network and mobile node sides, e.g., the eNB and the AN should be synchronized in time, measurement gap scheduling by eNB, the UE implementation of the measurement state.Another improvement to the basic handover procedure is to exploit a cached eHRPD session information. In Step (A.4), the UE's CDMA modem and the enhanced Access Network (eAN) make a transition from HRPD Idle state to HRPD Active state which means the traffic channel is completely ready. In so doing, they use the access channel MAC (ACMAC) to first access the CDMA air out of HRPD Idle state, and accordingly run the idle state protocol (ISP) to make the traffic channel ready. Then, they perform the address management protocol (AMP) to assign a unique ID for the UE and the session configuration protocol (SCP) to establish an eHRPD session, respectively. Any information related to the session setup can be cached at both the UE and the eAN side and reused if necessary, e.g., upon entering the eHRPD network again.In the single TX dual RX architecture, the session information should be made at the time of prior attachment through the CDMA air interface. The timer value for cache expiration is quite large, e.g., typically 54h. In the single TRX architecture, the session information should be made at the handover preparation phase through the LTE air interface and the S101 tunnel. The UE should implement the SAP such that relevant eHRPD messages are tunneled over the LTE air to the eAN. The eHRPD network side should also implement SAP and the LTE network should also support S101 tunneling-related functions [26,27]. In the dual TRX architecture, the concurrent CDMA modem is able to perform Step (A.4) before handover while the LTE modem is operating in LTE Connected state. Thus, it does not require prior attachment to the eHRPD in order to exploit a prior session information.In Step (A.5) and (A.6) of the basic handover procedure, the eAN and the HSGW make a main A10 connection, and then the UE and the HSGW open a PPP session and the EAP-AKA' authentication protocol is performed through the PPP session between the UE and the HSS. Once the UE, the eAN, and the HSGW perform those steps, they can store the related contexts in their local cache so that the main A10 connection between the eAN and the HSGW, the PPP session, and the authentication context can be reused if necessary. Exploiting the cache results in reduction in handover delay by skipping (A.5) and (A.6) at the handover execution phase.In the single TX dual RX architecture, the context should be made at the time of prior attachment to the eHRPD network through the CDMA air interface and cached for later use. The timeout value for cache expiration is typically 2h. In the single TRX architecture, the context should be made at the handover preparation phase through the LTE air interface and the S101 tunnel. The UE should implement SAP such that relevant eHRPD messages are tunneled over the LTE air to the eAN. The eHRPD network side should also implement the SAP and the LTE network should also support S101 tunneling-related functions. In the dual TRX architecture, the concurrent CDMA modem is able to perform Step (A.5) and (A.6) before handover while the LTE modem is operating in LTE Connected state. Thus, it does not require prior attachment to eHRPD in order to exploit a prior context, and thereby giving more chances for handover performance improvement.Table 1summarizes the impact of mobile node radio architectures on handover performance (both handover delay and energy consumption), which we discuss in this section, and flow mobility supportability, which we will discuss in Section 5.1. It also summarizes supported handover enhancement scenarios, and additional UE and network functional requirements that we have discussed in Section 3.Two key performance measures for mobile node radio architectures with respect to inter-RAT mobility are the handover delay and the energy consumption of mobile nodes. The inter-RAT handover delay is defined as time from the last transmission time interval (TTI) on physical downlink shared channel (PDSCH) containing an RRC handover command message in the source RAT (LTE) to the first uplink transmission in the target RAT (eHRPD) in a similar fashion to the definition of interruption time in the 3GPP standard [28]. The handover delay is considered important to user experiences, particularly for forthcoming voice over IP (VoIP) which requires seamless connectivity and hence voice quality without disruption. VoIP over LTE is commercially known as Voice over LTE (VoLTE), and should be seamlessly connected with eHRPD as well in the case of inter-RAT handover and system loss events. The energy consumption for radio architectures is a key metric directly related to the batter life to multi-radio user devices, especially battery-hungry smartphones. We are particularly interested in the comparison of different radio architectures in terms of energy consumption before and during inter-RAT mobility.We first investigate in detail the delay parameters of each step in the handover procedure in Fig. 2. First of all, Tacqis defined as the time taken for the UE CDMA modem to acquire CDMA pilots, which corresponds to Step (A.3) in Fig. 2. Based on 3GPP TS 36.133 [28], Tacqis modeled as follows, where TIUis uncertainty in timing change with a random between 0 and 26.66ms (one HRPD frame), Nknownis the number of HRPD cells known a priori, Nunknownis the number of unknown HRPD cells, and Wsearchis the search window size in the unit of chips.(1)Tacq=TIU+40+10⋅Nknown⋅Wsearch60+10⋅Nunknown⋅Wsearch60Thrpdis defined as the time required until the UE CDMA modem (called AT in the CDMA terminology) and the CDMA AN make a HRPD session and thereby make a transition to HRPD Active state. It corresponds to Step (A.4) in Fig. 2. The further breakdown of this step is as follows. The UE requests its identity by sending UATI (Unicast Access Terminal Identifier) request on uplink random access channel. The HRPD AN replies with UATI assignment and the UE sends UATI Complete message on the uplink random access channel. Then the UE sends Connection Request on the uplink random access channel. The AN replies with Traffic Channel Assignment (TCA) and subsequently the UE sends Traffic Channel Complete (TCC) on uplink traffic channel. For the simplicity of analysis, we assume the use of default HRPD session without further session negotiation.For the sake of statistical analysis, we introduce two models in the time analysis (a queueing model for multi-user uplink access channel, and a packet error rate-based model in consideration for wireless channel errors). Firstly, to reflect a multi-user model in the uplink random access channel, we use the M/D/1 queueing model with a constant, deterministic service time (transmission time) for each message. Suppose that the HRPD uplink service rate (μul) is 1/Tul, where the service time (transmission time) of one message is Tul=b/rul(s), assuming that the HRPD rate is rulbps and the message size is bbits. The message arrival rate (λul) is varied such that channel utilization is between 0.5 and 0.9. Then, the waiting time for uplink random access is obtained as in Eq. (2) using the M/D/1 model.(2)Twait=λul2μulμul−λulOther uplink transmission than the access channel does not incur random delay. For HRPD downlink, the AN centrally makes time schedules such that there is no consideration for random delay. The HRPD downlink service rate (μdl) is 1/Tdl, where the service time (transmission time) of one message is Tdl=b/rdl(s), assuming that the HRPD rate is 0bps and the message size is bbits.Secondly, to reflect the wireless channel errors, we introduce the packet error rate (perror). Let Nsuccessdenote the total number of transmission until success. Then its expected value (E[Nsuccess]) is given by:(3)ENsuccess=1+∑i=1∞i⋅perrori⋅1−perror=11−perrorTherefore, we obtain the expected transmission time of a single message for uplink random access, E[Tul,random]=E[Nsuccess]⋅(Twait+Tul). For other uplink transmission, the expected transmission time of a single message is E[Tul,deterministic]=E[Nsuccess]⋅Tul. For downlink transmission, the expected transmission time of a single message is E[Tdl,deterministic]=E[Nsuccess]⋅Tdl. Finally, we obtain the expected delay for HRPD session creation as follows since the procedure involves three uplink random access, two downlink deterministic access, and one uplink deterministic access.(4)EThrpd=3ETul,random+2ETdl,deterministic+ETul,deterministic=3λul2μulμul−λul+11−perror⋅1μul+211−perror⋅1μdl+11−perror⋅1μulTpppincludes the time to make a PPP (point-to-point protocol) session between the UE and the HSGW and the time for the HSS/AAA entity to authenticate the UE. It corresponds to Step (A.5) to (A.6) in Fig. 2. The HSGW sends Link Control Protocol (LCP) Configure-Request to the UE and the UE responds with LCP Configure-Ack. Then the HSGW sends EAP Request and the UE responds with EAP response. The HSGW send EAP-AKA' Challenge to the UE, and the UE responds to it. Finally, the HSGW sends EAP success to the UE. In addition to these message delays over the wireless channel (4 downlink messages and 3 uplink messages), the authentication processing delay Tauthshould be included in Tppp. Putting all together, we obtain the expected delay for PPP session creation as follows. Note that all uplink messages can now transmitted on the reverse traffic channel without need for randomness.(5)ETppp=4ETdl,deterministic+3ETul,deterministic+ETauth=411−perror⋅1μdl+311−perror⋅1μul+ETauthTpdnincludes VSNCP configure request and acknowledgment, and PMIP binding update procedure as a result of mobility. It corresponds to Step (A.7) to (A.11) in Fig. 2. The UE sends VSNCP Configure-Req with Handover attach type to the HSGW. After the path switch the HSGW sends VSNCP Configure-Ack to the UE. The HSGW sends VSNCP Configure-Req to the UE and the UE responds with VSNCP Configure-Ack. The message delay is caused by 2 downlink transmission on the forward traffic channel and 2 uplink transmission on the reverse traffic channel. Hence, we obtain the expected delay for PDN connection as follows.(6)ETpdn=2ETdl,deterministic+2ETul,deterministic(7)=211−perror⋅1μdl+211−perror⋅1μulConsidering the basic handover procedure together with possible enhancement points, we classify handover procedures and analyze the handover delay for each scenario. We refer to the basic scenario as Scenario 1 in this article. Then, if we denote the handover delay for scenario i by Di, we have the handover delay for Scenario 1. The scenario is the basic one in which the single TRX architecture without support for the tunneling protocol exhibits a baseline performance.(8)D1=ETacq+EThrpd+ETppp+ETpdnFurthermore, we refer to the procedure exploiting the inter-RAT measurement as Scenario 2. The scenario can be realized with the single TX dual RX architecture which basically provides inter-RAT measurement capability.(9)D2=EThrpd+ETppp+ETpdnWe refer to the handover procedure exploiting the inter-RAT measurement and eHRPD session information as Scenario 3. The scenario works with UEs with the single TX dual RX architecture enhanced with cached eHRPD session information.(10)D3=ETppp+ETpdnFinally, we refer to the handover procedure exploiting all possible improvements (inter-RAT measurement, eHRPD session information, and a prior HSGW context) as Scenario 4. We can realize this scenario under (1) the single TX dual RX architecture enhanced with eHRPD session information and a prior HSGW context, (2) the dual TRX architecture by simply making the CDMA modem operate before the handover trigger, and (3) the single TRX architecture with full support of the tunneling mechanism and protocol on both the UE and the network sides [26].(11)D4=ETpdnFor numerical evaluation, we use the following parameter values: Nknown=6, Nunknown=6, Wsearch=240, μul=18 for 1.8Mbps uplink, and μdl=31 for 3.1Mbps downlink. Fig. 4illustrates the numerical results of handover delay for different scenarios for varying uplink access channel utilization. We used varying uplink access channel utilization (from 0.1 to 0.9) and set perror=0.05. The major portion of handover delay is the EAP-AKA' authentication during PPP session establishment, which was set to 3s. A similar result was observed by other interworking technologies using EAP-AKA' [10]. We find that we can improve the handover delay by exploiting PPP/authenticaiton contexts established a priori or setting up the contexts by means of tunneling in case of single-TRX operation or dual-receiver operation. As the uplink channel utilization increases, the message transmission time on uplink random access increases, and thereby causing the handover delay involving uplink random access on HRPD (D1 and D2) to increase. Fig. 5illustrates the numerical results of handover delay for different scenarios for varying packet error rates (from 0.05 to 0.3) on wireless channel. We set uplink access channel utilization to 0.5. Since error-prone wireless transmission is involved in the entire handover procedure, the handover delay for all scenarios increases as the packet error rate on the wireless channel increases.Though the most important performance metric is handover delay related to data transmission, we also consider the energy consumption aspects of LTE–eHRPD interworking to investigate into more detailed radio interface states before/during handover. We note that inter-RAT handover is not very frequent though it can be triggered by user mobility, coverage holes, and interferences. The energy contribution to the entire operation of mobile nodes would not be so much. Even so, the fine-grained analysis of energy consumption while operating multi-radio interfaces on battery-hungry smartphones will help better understand the mobile node radio architectures in various promising use cases, e.g., inter-RAT handover, simultaneous operation [29,30], and flow mobility and offload [17,31].For the detailed comparison of energy consumption aspects, we focus on the LTE to eHRPD handover scenario. We first identify the power consumption parameters per state per radio technology. For LTE, the power consumption in LTE Idle state and in LTE Connected state with active transceiver is denoted by Plte,idleand Plte,conn, respectively. For simplicity of analysis, the average power consumption for frame transmission and frame reception is used to model Plte,conn. The power consumption where the LTE modem does not send or receive any frames in LTE Connected state is denoted by Plte,base. For eHRPD, the power consumption in HRPD Idle state and in HRPD Active state are denoted by Phrpd,idleand Phrpd,active, respectively. Phrpd,acqis the power consumption where the eHRPD modem completes acquisition of eHRPD signals. Idle state power consumption is calculated by averaging the power consumption during one duty cycle where for some short period the mobile node wakes up looking for control information and for remaining time it enters the deep sleep mode. In the deep sleep mode (also known as low power mode), TCXO (temperature compensated crystal oscillator) is completely turned off [32]. Getting out of the deep sleep state, the modem performs reacquisition of LTE signals or CDMA pilots and turns on TCXO.The energy consumption per scenario per radio architecture is then analyzed as follows. For a combination of scenario i and architecture arch we denote the energy consumption by Earch,i, and we are particularly interested in E1trx,1 and E1trx,4 for the single TRX architecture, E1tx2rx,2, E1tx2rx,3, and E1tx2rx,4 for the single TX dual RX architecture, and E2trx,4 for the dual TRX architecture. We define a time parameter Tprethat spans from the handover preparation phase (possibly performing inter-RAT measurement in LTE/eHRPD overlapped areas) until the actual handover trigger point.For the single TRX architecture in Scenario 1, a mobile node tries the acquisition of eHRPD signals after handover trigger and the eHRPD module of the modem needs to HRPD Acquisition state during Tacq. Then it performs eHRPD session establishment, PPP session establishment, and PDN connection in HRPD Active state. Here, α represents the channel usage ratio for user traffic.(12)E1trx,1=Tpre⋅α⋅Plte,conn+Tpre⋅1−α⋅Plte,base+Tacq⋅Phrpd,acq+Thrpd+Tppp+Tpdn⋅Phrpd,activeFor the single TRX architecture in Scenario 4, a mobile node at the handover preparation phase performs data transmission on the LTE interface and make inter-RAT measurement using the measurement gap. During this gap, the mobile node antenna is switched to eHRPD for acquisition and Ec/Io measurement. β means the frequency for inter-RAT measurement in Eq. (13). Here we assume for simplicity that the preparation phase is long enough for the mobile node to be able to acquire eHRPD signals. During the preparation phase, the mobile node additionally performs eHRPD session establishment, PPP session establishment, authentication via PPP, and PDN connection using the LTE interface. This is done by the tunneling protocol between the mobile node and the eHRPD network side, and the S101 interface between LTE and eHRPD.Upon handover trigger, the mobile node sends the eHRPD traffic channel complete message and the network completes PMIP binding update. The last term includes random access over the eHRPD air interface.(13)E1trx,4=Tpre⋅α⋅Plte,conn+Tpre⋅β⋅Phrpd,acq+Thrpd+Tppp+Tpdn⋅Plte,conn+Tpre⋅1−α−Thrpd−Tppp−Tpdn⋅Plte,base+Tpdn⋅Phrpd,activeFor the single TX dual RX architecture in Scenario 2, during the preparation phase, a mobile node can make inter-RAT measurement by exploiting dual reception of LTE signals and eHRPD signals while performing LTE data transmission. Upon handover trigger, the mobile node turns off the LTE interfaces and performs eHRPD session establishment, PPP session establishment, authentication via PPP, and PDN connection using the eHRPD air interface.(14)E1tx2rx,2=Tpre⋅α⋅Plte,conn+1−α⋅Plte,base+Tacq⋅Phrpd,acq+Tpre−Tacq⋅Phrpd,idle+Thrpd+Tppp+Tpdn⋅Phrpd,activeFor the single TX dual RX architecture in Scenario 3, the behavior of a mobile node during the preparation phase is the same as Scenario 2. Note that the mobile node already keeps cached eHRPD session context at this phase. Upon handover trigger, the mobile node skips eHRPD session establishment, but performs PPP session establishment, authentication via PPP, and PDN connection using the eHRPD air interface.(15)E1tx2rx,3=Tpre⋅α⋅Plte,conn+1−α⋅Plte,base+Tacq⋅Phrpd,acq+Tpre−Tacq⋅Phrpd,idle+Tppp+Tpdn⋅Phrpd,activeFor the single TX dual RX architecture in Scenario 4, the behavior of a mobile node during the preparation phase is the same as Scenario 2. Note that the mobile node already keeps cached eHRPD session context and PPP/authentication context at this phase. Upon handover trigger, the mobile node performs PDN connection procedure using the eHRPD air interface.(16)E1tx2rx,4=Tpre⋅α⋅Plte,conn+1−α⋅Plte,base+Tacq⋅Phrpd,acq+Tpre−Tacq⋅Phrpd,idle+Tpdn⋅Phrpd,activeFor the dual TRX architecture, a mobile node can conduct Scenario 4. During the preparation phase, the mobile node acquires eHRPD signals and makes inter-RAT measurement while doing LTE data transmission. During this phase, the UE additionally performs eHRPD session establishment and PPP/authentication procedure to set up corresponding contexts by using the eHRPD air interface. Upon handover trigger the mobile node completes handover by making PDN connections using the eHRPD air interface and turns off the LTE interface.(17)E2trx,4=Tpre⋅α⋅Plte,conn+1−α⋅Plte,base+Tacq⋅Phrpd,acq+Thrpd+Tppp⋅Phrpd,active+Tpre−Tacq−Thrpd−Tppp⋅Phrpd,idle+Tpdn⋅Phrpd,activeFor numerical evaluation, we use the following parameter values which are based on the specification of modem chip vendor implementation: Plte,conn=2670mW (assuming equal downlink and uplink transmission [33]), Plte,base=1060mW (no traffic in Connected state), Plte,idle=20mW (idle DRX operation [34,35]), Phrpd,active=2350mW (HRPD operation in traffic channel [36]), Phrpd,acq=550mW (pilot acquisition), Phrpd,idle=43.75mW (HRPD idle state), α=0.2 (channel usage ratio of user traffic), and β=0.1 (inter-RAT measurement frequency factor). The reference HRPD modem is MSM6800 chipset by Qualcomm [36] and we assume a duty cycle of 80ms per slot cycle of 1280ms for calculation of power consumption for HRPD idle state.Fig. 6illustrates the numerical results of total handover energy consumption for different values of preparation time (10s, 30s, and 50s). We used perror=0.05 and uplink channel utilization was set to 0.5. Compared with the baseline handover procedure (single TRX and Scenario 1), the single TRX architecture in Scenario 4 exhibits better efficiency than the baseline whereas the single TX dual RX architecture and the dual TRX architecture requires slightly higher energy consumption than the baseline. Caching PPP/authentication contexts in the single TX dual RX architecture in Scenario 4 results in the lowest energy consumption though some energy has been consumed for setting up such contexts for the first time. However, note that the difference in energy consumption is not so much and moreover the difference gets reduced as the handover preparation time increases (i.e., as the UE tunes to both radios for more time before actual handover is triggered). Fig. 7illustrates the numerical results of handover energy consumption for different scenarios for varying uplink channel utilization (from 0.1 to 0.9). We set Tpreto 30s. As uplink random access channel utilization increases, the message transmission time on uplink random access increases, and thereby causing more energy consumption for the radio architecture and scenario combination involving uplink random access on HRPD. However, the single TX dual RX architecture for Scenario 3 and 4 consumes energy during handover regardless of uplink random access channel utilization. The major portion of energy consumption comes from preparation time before handover while the second largest portion is the authentication that takes the major portion of time during handover. Fig. 8illustrates the numerical results of handover energy consumption for different scenarios for varying packet error rates on wireless channel. Since error-prone wireless transmission is involved in the entire handover procedure, the energy consumption for all scenarios increases as the packet error rate on the wireless channel increases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we dealt with a question of what impacts mobile node radio architectures can have on handover performance and mobility functions between heterogeneous wireless network standards. We provided a case study of LTE and eHRPD mobility and made a comparison of mobile node radio architectures. The unique contributions of this paper are articulated in the following. Firstly, we proposed a way of investigation into how heterogeneous wireless network standards can be analyzed in an in-depth detail by focusing on mobile node radio architectures. Particulary, we presented a representative example of LTE to eHRPD mobility where mobile node radio architectures can have diverse impacts on the functional aspects and performance aspects of mobility scenarios. Secondly, we provided a performance analysis on LTE to eHRPD mobility, in terms of both handover delay and energy consumption, under different radio architectures. The analysis of handover delay is done by means of message-level breakdown and statistical analysis. The analysis of energy consumption investigates into the further details of radio interface states both before and during handover. We found that setting up contexts a priori and exploiting them upon handover trigger contributes much to the reduction of total handover delay while consuming acceptable amount of additional energy. The implementation of such improvements for the single TRX architecture demands the additional implementation and deployment of tunneling protocols on both mobile and network sides. Meanwhile, it is feasible on the dual TRX architecture with just a simple extension on mobile sides only. Thirdly, we identified for the first time that future advanced mobility support in the precision of individual flows is promising for provision of better mobile user experiences, and it is only feasible on the dual TRX radio architecture. The design of mobile node radio architectures should include considerations for this advanced mobility support in future mobile networks. Conversely, a new standard proposing new types of mobility functions should consider the impact of different possible implementation of mobile node radio architectures during the course of specification.