@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid genetic algorithm-queuing multi-compartment model for optimizing inpatient bed occupancy and associated costs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An evolutionary-based approach for optimizing a queuing model is proposed.Data from St. George's Hospital, London, were used for assessment.An extended “What-if analysis” was proposed to explore management opportunities.Comparison with traditional approaches showed the effectiveness of the model.The model is expected to easily adapt to different medical departments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Queuing model,Genetic algorithm,Bed occupancy,Compartmental model,Cost model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeExplore how efficient intelligent decision support systems, both easily understandable and straightforwardly implemented, can help modern hospital managers to optimize both bed occupancy and utilization costs.Methods and materialsThis paper proposes a hybrid genetic algorithm-queuing multi-compartment model for the patient flow in hospitals. A finite capacity queuing model with phase-type service distribution is combined with a compartmental model, and an associated cost model is set up. An evolutionary-based approach is used for enhancing the ability to optimize both bed management and associated costs. In addition, a “What-if analysis” shows how changing the model parameters could improve performance while controlling costs. The study uses bed-occupancy data collected at the Department of Geriatric Medicine – St. George's Hospital, London, period 1969–1984, and January 2000.ResultsThe hybrid model revealed that a bed-occupancy exceeding 91%, implying a patient rejection rate around 1.1%, can be carried out with 159 beds plus 8 unstaffed beds. The same holding and penalty costs, but significantly different bed allocations (156 vs. 184 staffed beds, and 8 vs. 9 unstaffed beds, respectively) will result in significantly different costs (£755 vs. £1172). Moreover, once the arrival rate exceeds 7 patient/day, the costs associated to the finite capacity system become significantly smaller than those associated to an Erlang B queuing model (£134 vs. £947).ConclusionEncoding the whole information provided by both the queuing system and the cost model through chromosomes, the genetic algorithm represents an efficient tool in optimizing the bed allocation and associated costs. The methodology can be extended to different medical departments with minor modifications in structure and parameterization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of how to allocate healthcare resources has become increasingly pressing today. One of the major issues is the cost of the healthcare system in relation to its efficiency. The natural limitation of the allocated resources leads to the need for better management. Without an efficient management, the healthcare system will not be able to offer high quality patient care with affordable costs. One of the means to achieve a better management of the clinical facilities is the appropriate use of beds. This is directly connected to the patient flow through hospital, based on the progression of the health status. There are currently published data regarding this issue, Eurostat/European Commission – “Health care facilities” presenting an updated description of the hospital beds situation throughout the European Union [1]http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/Annexes/hlth_res_esms_an9.pdf [accessed 19.10.15]. A key solution for the effective management of healthcare resources is the optimization of bed occupancy and associated costs.Queuing theory, particularly, is widely used in making decisions to improve the customer service in various fields, including healthcare. The rich literatures regarding the contributions and applications of queuing theory in healthcare, along with useful information to model a healthcare process, have been recently reviewed in [2]. Finite-capacity queuing systems are often used in healthcare. In [3], the authors study a queuing system with finite-capacity buffer and a two-phase Cox distribution for service. The proposed methodology is applied to optimize a geriatric care unit by using an empirical analysis of the model and numerical calculations. Because queuing systems allow the use of simulation models for planning bed inventory in hospitals, the authors of [4] developed a simulation model, based on queuing theory, used for planning the bed capacity. A queuing model is applied in [5] to improve the quality of healthcare service. The authors propose a M/Ek/c system to model an orthopedic ward service aiming to determine both the optimal number of beds and the average loss of revenue across different wards. A queuing network with different priority classes of customers was used for Emergency Departments [6]. The authors propose a continuous-time Markov chain to analyze several hospital systems in order to assess the impact of systems resources on offload delays.Inspired by the compartmental kinetics, the patient flow may be described as the behavior of a drug in the body. Compartmental models have previously been shown to provide a suitable description of the patient flow through a hospital department. Starting with a deterministic two-compartment mathematical model [7], they went on to make further progress when stochastic models, along with mixed exponential distributions, were proposed [8,9].Previous work [10,11] has introduced two queuing models (M/PH/c and M/PH/c/N) in order to optimize the use of hospital resources. They enable the estimation of the probability of lost demands and the mean number of patients in hospital. Both approaches face a trade-off between the costs of empty beds and the cost of turning patients away, solved by introducing a cost function. The direct estimation of several values regarding the rejection probability and the associated cost, computed for different parameter settings, has been used for the optimization purpose. For the sake of simplicity, since the rejection probability and the associated cost are multivariable functions, their evaluation has been based on approximate computation (rejection probability), and graphical estimation (cost function). The former has been computed by varying only one parameter at a time, while a two-dimensional graph representing indifference curves has been used for the latter. Moderate accuracy has been a direct consequence of this approximation methodology. To overcome this empirical computation, the current work proposes a flexible strategy for the optimization of hospital bed occupancy and associated costs, based on the evolutionary paradigm. The mathematical model for the patient flow has been developed by combining elements of queuing theory with results from compartmental models in conjunction with phase-type distributions. An associated cost model has been set up in order to balance the expenses related to refusing patients and with maintaining the necessary number of beds. The methodology used in this paper is a modeling/simulation process in two steps. The first one consists in formalizing the flow of patients and associated costs. The former is modeled by means of both a finite capacity queuing model and a compartmental model, while the latter is achieved by using a base-stock policy approach [12]. The second one, based on the use of a genetic algorithm (GA), enables the exploitation of this formalization to optimize both the inpatient bed occupancy and associated costs. The work has two objectives. Firstly, we estimated the optimal values of the parameters defining the background queuing model in order to achieve a probability of a patient being turned away of no more than a pre-specified threshold. Secondly, we estimated the optimal values of the bed inventory and of the penalty and holding costs in order to minimize the long-run average associated cost. In addition, a “What-if analysis” has also been performed to highlight how changing the model parameters could improve performance while controlling costs. The achievement of these goals provides the hospital managers with a flexible and effective tool to simulate different possible scenarios, allowing them to improve and optimize the management of their unit. Different from the existing papers in literature, our approach uses the evolutionary paradigm in order to optimize both bed allocation and associated costs. It takes into account the diverse nature of the model parameters (both discrete and continuous), and considers the main system outcomes (rejection probability and associated costs) as objective functions. To our knowledge, no such approach has been used so far for bed and costs management in finite capacity queuing systems.The problem we wish to deal with in this paper is the optimization of the patient throughput in clinical departments and of the associated costs. It takes into account the use of some specific measurements, such as arrival rate, average length of stay, bed inventory, size of a possible waiting room, holding costs, etc. The components of the active healthcare service, such as short-term care, medium-term care, long-stay care, etc., depending on the clinical services provided by the hospital department, imply periods of time and resources. To deal with this complex problem, we converted the pattern of bed occupancy into the flow of patients through the clinical system. At the beginning, all patients are admitted into the hospital. It is noteworthy that they are not ‘homogeneous’, usually belonging to different categories. One group requires acute care, while others require medium or long-term rehabilitation. Accordingly, from acute care, they are either discharged back to community, or are transferred to the medium/long term care, from where they are discharged back or stay until death. We approached this system by means of queuing techniques, considering a compartmental model associated to different states (short-stay, medium-stay, etc.), and a mixed exponential distribution describing the average length of stay. The optimization of bed occupancy and associated costs, involving finding the optimal balance between bed inventory, holding costs and penalty costs, was addressed by the use of GAs.Since a modern hospital/clinical department represents a complex system, we need to identify patterns within this complexity. Although there are a wide variety of patients with different diseases (e.g., geriatrics, surgical, stroke, etc.), the general context is similar enough, enabling the hope for a common approach regarding the flow.Inspired by pharmacokinetics, which currently uses the multi-compartment model, the hospital/clinical department might be considered as a ‘body’ with different ‘organs’ (compartments). The number of transient patients thus represents the amount of drug [13]. Different from pharmacokinetics, where the tracking of an individual molecule of drug is measured by the total concentration of the drug in the organ, in the case of patient flow one can use the distribution of the patient length of stay.While a one-compartment model assumes a similar treatment for all patients (e.g., acute care), two- and three-compartment models assume two and three different kinds of treatments (e.g., acute care and long-term rehabilitation). It is worth mentioning that there are situations better described by more than three compartments [8,14,15].The mathematics behind the two-compartment model [13] can be briefly described as follows. Assume the clinical department has a constant admission rate A in equilibrium state, and let Ni(s), i=1, 2 be the number of patients in each compartment (A and B) with length of occupancy s (days). Let r1 and r2 be the rates of discharge from compartment A and B respectively, with the assumption that r2<r1; let v1 be the rate of transfer from A to B. The model is described by the following equations:(1)N1(s+1)=(1−r1−v1)N1(s),(2)N2(s+1)=v1N1(s)+(1−r2)N2(s),with the initial conditions N1(0)=A0, N2(0)=0. The two-compartment model was developed based on the empirical observation that the pattern of bed occupancy is best fitted by a two-term mixed exponential distribution (phase-type) Ae−Bs+Ce−Ds, whereA=(1−k)A0/(v1+r1),k=v1/(v1+r1−r2),e−B=1−v1−r1, C=A0k/r2, e−D=1−r2. Fig. 1depicts the two-compartment model.When fitting compartment models to observations, one assumes that:a)The admissions occur at random (i.e., Poisson arrivals), such an assumption being reasonable for a stable hospital system;The models, either discrete-time deterministic or continuous-time stochastic, may be regarded as phase-type [16], with the number of components equaling the number of compartments. This distribution describes the time to absorption of a finite Markov chain in continuous time, when there is a single absorbing state and the stochastic process starts in a transient state.A fruitful and feasible operation research (OR)-based approach for modeling clinical departments is inspired by multiple-server queuing models, where the servers are represented by hospital beds. Note that the queuing system is assumed in statistical equilibrium (steady-state), so that all the queuing characteristics refer to long-run measures of performance of the system.The Erlang B queuing system (M/PH/c/c) can be considered as one of the simplest ways to model the department. In this model, patients arrive according to a Poisson process (M stands for Markov/memoryless), the service distribution is phase-type (PH stands for phase-type), where the number of phases equals the number of compartments; c represents the number of available beds with no waiting positions. Since there are no waiting positions, a patient finding upon arrival that all c beds are occupied is lost for the system. Mathematically, λ denotes the Poisson arrival rate, the (hospital) length of stay (LoS) is phase-type with the probability density function:(3)f(t)=∑i=1lαiρie−αit,and corresponding mean:(4)τ=∑i=1lρi/αi,where l represents the number of phases/compartments, αis the mixing proportions, and the ρis the transition rates with∑i=1lρi=1.In such a “loss” system, the probability that an arriving patient will be blocked, that is the probability that all the c beds are occupied, is given by:(5)Pc=ac/c!∑k=0cak/k!(Erlang's loss B formula),where a=λ·τ represents the average number of arrivals during an average LoS, also known as offered load[17,18].An excess of demand over supply causes waiting times. The elimination of waiting times in the public healthcare system is practically impossible. Since public healthcare services are, in principle, free, the waiting lists are unavoidable, becoming a practical tool for rationing demands and prioritizing supply. Hospital waiting lists are a major concern for the national health services, which cannot be solved just by a simple queuing model [19]. A beneficial and reasonable, at the same time, approach to solve this situation is a model using extra/back-up beds. The number of available beds depends on both the hospital bed capacity and the number of nurses/physicians on duty, and it is unreasonable to add only supplementary beds. This situation involves costs referring to both unoccupied beds and corresponding medical staff. Under these circumstances, one can extend the “loss” model by considering the possibility of estimating the provision of supplementary (unstaffed/back-up) beds to act as a temporary buffer at times of increased demand. Thus, the patients are admitted directly to whatever bed is available. These supplementary beds would be used only at times of crisis.From the queuing theory point of view, the M/PH/c/N model can reasonably describe the underlying queuing system, considering the supplementary beds as a “waiting room/ward”. In such a system, the number c of servers (beds) is fixed, N≥c denotes the maximum capacity of the system, and the waiting room has a maximum of (N−c) beds available. A limit of N patients is allowed, and a patient finding upon arrival N other patients in the system is turned away. This model represents a generalization of the “loss” system, with N=c.Two probabilities are crucial for describing the M/PH/c/N queuing model [20]:•The steady-state probability that there are j patients in the system, given by:(6)Pj=ajj!⋅P0,ifj=1,2,…,c,acc!⋅acj−c⋅P0,ifj=c+1,…,N,whereP0=∑j=0c(aj/j!)+(ac/c!)⋅∑j=1N−c(a/c)j−1represents the steady-state probability for empty system.The long-run fraction of arrivals that are rejected:(7)PN=acc!⋅acN−c⋅P0.According to Little's formula, the average number of patients in the system is given by L=λ·τ·(1−pN), measuring the mean bed usage. The bed occupancy is given by ρ=L/c.A main concern when proposing a model to support healthcare decision-making is to find the trade-off between the best possible service to patients and a maximum utilization of resources (i.e., beds). By adding costs to the queuing model, we may determine the expenditure involved in treating patients, and thus the hospital planners may identify cost-effective strategies. We used a base-stock policy borrowed from the inventory theory [12] to determine an (near) optimal cost strategy. In this paradigm, we try to identify the trade-off between holding costs of (expensive) inventory items and penalty costs if a demand is left unsatisfied. The costs are associated with the stock policy and with the penalty for refusing patients. Two types of holding costs are envisaged, similar to the inventory problem. For each idle/unused-staffed bed, a cost of φ monetary units per day is considered. A different cost of ψ monetary units per day for each idle/unused back-up bed is taken into consideration. On the other hand, for each patient that is turned away (lost demand) a fix penalty cost of π monetary units is incurred. Among all costs incurred by the healthcare provider, we are interested in the holding costs and penalty cost only. Totaling the above costs, we obtain the average cost per day incurred by a clinical department (hospital), given by:(8)g=g(λ,τ,c,N,π,φ)=π⋅λ⋅PN+φ⋅(c−L)+ψ⋅(N−c),ifc≥Lπ⋅λ⋅PN+ψ⋅(N−L),ifc<L.Alternatively, the cost formula for the “loss” model is [9]:(9)gE(λ,τ,c,π,φ)=π⋅λ⋅Pc+φ⋅(c−L).Remark. It is in the same way in which the parameters c and N are chosen by hospitals, according to their capacity limitation, that the values for the holding and penalty costs are determined according to the hospitals scale. Taking into account the difference between the staffed beds, for which staff is on hand to the patient occupying the bed, and the back-up/unstaffed beds, with no current staff, the (staffed) holding cost φ is larger than the (unstaffed) holding cost ψ. The difference between them depends on the hospital policy.The goal of the paper is to optimize hospital bed occupancy and associated costs for a publicly funded healthcare service, in other words, to find the optimal balance between inventory costs (keeping a minimum number of empty beds to meet demands), and penalty costs (avoiding having to turn away patients). Focusing on the cost function g and rejection probability PN, the issue of improving the inventory level/resource utilization is equivalent to an optimization problem. Concretely, the optimization of the inventory level/resource utilization consists of finding the best possible values of the parameters λ, τ, c, N, π, φ, and ψ from all feasible choices, in order to minimize the cost function g and the rejection probability PN, depending on different tolerable thresholds generally accepted by practitioners.To locate extreme values of a function is one of the basic objectives of mathematical optimization (continuous or discrete). Calculus is a widely used mathematical tool to figure out when a function of continuous argument takes on a local or global extreme value, while the discrete optimization represents a traditional alternative for the discrete argument case. Different from the mathematical approach, we proposed the use of the evolutionary paradigm, taking into account:•The diverse nature of arguments – both discrete (c and N), and continuous {λ, τ, π, φ, ψ};The effectiveness of GAs as heuristic searching tools not requiring the functions to be continuous or differentiable, and encoding through chromosomes the entire information (queuing and cost models parameters).The parameters defining the queuing system along with the associated cost model generally belong to two different categories from the point of view of the control exercised upon them by the hospital management. Thus, there are parameters the healthcare professional cannot change, such as the arrival rate or the mean service time/length of stay. This kind of parameters may be considered as “objective” parameters. The other types of parameters that can be changed by the healthcare professionals in some circumstances are seen as “subjective” parameters. Summarizing, hereinafter we will deal with the “objective” parameters λ, τ, and with the “subjective” parameters c, N, π, φ, ψ. However, it is noteworthy that even the “objective” parameters may change in some circumstances. Thus, the arrival rate can be influenced by external factors (e.g., demographics, epidemiology, perceptions, etc.), while the length of stay can significantly differ for different patients with the same disease. Moreover, the maximum capacity of the system N may be subject to choice/change in some circumstances.Computer-based optimization of both patient flow and hospital resource utilization represents a major challenge in patient management using artificial intelligence (AI) technologies. The task of finding an optimum balance between the number of beds (both occupied and ready for use) and the best health service can be approached by using GAs, seen as optimization algorithms [21].GAs represent stochastic algorithms modeled after the biological processes of life, reproduction and death. The following features characterize them: populations of chromosomes, selection according to fitness, crossover to produce new offspring, and random mutation of new offspring. At the beginning, a large population of random chromosomes is created. They contain all the information about the potential candidates for an optimization problem. A cost function is evaluated at each iteration for all the existing chromosomes and the best of them are kept. Then, they are mated with each other to replenish the population, and the cost function is evaluated again. Some of them are deliberately mutated to help in getting the search out of local minima/maxima. The chromosomes are again evaluated for fitness, and the process is repeated until a termination criterion is met.For the GA-based optimization, we implemented a standard GA [22,23] in Java. The efficiency of GA is greatly dependent on its tuning parameters. The choice is between ‘standard’ parameter settings (e.g., De Jong, Grefenstette) or customized settings for the specific problem. With these thoughts in mind, we considered the following parameter setting, which proved to be feasible, allowing a relative quick convergence (flat improvement curve):-Using a heuristic evaluation, with population sizes ranging from 20 to 200 chromosomes, the best performance has been obtained for n=100 chromosomes.The whole (total) arithmetic recombination (crossover rate pc=0.35 and parameter α=0.3), and the non-uniform (normally distributed) mutation (mutation rate pm=0.4) have been used.Using a heuristic evaluation, with the number of generations ranging from 20 to 200, the manual inspection of the values of the corresponding fitness functions (either PNor g) indicated that 100 is the (near) optimal value.We considered, for the sake of simplicity, intervals with 30% deviation around the mean as default search spaces for the chromosomes encoding the queuing model parameters; the same rule applies to the associated healthcare costs. Note that the distributions of the queuing parameters are not Gaussian (number of allocated beds, arrival rate, phase-type service), and the healthcare costs depend on the hospital administration.Based on the ‘no guarantees to reach an optimum’ feature of GAs, a pre-determined level equaling 100 fitness evaluations has been considered as termination condition, also supported by a manual inspection indicating no significant fitness improvement.The optimization problem refers both to the rejection probability and to the cost function. Firstly, we wish to determine the optimal values of the parameters defining the rejection probability given by (7) in order to achieve a probability of lost demands of no more than a pre-specified threshold (i.e., a maximum acceptable rejection). Secondly, we are interested in evaluating the optimal values of the parameters defining the cost function g, given by (8), in order to minimize it. The envisaged optimization process is two-fold:(a)To estimate an acceptable threshold for the long-run fraction of rejected arrivals PNdepending either on the number c of beds and the maximum system capacity N, or on all the queuing parameters (c, λ, τ);To minimize the cost function g by controlling the “subjective” parameters c, π, φ, and ψ.Accordingly, in the first case we consider the rejection probability PNas fitness function, while in the second case the cost function g is the fitness function. Next, in the first case, a chromosome is represented either by a single gene c, or by a vector (c, λ, τ). In the second case, a chromosome is represented by a vector (c, λ, τ, φ, ψ, π).It is noteworthy that the model described in this paper can be implemented using freely available software (e.g., Java, R programming language, ECJ (ECLab – George Mason University) (http://cs.gmu.edu/∼eclab/projects/ecj/), etc.), or a classical software package (e.g., MATLAB/GA Solver).The methodology presented above is illustrated using bed-occupancy data collected at the Department of Geriatric Medicine – St. George's Hospital, London, period 1969–1984 [24], and January 2000 [25]. It can be adapted to different medical departments, such as surgery, stroke, mental illness, etc. Although the underlying paradigm is the same, when adapting the model to different medical departments, the practitioners have to anticipate the specific patient flow pattern, characterized by different values of the corresponding parameters and specific cost function components.Remark1.According to the American Hospital Association (AHA) Annual Survey of Hospitals [26]http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2010/104.pdf; http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2010/113.pdf [accessed 19.10.15], the corresponding queuing model parameters referring to surgery were estimated as λ=16.14 patients per day, τ=5.5 days, and c=150 beds, corresponding to community hospitals. This system envisages the post anesthesia care unit/surgical ward, seen as a one-compartment model.The stroke data originate from the UK's Hospital Episode Statistics (HES) database and concerns stroke patients [27,28]. The corresponding parameters were estimated as λ=286.2 patients per day, τ=14.29 days, and c=5587 beds, modeled as a three-compartment system.The mental health data originate from the Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research (CMHPSR), Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania (Medicaid) [29]. The corresponding model parameters were estimated as λ=1.907 patients per day, τ=1151 days, and c=562 beds, seen as a three-compartment system.The healthcare assistance in the Department of Geriatric Medicine – St. George's Hospital, London, UK consisted of acute, rehabilitative, and long-stay medical service, corresponding to the three-compartment case. In the period of 15 years (1969–1984), a number of 7217 people with an average age of 81 years were inpatients (70% female and 30% male). Different causes (e.g., economic pressure, influenza epidemic in the 1970s, etc.) led to changes in the bed allocation, annual admission and mean length of stay. Based on the collected data, the steady-state geriatric department is well described by an average number of 186 beds per year, a mean arrival rate equaling λ=5.9 patients per day, and a mean length of stay equaling τ=24.9 days.The inpatient hospital costs nowadays represent the largest component of healthcare expenditures in most developed countries. The inpatient costs are far from being uniformly and undoubtedly assessed. For a purely informative purpose, we mention that the average hospital adjusted expenses per inpatient day was $1730 throughout USA, and £225 in UK [30]http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/expenses-per-inpatient-day/ [accessed 19.10.15], [31]http://www.institute.nhs.uk/ [accessed 19.10.15]. Beyond the statistics, the actual inpatient costs are estimated by each hospital. While the cost function g may be used as it is, the parameters π, φ, and ψ are specifically chosen by each administrator according to the given situation.To assess the effectiveness of the cost model, we have considered the estimated parameters related to a geriatric department as follows [10,11]:(a)The total cost per patient per day is £168, where £50 are incurred with respect to the bed, and £118 with respect to the treatment;The holding cost for idle staffed beds was estimated as φ=£50 per day;The holding cost for idle back-up beds was estimated as ψ=£15, other approaches being possible taking into account the specific situation of a certain hospital;The penalty cost is π=168×24.9×0.25=£1046, assuming that the total cost of turning away a patient may equal the cost per day multiplied by the expected length of stay, and the penalty cost represents 25% of the total cost of turning away a patient.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
There is much research in healthcare modeling proposing new interesting models. Different approaches originating in OR and AI techniques have brought a significant contribution to providing practical ways of managing patients in a more efficient manner. It is noteworthy to highlight the fact that such approaches are far from being directly used by hospital administrators, their main role being to offer decision-making support.From a theoretical point of view, the hospitals administrators need at least: (a) to understand and evaluate the patient flow characteristics, the available inventory and financial resources, (b) to identify the actual possibilities of amending the bed-occupancy/resource parameters (e.g., length of stay, availability of unstaffed beds, costs per occupied/unstaffed bed, penalty costs, etc.), and (c) to estimate/forecast changes in the government healthcare philosophy regarding bed stock and financial support.After the model is built, its implementation should encompass: (a) the analysis of the data records regarding the patient flow in order to estimate the queuing model parameters, (b) the analysis of the bed allocation history (constrains in bed stock, bed closure, bed crisis, etc.) allowing the use of different scenarios regarding the bed inventory, and (c) the analysis of the changes in the hospital management philosophy regarding the allocated budget.Once these steps are completed, the model can be applied by testing different scenarios using optimization techniques through the “What-if analysis”. The intent of such an approach is to provide healthcare professionals with a supporting computer-aided tool to simulate different scenarios in order to decide what policies could be introduced with beneficial effect.This paper explores the feasibility of applying such an approach, by using theoretical results, empirical knowledge achieved through long practice, and the adaptive heuristic search of the GA to support the hospital bed management and resource utilization. This approach aims at providing hospital managers with a supporting computer-aided tool enabling the decision optimization by simulating different scenarios regarding the values of both the ‘objective’ and ‘subjective’ parameters involved in the model.Starting from a standard M/PH/c/N finite capacity queuing model for bed-occupancy in hospitals, an evolutionary-based approach is proposed to optimize hospital management by providing an efficient way to estimate the control parameters in order to obtain a reasonable proportion of turned away patients, along with an (near) optimum number of beds (both staffed and unstaffed). In addition, a cost model was proposed, enabling the hospital management to balance the cost of idle staffed and back-up beds against the cost of turning patients away, thus facilitating a quality healthcare service with affordable costs.To enhance the decision process, a “What-if” analysis has also been proposed. It enables the hospital manager to simulate several scenarios in order to make the (near) optimal decision depending on circumstances.Based on a base-stock policy often used in inventory systems of expensive and slow-moving items, we have explored the circumstances in which we are indifferent between neighboring values of the number of beds and the average number of patients in system upon the proportion of lost demands and corresponding healthcare costs. Under these circumstances, the hospital manager can choose adequate bed-stock policies, suitable arrival rates, and lengths of stay along with corresponding costs in order to maintain proper medical care, by keeping the percentage of lost demands at a low level.We have illustrated the methodology using bed-occupancy data based on the practice of the Department of Geriatric Medicine of St. George's Hospital, London, UK. The cost model was inspired by previous studies [10,11], this approach being meant to be indicative, actual costs depending only on the concerned hospital.The idea of using the evolutionary paradigm to optimize the hospital inventory and corresponding healthcare is advantageous and handy in several aspects. Encoding the whole information provided by both the queuing system and the cost model through chromosomes, the GA algorithm represents an efficient tool in optimizing the bed allocation and associated costs. It is noteworthy to mention that, due to the flexibility of GAs, the optimization process is straightforward and the methodology can be adapted to a wide variety of possible scenarios.Most importantly, the methodology can be extended to different medical departments, this approach providing a prototype mix model, both the queuing and the evolutionary components being ready to be applied to different circumstances with minor modifications in structure and parameterization.It is noteworthy to mention that the main role of this heuristic approach is to offer decision-making support to healthcare professionals, the direct use by hospital administrators being difficult from a practical point of view.Starting from this study, future work may carry forward the approach presented above. The standard GA algorithm could be engineered by adjusting its characteristics to different types of medical departments/hospitals, different types of patients/illnesses, different geographical regions. In addition, novel GA models, such as hybrid neural networks-GA algorithms, may be developed and applied to better suit the specific environment. The initial “What-if analysis” may be extended to cover a larger range of possible scenarios.