@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessment of surveys for the management of hospital clinical pharmacy services

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
OrdEval analysis of surveys allows evaluation of dependent ordinal features.Approach identifies feature thresholds where user satisfaction changes.We present a novel application to management of clinical pharmacy.Approach identifies three types of competences: basic, performance, and excitement.Findings are relevant to human resources management in hospitals, survey design, and survey applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Survey analysis,Kano model,OrdEval algorithm,Human resource management,Clinical pharmacy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
SummaryObjectiveSurvey data sets are important sources of data, and their successful exploitation is of key importance for informed policy decision-making. We present how a survey analysis approach initially developed for customer satisfaction research in marketing can be adapted for an introduction of clinical pharmacy services into a hospital.Methods and materialWe use a data mining analytical approach to extract relevant managerial consequences. We evaluate the importance of competences for users of a clinical pharmacy with the OrdEval algorithm and determine their nature according to the users’ expectations. For this, we need substantially fewer questions than are required by the Kano approach.ResultsFrom 52 clinical pharmacy activities we were able to identify seven activities with a substantial negative impact (i.e., negative reinforcement) on the overall satisfaction of clinical pharmacy services, and two activities with a strong positive impact (upward reinforcement). Using analysis of individual feature values, we identified six performance, 10 excitement, and one basic clinical pharmacists’ activity.ConclusionsWe show how the OrdEval algorithm can exploit the information hidden in the ordering of class and attribute values, and their inherent correlation using a small sample of highly relevant respondents. The visualization of the outputs turns out highly useful in our clinical pharmacy research case study.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In spite of a plethora of new information sources available, surveys are still the most important and frequently used tool for managers and decision makers when investigating alternative outcomes and possible strategies before making important decisions. Any progress made in this standard tool which would allow better insight into the information gathered is therefore an important contribution, not only to the field of data analytics, but also to the applicative fields using the surveys.Clinical pharmacy is a relatively new discipline in the pharmacy profession. It is patient—rather than drug-oriented, and aims to improve the quality of drug therapy. An acceptance of clinical pharmacists in hospital wards depends on how well their activities meet the needs and expectations of physicians and nurses. Physicians’ perceptions of the importance of clinical pharmacy activities differ substantially from pharmacists’ perceptions [1]. Therefore, it is necessary to recognize the most important clinical pharmacy activities from the perspective of its users, namely physicians and nurses’.According to the behavioural decision theory and total quality management approach of Kano [2,3], the analysis of customer needs is a three-phase process: (1) understanding customer preferences, (2) requirement prioritization, and (3) requirement classification. The Kano model is widely used in several industries as an effective tool to understand the first phase, namely customer preferences. Kano proposed a two-dimensional system for quality management (expectations vs. satisfaction), where he identified three levels of customer expectations. Satisfying basic expectations keeps customers satisfied, while not meeting their expectations makes them dissatisfied. These kinds of expectations are denoted dissatisfiers or basic, or must be expectations. The second type of expectations make customer satisfied/dissatisfied depending on the quality/quantity of performance that is why they are called ‘performance expectations.’ ‘Customers’ expectations of the third type are hidden, unconscious expectations. Satisfying those makes a customer delighted. These are delighters or excitement expectations.In connection with his theory of two-dimensional quality—the customer satisfaction relationship, Kano proposed the structure of the survey questionnaire to categorize the quality attributes. For each product's feature a pair of questions must be formulated, to which the customer can answer in one of five different ways [3]. The first question is concerned with the reaction of the customer if the product has that feature (functional form of the question); and the second is concerned with his reaction if the product does not have that feature (dysfunctional form of the question). Using Kano's model, quality attributes that have the greatest influence on customer satisfaction can therefore be identified. On the other hand, the questionnaire, proposed by Kano, can be very long when many features are explored, which can result in a lower response rate.As an alternative, we present a case study how a survey analysis approach called ‘OrdEval,’ initially developed for customer satisfaction research in marketing, can be adapted to a completely different problem, namely the introduction of clinical pharmacy services into a hospital. The approach is based on the evaluation of ordinal attributes, i.e. survey questions and their relation to the expected outcome. By taking the ordinal nature of many surveys’ questions into account the approach allows a sort of what-if analysis. Conditional probabilities of the expected outcome are computed, where the condition is upon changes in outcomes of survey questions. An example of the output would be a probability of a more successful service introduction if certain features of the service are better communicated to the users. As human resources are limited, such knowledge is valuable for efficient allocation of the resources. The approach also allows categorization of the clinical pharmacy activities, according to the Kano model. The motivation and contribution of this paper is to: demonstrate how OrdEval works in a medical management context, how its output can be visualized and adapted to include information relevant for decision markers, and to provide new insights into clinical pharmacy services, which are used as our application topic.As our study is interdisciplinary and composed from machine learning and clinical pharmacy, we would like to warn the readers about the terminology used, which might be typical for one area and unusual for the other. Attribute or feature is a property of an object or person. Research objects in our study are clinical pharmacy activities and pharmacists’ competences. Clinical pharmacy activities are specific professional activities of pharmacists that comprise clinical pharmacy services in a health care setting. Competences are knowledge and skills of pharmacists, acquired through formal and informal study and training programmes.The paper is divided into six sections. In Section 2, we discuss related work. In Section 3, we present a clinical pharmacy study, and the survey we designed to measure the expectations of doctors, nurses, and pharmacists. In Section 4, we describe the OrdEval approach to evaluate attributes and the way the attributes can be interpreted. In Section 5, we present the results of our analysis with an emphasis on the methodological contributions of OrdEval. In Section 6, we conclude with an overview of the contributions and plans for further work. Appendix A contains the survey questions used and some basic statistics of the collected data set.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We adapted a general methodology for analysis of ordered data to the specifics of human resources management in hospitals. We were able to obtain useful, managerially relevant information from a relatively small population of highly relevant respondents. We showed how the OrdEval algorithm exploits the information hidden in the ordering of class and attribute values. It is able to handle each value of the attribute separately. It is robust to noise and missing values. The output can be effectively visualized and complemented with confidence intervals. The visualizations turned out useful in our clinical pharmacy research case study.Contrary to other survey analysis algorithms, using the OrdEval algorithm results in better insight into the opportunities to influence the satisfaction with clinical pharmacy services. OrdEval served as a tool that revealed the crucial attributes which decrease/increase the overall satisfaction value. We were able to detect the basic, performance, and excitement attributes expressed in our survey questions, which is important for planning and management of clinical pharmacy service in the clinical departments of the hospital.When compared to the questionnaire structure proposed by Kano, our questionnaire contained only one question per feature (instead of two). Using the OrdEval algorithm we identified the attributes that have the greatest influence on customer satisfaction, but kept the questionnaire short.Survey data sets are important sources of data and their successful analysis is of key importance for informed decision making. We showed that the OrdEval can be efficient in this respect.While we had good reasons to limit the size of the data set to the most important decision makers, though it would be reasonable to take a larger sample from an analytical point of view. A future survey involving all the physicians and nurses would be highly welcome and would allow construction of a prediction model.