@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cardiorespiratory fitness estimation in free-living using wearable sensors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Used machine learning methods to determine multiple level of context in free living and contextualize heart rate data.Estimated cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) using contextualized heart rate in free living, without laboratory protocols.Reduced CRF estimation error by up to 22.6% compared to other methods.The proposed CRF estimation method does not require specific exercise and was validated against VO2max.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Context recognition,Topic models,Bayesian models,Cardiorespiratory fitness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveIn this paper we propose artificial intelligence methods to estimate cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) in free-living using wearable sensor data.MethodsOur methods rely on a computational framework able to contextualize heart rate (HR) in free-living, and use context-specific HR as predictor of CRF without need for laboratory tests. In particular, we propose three estimation steps. Initially, we recognize activity primitives using accelerometer and location data. Using topic models, we group activity primitives and derive activities composites. We subsequently rank activity composites, and analyze the relation between ranked activity composites and CRF across individuals. Finally, HR data in specific activity primitives and composites is used as predictor in a hierarchical Bayesian regression model to estimate CRF level from the participant's habitual behavior in free-living.ResultsWe show that by combining activity primitives and activity composites the proposed framework can adapt to the user and context, and outperforms other CRF estimation models, reducing estimation error between 10.3% and 22.6% on a study population of 46 participants.ConclusionsOur investigation showed that HR can be contextualized in free-living using activity primitives and activity composites and robust CRF estimation in free-living is feasible.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the past few years, ubiquitous sensing technologies showed unprecedented insights into the relation between physical activity and health [1]. Wearable sensors are getting more and more widespread due to improvements in miniaturization, battery capacity and user experience design, reaching ubiquitousness in the quantified-self community and being rapidly adopted by the general population. Due to fast paced technological developments and increased availability of multivariate data streams acquired from wearable sensors (e.g. accelerometer, physiological data), new computational and artificial intelligence applications and techniques have been developed. When deployed in unsupervised free-living settings computational and artificial intelligence techniques can help shedding light on the complex relation between human behavior and health, ultimately driving behavioral change and better health outcomes [2–5].Wearable sensors have great potential for accurate physical activity monitoring in daily life [2,3]. However, artificial intelligence capabilities of current systems and devices are limited, with almost all solutions focusing on behavioral aspects of physical activity such as steps, activity type and energy expenditure [6,7]. On the other hand, cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) is a marker of cardiovascular and cardiorespiratory health, and therefore is a key health parameter that could be estimated using state of the art technologies and computational methods [8–10].CRF is defined as the ability of the circulatory and respiratory systems to supply oxygen during sustained physical activity and is considered among the most important determinants of health and wellbeing. CRF is not only an objective measure of habitual physical activity, but also a useful diagnostic and prognostic health indicator for patients in clinical settings, as well as healthy individuals [8]. Epidemiological research has shown that in both individuals affected by disease [11] and healthy individuals [12,13] higher level of CRF resulted in better outcomes in term of slower disease progression, lower risk of cardiovascular disease as well as lower risk of all cause mortality. Thus, knowledge of CRF can be key in managing a healthy lifestyle.Current practice for CRF measurement is direct measurement of oxygen volume (VO2 in ml/min) during maximal exercise (i.e. VO2max), the gold standard. However, VO2max tests are affected by multiple limitations. Medical supervision is required and the test can be risky for individuals in non-optimal health conditions. Less risky submaximal tests have also been developed [14]. Submaximal tests to estimate CRF typically require measuring heart rate (HR) while running at a certain speed or biking at a certain intensity. The inverse relation between HR at a certain exercise intensity, fixed by the strict exercise protocol that has to be sustained, and fitness, is the rationale behind this approach.In this work, we propose to use artificial intelligence methods to estimate CRF using wearable sensor data acquired in free-living. We rely on the inverse relation between HR and fitness, but without the need for specific exercise protocols in laboratory settings. We aim at using computational techniques to automatically determine contexts in which HR can be interpreted, without any supervision from the user, and in free-living. Our hypothesis is that physiological data, for example HR, in free-living settings is not only affected by activity primitives such as walking, but by a combination of activity primitives and more abstract activity composites such as social interactions, working, etc. We define context as a combination of activity primitives and activity composites. Thus, we propose a method to determine both activity primitives and activity composites, to contextualize HR. Finally, after determining the user's context, we use contextualized HR to estimate person-specific CRF in a hierarchical Bayesian model. By using a non-nested hierarchical Bayesian model, parameters can vary depending on the activity performed, therefore being more flexible than models requiring specific activities. This paper provides the following contributions:1.We propose a context recognition framework to contextualize HR and estimate CRF based on contextualized HR in free-living. First, we use topic models (TMs) to derive activity composites. Secondly, we rank activity composites to determine which activity composites are best suited for CRF estimation. Finally, we use HR data in specific contexts (i.e. activity primitives, walking speeds and activities composites) as a predictor in a hierarchical Bayesian model to estimate CRF.We show the effectiveness of the proposed approach to estimate CRF on a dataset including 14 days of unsupervised free-living recordings from 46 participants and reference VO2max acquired in laboratory conditions. CRF estimation error was reduced between 10.3% and 22.6% compared to alternative methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
