@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ontology for assessment studies of human–computer-interaction in surgery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed an investigation model for assessment studies of HCI in surgery.We compared four top-level ontologies for model implementation: OCHRE, BFO, GFO, DOLCE.GFO was selected for investigation model implementation in the form of a new ontology.The investigation model and its ontology provide a modular study guideline.Investigation model ontology is a tool to create knowledge bases of HCI assessment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human–computer-interaction,Automation consequences,Ontology,Surgery,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveNew technologies improve modern medicine, but may result in unwanted consequences. Some occur due to inadequate human–computer-interactions (HCI). To assess these consequences, an investigation model was developed to facilitate the planning, implementation and documentation of studies for HCI in surgery.Methods and materialThe investigation model was formalized in Unified Modeling Language and implemented as an ontology. Four different top-level ontologies were compared: Object-Centered High-level Reference, Basic Formal Ontology, General Formal Ontology (GFO) and Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering, according to the three major requirements of the investigation model: the domain-specific view, the experimental scenario and the representation of fundamental relations. Furthermore, this article emphasizes the distinction of “information model” and “model of meaning” and shows the advantages of implementing the model in an ontology rather than in a database.ResultsThe results of the comparison show that GFO fits the defined requirements adequately: the domain-specific view and the fundamental relations can be implemented directly, only the representation of the experimental scenario requires minor extensions. The other candidates require wide-ranging extensions, concerning at least one of the major implementation requirements. Therefore, the GFO was selected to realize an appropriate implementation of the developed investigation model. The ensuing development considered the concrete implementation of further model aspects and entities: sub-domains, space and time, processes, properties, relations and functions.ConclusionsThe investigation model and its ontological implementation provide a modular guideline for study planning, implementation and documentation within the area of HCI research in surgery. This guideline helps to navigate through the whole study process in the form of a kind of standard or good clinical practice, based on the involved foundational frameworks. Furthermore, it allows to acquire the structured description of the applied assessment methods within a certain surgical domain and to consider this information for own study design or to perform a comparison of different studies. The investigation model and the corresponding ontology can be used further to create new knowledge bases of HCI assessment in surgery.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Automation plays a key role in high performance activities such as surgery up to the point when the human and the machine form an inextricable unit [1,2]. Automation is defined as a device or system that accomplishes (partially or in full) a function that was previously, or conceivably could be, carried out (partially or in full) by a human operator [3].The use of automation in surgery aims to increase accuracy, efficiency, safety and flexibility of surgical tasks [4]. To reach this it is necessary to use human-centered automation concepts. At the same time the high level of complexity of automated processes creates new risks and dangers, especially within the high-risk field of surgery [5], and thus can lead to errors in the human–computer-interaction (HCI, alternatively called the man–computer-interaction or man–machine-interaction). HCI is the study which examines the interaction between humans and computers and to what extent computers are or are not developed for successful interaction with human beings [6].The resulting demand is the mandatory investigation of HCI and the automation consequences in surgery, in order to avoid possible errors and to increase the quality of health care [7,8]. Geißler et al. [4] propose a review of the human-centered automation design in surgery and subdivide the possible consequences of automation to the user into eight categories, the so-called human performance consequences. The considerations of Geißler et al. emphasize that the area of HCI research in surgery is complex and requires wide-ranging assessment. Thus the adequate assessment requires approaches focusing especially on the domain of HCI in surgery. There is already a wide range of established approaches considering the HCI in general [3,9]. These approaches need comprehensive adoption to be applicable for the medical domain and further extension for the sub-domain of HCI in surgery. Other existing approaches consider either delimited automation fields [10] or exemplary several concrete automation consequences of automation only [11–13].An adequate assessment approach has furthermore to comply with legal specifications concerning the investigation process in medicine, i.e. the Medical Device Act [14] and compulsory standards such as DIN EN ISO 14155 [15], DIN EN ISO 14971 [16] and IEC 62366 [17], etc. These legal specifications form the general normative framework for medical investigation.In a previous work an investigation model for HCI in surgery was developed [18] to facilitate the planning and implementation processes of HCI studies. Furthermore it aimed at providing a framework for study documentation. This investigation model supports systematic assessment approaches for the HCI research, but its application requires an adequate formalization of the inherent concepts. Therefore this article examines three different formalization approaches: Unified Modeling Language (UML), database and ontology. The emphasis was put on assessment studies of HCI within the surgical domain, including clinical and preclinical (laboratory) research. This work shows further the advantages, as well as the limitations of the three formalization approaches and describes the application of an ontology to represent the investigation model. Furthermore, the formalizations provided by four top-level ontologies were compared. The main purpose of the presented work is to choose an adequate top-level ontology to formalize the developed investigation model and to apply this ontology to create an own ontology for HCI assessment studies in surgery.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The investigation model and its ontological implementation provide a modular guideline for study planning, implementation and documentation within the area of HCI research in surgery with the main focus on possible automation consequences. This guideline helps to navigate through the whole study process regarding the different templates in the form of a kind of standard or good clinical practice. Furthermore, it enables the documentation of study results in a well-structured way.The ontological implementation of the investigation model provides a new approach of structured information representation of HCI assessment studies. This approach forms the basis of developing new applications e.g. to acquire the structured description of the applied assessment methods within a certain surgical domain and to consider this information for the design of new studies efficiently. In the next steps the ontological implementation can be used further to develop applications for study comparison. Furthermore, the investigation model and the corresponding ontology can be used in future work to create new knowledge bases of HCI assessment in surgery. In addition, it is conceivable to expand the model concepts and to derive new ontological templates for other clinical and research application areas.The authors of this article declare that within the presented development of the investigation model (including the corresponding formalization and implementation) no human or animal studies were performed, thus no human or animal study subjects were involved. The mentioned study examples in this article are only references to other publications. These referenced studies are not at all parts of the development process.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.