@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predictive modelling of survival and length of stay in critically ill patients using sequential organ failure scores

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A dataset of 14,480 critically ill patients within the ICU was collected.Machine learning models are constructed to predict patient length of stay and mortality.Prediction accuracy was improved by using a two-by-two classification grid.Probabilistic model outputs can improve interpretation by physicians.Moving data window shows potential for real-time ICU patient analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mortality prediction,Length of stay modeling,Support vector machines,Critical care,Sequential organ failure score,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionThe length of stay of critically ill patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) is an indication of patient ICU resource usage and varies considerably. Planning of postoperative ICU admissions is important as ICUs often have no nonoccupied beds available.Problem statementEstimation of the ICU bed availability for the next coming days is entirely based on clinical judgement by intensivists and therefore too inaccurate. For this reason, predictive models have much potential for improving planning for ICU patient admission.ObjectiveOur goal is to develop and optimize models for patient survival and ICU length of stay (LOS) based on monitored ICU patient data. Furthermore, these models are compared on their use of sequential organ failure (SOFA) scores as well as underlying raw data as input features.MethodologyDifferent machine learning techniques are trained, using a 14,480 patient dataset, both on SOFA scores as well as their underlying raw data values from the first five days after admission, in order to predict (i) the patient LOS, and (ii) the patient mortality. Furthermore, to help physicians in assessing the prediction credibility, a probabilistic model is tailored to the output of our best-performing model, assigning a belief to each patient status prediction. A two-by-two grid is built, using the classification outputs of the mortality and prolonged stay predictors to improve the patient LOS regression models.ResultsFor predicting patient mortality and a prolonged stay, the best performing model is a support vector machine (SVM) with GA,D=65.9% (area under the curve (AUC) of 0.77) and GS,L=73.2% (AUC of 0.82). In terms of LOS regression, the best performing model is support vector regression, achieving a mean absolute error of 1.79 days and a median absolute error of 1.22 days for those patients surviving a nonprolonged stay.ConclusionUsing a classification grid based on the predicted patient mortality and prolonged stay, allows more accurate modeling of the patient LOS. The detailed models allow to support the decisions made by physicians in an ICU setting.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The patient length of stay (LOS) is often seen as an indication of the patient resource usage in the intensive care unit (ICU) [1]. Currently ICU physicians generally plan only a single day ahead based on clinical judgement. Automated scheduling assistance based on patient survival and LOS predictions would be beneficial in optimizing ICU resource usage, e.g., estimating the number of occupied beds, as well as individualized patient care. Moreover, this enables the adaptation of surgery scheduling to the predicted ICU load. In addition, predictive ICU models could be a building block in the larger process of making do not resuscitate (DNR) decisions to determine whether to stop patient therapy to avoid unnecessary suffering and treatment costs.In this work, machine learning techniques are trained based on the sequential organ failure (SOFA) score [2–5], a score assessing the daily individual degree of organ failure. The SOFA score is an objective score that allows for calculation of both the number and the severity of organ dysfunction in six organ systems (respiratory, coagulation, liver, cardiovascular, renal, and neurological). The score can measure individual or aggregate organ dysfunction over time and is useful to evaluate morbidity. Although the SOFA scoring was not developed to predict outcome, the obvious relationship between organ dysfunction and mortality has been demonstrated in several studies [3,6,7].Moreover, patient mortality and LOS estimation is studied in a live monitoring setting by taking into account not only data from the first few days after admission, but also from a moving data window. This allows us to predict the status for a patient with an arbitrary current LOS. Additionally, our models assign a degree of certainty to their classification outputs, allowing ICU physicians to adapt their interpretation of the model to its credibility.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
