@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating the effects of cognitive support on psychiatric clinical comprehension

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We evaluate the effects of cognitive support on psychiatric clinical comprehension.Users selectively attended to clinically relevant points highlighted by the system.Organization of information facilitated hypothesis generation and evaluation.Users focused on information pertinent to acute care.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomedical informatics,Cognitive science,Clinical comprehension,Cognitive support,Latent semantic analysis,Propositional analysis,Verbal protocol analysis,Psychiatry,Emergency psychiatry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveClinicians’ attention is a precious resource, which in the current healthcare practice is consumed by the cognitive demands arising from complex patient conditions, information overload, time pressure, and the need to aggregate and synthesize information from disparate sources. The ability to organize information in ways that facilitate the generation of effective diagnostic solutions is a distinguishing characteristic of expert physicians, suggesting that automated systems that organize clinical information in a similar manner may augment physicians’ decision-making capabilities. In this paper, we describe the design and evaluation of a theoretically driven cognitive support system (CSS) that assists psychiatrists in their interpretation of clinical cases. The system highlights, and provides the means to navigate to, text that is organized in accordance with a set of diagnostically and therapeutically meaningful higher-level concepts.Methods and materialsTo evaluate the interface, 16 psychiatry residents interpreted two clinical case scenarios, with and without the CSS. Think-aloud protocols captured during their interpretation of the cases were transcribed and analyzed qualitatively. In addition, the frequency and relative position of content related to key higher-level concepts in a verbal summary of the case were evaluated. In addition the transcripts from both groups were compared to an expert derived reference standard using latent semantic analysis (LSA).ResultsQualitative analysis showed that users of the system better attended to specific clinically important aspects of both cases when these were highlighted by the system, and revealed ways in which the system mediates hypotheses generation and evaluation. Analysis of the summary data showed differences in emphasis with and without the system. The LSA analysis suggested users of the system were more “expert-like” in their emphasis, and that cognitive support was more effective in the more complex case.ConclusionsCognitive support impacts upon clinical comprehension. This appears to be largely helpful, but may also lead to neglect of information (such as the psychosocial history) that the system does not highlight. The results have implications for the design of CSSs for clinical narratives including the role of information organization and textual embellishments for more efficient clinical case presentation and comprehension.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In complex clinical environments, clinicians must cope with and manage multiple, voluminous, heterogeneous data sources to solve clinical problems [1,2]. Both comprehension and problem solving capabilities of physicians affect their efficiency, as comprehension is a prerequisite to problem solving [3]. Previous studies have suggested that the process of clinical comprehension differs between expert and novice clinicians with respect to selective filtering, pattern recognition and accuracy of inferences generated [4]. Specifically, experts use knowledge structures called “intermediate constructs” that represent clinically meaningful clusters of observations that lead toward specific diagnoses. The ability to generate intermediate constructs is a distinguishing characteristic of expert clinical comprehension [5]. In contrast, non-experts (e.g., residents) and other trainees may possess a less organized, albeit large, knowledge base.It has been argued that the application of information technology to simulate aspects of expert comprehension in order to provide cognitive support may allow trainees to reason in an expert-like manner [6]. Therefore, a cognitive support system (CSS) that organizes the information in a manner that mediates efficient problem solving may improve the quality and efficiency of patient care. While we have chosen the narratively rich clinical specialty of psychiatry as our problem domain, the problem we describe is related to human information processing in general. As such, this work has implications for the organization of information in any knowledge-intensive domain.In this paper, we describe the development and evaluation of a CSS based on intermediate constructs. The problem solving processes of users of this interface are characterized, and compared to those of users of another interface without cognitive support. The interface and its evaluation provide insights for the design of technology that can help clinicians organize information in a manner conducive to efficient decision-making.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
