@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Value of information analysis for interventional and counterfactual Bayesian networks in forensic medical sciences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method based on the underlying principle of Value of Information analysis.For interventional and counterfactual Bayesian networks in forensic medical sciences.Examines whether interventional decision making is subject to amendments.Assesses what further information is worthwhile seeking prior to decision making.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Causal inference,Bayesian networks,Interventional analysis,Counterfactual analysis,Value of Information,Forensic medicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesInspired by real-world examples from the forensic medical sciences domain, we seek to determine whether a decision about an interventional action could be subject to amendments on the basis of some incomplete information within the model, and whether it would be worthwhile for the decision maker to seek further information prior to suggesting a decision.MethodThe method is based on the underlying principle of Value of Information to enhance decision analysis in interventional and counterfactual Bayesian networks.ResultsThe method is applied to two real-world Bayesian network models (previously developed for decision support in forensic medical sciences) to examine the average gain in terms of both Value of Information (average relative gain ranging from 11.45% and 59.91%) and decision making (potential amendments in decision making ranging from 0% to 86.8%).ConclusionsWe have shown how the method becomes useful for decision makers, not only when decision making is subject to amendments on the basis of some unknown risk factors, but also when it is not. Knowing that a decision outcome is independent of one or more unknown risk factors saves us from the trouble of seeking information about the particular set of risk factors. Further, we have also extended the assessment of this implication to the counterfactual case and demonstrated how answers about interventional actions are expected to change when some unknown factors become known, and how useful this becomes in forensic medical science.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Value of Information (VoI) is a technique initially proposed in economics [1] for the purposes of:1.determining the amount a decision maker would be willing to pay for further information; andprioritising unobserved model factors for acquiring information based on their impact against a desired utility value or probability distribution.VoI analysis has subsequently been adopted in a number of domains including finance [2], supply chain management [3], pharmaceuticals [4], and health care [5].An especially important application domain is medicine. For example, VoI has been used:1.as a decision analytic approach to clinical trial design and research priority-setting, by taking into consideration the costs of sampling, the benefits of the sample information, and the decision rules of the cost-effectiveness analysis [6];to determine optimal sample size for clinical trials as an alternative to the more traditional null hypothesis methods [7–10];for the development and evaluation of clinical trials [11,12];to investigate the expected value of partial perfect information, and the research decision it can address in medical decision making [13];as a guide to evaluate decision support for differential diagnosis [14];as a decision analysis technique to identify the most beneficial factors in health economic models [5,15–17].For a comprehensive review of VoI analyses related to health risk management see [18].In this paper, we are interested in using VoI to determine whether missing information can lead to different interventional actions in decision analysis with Bayesian networks (BNs). The use of VoI for interventions has previously been explored in [19] where VoI is used to identify novel actions (a process which the authors call search for opportunities) in influence diagrams, in the sense that interventions are identified to improve a desirable utility function. More recently, in [20]VoI is also considered as an evaluation method for interventional strategies in epidemiology, under competing models, and to quantify the benefit of adaptive versus static intervention strategies. Our major contribution here is to extend VoI for interventional decision analysis to the counterfactual setting. This allows decision makers to compare the observed results of the actual world to those of a hypothetical world; i.e. what would have happened had we proposed treatment (or intervention) B instead of treatment A. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no previous attempts to incorporate the concept of VoI to counterfactual problems with BNs.Our application of VoI is motivated by real-world problems in forensic medical sciences in which BNs were developed for decision making. BNs are based on sound foundations of causality and conditional probability theory. Our objective is to show how VoI can be applied to BNs to make them especially suitable for simulating interventions and inferring answers from counterfactual questions.The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the forensic medical science problem motivating this work; Section 3 provides the necessary background overview of the methods: VoI, BNs, interventional and counterfactual analysis; Section 4 demonstrates the modelling process of integrating VoI analysis into interventional and counterfactual BN decision analysis models; Section 5 demonstrates and discusses the results generated by applying the method to two real-world forensic medical case studies; we provide our concluding remarks in Section 6.Forensic medical practitioners and scientists based at the Violence Prevention Research Unit11Formerly known as Forensic Psychiatry Research Unit (FPRU).(VPRU); Queen Mary University of London have, for several years, sought improved decision support for determining care and release of people with mental health problems. In particular, they are interested in managing the risk of violent reoffending by releasing such convicted prisoners from prison and discharging such patients from medium secure services [21]. In collaboration with the medical practitioners we have developed two BN models for this purpose – one for prisoners and one for patients [22,23]. These models delivered significantly improved predictive accuracy with respect to whether a prisoner/patient is determined suitable for release/discharge (hereafter referred to simply as ‘release’). The models also provided the additional benefits that causal BN models provide over and above black-box decision models (see Chapters 2 and 3 of [24] for a detailed discussion). However, while, those models were developed for the purpose of simulating interventions (i.e. treatments/therapies) for violence risk management, prior to releasing an individual, they did not consider the possibility that decisions about release could be subject to amendments on the basis of some incomplete information within the model. The BN models were large and complex. Consequently, when assessing an individual for release, information was very often missing for variables that could have been observed.22Some variables in BNs are supposed to be unobserved. For instance, specific type of latent or uncertain synthetic variables. These also include variables representing symptoms post-treatment, on the basis of some imperfect intervention (see Fig. 3). In this paper we are only interested in variables with missing information; i.e. those that are not observed, but could have been observed.Specifically, a decision maker (such as a probation officer or a clinician) has to determine whether to release a prisoner/patient based on the probability distribution (or the expected value) of the hypothesis variable; i.e. the risk of violence assuming release. Prior to deciding on release, the decision maker has the option to simulate various interventions for the purpose of determining whether an individual's risk of violence can be managed to acceptable levels. Additionally, the decision maker may have the option to gather further information about the individual. While any set of unknown information can still be estimated on the basis of Bayesian inference (via observations provided to other relevant factors within the BN model) it is still possible that knowing (rather than estimating) one or more of these unobserved factors, may lead to amendments in the probation officer's original decision about release.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
