@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
From decision to shared-decision: Introducing patients’ preferences into clinical decision analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We provide a framework encapsulating patient's preferences elicitation and decision models.We define a shared decision-making framework to be used by physicians and patients together.We use as a case study the prevention of thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation patients.Using personalized utility coefficients allows taking into account the features of the population.We show how to integrate shared decision-making into a guideline-based decision support tool.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shared decision-making,Decision trees,Patient preferences,Utility coefficients,Atrial fibrillation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveTaking into account patients’ preferences has become an essential requirement in health decision-making. Even in evidence-based settings where directions are summarized into clinical practice guidelines, there might exist situations where it is important for the care provider to involve the patient in the decision. In this paper we propose a unified framework to promote the shift from a traditional, physician-centered, clinical decision process to a more personalized, patient-oriented shared decision-making (SDM) environment.MethodsWe present the theoretical, technological and architectural aspects of a framework that encapsulates decision models and instruments to elicit patients’ preferences into a single tool, thus enabling physicians to exploit evidence-based medicine and shared decision-making in the same encounter.ResultsWe show the implementation of the framework in a specific case study related to the prevention and management of the risk of thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation. We describe the underlying decision model and how this can be personalized according to patients’ preferences. The application of the framework is tested through a pilot clinical evaluation study carried out on 20 patients at the Rehabilitation Cardiology Unit at the IRCCS Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri hospital (Pavia, Italy). The results point out the importance of running personalized decision models, which can substantially differ from models quantified with population coefficients.ConclusionsThis study shows that the tool is potentially able to overcome some of the main barriers perceived by physicians in the adoption of SDM. In parallel, the development of the framework increases the involvement of patients in the process of care focusing on the centrality of individual patients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Patients’ preferences are progressively emerging as an essential requirement in health decision-making [1,2]. Over the past three decades, the proportion of patients willing, and asking, to be involved in clinical decisions during encounters with their physicians has been constantly growing and accounts now for the majority of the patients [3]. This changing attitude does not only include the need for information but also the need to consider personal preferences as an essential part of medical interventions. In the perspective of providing patient-centric care [4], attention is focused on addressing individual attitudes, considering a patient's perception of his/her health conditions, personal context, job-related requirements and economic conditions. This new trend is also reflected by the new Horizon2020EU calls for eHealth projects, which address personalized medicine as the central topic of the “Personalizing Health and Care” focus area (http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/portal/desktop/en/opportunities/h2020/index.html, accessed 07 October 2014).Clinical decision analysis refers to the systematic exploitation of a decision-theoretic model to evaluate the choice between two or more alternatives [5]. As an example, alternatives may concern the choice between two similarly effective pharmacological treatments, between a surgical intervention and a drug, or deciding whether to undergo cancer preventive screening that requires an invasive examination. As a matter of fact, even in an ideal evidence-based and clinical practice guideline (CPG) decisional environment, there might exist situations in which it is desirable to involve the patient and his/her preferences in the decision. This may happen due to the limitation/poor applicability of the scientific evidence or to an explicit indication of the CPG that suggests the use of the patient's preferences [6]. The process during which the patient and his/her care provider reach a clinical decision together is known as shared decision making (SDM) [7–9].In this paper we present a general web-based framework that can be used by physicians to exploit some methodologies commonly used in clinical decision-making and to couple them to instruments for eliciting patients’ preferences and performing SDM. The concept of preference we refer to involves the patient's actual perception of his/her health condition, the perception of the consequence of a therapeutic choice and also the impact of such choices on the patient's out-of-pocket costs.Our approach includes a utility model and a cost model. Such models are coupled to a theoretical decision model framework to solve the decision task. The final decision will thus account for patient-specific parameters, which might be different from population parameters derived from the literature. To the best of our knowledge, a system incorporating CPGs, decision-theoretic models and tools for preferences elicitation is still not available in the literature.The framework was developed in the context of MobiGuide (http://www.mobiguide-project.eu/, accessed: 07 October 2014), a project funded under the European commission 7th framework program and carried out by a consortium of 13 partners from several European countries (Israel, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, and Austria). It is aimed at developing a knowledge-based patient guidance system based on computer-interpretable guidelines (CIGs) and designed for the management of chronic or subacute illnesses, including atrial fibrillation (AF). The main components of the MobiGuide System are a decision support system (DSS), devoted to the representation and execution of CIGs, and a body area network (BAN), including a network of sensors and a smartphone, to support telemonitoring of the patient. The data collected by the system are stored in a patient health record (PHR). Of the project objectives, here we focused on the identification and analysis of the CPG recommendations requiring a shared decision due to the lack of robust clinical evidence. After this identification step, a suitable framework is set up to support the physician to properly manage the SDM process.This paper extends a previous work [10] by providing deeper insight into both the architectural and theoretical aspects of the framework. In addition, a first evaluation of the system is presented. The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we introduce the theoretical basis of the proposed framework and the implementation strategy within the MobiGuide system. Section 3 presents the proposed models and the implemented interfaces on a specific application regarding thromboembolism prevention in AF patients. Section 4 shows the results of a preliminary clinical application. In Section 5 we discuss the proposed framework and, in Section 6, we draw our concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have presented the methodological, design and implementation choices underlying the definition of a SDM framework to be used by physicians and patients to elicit patient preferences and, consequently, run patient-specific clinical decision models. We believe that such a framework might be of help to improve patients’ empowerment and to overcome some of the barriers that physicians perceive with respect to the application of SDM in clinical practice.The novelty of our work relies in the possibility of fully personalizing and deploying decision trees on the web. This represents a possible future exploitation of the MobiGuide project results, establishing the basis for a repository of web-interactive tools for medical decision making.