@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessing the feasibility of a mobile health-supported clinical decision support system for nutritional triage in oncology outpatients using Arden Syntax

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
“Assessing feasibility of a mobile health-supported clinical decision support system for nutritional triage in oncology outpatients using Arden Syntax”.A clinical decision support system using patient-generated data and data from protected clinical data domains is feasible.Such a system can be used to combine data generated by home monitoring apps with clinical data.Smartphone applications are adopted quite well by patients, and could be used to monitor nutritional status in patients, and make patients more able to cope with their disease.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Telemedicine,Mobile health,Medical oncology,Disease-related malnutrition,Nutritional status,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundNutritional screening procedures followed by regular nutrition monitoring for oncological outpatients are no standard practice in many European hospital wards and outpatient settings. As a result, early signs of malnutrition are missed and nutritional treatment is initiated when patients have already experienced severe weight loss.ObjectiveWe report on a novel clinical decision support system (CDSS) for the global assessment and nutritional triage of the nutritional condition of oncology outpatients. The system combines clinical and laboratory data collected in the clinical setting with patient-generated data from a smartphone application for monitoring the patients’ nutritional status. Our objective is to assess the feasibility of a CDSS that combines the aforementioned data sources and describe its integration into a hospital information system. Furthermore, we collected patients’ opinions on the value of the system, and whether they would regard the system as a useful aid in coping with their condition.Materials and methodsThe system implements the Patient-Generated Subjective Global Assessment (PG-SGA) to monitor nutritional status in the outpatient setting. A smartphone application is used to collect patient-generated data by performing weekly mini-surveys on patients concerning their eating habits, weight, and overall well-being. Data are uploaded on completion of each mini-survey and stored on a secure server at the Medical University of Vienna (MUV). The data are then combined with relevant clinical information from the Vienna General Hospital (VGH) information system. The knowledge base for the CDSS is implemented in medical logic modules (MLMs) using Arden Syntax. A three-month pilot clinical trial was performed to test the feasibility of the system. Qualitative questionnaires were used to obtain the patients’ opinions on the usability and personal value of the system during the four-week test period.ResultsWe used the existing separation between the scientific and clinical data domains in the secured network environment (SNE) at the MUV and VGH to our advantage by importing, storing, and processing both patient-generated and routine data in the scientific data domain. To limit exposure to the SNE, patient-generated data stored outside the SNE were imported to the scientific domain once a day. The CDSS created for nutritional assessment and triage comprised ten MLMs, each including either a sub-assessment or the final results of the PG-SGA. Finally, an interface created for the hospital information system showed the results directly in clinical routine. In all 22 patients completed the clinical study. The results of the questionnaires showed that 91% of the patients were generally happy with the usability of the system, 91% believed that the application was of additional value in detecting cancer-related malnutrition, and 82% found it helpful as a long-term monitoring tool.Discussion and conclusionDespite strict protection of the clinical data domain, a CDSS employing patient-generated data can be integrated into clinical routine. The CDSS discussed in this report combined the information entered into a smartphone application with clinical data in order to inform the physician of a patient's nutritional status and thus permit suitable and timely intervention. The initial results show that the smartphone application was well accepted by patients, who considered it useful, but not many oncological outpatients were willing to participate in the clinical study because they did not possess an Android phone or lacked smartphone expertise. Furthermore, the results indicate that patient-generated data could be employed to augment clinical data and calculate metrics such as the PG-SGA without excessive effort by using a secure intermediate location as the locus of data storage and processing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cancer patients are at high risk of a poor nutritional status because of their disease as well as their anti-cancer treatment. Weight loss is a common phenomenon in cancer patients [1], and is significantly related to a poor clinical outcome, poor tolerance of anti-cancer treatment, and reduced quality of life [2–4]. Finally, malnutrition is associated with high mortality [3] and greater consumption of healthcare resources due to numerous and prolonged hospital visits and stays, apart from the cost of treatment [5]. The management of malnourished patients may cost twice as much as the treatment of well-nourished patients [6].The guidelines of the European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism clearly recommend the following investigations for cancer patients: regular screening on hospital admission, re-screening at pre-defined intervals (e.g., weekly) during a hospital stay for patients without nutritional impairment, and frequent nutritional assessments and early intervention in the event of deficiencies [2,3,7,8]. In the community setting, the guidelines recommend repeated screening of patients at moderate risk of undernutrition, with intervals ranging “from <1 month to >6 months (with dietary advice if necessary)” [8]. Patients already receiving nutrition interventions also need more frequent follow-ups.However, the aforementioned guidelines are not always a part of overall patient care in European hospitals and outpatient facilities [9]. Therefore, early signs of malnutrition are missed and nutritional therapy is implemented rather late, when patients have already experienced significant weight loss [10]. The transition of oncological treatment from inpatient to outpatient care is an additional challenge. Currently, the majority of patients receive ambulatory cancer treatment and follow-up which, depending on their disease status and the ongoing therapy, occur at variable intervals. Some patients are seen as often as three times a week while others come in every six months. As shown by the SCRINIO working group, weight loss and a high level of nutritional risk are common among oncological outpatients [1,7].Modern information technologies such as telecare or mobile health (mHealth) systems could be used to monitor the nutritional status and food intake of oncological outpatients, as well as identify nutritional complications. mHealth applications were found to be economical and effective in a variety of care settings [11,12], and are usually well accepted by patients and healthcare professionals [13,14]. As mobile technology is becoming more widespread, mHealth applications will be able to reach more people. This may improve the effectiveness of mobile interventions. However, as these data are patient-generated, they cannot be stored in a hospital information system (HIS). It would be necessary to establish a site of storage and safe processing for patient-generated data as well as data from clinical routine. The processed data should then be retrievable and available for use in clinical routine.Our purpose was to create a clinical decision support system (CDSS) that would employ patient-generated data as well as data from clinical routine in order to monitor the nutritional status of oncological outpatients. To collect patient-generated data, we developed a smartphone application known as MONTE. With MONTE, oncological outpatients are monitored on a weekly basis rather than per-visit, for the purpose of initiating early nutritional interventions and reducing unnecessary hospital visits. Patient-generated data are uploaded to a remote server and imported into the secure network environment (SNE) of the Medical University of Vienna (MUV), where they are stored and combined with routine clinical data of the Vienna General Hospital (VGH). A CDSS was created that performs nutritional triage in accordance with the Patient-Generated Subjective Global Assessment (PG-SGA) [15], and was implemented in medical logic modules (MLMs) using Arden Syntax. Finally, a graphical interface was created in order to integrate the CDSS into the VGH HIS. A three-month trial was performed to test the feasibility of the integration solution and obtain the patients’ personal opinions concerning the value and usefulness of the system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
