@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pediatric decision support using adapted Arden Syntax

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In 2004 we developed a pediatric computer based clinical decision support system, CHICA, using Arden Syntax medical logic modules (MLM).CHICA has run continuously for 10 years and has been used by 755 physicians, residents, fellows, nurse practitioners, nurses and clinical staff.There are 429 MLMs implemented in CHICA using the Arden Syntax standard.CHICA has served over 44,000 patients at 7 pediatric clinics in our healthcare system in the last decade and its MLMs have been fired 6182,700 times to produce and 5334,021 times to read patient documents.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical decision support,CHICA,Arden Syntax,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundPediatric guidelines based care is often overlooked because of the constraints of a typical office visit and the sheer number of guidelines that may exist for a patient's visit. In response to this problem, in 2004 we developed a pediatric computer based clinical decision support system using Arden Syntax medical logic modules (MLM).MethodsThe Child Health Improvement through Computer Automation system (CHICA) screens patient families in the waiting room and alerts the physician in the exam room. Here we describe adaptation of Arden Syntax to support production and consumption of patient specific tailored documents for every clinical encounter in CHICA and describe the experiments that demonstrate the effectiveness of this system.ResultsAs of this writing CHICA has served over 44,000 patients at 7 pediatric clinics in our healthcare system in the last decade and its MLMs have been fired 6182,700 times in “produce” and 5334,021 times in “consume” mode. It has run continuously for over 10 years and has been used by 755 physicians, residents, fellows, nurse practitioners, nurses and clinical staff. There are 429 MLMs implemented in CHICA, using the Arden Syntax standard. Studies of CHICA's effectiveness include several published randomized controlled trials.ConclusionsOur results show that the Arden Syntax standard provided us with an effective way to represent pediatric guidelines for use in routine care. We only required minor modifications to the standard to support our clinical workflow. Additionally, Arden Syntax implementation in CHICA facilitated the study of many pediatric guidelines in real clinical environments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Preventive services are a critical part of pediatric care as they assure proper growth and development and early detection of remediable conditions. About half of outpatient visits for children in the US are for health maintenance. Logically, then, scores of preventive care guidelines for children exist [1–4]. Unfortunately, these guidelines are often not followed in routine care [5]. This is for two main reasons. First, guideline based care may often be overlooked because of less important, but more immediate problems, and second, the sheer number of primary care guidelines exceeds what can be done in the typical 18min well child visit [6].In response to this problem, we developed the Child Health Improvement through Computer Automation system (CHICA) in 2004 [7]. CHICA is a computer-based clinical decision support system (CDSS) that has been operating for the last decade in practices of the Eskenazi Health System in Indianapolis, IN. CHICA uses a set of Arden Syntax [8,9] Medical Logic Module (MLM) or rules to produce a set of encounter documents for each patient visit. The first set is to select 20 questions that the patient's family answers in the waiting room, and the second set is to produce alerts and reminders to the physician [10,11]. We describe the adaptation of Arden Syntax to support this system [12] and the experiments that demonstrate its effectiveness.First, we briefly describe CHICA and then our methods to represent a pediatric guideline using Arden Syntax in CHICA in detail. We also describe adaptation of the standard to support our clinical workflow and a brief description of the expected value prioritization scheme that we implemented to execute guidelines (encoded as MLMs) within the context of a patient visit. Lastly, we describe our minor modifications to the Arden Syntax standard and the design and development of our Arden Syntax parser.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
CHICA's success is related to its ability to be useful with virtually every patient who walks in the door. The modules created for CHICA cover the full gamut of preventive services and the most common chronic conditions of childhood. To achieve this, we needed a sophisticated rule-based system with an expected value based prioritization scheme. Because we are committed to standards based health information technology development, we chose Arden Syntax, but minor modifications were needed to accommodate CHICA's specialized functionality. Arden Syntax provided us with a way to not only effectively represent pediatric guidelines but to also study them in a real clinical environment and modify or enhance them as needed. Dozens of publications now demonstrate the value of CHICA, and we are moving forward with distributing it through a web services model.