@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analyzing depression tendency of web posts using an event-driven depression tendency warning model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We define four depression tendency factors and collected seed lexicons for them.We proposed three automatic negative event extraction methods.Predict depression tendency via proposed event-driven depression tendency warning model.Drawing trend char to track the depression tendency score.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Part of speech pattern,Negative event,Negative emotion,Depression tendency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThe Internet has become a platform to express individual moods/feelings of daily life, where authors share their thoughts in web blogs, micro-blogs, forums, bulletin board systems or other media. In this work, we investigate text-mining technology to analyze and predict the depression tendency of web posts.MethodsIn this paper, we defined depression factors, which include negative events, negative emotions, symptoms, and negative thoughts from web posts. We proposed an enhanced event extraction (E3) method to automatically extract negative event terms. In addition, we also proposed an event-driven depression tendency warning (EDDTW) model to predict the depression tendency of web bloggers or post authors by analyzing their posted articles.ResultsWe compare the performance among the proposed EDDTW model, negative emotion evaluation (NEE) model, and the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders-based depression tendency evaluation method. The EDDTW model obtains the best recall rate and F-measure at 0.668 and 0.624, respectively, while the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders-based method achieves the best precision rate of 0.666. The main reason is that our enhanced event extraction method can increase recall rate by enlarging the negative event lexicon at the expense of precision. Our EDDTW model can also be used to track the change or trend of depression tendency for each post author. The depression tendency trend can help doctors to diagnose and even track depression of web post authors more efficiently.ConclusionsThis paper presents an E3 method to automatically extract negative event terms in web posts. We also proposed a new EDDTW model to predict the depression tendency of web posts and possibly help bloggers or post authors to early detect major depressive disorder.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The World Health Organization [1] predicts depression disorder will become a widespread disease in the next 20 years. In modern times, diagnoses of dysphoria, dysthymia, and persistent depressive disorder have gradually increased. These disorders may affect a person's general health and habits in areas such as altered sleeping and eating patterns in addition to their interpersonal relationships and their work or school life. The American Psychiatric Association published a clinical diagnosis guideline called the fourth text revision of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-IV-TR) [2], which gives specific criteria for classification. There exist some useful self-diagnosis tools such as the Goldberg depression scale [3], patient health questionnaire (PHQ-9) [4], and Beck Depression Inventory. There are also culturally specific tools like the Chinese depression inventories provided from the John Tung Foundation for self-diagnosis [5].The Internet has become a platform to express individual moods/feelings of daily life, where authors share their thoughts in web blogs, micro-blogs, forums, bulletin board systems or other media. Large amounts of web posts are published each day. In this work, we investigate text-mining technology to analyze and predict the depression tendency of web posts. The Center of Healthy Living of Western Washington University characterizes depression as prolonged feelings of sadness, dejection and hopelessness. Sometimes, depression can be triggered by something as simple as a terrible day at work or being slighted by a friend.After our observations on a large number of collected web posts, we found when some people encounter negative events, these individuals will also express negative emotions. The negative emotions trigger some symptoms and negative thoughts. These people may fall into depression easier than others. Thus, they intend to express negative emotions, symptoms, and negative thoughts simultaneously in the same post. Fig. 1shows that emotions, symptoms, and depressive thinking play major roles in the key path of a depression cycle [6]. This is consistent with our observations from the web posts of authors with major depressive disorder. Based on diagnosis criteria of major depression disorder from the DSM-IV-TR (see Table 1in Section 2), we categorized four depression factors which include negative event factor, negative emotion factor, symptom factor, and negative thought factor as in our previous work [7]. In the previous work, we proposed a negative emotion evaluation (NEE) model to predict the depression tendency of web posts and negative event terms were extracted manually from web posts. In this paper, to address the problem of extracting event terms, we propose an enhanced event extraction (E3) method to automatically extract negative event terms. In addition, we also propose an event-driven depression tendency warning (EDDTW) model to predict the depression tendency of post authors by analyzing their posted content. This work focuses on finding negative sentiment in web posts that could be triggered by life events. Our experimental results show that the proposed EDDTW model obtains over 60% precision.In this paper, we address the important issue of analyzing and predicting depression tendency of post authors. The main contributions of this paper are listed as follows:•We enhanced lexicon terms for the depressive factors that proposed in our previous work.Assert negative event factor is the root cause of depression tendency.Negative emotion, symptom, and negative thought factors are mapped to the criteria of major depressive disorder defined in DSM-IV-TR.Propose three event extraction features to automatically extract negative event terms.Propose an effective event-driven depression tendency warning model to improve upon our previous negative emotion evaluation model.Collection of nearly 18,000 depression related posts, which could be used on other related research works.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes previous works on clinical diagnosis and methods for dealing with depressive factors analysis in web posts. Section 3 describes the proposed model and lexicons, as well as the methodology followed. Section 4 presents the experimental results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents an enhanced event extraction method to automatically extract negative event terms in web posts, which improves upon the manual extraction of event terms in our previous work. We also proposed a new event-driven depression tendency warning model to predict the depression tendency of web posts and possibly help bloggers or post authors to early detect major depressive disorder. The experimental results show our proposed EDDTW model obtains over 60% precision.In the future, we hope to increase the accuracy of negative event extraction by introducing some advanced natural language processing techniques. The number of lexicon terms is unbalanced among the negative event, negative emotion, symptom, and negative thinking lexicons. We plan to keep adding more depression related terms into each lexicon and increasing the quality of lexicon corpus. Finally, we will utilize big data techniques with our proposed model to deal with huge datasets from online social media like Facebook or Twitter, etc.