@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SmartFABER: Recognizing fine-grained abnormal behaviors for early detection of mild cognitive impairment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SmartFABER is an innovative hybrid activity and anomaly recognition framework.It supports early diagnosis of MCI.It overcomes the shortcomings of purely statistical methods.We experimented SmartFABER with real-world datasets.SmartFABER detects most anomalies producing a small number of false positives.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mild cognitive impairment,Cognitive decline,Abnormal behavior detection,Activity recognition,Pervasive computing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveIn an ageing world population more citizens are at risk of cognitive impairment, with negative consequences on their ability of independent living, quality of life and sustainability of healthcare systems. Cognitive neuroscience researchers have identified behavioral anomalies that are significant indicators of cognitive decline. A general goal is the design of innovative methods and tools for continuously monitoring the functional abilities of the seniors at risk and reporting the behavioral anomalies to the clinicians. SmartFABER is a pervasive system targeting this objective.MethodsA non-intrusive sensor network continuously acquires data about the interaction of the senior with the home environment during daily activities. A novel hybrid statistical and knowledge-based technique is used to analyses this data and detect the behavioral anomalies, whose history is presented through a dashboard to the clinicians. Differently from related works, SmartFABER can detect abnormal behaviors at a fine-grained level.ResultsWe have fully implemented the system and evaluated it using real datasets, partly generated by performing activities in a smart home laboratory, and partly acquired during several months of monitoring of the instrumented home of a senior diagnosed with MCI. Experimental results, including comparisons with other activity recognition techniques, show the effectiveness of SmartFABER in terms of recognition rates.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Independent living and pro-active healthcare are becoming strategic application areas for major research programmes all over the world, considering that the senior population (aged over 65) is projected to double as a percentage over the whole population in the next decades  [1]. Among the most frequent threats to independent living is cognitive decline, whose early symptoms often lead to a mild cognitive impairment (MCI) diagnosis. According to the International Working Group on MCI, there are evidences of subtle differences in performing instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) among MCI patients compared to both healthy older adults and individuals with dementia  [2]. Other studies [3,4] observed how a closer examination of functional skills in individuals with MCI may enhance our understanding of the natural history and cognitive correlates of functional deterioration associated with dementia. They pointed out the limits of informant-based reports on subject abilities and proposed to extend well known performance evaluation tests (e.g., NAT  [5]) with subtle errors recognition. Hence, from a medical point of view there is a clear interest in methods to monitor daily living activities of the elderly with the goal of identifying specific abnormal behaviors as indicators of cognitive decline.Ubiquitous computing technologies coupled with intelligent data analysis have a recognized potential in the automatic recognition of IADLs. Indeed, several research projects, and numerous research papers have tried to detect behavioral markers of MCI onset through ubiquitous computing technologies, obtaining a correlation between the predicted and actual cognitive status of the patient. Some of these approaches require the execution of ability tests about the performance of IADLs in an instrumented smart home of a medical institution; hence, they incur in high costs and cannot be applied on a continuous basis. Some of them deploy cameras and sensor networks in controlled environments and use video and audio for activity recognition: these systems are often perceived as too invasive for the elderly's privacy. Other works rely on continuous monitoring of low-level behavioral markers (steps taken, walking speed, …) and trigger alarms whenever they detect situations sufficiently distant from the expected (modeled) behavior.We have joined this research effort by designing and implementing SmartFABER, a pervasive system for fine-grained abnormal behavior recognition. SmartFABER is intended as a tool for clinicians for analysing the decline of functional abilities, supporting the diagnosis of MCI or even distinguishing between different MCI subtypes. SmartFABER has a sensor network component intended to be installed in the home of the senior and continuously acquiring data. Video and audio acquisition are excluded as too intrusive, while sensors are used to detect presence in particular locations, opening and closing of drawers, fridge and cabinet doors, use of appliances, as well as use of specific tools and food items.With respect to other activity recognition systems, SmartFABER is designed to go beyond the recognition of the activity being performed by identifying the anomalies that can be observed in carrying out the activity (e.g., inappropriate timing in assuming food or medicine intake, improper use of equipment, unnecessary repetitions of actions). This is a challenging task for at least two reasons: (a) only certain anomalies or patterns of anomalies are relevant indicators for clinicians and they need to be properly modeled based on cognitive neuroscience expertise and (b) most approaches to activity recognition lack the ability to identify the fine-grained anomalies that are of interest to clinicians.Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:•We describe SmartFABER, a complete pervasive system that can be used by clinicians to identify and analyse even mild functional difficulties in elderly subjects performing daily activities at home;We explain the technical approach of SmartFABER that combines statistical and knowledge based methods to achieve the fine-grained anomaly detection goal;We experimentally compare the activity recognition ability of SmartFABER with a state of the art technique proposed in the literature showing its superiority both on a lab-acquired dataset and on a real-home dataset; we also show the improvements in anomaly detection over a preliminary version of our system;We report on the experience of deploying SmartFABER in the house of a senior diagnosed with MCI with the positive outcome of detecting most targeted anomalies with small number of false positives.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 reports our model of activities and abnormal behaviors. Section 4 presents the SmartFABER method. Section 5 reports experimental results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we addressed the challenging issue of unobtrusively recognizing behaviors exhibited by elderly persons at home that have been identified by clinicians as relevant for the early diagnosis of MCI. Our SmartFABER hybrid technique to recognize abnormal behaviors differs from previous approaches for combining supervised learning with knowledge-based reasoning to more precisely recognize specific anomalies in carrying out daily living activities. We designed the models of anomalies collaborating with cognitive neuroscience experts. Hence, instead of identifying only generic deviations from normal behavior as most related works do, we provide clinicians with a fine-grained description of the recognized abnormal behaviors identified as indicators of MCI.Of course, human behaviors are characterized by wide variability; factors such as contextual conditions, individual habits and personality traits may determine the execution of various anomalies that are not necessarily due to cognitive impairment. This is especially true for non-critical anomalies, as leaving repositories open, which may be normally done by cognitively healthy people for negligence or hastiness. Hence, while the considered anomalies are indicators of possible abnormal behaviors, they are not intended to provide an automatic diagnosis of the patient's cognitive status, especially when they occur in isolation. For instance, the fact that the subject has taken a medicine that was not prescribed is critical if he does it unintentionally (e.g., for a memory disorder). In other cases it may be a normal behavior; e.g., if the patient intentionally takes an over-the-counter drug that does not interfere with his medical prescriptions. Therefore, our system is not intended to provide a diagnosis hypothesis, but simply as a powerful data analysis tool at the service of practitioners reporting the type, frequency, correlation and temporal trend of detected anomalies. By joining this information with other methods and with the subject profile and therapy, it is also possible to set personalized trigger alarms.We implemented a prototype of the system in both a smart home lab and in the real home of an elderly person. Experiments with datasets of activities and anomalies show that SmartFABER achieves high recall while generating a small number of false positives.The achieved results are promising, but we plan to improve this work in several directions. Our current anomaly recognition method is based on logic rules that strictly determine the detection of an abnormal behavior based on a user-defined set of observations. We consider extending this rigid system with probabilistic reasoning. We are working on integrating data analysis tools in the dashboard offered by the system to clinicians to automatise some of the reasoning that they currently do by looking at long term activity data. Other future work also includes addressing the case of multi-inhabitants. Finally, we plan to work closely with clinicians to extend the set of activities and associated significant anomalies to be monitored, and to extend the experiments to multiple real homes.