@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Semi-online patient scheduling in pathology laboratories

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A semi-online patient scheduling problem in the pathology laboratory is studied.The problem is formulated as a semi-online hybrid shop scheduling problem.A genetic algorithm is developed for solving the problem.Several experiments are conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the approach.The approach reduces waiting time of patients and improves operations efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health care operations management,Patients scheduling,Pathology laboratory,Genetic algorithm,Response surface methodology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveNowadays, effective scheduling of patients in clinics, laboratories, and emergency rooms is becoming increasingly important. Hospitals are required to maximize the level of patient satisfaction, while they are faced with lack of space and facilities. An effective scheduling of patients in existing conditions is vital for improving healthcare delivery. The shorter waiting time of patients improves healthcare service quality and efficiency. Focusing on real settings, this paper addresses a semi-online patient scheduling problem in a pathology laboratory located in Tehran, Iran, as a case study.Methods and materialDue to partial precedence constraints of laboratory tests, the problem is formulated as a semi-online hybrid shop scheduling problem and a mixed integer linear programming model is proposed. A genetic algorithm (GA) is developed for solving the problem and response surface methodology is used for setting GA parameters. A lower bound is also calculated for the problem, and several experiments are conducted to estimate the validity of the proposed algorithm.ResultsBased on the empirical data collected from the pathology laboratory, comparison between the current condition of the laboratory and the results obtained by the proposed approach is performed through simulation experiments. The results indicate that the proposed approach can significantly reduce waiting time of the patients and improve operations efficiency.ConclusionThe proposed approach has been successfully applied to scheduling patients in a pathology laboratory considering the real-world settings including precedence constraints of tests, constraint on the number of sites or operators for taking tests (i.e. multi-machine problem), and semi-online nature of the problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Laboratory tests are medical services that include testing samples of blood, urine, saliva, and various tissues or substances in the patient's body. A laboratory test may be taken for one or more of the following reasons: (1) to verify a suspected diagnosis e.g. measuring plasma glucose level to confirm diabetes mellitus, (2) to exclude a diagnosis e.g. a negative urine culture may rule out bladder and kidney bacterial infection, or (3) to check the effectiveness of the treatment or drugs. Planning and scheduling patients requesting for tests is a cumbersome task because it necessitates concerted cooperation of different parts in the laboratory to minimize patients waiting time and maximize laboratory resources utilization [1]. It is noteworthy that in this article “planning” is referred to as a decision-making process which determines the activities and resources needed to perform those activities in order to design a desired system and effective ways of meeting the performance objectives. “Scheduling” is the process of assigning activities to the resources, deciding on the sequence of activities, and determining the exact start and finish time of each activity.Each laboratory may have several types of tests such as hematology, immunology, chemistry and microbiology and the patient who arrives to the laboratory may take test of blood, urine, saliva, sperm or stool. Unlike the offline problems, in this situation the arrival times of patients are not known in advance. Nevertheless, when a patient arrives, the types of tests that the patient must take and the processing times are known. The sequence of some of these tests is restricted (e.g., the urine test must precede the stool test) and some tests can be performed without the predefined precedence constraints. Additionally, when a patient arrives, the patients already in the system cannot be rearranged. Thus, the problem can be formulated as a semi-online hybrid shop scheduling problem (SHSSP). Hybrid shop is an open shop problem with partial precedence constraints. The difficulty in solving hybrid shops is due to the fact that pre-specified precedence constraints must be regarded in the schedule [2]. Fig. 1illustrates the SHSSP using the example of two patients. Patient 1 is male and requires four samples of tests, where test D cannot be taken before test B, while tests A and F can be taken at any order. Meanwhile, patient 2 is female and requires three samples of tests, where test E cannot be taken before test C, while test A can be taken at any order.Motivated by real needs, this study is application-oriented and aims to develop an effective approach for increasing service quality by reducing the patient waiting time and improving the operations efficiency. A mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model is developed to formulate the problem. A genetic algorithm is then proposed to solve the formulated semi-online hybrid shop scheduling problem and a structured procedure based on response surface methodology (RSM) is used for setting the GA parameters. To estimate the validity of the algorithm, a lower bound is also calculated and the results obtained by the proposed algorithm on randomly generated problems are compared to the lower bound. Finally, the proposed approach is applied to a simulated laboratory for some days to illustrate its effectiveness and robustness.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a review of the literature related to patient scheduling. The mathematical formulation of the problem is proposed in Section 3. The proposed GA and its operators are described in Section 4. For verification, a lower bound is calculated in Section 5. In Section 6, a laboratory is simulated and the efficiency of the proposed approach is investigated and finally, Section 7 draws some conclusions from this study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
