@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Clinical decision support systems at the Vienna General Hospital using Arden Syntax: Design, implementation, and integration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Introduction of a hospital information system capable of decision support lead to increased interest and demand from clinicians.Integration of clinical decision support systems in clinical routine causes added technical and social complexity, but produces encouraging results.CDSSs can be only truly be widely accepted and adopted if they are supported long-term, and if there is enough high-quality data electronically available.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hospital information systems,Medical informatics standards,Clinical decision support systems,Clinical knowledge-based systems,Arden Syntax,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionThe Allgemeines Krankenhaus Informations Management (AKIM) project was started at the Vienna General Hospital (VGH) several years ago. This led to the introduction of a new hospital information system (HIS), and the installation of the expert system platform (EXP) for the integration of Arden-Syntax-based clinical decision support systems (CDSSs). In this report we take a look at the milestones achieved and the challenges faced in the creation and modification of CDSSs, and their integration into the HIS over the last three years.Materials and methodsWe introduce a three-stage development method, which is followed in nearly all CDSS projects at the Medical University of Vienna and the VGH. Stage one comprises requirements engineering and system conception. Stage two focuses on the implementation and testing of the system. Finally, stage three describes the deployment and integration of the system in the VGH HIS. The HIS provides a clinical work environment for healthcare specialists using customizable graphical interfaces known as parametric medical documents. Multiple Arden Syntax servers are employed to host and execute the CDSS knowledge bases: two embedded in the EXP for production and development, and a further three in clinical routine for production, development, and quality assurance.ResultsThree systems are discussed; the systems serve different purposes in different clinical areas, but are all implemented with Arden Syntax. MONI-ICU is an automated surveillance system for monitoring healthcare-associated infections in the intensive care setting. TSM-CDS is a CDSS used for risk prediction in the formation of cutaneous melanoma metastases. Finally, TacroDS is a CDSS for the manipulation of dosages for tacrolimus, an immunosuppressive agent used after kidney transplantation. Problems in development and integration were related to data quality or availability, although organizational difficulties also caused delays in development and integration.Discussion and conclusionSince the inception of the AKIM project at the VGH and its ability to support standards such as Arden Syntax and integrate CDSSs into clinical routine, the clinicians’ interest in, and demand for, decision support has increased substantially. The use of Arden Syntax as a standard for CDSSs played a substantial role in the ability to rapidly create high-quality CDSS systems, whereas the ability to integrate these systems into the HIS made CDSSs more popular among physicians. Despite these successes, challenges such as lack of (consistent and high-quality) electronic data, social acceptance among healthcare personnel, and legislative issues remain. These have to be addressed effectively before CDSSs can be more widely accepted and adopted.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An increasing body of information is available in modern healthcare, but clinicians and nurses are facing difficulties in performing time-consuming manual data analysis to make the optimal medical decisions while reducing uncertainty, risks for patients, and costs [1,2]. This results in inadequate patient care. One study shows that, in the USA, 44,000 to 98,000 patients die each year due to preventable medical errors (2–4% of all medical deaths per year) [3]. Another study showed that as many as many as 40% of patients were not receiving the recommended care for chronic or acute conditions [4]. Computer technology can be used to create systems that aid these efforts, which are usually referred to as clinical decision support systems (CDSSs).Studies have shown that CDSSs may exert a positive effect on patient outcomes [2,5]. Through literature analysis and group discussion, several efforts have been made to identify successful CDSS features [2,6]. CDSS features associated with improved clinical practice included the automatic provision of decision support as part of a clinical workflow, the provision of decision support at the time and place of decision making, and the provision of recommendations rather than assessments. However, a recent study on the acceptance of CDSSs [7] shows that, apart from these technical aspects, human and organizational factors such as the ease of system use and adequate budgeting [8] are important factors in the acceptance of a CDSS, but are frequently underemphasized. Instead, technical aspects are given importance.Although the potential of CDSSs has been recognized for a long time, less than 50% of the systems pass the testing and publication stage and are actually used in clinical routine [9]. Varonen et al. [8] state that the primary (social) barrier for the acceptance of CDSSs is negative experience in regard of healthcare information systems. Other social and psychological barriers include a perceived threat to the doctor–patient relationship, obscured responsibility, knowledge management, and the unwillingness to change. From a technical perspective, the greatest barrier to the routine use of CDSSs by clinicians has been lack of interoperability [8,10]. A clinician's acceptance and utilization of a CDSS depends on a system's ability to fit in the clinician's workflow, its context-sensitive accessibility, availability at the point of care, and ideally its integration into an HIS [11,12]. Commercially operated HISs tend to focus on administrative tasks and do not provide additional knowledge-based functionality. They also do not offer extensibility in these areas, making it virtually impossible to integrate or interact with custom-built or third-party software [9,13–15].A few years ago, a new project known as Allgemeines Krankenhaus Informations Management (AKIM) was introduced at the Vienna General Hospital (VGH) with the aim of renewing the VGH HIS and promoting collaboration between clinical routine and research. The new HIS of the VGH is known as i.s.h.med; IS stands for industry solutions, and H for healthcare. The AKIM project also facilitates the installation of several additional IT systems for scientific and educational use at the Medical University of Vienna (MUV), including the expert system platform (EXP) for the development and integration of CDSSs. As a result, i.s.h.med has the ability to communicate with the EXP, which integrates two Arden Syntax servers, but also contains three Arden Syntax servers itself, thus it can run CDSSs directly in clinical routine. This led to a new impulse in the creation of CDSSs, as well as the direct integration of developed systems into i.s.h.med.In this report we outline the technical and clinical aspects of three CDSSs integrated into i.s.h.med over the last three years: MONI-ICU, an automated surveillance system monitoring healthcare-associated infections; TSM-CDS, a CDSS developed for the prediction of cutaneous melanoma metastases; and TacroDS, a CDSS for the manipulation of dosages for immunosuppressive agents used after kidney transplantation. These systems were chosen because they all employ the Arden Syntax standard for the implementation of their knowledge bases, were developed recently, chosen as pilot projects for integration into clinical routine, and are still backed by solid clinical support at the VGH, which allows them to be continuously updated and renewed. Apart from a description of the systems, we discuss the challenges faced in the development, integration and use of CDSSs in clinical routine.A CDSS is defined as any computer system designed to support healthcare professionals in making clinical decisions through the management of clinical data or medical knowledge [16]. In healthcare a CDSS may be broadly defined as a system that combines patient data with medical knowledge, thereby using an inference mechanism to produce patient-specific output to actively support clinicians in clinical decision making [8,17]. Three functions are supported by decision support systems [18]: the provision of automated clinical information management, such as data entry and retrieval; attention focusing, such as medical alerts and reminders; and supplying patient-specific recommendations or advice based on patient data.The systems discussed in this paper are all knowledge-based systems, which are a type of CDSS that perform decision making at the level of a domain expert. These CDSSs declare knowledge explicitly using a knowledge base, and present facts about the problem domain. To interpret the facts and make logical assertions about them, the systems employ a logical inference mechanism, usually through rules such as if-then-else statements. The interpretation usually proceeds through a match–resolve–execute process. First, all rules corresponding with the input data are matched, then an order of rule execution is determined (including conflict resolution), and finally execution takes place.Knowledge-based systems have properties that make them well-suited for clinical decision making, given the aforementioned success factors for CDSSs. The structuring and decoupling of facts and rules eases maintenance because rules are no longer hardcoded in a program. Furthermore, data combined with the executed rules serve as an explanation for a diagnosis, making it easier to understand and trust the system.Arden Syntax is a programming language for the collection, description and exchange of medical knowledge in an executable format, suited for use in medical knowledge-based systems. Currently the most recent version of Arden Syntax is version 2.10, which was released in November 2014 [19].An Arden Syntax knowledge base comprises a set of rules collected in programming units known as medical logic modules (MLMs), each of which contains the necessary logic to make a single medical decision [20]. Each MLM is uniformly formatted, and consists of four categories: maintenance, library, knowledge, and resources. The maintenance category is used for knowledge base versioning and change control, and provides metadata such as MLM authors, version, name and description. The library category allows implementers to explain the purpose and workings of an MLM, and supply additional literature references and keywords. The knowledge category contains the medical knowledge necessary for the decision making that the MLM was intended for. The category defines what input arguments need to be provided, the logic used to draw a conclusion based on these data, and actions that need to be undertaken when a conclusion is reached. Finally, the resources category is used to define messages and parameterized output. Provisions for localization have also been made to promote the dissemination of MLMs.Since its inception, several CDSSs have employed the Arden Syntax standard to perform a variety of functions in a variety of medical settings, such as the validation of laboratory data in a laboratory information system [21], the automation and marshalling of (temporally) complex clinical practice guidelines [22], and a warning system to avoid adverse events in pediatric care [23,24], to name a few. There have also been several implementations of compilers and frameworks for the execution of Arden Syntax MLMs, such as Arden/J [25], Arden2ByteCode [26], and the Arden Syntax server [11].The AKIM project was started as a joint project between the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Vienna (now the MUV) and the City of Vienna in 1997. The overall goal was to create a consistently functional IT environment for patient care, patient management and research, and create an HIS that contained all relevant patient data to continuously support clinical workflows within the VGH.Siemens Health Services, contracted for the implementation of the system, offered a solution based on their Systems, Applications and Products in Data Processing (SAP) framework, integrating SAP/IS-H for administration and accounting, SAP/i.s.h.med for clinical operation, and custom-made extensions in accordance with VGH specifications and requirements [27]. Through several tools and functions, AKIM supports all routine processes in inpatient and outpatient settings, such as a document viewer that offers a chronological overview of patient data, documents, diagnoses and services.After several years of development at three pilot clinics, a hospital-wide rollout of the system for all 29 clinics at the VGH was started in 2010 and completed in January 2015. In February 2015 the Cerner Corporation finished its acquisition of Siemens Health Services, and is now responsible for the management and further development of AKIM [28].One of the features requested by the VGH was support for CDSSs. As such, the expert system platform EXP was developed to support the creation, maintenance and integration of CDSSs for scientific and educational use, and also for the improvement of healthcare quality at the VGH. EXP is a development and production environment for distributed medical expert systems. Direct and secure access to clinical patient data is available in order to support the rapid development of expert systems. Furthermore, EXP supports the deployment of expert systems in clinical routine. As such, the created CDSSs no longer serve educational and scientific purposes alone. As of fall 2014, the most recent version of EXP offers the option of creating and running expert systems in a variety of programming language and standards, including Arden Syntax 2.10 through the use of the ArdenSuite, developed and maintained by Medexter Healthcare [29].From a technical perspective, the secure network environment (SNE) of the VGH and the MUV can be divided into the clinical domain (i.s.h.med) and the research domain. Both of these domains are shielded from the public domain and from each other through firewalls and various access protocols. The clinical domain provides an environment for the retrieval of patient data, laboratory tests and other medical examination results. The data are accessed via a graphical user interface known as a parametric medical document (PMD), and provides a framework for customized medical documentation to fulfil specific medical needs. Communication to and from the clinical domain, as well as internally, proceeds through the communication server. The EXP resides in the research domain and is meant to serve research, development, testing, deployment and integration of CDSSs. Fig. 1shows how i.s.h.med and EXP are tied together. Note that in the present report we only discuss the details pertinent to understanding the workings of the CDSSs, and not the entire infrastructure.Both the clinical domain and the research domain contain an Arden Syntax server which supports the deployment and execution of knowledge-based CDSSs using Arden Syntax [30,31]. Data to and from the Arden Syntax server are communicated via web services or via a database connection module.In this section we discuss the backgrounds of the three systems addressed in this report. We discuss their medical backgrounds and setting, the reasons for their creation, and the history of their development.MONI-ICU, an acronym for MOnitoring of Nosocomial Infections in Intensive Care Units, is a clinical system for the detection and monitoring of healthcare-associated infections (HAIs), tailored to the intensive care (ICU) setting [32,33]. The system employs rules defined in the Hospital in Europe Link for Infection Control through Surveillance (HELICS) program [34] to automatically detect bloodstream infections, central venous catheter-related infections, pneumonia, and urinary tract infections.HAIs are infections contracted during a patient's stay in a healthcare facility or as a result of treatment in such a facility. HAIs may have severe consequences for a patient's health and recovery. More than 4 million people in Europe suffer from HAIs each year, resulting in almost 150,000 fatalities of which 37,000 are directly attributable to HAIs [35]. The HAI detection rules defined by HELICS specify the pathological conditions that need to be present for a particular HAI; the most common and threatening HAIs have been included in the list. The presence of these conditions can be determined with a variety tests and examinations, including the evaluation of clinical patient data as well as biochemical, microbiology and radiology examinations, depending on the location of the suspected infection.The development of the first MONI version started in 1995. It was intended to be a semi-automated system for the reduction of HAIs and HAI-related deaths by improving the quality of patient care and shortening the length of hospital stay [36]. Since then, the program has evolved into a service-oriented automated monitoring system that employs fuzzy logic to detect patients with an HAI, as well as patients who partially conform to the HELICS rules and might therefore be at higher risk of developing an infection in the near future or might relapse after a previous infection episode [37,38].TNM-CDS is a CDSS that classifies tumor stages of cutaneous melanoma (CM) according to the TNM classification of Malignant Tumours (TNM), which is a standardized and widely accepted cancer staging notation system. It informs oncologists as to whether a given pattern of tumor markers indicates a risk for an underlying metastatic event and thus supports the selection of treatment therapies. The development of the system was started in 2010. Its integration and clinical testing has been underway since early 2013.CM are regarded as one of the most lethal forms of skin cancer and known to be highly metastatic. In 2008 the incidence of CM in Germany and Austria ranged between 12 and 15/100,000 inhabitants, and has been steadily rising by about 7% per year [39]. CM are initially determined by performing a surgical biopsy, after which the tumors are classified according to the TNM classification system for CM published by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) [40,41]. T describes the size of the primary tumor and whether it has invaded adjoining tissue or not, N describes the involvement of lymph nodes in the vicinity of the tumor, and M describes distant metastasis. The TNM classification system partitions CM into different categories, thereby predicting the risk of distant metastasis.The goal was to create a knowledge-based expert system that functions within the clinical workflow and produces results comparable to the opinions of medical experts. This required the integration of several risk assessments into a single system; an interpretation of the TNM classification, a mortality risk assessment, and the interpretation of known tumor markers. To classify the TNM stage of a tumor, the system employs Breslow tumor thickness [42], ulceration, and the rate of mitosis. To estimate the risk of a metastatic event, the system analyzes the presence of well-known markers such as S100β, melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH).TacroDS is a CDSS that supports the selection and dose adaptation of the immunosuppressive agent tacrolimus. The system implements a model for the classification of specific patient groups. For each patient group it defines rules for regulating the dosage of tacrolimus.Patients who have received a kidney transplant are required to follow a regimen of immunosuppressive therapies. One drug frequently used for immunosuppression in kidney transplant patients is tacrolimus, a calcineurin inhibitor that inhibits cell-mediated and humoral immune responses. However, as the absorption rate for tacrolimus varies from patient to patient, therapeutic drug monitoring is necessary to avoid organ rejection or adverse events such as liver dysfunction, blurred vision, depression, sleep disorders, edema, cardiac toxicity, nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, or hyperglycemia [43,44]. Currently the immunosuppressant dosage is determined on the basis of the actual medication level and patient-specific factors, such as the immunological situation, time after transplant, rejection reactions, and laboratory data. However, since these factors are highly inter-related, it is difficult to estimate the effect of adaptation of the medication.The resulting system employs an algorithm based on patients with similar traits rather than individual patients. Based on these classes as well as individual patient data, patient distribution percentages are specified for increased, reduced or unchanged doses. For each option, intervals are specified for the expected tacrolimus level after the respective dose change.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
