@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comparative analysis of the density of the SNOMED CT conceptual content for semantic harmonization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We designed a structure-based algorithmic method to support semantic harmonization.We defined a set of topological patterns across pairs of terminologies that are of different density.We explored how these topological patterns appear for a subset of UMLS terminologies, focusing on SNOMED CT.A human expert evaluated the method with a random sample generated by the algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomedical terminology,Semantic interoperability,Semantic harmonization,Structural methodology,SNOMED CT,UMLS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesMedical terminologies vary in the amount of concept information (the “density”) represented, even in the same sub-domains. This causes problems in terminology mapping, semantic harmonization and terminology integration. Moreover, complex clinical scenarios need to be encoded by a medical terminology with comprehensive content. SNOMED Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT), a leading clinical terminology, was reported to lack concepts and synonyms, problems that cannot be fully alleviated by using post-coordination. Therefore, a scalable solution is needed to enrich the conceptual content of SNOMED CT. We are developing a structure-based, algorithmic method to identify potential concepts for enriching the conceptual content of SNOMED CT and to support semantic harmonization of SNOMED CT with selected other Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) terminologies.MethodsWe first identified a subset of English terminologies in the UMLS that have ‘PAR’ relationship labeled with ‘IS_A’ and over 10% overlap with one or more of the 19 hierarchies of SNOMED CT. We call these “reference terminologies” and we note that our use of this name is different from the standard use. Next, we defined a set of topological patterns across pairs of terminologies, with SNOMED CT being one terminology in each pair and the other being one of the reference terminologies. We then explored how often these topological patterns appear between SNOMED CT and each reference terminology, and how to interpret them.ResultsFour viable reference terminologies were identified. Large density differences between terminologies were found. Expected interpretations of these differences were indeed observed, as follows. A random sample of 299 instances of special topological patterns (“2:3 and 3:2 trapezoids”) showed that 39.1% and 59.5% of analyzed concepts in SNOMED CT and in a reference terminology, respectively, were deemed to be alternative classifications of the same conceptual content. In 30.5% and 17.6% of the cases, it was found that intermediate concepts could be imported into SNOMED CT or into the reference terminology, respectively, to enhance their conceptual content, if approved by a human curator. Other cases included synonymy and errors in one of the terminologies.ConclusionThese results show that structure-based algorithmic methods can be used to identify potential concepts to enrich SNOMED CT and the four reference terminologies. The comparative analysis has the future potential of supporting terminology authoring by suggesting new content to improve content coverage and semantic harmonization between terminologies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this analysis of 1:k and k:1 trapezoid topological patterns, path length ratios of up to 1:9 and 6:1 were observed, i.e., a parent in MEDCIN was separated in SNOMED CT from the MEDCIN child by a path of nine “PAR” relationships. Six “PAR” relationships were found in NCI between two concepts that are connected by one “PAR” relationship in SNOMED CT. SNOMED CT curators could consider importing intermediate concepts found in these trapezoids to improve its coverage. SNOMED CT itself could function as a source for exporting concepts to the four reference terminologies.In the analysis of 2:3 and 3:2 trapezoid topological patterns, 299 randomly selected cases were reviewed by a domain expert. It was shown that 39.1% and 59.5% of the intermediate concepts were deemed to be alternative classification in the 2:3 and 3:2 trapezoids, respectively. In 30.5% and 17.6% of the cases it was found that intermediate concepts could be imported into SNOMED CT and into reference terminologies, respectively, to enhance their conceptual content. This study contributes a structural method that has the potential to support semantic harmonization efforts.