@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An unsupervised feature learning framework for basal cell carcinoma image analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A framework for basal cell carcinoma detection based on unsupervised feature learning.Experimental results show an improvement when compared to state-of-the-art methods.The framework integrates a digital staining method which improves interpretability.Digital staining highlights regions in the image which the model relates to cancer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Digital pathology,Representation learning,Unsupervised feature learning,Basal cell carcinoma,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThe paper addresses the problem of automatic detection of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) in histopathology images. In particular, it proposes a framework to both, learn the image representation in an unsupervised way and visualize discriminative features supported by the learned model.Materials and methodsThis paper presents an integrated unsupervised feature learning (UFL) framework for histopathology image analysis that comprises three main stages: (1) local (patch) representation learning using different strategies (sparse autoencoders, reconstruct independent component analysis and topographic independent component analysis (TICA), (2) global (image) representation learning using a bag-of-features representation or a convolutional neural network, and (3) a visual interpretation layer to highlight the most discriminant regions detected by the model. The integrated unsupervised feature learning framework was exhaustively evaluated in a histopathology image dataset for BCC diagnosis.ResultsThe experimental evaluation produced a classification performance of 98.1%, in terms of the area under receiver-operating-characteristic curve, for the proposed framework outperforming by 7% the state-of-the-art discrete cosine transform patch-based representation.ConclusionsThe proposed UFL-representation-based approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods for BCC detection. Thanks to its visual interpretation layer, the method is able to highlight discriminative tissue regions providing a better diagnosis support. Among the different UFL strategies tested, TICA-learned features exhibited the best performance thanks to its ability to capture low-level invariances, which are inherent to the nature of the problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Digital pathology refers to the set of computational methods and technologies that support the different pathology workflow stages, including digital slide acquisition, computer aided diagnosis, prognosis and theragnosis [1]. The importance and popularity of digital pathology have rapidly grown during the last years thanks of the emergence of fast, cost-effective whole slide image acquisition systems. An important component of digital pathology is automatic image analysis, which is fundamental for tasks such as automatic tumor detection and grading [2]. Automatic image analysis encompasses different kinds of computer vision and pattern recognition problems associated with the detection, segmentation and classification of biological structures (pathological and non-pathological).The success of any histopathology image analysis method depends on how well it captures morphological and architectural characteristics from nuclei, cells, glands, organs and tissues. In turn this depends on how well the method characterizes the visual content of the histopathology image. This characterization is accomplished by a feature extraction process which typically uses canonical (e.g. wavelet transforms) or hand-engineered features (e.g. SIFT). Different visual features have been proposed and extensively evaluated in different histopathology image analysis problems: (1) object level features to characterize biological structures, e.g. size and shape, radiometric and densitometric, texture, chromatin-specific; (2) spatially related features to represent the architectural arrangement of cells or other structures, usually derived from graph-based representations and descriptors, e.g. Voronoi tessellation, Delaunay triangulation, minimum spanning graph, connected graph, relative neighbor graph and others [2,3]; (3) multi-scale feature extraction algorithms, e.g. multi-resolution, pyramid and hierarchical representation of images among others [2,3]. Mostly, feature choice is handmade and based on the particularities of the problem at hand. However, recent investigations in computer vision suggests that strategies which learn the image representation directly, and automatically, from image collections may produce better representations resulting in better performance of automatic analysis algorithms [4]. This approach, known as unsupervised feature learning (UFL), has been applied to different computer vision and pattern recognition problems with great success [5].This paper explores the application of UFL strategies to the representation and automatic analysis of histopathology images. In particular, the paper presents a framework for basal cell carcinoma (BCC) image analysis which is able to learn an appropriate representation from a representative set of images for automatic carcinoma detection. The experimental evaluation shows that the proposed framework outperforms state-of-the-art BCC histopathology image representation and classification methods. The main contributions of this work are:•a novel hybrid method combining the state-of-the-art visual representations and learning techniques to integrate UFL in a complete data-driven approach;a strategy to endow the classification method with a visual interpretation layer, which exploits both the hierarchical representation of the model, to highlight those regions of the image that contribute to a higher degree to the model prediction, and the topographic organization of the learned representation, to identify visual patterns associated with tumor and non-tumor images; anda systematic evaluation of different UFL strategies on BCC histopathology images, which shows that, in this particular problem, learned features outperform state-of-the-art canonical representations.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 makes a review of the relevant literature, Section 3 describes the unified unsupervised learning framework for BCC histopathology image representation and analysis; Section 4 presents the results of experimental evaluation for BCC detection. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presented a novel UFL framework for BCC detection, which was systematically evaluated. This framework integrated UFL, supervised learning and visual interpretability for histopathology image analysis. A comprehensive evaluation of different UFL strategies for the new framework was performed on BCC histopathology images. The evaluation shows that, in this particular problem, learned features outperform state-of-the-art canonical representations.Feature learning for histopathology image representation is entirely performed in an unsupervised way allowing to discover discriminant patterns in the collection without using prior knowledge from pathologists or hand-engineered features. Consistently discovered patterns are related to visual appearance of tumoral cells or nuclei. However these patterns could be confused with cell proliferation patterns in healthy tissues. Others remarkable findings were that learned features by the model provide translation, rotation, scaling and color invariances, which are desirable properties for this kind of images given their visual particularities produced by different cell arrangement, types of cuts, acquisition, staining and digitalization processes.The best results were obtained using stacked architectures. This yields hierarchical features which simulate brain's visual cortex by building primitive structures like edges, and then building more complex shapes like corners. These higher-level features improved classification performance in all methods.The proposed framework was evaluated in a supervised learning task to distinguish between cancer and non-cancer tissues in a BCC dataset. The framework outperformed the canonical state-of-the-art representation by 7% in terms of AUC achieving the best results by TICA combined layers obtaining 98.1% in test set.The final stage of the framework includes a noteworthy visualization model to highlight tissue regions that the model finds to be related to the appearance of cancerous tissue, working like a digital staining. This novel technique showed that a trained feature learning model can provide a visual interpretability layer which is able to explain the automatic classification decision by detecting and highlighting textures and discriminant visual structures over the image. Indeed, these resultant salient maps of digital staining are potentially useful to be used as image-based biomarkers, a valuable tool for pathologist diagnosis support and cancer research.Future work includes further evaluation using deeper architectures, supervised feature learning and other types of cancer images using larger whole-slide image collections.