@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Outcome quality assessment by surgical process compliance measures in laparoscopic surgery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assess the relation of processes and outcome quality for surgical processes.The assessment is performed on 450 training tasks in laparoscopic surgery.There is a strong correlation between best practice processes and training outcome.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Workflow [L01.906.893],Computer-assisted surgery [E02.950.875],Surgical process model,Distance measures,Quality of outcome,Best practice,Process benchmarking,Process compliance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThe effective and efficient assessment, management, and evolution of surgical processes are intrinsic to excellent patient care. Hence, in addition to economic interests, the quality of the outcome is of great importance. Process benchmarking examines the compliance of an intraoperative surgical process to another process that is considered as best practice. The objective of this work is to assess the relationship between the course and the outcome of surgical processes of the study.Materials and methodsBy assessing 450 skill practices on rapid prototyping models in minimally invasive surgery training, we extracted descriptions of surgical processes and examined the hypothesis that a significant relationship exists between the course of a surgical process and the quality of its outcome.ResultsThe results showed a significant correlation with Person correlation coefficients >0.05 between the quality of process outcome and process compliance for simple and complex suturing tasks in the study.ConclusionsWe conclude that high process compliance supports good quality outcomes and, therefore, excellent patient care. We also showed that a deviation from best training processes led to a decreased outcome quality. This is relevant for identifying requirements for surgical processes, for generating feedback for the surgeon with regard to human factors and for inducing changes in the workflow in order to improve the outcome quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The development of the digital operating room is an ever-progressing topic [1,2], and the complexity of the systems and the concomitant challenges posed to surgeons and other medical and technical staff are rapidly increasing. To cope with these growing demands and to develop new and sensible systems, it is indispensable to assess, manage, and evolve the surgical processes that are intrinsic to patient care.Within the management of surgical processes, in addition to economic interests, the outcome quality is of great importance. By means of evaluating key performance indicators, the outcome quality can be determined. Postoperative pain, patient satisfaction and length of stay are some of these key performance indicators [3,4].To improve the outcome quality, standards and recommendations for performing surgical processes were developed [3,5]. Compliance with these standards is controlled by quality assurance measures. Process benchmarking to compare processes with the best-known processes, the best practices allow for quality improvements to be made [6].The outcome quality is considered to be good if the process conforms to the standards, whereas deviation from the standards leads to decreased quality. Analysis of this common sense relationship for surgical process standards is the subject matter of this work.Three main components were identified by Donabedian for evaluating the quality of medical care [3]: the quality of outcomes, the assessment of the examination of the care process itself and the setting in which the medical care takes place. Furthermore, he assessed all the fundamental principles of evaluating this matter, including data sources and data collection, empirical evidence, normative standards and measurement scales, and thereby pointed out the manifold problem areas that exist within the evaluation of the quality of medical care. One key issue of this work is the analysis of the correlation between the course of a surgical process and the outcome of the process. Hence, two of the three components identified by Donabedian will be directly interrelated.The correlation between the distance measurements of surgical processes and the outcome quality allows for analysis of the following hypothesis: surgical processes that are at a greater distance from the best surgical process will lead to worse training outcomes.Hammermeister et al. concluded that if all three elements of Donabedian's quality triad (processes, structures and outcomes) are used, then the improvement in outcome quality proceeds most efficiently and effectively [4]. The strengths and weaknesses of outcome-directed assessments and improvements to the quality of care were reviewed. Furthermore, a summary of the current knowledge of the linkages between outcomes and the processes and structures of care was given. In most reports, no details regarding these processes have been described. The relationships between processes of care and outcomes have only been reported regarding patient analysis.Several authors have applied these measures to hospital business processes, in order to systematically improve hospital business processes [5], to relate process compliance with patient risk factors [7], or to improve quality management methods [8]. Furthermore, Schmutz and Manser [9] conducted a literature review to examine the impact of team process behaviors, including coordination, leadership, and communication, on clinical performance. They found strong effects indicating that team processes significantly influence clinical performance in most studies.Within surgery research, there are many authors who have compared different surgical methods to the quality of outcome. These authors used technical methods, such as Mehndiratta et al. [10], who used a color-coded versus gray-scale DCE-MR imaging display, as well as clinical methods, such as Baccari et al. [11], who evaluated the outcome after laparoscopic repair of large incisional hernias. Teoh et al. [12] assessed several outcome measurements of a double-blinded, randomized, controlled trial of laparoscopic single-site access versus conventional 3-port appendectomy. Theodosopoulos et al. [13] analyzed surgical outcomes of 5000 neurosurgical procedures in a prospective study; the outcomes for neurosurgical treatments were reported based on point-of-care interactions recorded in the electronic medical record.Nøhr [14] reviewed ten evaluation studies to investigate the extent to which these studies reflect the structure, process, and outcome of the conceptual framework. It was found that all of the evaluation studies focused on structure measures. Nøhr stated that evaluation studies must strive to also evaluate process and outcomes measures in order to create adequate computer programs to support medical decision-making.In summary, the outcome quality in surgery and medical care is a very important research topic. Some authors have focused on processes or methods, while others have focused on the outcomes themselves. There are a few studies that related the flow and the outcome of processes; these studies, however, assessed this relationship on a qualitative level. To the best of our knowledge, there is no publication in the medical field that has assessed this relationship on a quantitative level. In this paper, we quantitatively assessed the relationship between the workflow and the outcome of surgical processes, resting upon data recorded in a mockup scenario. Furthermore, the workflow-analysis was based not just on some of the key points, but rather comprises all performed steps of work at a high level of granularity.In Section 2, the study setup, clinical datasets, and distance measurements (Levenshtein distance and Adjacency distance) are introduced. The results of the correlation analysis for the selected surgical tasks are depicted in Section 3. Finally, the results are discussed, and an outlook for future work is provided in the discussion.The data sets consisted of surgical cases obtained during surgical training sessions in the context of pediatric surgery. The surgical processes were obtained by observation during training sessions in minimally invasive surgery in the Department of Pediatric Surgery of the University Medical Center Leipzig in 2011. Observation was supported by a software tool called the surgical workflow editor, which was validated in previous studies and showed a data acquisition accuracy of greater than 90% [15].The main work steps for acquisition, preprocessing, and analysis of the data are shown in Table 1.Surgical processes consist of surgical activities and can be modeled by means of formal and structured languages [16]. Thus, surgical process models (SPMs) are an abstract concept used to represent surgical processes analogous to business processes. SPMs are used to study, analyze, and optimize surgical processes, as well as to evaluate technical support systems in the operating room [17]. The aggregate of all work steps in a single surgical case (one patient or one surgical session within a training system) is referred to as an individual surgical process model (iSPM) [18]. Each activity in an iSPM is associated with a surgical work step in the underlying surgical process.In each training session, members of two subject groups, one consisting of five novices and the other of five expert surgeons, each performed three different tasks (cutting, simple suturing, and complex suturing) by applying different surgical strategies. A sequence of work steps was required in order for a task to be performed. A Pelvitrainer [19], which represented the abdomen, and silicone manikins, on which several tasks were performed, was used (see Fig. 1). The surgical strategy variations involved applying different instrument types and incision points: single incision with angled laparoscopic instruments, triple incision with straight laparoscopic instruments, and triple incision with angled laparoscopic instruments. The subjects repeated each task and each incision/instrument combination five times. Thus, the evaluation data set contained 450 iSPMs and a total of approximately 28,600 activities.The work steps of the 450 training sessions were recorded using the ICCAS surgical workflow editor [20] and contained a high level of information. Decomposition of the surgical processes into single surgical motions followed the hierarchical decomposition approach of MacKenzie et al. [21,22].The quality of the task results was reviewed in a blinded manner. Four experts marked the results independently from each other. They did not know either the setting or the level of experience of the executing subject. Grades from 1 (very good) to 5 (very bad) were given. The degree of achievement of the objectives (e.g. only 3 of 4 stitches achieved) and the accuracy of the result (e.g. exact cutting) were marked. The average of the four marks became the quality of the result of a single surgical process, providing an objective assessment of the process outcome.In the field of business science, process benchmarking is an ongoing, systematic, and purposeful method used to compare one's own processes with the processes of other companies. The best solution, referred to as the best practice, is used as a reference for achieving superior performance [23]. A process is called best practice when it is best from a contextual sense, such as for patients or the community [6].In surgery, the best practice is the surgical process that is renowned as the best procedure to achieve a given therapy goal. In our study, the method for producing a high-quality outcome was studied. Therefore, for each setting, the surgical process with the highest quality outcome was chosen as the best practice.Process benchmarking was used to examine the compliance of a surgical process with the best practice process. Measuring the compliance of a process to another is the same as measuring the distance between them. The distance between two processes is defined as the quantitative difference between the courses of the activities. Varieties in the frequency and sequence of the performed work steps caused increases in distances.Previous work [24] identified the Levenshtein and Adjacency distances as the most suitable measures for distances between surgical processes. The distance measurements quantify the variance of the course of action.The Levenshtein distance [25] is often referred to as the string edit distance. The basis for calculation is the minimal number of the edit operations insert, delete, and substitute applied to work steps that are needed to transform one surgical process into another.The editing operations and their order of succession are not definite, and there are various possibilities for transforming one surgical process into another. The Levenshtein distance dLmeasures the minimal number of such operations performed to transform surgical process X1 into surgical process X2:(1)d12L=min+0if similar+1if insertion+1if deletion+1if substitutionThe basis for the calculation of the Levenshtein distance thus comprises not only the number of activities, but also their order in the surgical process. For more explanation of the metrics applied in this work, refer to [24].Adjacency matrices are neighborhood matrices in the sense that they depict the consecutiveness of elements of a process or graph [26]. Concerning a surgical process, this matrix is constructed from all possible work steps of an intervention.For a given surgical process X1, each element of the matrix represents the frequency Cmkof each different pair of consecutive work steps. For a comparison of the two surgical processes X1 and X1, the Adjacency matrices MX1 and MX2 are constructed. For calculation of the Adjacency distance, the Euclidian distance of the two matrices MX1 and MX2 is calculated using(2)d12A=(s11−t11)2+⋯+(sMM−tMM)2,smk=CmklnX1andtmk=CmklnX2.Thus, transitions between activities and their frequency form the basis for the calculation of the Adjacency distance.These two distance measurements were applied to the compliance analysis between the best practice and all other surgical processes in each setting.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
