@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Thirty years of artificial intelligence in medicine (AIME) conferences: A review of research themes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fifteen Artificial Intelligence in MEdicine (AIME) conferences have been organized over the last 30 years.We review the main research themes and investigate their scientific impact.Knowledge engeering for medical expert systems dominated the first decade of AIME, while machine learning and data mining prevailed thereafter.The work on guidelines and protocols has been highly cited, followed by temporal information management and machine learning/data mining.Promising directions for future research are Big Data, personalized medicine, Evidence Based Medicine, business process modeling, process mining and NLP in social media.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine,Literature review,History of science,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundOver the past 30 years, the international conference on Artificial Intelligence in MEdicine (AIME) has been organized at different venues across Europe every 2 years, establishing a forum for scientific exchange and creating an active research community. The Artificial Intelligence in Medicine journal has published theme issues with extended versions of selected AIME papers since 1998.ObjectivesTo review the history of AIME conferences, investigate its impact on the wider research field, and identify challenges for its future.MethodsWe analyzed a total of 122 session titles to create a taxonomy of research themes and topics. We classified all 734 AIME conference papers published between 1985 and 2013 with this taxonomy. We also analyzed the citations to these conference papers and to 55 special issue papers.ResultsWe identified 30 research topics across 12 themes. AIME was dominated by knowledge engineering research in its first decade, while machine learning and data mining prevailed thereafter. Together these two themes have contributed about 51% of all papers. There have been eight AIME papers that were cited at least 10 times per year since their publication.ConclusionsThere has been a major shift from knowledge-based to data-driven methods while the interest for other research themes such as uncertainty management, image and signal processing, and natural language processing has been stable since the early 1990s. AIME papers relating to guidelines and protocols are among the most highly cited.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In September 1985, Ivo de Lotto and Mario Stefanelli organized a 2-day conference on Artificial Intelligence (AI) in medicine at the University of Pavia in Italy [1]. The idea was to bring together researchers working in this field, that had emerged in the early 1970s and that sits at the crossroads of AI, Computer Science, Medicine and Biology. By the close of the meeting, the participants agreed that they clearly shared a common interest and that it would be valuable to organize similar meetings in the future. Subsequent, biennial meetings were organized in different European cities, as detailed in Table 1.Initially, the name “Artificial Intelligence in Medicine Europe” was adopted but later changed into “Artificial Intelligence in MEdicine”; the acronym “AIME” has remained. Since 1998, the Artificial Intelligence in Medicine journal has been connected to the AIME conference by publishing a series of eight special issues with extended versions of selected AIME papers, thus opening a selection of work presented at the conference to a wider audience.Throughout the years, AIME has established itself as a meeting that focuses on methods and techniques from computer science and artificial intelligence, but with a strong attention to applications in biomedicine and healthcare. Accordingly, papers in AIME conferences are selected by methodological rigour, originality of the proposed solutions, and to their effectiveness in addressing biomedical and healthcare problems. This distinguishes AIME from general AI conferences, (e.g., the Association for the Advancement of AI [AAAI] conferences, International Joint Conferences on AI [IJCAI], European Conference on AI [ECAI]), biomedical engineering conferences (e.g., IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society) and medical informatics conferences (e.g., Medinfo, American Medical Informatics Association [AMIA] Annual Symposium). As a result, AIME is also smaller than these more general conferences (usually around 125–150 attendants), and is comparable to other technically-oriented conferences such as the IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics and the Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health Informatics from the Association for Computing Machinery.The three decades that have passed since the inception of AIME have witnessed major changes to biomedicine and healthcare and revolutionary developments in information technology. Evidence based medicine and clinical practice guidelines have become leading paradigms for clinical decision making, and the growing incidence of chronic illness and the rising costs of healthcare have been identified as primary challenges for the healthcare system. Technological developments have brought us computers that are many times smaller, faster, equipped with more storage capacity, and more connected to each other than 30 years ago, while high-throughput sequencing techniques have created unprecedented opportunities for collecting biological information. These changes are reflected by the research themes that have been addressed at AIME conferences over the years. Most presentations at the 1985 meeting focused on knowledge engineering for expert systems and other forms of computerized clinical decision support, and on qualitative modeling and reasoning in physiological systems, while these themes have received little attention during the last decade. Instead, guidelines and protocols, machine learning, semantic technology and bioinformatics have become prominent themes in recent editions of the conference.The 30th anniversary of AIME provides the opportunity to look back at the history of the conference and assess how research themes have changes and emerged over time, and what their scientific impact has been. Therefore we studied the history of AIME, with the following objectives:•to identify the main research themes that have been addressed at AIME conferences, as well as their evolution over the years andto assess the scientific impact of these research themes, measured by the number of citations to papers associated with the themes.To this end, we first conducted a qualitative analysis of research themes and topics covered by the AIME proceedings 1985–2013, by categorizing all published papers in these proceedings using a combination of established taxonomies and bottom-up classification. Then, we performed a bibliographic analysis of papers published in the conference proceedings and in the series of special issues of the Artificial Intelligence in Medicine journal. Finally, based on the results of the two previous phases and our own experience in the field, we identified research challenges and promising research areas for the future of AIME.As the analysis focused on AIME papers and on related special issue papers published in this journal, this survey is limited in scope and deliberately focused. A comprehensive survey of the entire field is beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, we believe that much of the developments that have occurred within the AIME conferences are representative for the wider AI in medicine field, and therefore our work provides insights that reach beyond the AIME conference itself.This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe the qualitative and bibliographic analysis methods that were used in this review in more detail. Section 3 presents the results of the analysis using twelve broad research themes that have been covered at AIME conferences through the years, and describes the results of the bibliographic analysis by discussing the 25 most influential papers that have been published in AIME proceedings or in one of the affiliated special issues. In Section 4, we address limitations of our analysis and reflect on future challenges and opportunities for the field. The paper ends with a conclusion in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we reviewed 30 years of research in AI in Medicine through an analysis of research themes in AIME conferences, and an assessment of their scientific impact. Over these three decades, there has been a major shift from knowledge-based to data-driven methods. Within AIME, the interest for other research themes such as uncertainty management, image and signal processing, and natural language processing has been stable since the early 1990s. In terms of citations, the largest impact of AIME publications has been in guidelines and protocols, followed by temporal information management, and machine learning and data mining. Promising directions for future research are Big Data and personalized medicine, Evidence Based Medicine, business process modeling and process mining and NLP in social media.AIME 2011Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume 57, Issue 2 (February 2013)Edited by M. Peleg and C. Combi.AIME 2009Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume 52, Issue 2 (June 2011)Edited by Y. Shahar and C. Combi.AIME 2007Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume 46, Issue 1 (May 2009)Edited by R. Bellazzi and A. Abu-HannaAIME 2005Artificial Intelligence in Medicine Volume 39, Issue 2 (February 2007)Edited by S Miksch, J Hunter, and E KeravnouAIME 2003Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume 34, Issue 1 (May 2005)Edited by M. Dojat and E. KeravnouAIME 2001Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume 29, Issues 1–2 (September–October 2003)Edited by S. QuagliniAIMDM ‘99Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume 20, Issue 1 (September 2000)Edited by W. HornAIME ‘97Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume 14, Issues 1–2 (September–October 1998)Edited by E. Keravnou