@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intra-axiom redundancies in SNOMED CT

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a method to automatically detect intra-axiom redundancies.In SNOMED CT, intra-axiom redundancies are continuously introduced and removed.In SNOMED CT, a consistent proportion of about 12 overlooked redundancies may result in suboptimal maintenance.Redundancy detection and elimination should be part of terminology maintenance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automated auditing method,Intra-axiom redundancies,OWL 2 EL,Clinical terminology,SNOMED CT,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveIntra-axiom redundancies are elements of concept definitions that are redundant as they are entailed by other elements of the concept definition. While such redundancies are harmless from a logical point of view, they make concept definitions hard to maintain, and they might lead to content-related problems when concepts evolve. The objective of this study is to develop a fully automated method to detect intra-axiom redundancies in OWL 2 EL and apply it to SNOMED Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT).Materials and methodsWe developed a software program in which we implemented, adapted and extended readily existing rules for redundancy elimination. With this, we analysed occurence of redundancy in 11 releases of SNOMED CT (January 2009 to January 2014). We used the ELK reasoner to classify SNOMED CT, and Pellet for explanation of equivalence. We analysed the completeness and soundness of the results by an in-depth examination of the identified redundant elements in the July 2012 release of SNOMED CT. To determine if concepts with redundant elements lead to maintenance issues, we analysed a small sample of solved redundancies.ResultsAnalyses showed that the amount of redundantly defined concepts in SNOMED CT is consistently around 35,000. In the July 2012 version of SNOMED CT, 35,010 (12%) of the 296,433 concepts contained redundant elements in their definitions. The results of applying our method are sound and complete with respect to our evaluation. Analysis of solved redundancies suggests that redundancies in concept definitions lead to inadequate maintenance of SNOMED CT.ConclusionsOur analysis revealed that redundant elements are continuously introduced and removed, and that redundant elements may be overlooked when concept definitions are corrected. Applying our redundancy detection method to remove intra-axiom redundancies from the stated form of SNOMED CT and to point knowledge modellers to newly introduced redundancies can support creating and maintaining a redundancy-free version of SNOMED CT.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
SNOMED Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) allows for meaning-based recording and retrieval of clinical information, which thereby becomes (re)usable. One of the advantages of SNOMED CT is its large size and coverage, which on the other hand makes defining new and maintaining existing concepts a challenging task.Spackman [1] indicated back in 2001 that concept modellers have been uncertain about which elements are inherited from supertypes and therefore do not have to be added explicitly to a concept definition. Such intra-axiom redundancies, i.e. elements that are already entailed by other elements of the concept definition, are harmless from a logical point of view. However, they impede the maintainability of a terminology [2,3], as they misleadingly suggest that new, meaningful information has been added to a concept.Moreover, redundant elements might lead to content-related problems when concepts evolve. For example, the rolegroup in the subconcept Thyroid uptake with thyroid stimulation was redundant in the July 2012 version of SNOMED CT, as it repeated a rolegroup already contained in the definition of the superconcept Non-imaging thyroid uptake test, see Example 1.1. In the subsequent version of SNOMED CT, the method Radionuclide imagingwas removed from the rolegroup in the superconcept, which makes sense for a concept with the nameNon-imaging thyroid uptake test. However, the method was not removed from the rolegroup in the subconcept, as shown in Example 1.2, which is apparently incorrect. In this paper, we inventory redundant elements in SNOMED CT concept definitions.Example 1.1Two concept definitions in the July 2012 version of SNOMED CT. The definition of Thyroid uptake with thyroid stimulation contains a redundant element, the rolegroup (RG).Example 1.2Definitions of the concepts from Example 1.1 in the January 2013 version of SNOMED CT. The definition of Non-imaging thyroid uptake test has been corrected, but the previously redundant rolegroup is left unchanged.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our results show that 35,010 (12%) of all 296,433 SNOMED CT concepts of the July 2012 version were defined redundantly. These redundancies unnecessarily impede the work of concept modellers, and ultimately the quality of a terminology. Redundant elements in concept definitions are introduced and solved in comparable amounts in all versions of SNOMED CT between January 2009 and January 2014. On average, about three quarters of the introduced redundancies are caused by changes in definitions of existing concepts, rather than by creating new concepts. This indicates that redundancy is easily overlooked and hard to detect. Our own experience confirms that manual search for the causes of redundancies can be a tedious task. Therefore, we suggest to remove them from the stated relationships. To reach this goal, the four rules of redundancy detection would have to be applied once to SNOMED CT in its entirety.44It should be noted that applying the four rules of redundancy detection to the entire SNOMED CT is computationally feasible but not in an interactive environment (about 6h on a laptop equipped with a 2.8GHz Intel Core 2 Duo processor and 8 GB of physical memory). However, analysing only one concept is sufficiently fast to be executed as a background process.Further redundancies should be avoided by pointing concept modellers to newly introduced redundancies in the definitions of the concepts they are currently working on, and explaining why these elements are redundant. As shown in Fig. 2, redundancy is generally caused by nearby superconcepts, so that the explanations will most probably be intuitive. For this task, the four rules of redundancy detection could be applied as a background process of terminology editing tools to the concepts that are currently being edited. In order to support these goals, we make both our tools and our results freely available.55https://github.com/kathrinrin/redundancies (Accessed: 1 October 2014).