@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of a two-stage fuzzy neural network to a prostate cancer prognosis system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose a two-stage fuzzy neural network (FNN) for prediction.The results for three benchmark functions show that the proposed FNN has better performance.The proposed algorithm is applied to prostate cancer prognosis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimization version of an artificial immune network,Particle swarm optimization algorithm,Fuzzy neural network,Prostate cancer,Prognosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThis study intends to develop a two-stage fuzzy neural network (FNN) for prognoses of prostate cancer.MethodsDue to the difficulty of making prognoses of prostate cancer, this study proposes a two-stage FNN for prediction. The initial membership function parameters of FNN are determined by cluster analysis. Then, an integration of the optimization version of an artificial immune network (Opt-aiNET) and a particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm is developed to investigate the relationship between the inputs and outputs.ResultsThe evaluation results for three benchmark functions show that the proposed two-stage FNN has better performance than the other algorithms. In addition, model evaluation results indicate that the proposed algorithm really can predict prognoses of prostate cancer more accurately.ConclusionsThe proposed two-stage FNN is able to learn the relationship between the clinical features and the prognosis of prostate cancer. Once the clinical data are known, the prognosis of prostate cancer patient can be predicted. Furthermore, unlike artificial neural networks, it is much easier to interpret the training results of the proposed network since they are in the form of fuzzy IF–THEN rules. These rules are very important for medical doctors. This can dramatically assist medical doctors to make decisions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Prostate cancer is one of the most common causes of death for men in most industrialized countries [1]. Many studies have considered the introduction of diagnoses for prostate cancer, but few studies have aimed at prognoses for the prostate. Other studies have evaluated the use of artificial neural networks (ANNs) to increase prostate cancer detection rates and reduce unnecessary biopsies [2] and used a neuro-fuzzy system based on both serum data (total prostate-specific antigen; tPSA, percent free PSA; %fPSA), and clinical data (age) to enhance the performance of tPSA in discriminating prostate cancer [3]. However, none of these studies have discussed prognoses of prostate cancer. In Taiwan, the rates of morbidity and mortality of prostate cancer have been rising in recent years. Patients often wonder how much time they have left and how serious their disease is. Doctors can only point to a five-year survival rate ratio depending on patients’ clinical data. Therefore, this study intends to build a prognosis system for prostate cancer to estimate how many years patients have remaining, not just classify patients into two categories (those who can survive more than five years and those who cannot).Nowadays, many business decisions are made based on the results of data analysis. Another important application area of this type of analysis is in medical diagnoses. Models obtained from data analysis that are applied in practice require transparency and interpretability in terms of the attributes they process. Only then can the user can understand what the results mean easily. Thus, employing appropriate algorithms to build a prognosis system is a very important issue. This kind of algorithm can enable more accurate prediction of prostate cancer prognoses and translate the results of the proposed scheme into comprehensible information for users, or doctors.In view of the excellent performance of artificial immune systems (AIS) in many fields [4], this study proposes a novel two-stage FNN and applies it to prostate cancer prognoses. The proposed approach includes the following steps: (1) cluster the features and get the initial means and variances of FNN and (2) integrate Opt-aiNET and PSO-based FNN (IOAP-FNN) to forecast the prognoses of prostate cancer patients. The solution is first found through Opt-aiNET due to its good searching capability and then fine-tuned by using PSO. Since the proposed algorithm combines both the advantages of Opt-aiNET and PSO, it has good searching capability, avoids getting stuck to the local optimal solutions and is able to converge rapidly. Unlike an artificial neural network, it is much easier to interpret the training results when using the fuzzy neural network since they are in the form of fuzzy IF–THEN rules.In order to verify the proposed FNN, three benchmark functions are first employed. Then, the proposed network is further applied to prostate cancer data in order to build a prognosis system for medical doctors who can use these results to improve the diagnoses of prostate cancer patients.The remainder of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a review of the related literatures. Section 3 presents the proposed prognosis system which employs two-stage FNN, while the simulation results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 presents the model evaluation results for the prostate cancer prognosis system. Discussions and concluding remarks are finally made in Sections 6 and 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study has presented a novel two-stage FNN for a prostate cancer prognosis system. The proposed two-stage FNN can learn the relationship between the clinical features of prostate cancer and the prognosis of prostate cancer. Its performance is better than those of other soft computing-based techniques including AIS, GA, PSO and Opt-aiNET. The two-stage FNN results, which are in the form of fuzzy IF–THEN rules, can be easily interpreted. Once the clinical data are known, the prognosis of prostate cancer patient can be forecasted, thus providing doctors with a different way to make prognoses.In the future, other soft computing techniques might be integrated into the heuristics in order to provide better estimation. Rule pruning might also be considered. In addition, increasing the amount of data model evaluation might increase the accuracy of the prognosis of prostate cancer. Since it is quite difficult to collect prostate cancer cases, it might be feasible to combine different hospitals’ prostate cancer cases together for the current study.