@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Information extraction from multi-institutional radiology reports

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We described an information extraction system for radiology report narrative.The system finds clinically significant concepts according to an information model.Our evaluation showed the effectiveness and generalizability of our approach.CMM and CRF named-entity recognition models are equally effective in our system.Our machine learning system outperforms the commonly used dictionary-based approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing,Information extraction,Discriminative sequence classifier,Radiology report narrative,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesThe radiology report is the most important source of clinical imaging information. It documents critical information about the patient's health and the radiologist's interpretation of medical findings. It also communicates information to the referring physicians and records that information for future clinical and research use. Although efforts to structure some radiology report information through predefined templates are beginning to bear fruit, a large portion of radiology report information is entered in free text. The free text format is a major obstacle for rapid extraction and subsequent use of information by clinicians, researchers, and healthcare information systems. This difficulty is due to the ambiguity and subtlety of natural language, complexity of described images, and variations among different radiologists and healthcare organizations. As a result, radiology reports are used only once by the clinician who ordered the study and rarely are used again for research and data mining. In this work, machine learning techniques and a large multi-institutional radiology report repository are used to extract the semantics of the radiology report and overcome the barriers to the re-use of radiology report information in clinical research and other healthcare applications.Material and methodsWe describe a machine learning system to annotate radiology reports and extract report contents according to an information model. This information model covers the majority of clinically significant contents in radiology reports and is applicable to a wide variety of radiology study types. Our automated approach uses discriminative sequence classifiers for named-entity recognition to extract and organize clinically significant terms and phrases consistent with the information model. We evaluated our information extraction system on 150 radiology reports from three major healthcare organizations and compared its results to a commonly used non-machine learning information extraction method. We also evaluated the generalizability of our approach across different organizations by training and testing our system on data from different organizations.ResultsOur results show the efficacy of our machine learning approach in extracting the information model's elements (10-fold cross-validation average performance: precision: 87%, recall: 84%, F1 score: 85%) and its superiority and generalizability compared to the common non-machine learning approach (p-value<0.05).ConclusionsOur machine learning information extraction approach provides an effective automatic method to annotate and extract clinically significant information from a large collection of free text radiology reports. This information extraction system can help clinicians better understand the radiology reports and prioritize their review process. In addition, the extracted information can be used by researchers to link radiology reports to information from other data sources such as electronic health records and the patient's genome. Extracted information also can facilitate disease surveillance, real-time clinical decision support for the radiologist, and content-based image retrieval.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Radiology report narrative encompasses critical information about many body parts and health conditions and is a major component of the evidence for clinical diagnosis and disease treatment. In addition, radiology reports provide a rich source of information for disease surveillance, information retrieval, and clinical decision support. However, the free text format of radiology reports and the complexity of natural language make it difficult to extract and re-use report information for clinical care and biomedical research.Despite this complexity, radiology report narrative mostly follows a common information model consisting of specific semantic elements, such as uncertainty, anatomy, observations, and their modifiers [1]. These common elements capture the essence of report semantics and summarize report information content. Using this information model as a framework for information extraction provides structured details for clinical and research applications and could be generalizable to a wide variety of radiology studies and healthcare organizations. However, identifying and extracting these information model elements is a challenging task due to the ambiguity and subtlety of natural language, the complexity of the described images, and the stylistic variations among radiologists and healthcare organizations.In this paper, we first present an imaging report information model from an earlier radiology reporting system [1] that defines and summarizes the information content of a radiology report. This information model covers the majority of clinically significant information in radiology reports and is applicable to a wide variety of diagnostic radiology study types. Then we propose an automatic natural language processing (NLP) system to extract clinically significant concepts from the radiology report according to this information model. This system uses a named-entity recognition sequence classifier to identify the information model elements and extract them from the reports. Our approach is applied and evaluated on de-identified radiology reports from three major healthcare organizations: Mayo Clinic (Mayo), MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDA), and Medical College of Wisconsin (MCW).The main contribution of our work is using existing machine learning techniques to build an information extraction system that can accurately identify significant terms and phrases in radiology reports according to a radiology-specific information model. Our information extraction system yields structured data from the radiology report to link with other clinical and genomic data sources for translational research, information retrieval, disease surveillance, and clinical decision support. The structured data extracted from the radiology report can also improve search of imaging reports for healthcare monitoring and help clinicians and researchers review and understand the reports.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We described a machine learning information extraction system to extract clinically significant concepts from radiology reports according to a published information model. This information model covers the majority of clinically significant information contained in radiology reports and is applicable across organizations. We investigated two machine learning methods, CMM and CRF, and a commonly used dictionary-based method as baseline for named-entity recognition in our system. We evaluated our methods using a data set containing 150 manually annotated radiology reports from three major healthcare organizations. The machine learning information extraction system performed equally effectively with both CMM and CRF named-entity recognition methods (average F1 score: 85%). Our results showed the strength and generalizability of our machine learning approach compared to the dictionary-based approach.The extracted information from radiology reports can be used to link radiology report information to the patient's electronic health record or to genomic data. The same results can enable clinicians to prioritize the report review process and to rapidly identify reports that need further follow up. The extracted report information can facilitate automated identification of patients for clinical trials based on imaging features, accelerate disease surveillance, and enable real-time clinical decision support systems for radiologists. In addition, by attaching the extracted concepts to the images themselves, content-based image retrieval becomes possible. Therefore, the described information extraction system provides substantial utility to support biomedical research and clinical practice.