@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transductive domain adaptive learning for epileptic electroencephalogram recognition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Epileptic EEG detection usually assumes same training and test data distribution.Transfer learning is used to deal with data of different distributions.The proposed algorithm has higher accuracy and stronger adaptability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transfer learning,Wavelet packet decomposition,Short time Fourier transform,Kernel principal component analysis,Electroencephalogram,Epilepsy detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveIntelligent recognition of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals is an important means for epilepsy detection. Almost all conventional intelligent recognition methods assume that the training and testing data of EEG signals have identical distribution. However, this assumption may indeed be invalid for practical applications due to differences in distributions between the training and testing data, making the conventional epilepsy detection algorithms not feasible under such situations. In order to overcome this problem, we proposed a transfer-learning-based intelligent recognition method for epilepsy detection.MethodsWe used the large-margin-projected transductive support vector machine method (LMPROJ) to learn the useful knowledge between the training domain and testing domain by calculating the maximal mean discrepancy. The method can effectively learn a model for the testing data with training data of different distributions, thereby relaxing the constraint that the data distribution in the training and testing samples should be identical.ResultsThe experimental validation is performed over six datasets of electroencephalogram signals with three feature extraction methods. The proposed LMPROJ-based transfer learning method was compared with five conventional classification methods. For the datasets with identical distribution, the performance of these six classification methods was comparable. They all could achieve an accuracy of 90%. However, the LMPROJ method obviously outperformed the five conventional methods for experimental datasets with different distribution between the training and test data. Regardless of the feature extraction method applied, the mean classification accuracy of the proposed method is above 93%, which is greater than that of the other five methods with statistical significance.ConclusionThe proposed transfer-learning-based method has better classification accuracy and adaptability than the conventional methods in classifying EEG signals for epilepsy detection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epilepsy is one of the most common diseases in human brain that affects a population of 50 million people in the world [1]. It is a transient brain dysfunction phenomenon caused by abnormal brain neurons. There has been increasing interest in the use of intelligent recognition technology for the detection of epilepsy based on electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. It has become an important means for epilepsy detection since many physiological and pathological information in brain can be obtained from the EEG signals.At present, a variety of intelligent recognition methods [2–7] have been applied to EEG signal identification, including decision tree algorithm (DT) [6], naïve Bayes algorithm (NB) [4,6], support vector machine algorithm (SVM) [3], nearest-mean algorithm (NM) [4], linear discriminant analysis method (LDA) [2,5,7]. Although these existing methods have demonstrated both effectiveness and feasibility for epilepsy detection, they all face a critical challenge – the effectiveness of these methods are dependent on the premise that the training data and testing data are drawn from samples of identical distribution. However, this assumption cannot be satisfied in many practical application scenarios. For instance, when drifting exists between the distributions of the training and testing EEG samples, the performance of the conventional intelligent recognition methods would deteriorate significantly.In fact, the distributions of EEG data collected from both epileptic patients and normal people may vary from time to time depending on multiple factors, such as health status, drug actions and the timing of EEG measurements. Typically, the EEG signals collected can be divided into three classes, including (1) Class 1: EEG signals obtained from healthy people in normal conditions; (2) Class 2: EEG signals derived from epileptic patients during seizure free interval (preictal); and (3) Class 3: EEG signals obtained from epileptic patients during seizure (ictal). The data distribution characteristics of these three classes of signals are somewhat independent. Generally, the conventional recognition methods use the labeled data from the first two classes of signals to build a classification model. If this model is used to identify Class 3 EEG signals, the identification accuracies will decline greatly, and the existing intelligent recognition methods would no longer be appropriate for handling such situations. Hence, an epileptic EEG identification method that is more adaptable to differences in EEG data distributions is needed to meet the challenge.In this paper, a novel epileptic EEG signal recognition method based on transfer learning is proposed. The method is advantageous in that it allows for differences in distributions between the training and testing data, which greatly improves the adaptation ability of epileptic EEG signal identification. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, classical feature extraction and recognition methods on EEG signals for epilepsy detection are reviewed briefly. In Section 3, the EEG signal recognition classifier based on transfer learning method is proposed. The experimental studies are reported in Section 4, and the conclusion is given in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a transfer-learning-based EEG signals recognition method for epilepsy detection. The method can cope with situations where the difference in distributions between the training and testing data exists. Although the proposed transfer learning method has demonstrated distinctive effectiveness, there are rooms for the further study and improvement. For example, in addition to EEG signal classification, it is also important to develop more effective transfer-learning-based feature extraction methods for EEG signals in order to further improve the overall performance of automatic epilepsy detection based on EEG.