@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A wearable sensor system for medication adherence prediction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a wearable sensor system for detecting swallows.We collect data and evaluate the system's ability to detect medication using machine learning algorithms.We use a probabilistic model to improve classification accuracy based on timing information.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pervasive computing,Wearable devices,Medication adherence,Deglutition,Piezoelectric sensor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveStudies have revealed that non-adherence to prescribed medication can lead to hospital readmissions, clinical complications, and other negative patient outcomes. Though many techniques have been proposed to improve patient adherence rates, they suffer from low accuracy. Our objective is to develop and test a novel system for assessment of medication adherence.MethodsRecently, several smart pill bottle technologies have been proposed, which can detect when the bottle has been opened, and even when a pill has been retrieved. However, very few systems can determine if the pill is subsequently ingested or discarded. We propose a system for detecting user adherence to medication using a smart necklace, capable of determining if the medication has been ingested based on the skin movement in the lower part of the neck during a swallow. This, coupled with existing medication adherence systems that detect when medicine is removed from the bottle, can detect a broader range of use-cases with respect to medication adherence.ResultsUsing Bayesian networks, we were able to correctly classify between chewable vitamins, saliva swallows, medication capsules, speaking, and drinking water, with average precision and recall of 90.17% and 88.9%, respectively. A total of 135 instances were classified from a total of 20 subjects.ConclusionOur experimental evaluations confirm the accuracy of the piezoelectric necklace for detecting medicine swallows and disambiguating them from related actions. Further studies in real-world conditions are necessary to evaluate the efficacy of the proposed scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Prior research has shown that non-adherence to prescribed medications can result in poor patient outcomes [1]. For example, non-compliant schizophrenia patients are at significantly higher risk for depression, arrest, and substance abuse [2]. Generally speaking, non-adherence can result in medical complications, hospital readmissions, and death [3]. Besides the risk of undesirable health outcomes for patients, poor adherence can result in unnecessary healthcare expenses and increased burden on the healthcare system. This issue is also a concern for medical researchers, as patients who choose not to take the appropriate dose of their medication render the assessment of the treatment effectiveness to be much more challenging. Therefore, many methods have been proposed in recent years to address these issues, including pill counts, self-reporting, interviews, and countless interventions intended to increase adherence rates [4–6]. However, these methods are typically associated with low accuracy [7].Digital technologies that operate with relative transparency to the end user have the potential to improve accuracy compared to manual methods, as issues of human error and intentional misreporting are minimized. Interest in health-monitoring devices have therefore increased significantly in recent years, including activity monitoring approaches such as FitBit and MisFit [8–10].In the same vein, smart pill-bottles have recently been proposed, which can detect when they have been opened and closed [11,12]. Though this technology can be useful in a number of different circumstances, such as when individuals themselves have no recollection of whether they took their pills, there are several shortcomings associated with this approach. More specifically, there is no definitive information to suggest that the medicine has been ingested after the bottle has been opened.First, consider a case in which the subject opens the bottle, but is then interrupted by an outside event such as a phone call. Subsequently, the subject may forget to take his or her medication, and would benefit from a reminder a short time later. Furthermore, the individual may “cheat” the system, by discarding the medication after removing it from the bottle. Lastly, the individual may remove the bottle and, inadvertently or deliberately, take more pills than necessary.To address these shortcomings, we propose supplementing information from the smart bottle with information from a smart necklace, that can detect when a pill is swallowed using a piezoelectric sensor and associated processing algorithms. The skin motion during the swallow of a medication has a unique pattern that can be used to confirm that the medication has been ingested after the bottle is opened. Data from the necklace is acquired by sampling the piezoelectric sensor strip, which generates a voltage in response to the mechanical stress of deglutition (swallowing). Data acquired from the necklace is transmitted to an Android application for processing using the low-power Bluetooth LE protocol, where classification algorithms are capable of distinguishing between swallowed medication and other types of swallows such as saliva and water. Though this classification is not free of errors, the necklace provides an additional layer of information which can improve detection of noncompliance and provide feedback.We evaluate adherence based on two different kinds of medicines and supplements: chewables, which are typically targeted towards children in the form of vitamins, asthma medication, Tylenol, and ADHD treatment, and capsules, which are more appropriate for adults. Various use cases are outlined in Fig. 1. Our proposed system extends prior work at ensuring medication adherence; the figures in green represent those steps which cannot be detected with most smart pill boxes.This paper is organized as follows:•In Section 2, we describe related work in this field.In Section 3, we describe the hardware architecture of the smart necklace.In Section 4, we elaborate on the algorithms used to detect medication ingestion.In Section 5, we describe the experimental procedure.In Section 6, we present our results.In Section 7, we discuss the results.In Section 8, we provide concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
