@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving structural medical process comparison by exploiting domain knowledge and mined information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Our framework support process mining and process comparison in medicine.Process comparison exploits domain knowledge and all available mined information.Tests in stroke management show that, with respect to previously published metrics our approach generates outputs closer to those of a stroke management expert; the framework can support experts in answering key research questions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Process mining and comparison,Graph edit distance,Stroke management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesProcess model comparison and similar process retrieval is a key issue to be addressed in many real-world situations, and a particularly relevant one in medical applications, where similarity quantification can be exploited to accomplish goals such as conformance checking, local process adaptation analysis, and hospital ranking. In this paper, we present a framework that allows the user to: (i) mine the actual process model from a database of process execution traces available at a given hospital; and (ii) compare (mined) process models. The tool is currently being applied in stroke management.MethodsOur framework relies on process mining to extract process-related information (i.e., process models) from data. As for process comparison, we have modified a state-of-the-art structural similarity metric by exploiting: (i) domain knowledge; (ii) process mining outputs and statistical temporal information. These changes were meant to make the metric more suited to the medical domain.ResultsExperimental results showed that our metric outperforms the original one, and generated output closer than that provided by a stroke management expert. In particular, our metric correctly rated 11 out of 15 mined hospital models with respect to a given query. On the other hand, the original metric correctly rated only 7 out of 15 models. The experiments also showed that the framework can support stroke management experts in answering key research questions: in particular, average patient improvement decreased as the distance (according to our metric) from the top level hospital process model increased.ConclusionsThe paper shows that process mining and process comparison, through a similarity metric tailored to medical applications, can be applied successfully to clinical data to gain a better understanding of different medical processes adopted by different hospitals, and of their impact on clinical outcomes. In the future, we plan to make our metric even more general and efficient, by explicitly considering various methodological and technological extensions. We will also test the framework in different domains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Process model comparison and similar process retrieval is a key issue to be addressed in many real-world situations. For example, when two companies are merged, process engineers need to compare processes originating from the two companies, in order to analyze their possible overlaps, and to identify areas for consolidation. Moreover, large companies build over time huge process model repositories, which serve as a knowledge base for their ongoing process management/enhancement efforts. Before adding a new process model to the repository, process engineers have to check that a similar model does not already exist, in order to prevent duplication. Particularly interesting is the case of medical process model comparison, where similarity quantification can also be exploited in a conformance checking perspective. Indeed, the process model actually implemented at a given healthcare organization can be compared to the existing reference clinical guideline, to check conformance, and/or to understand the level of adaptation to local constraints that may have been required. As a matter of fact, the existence of local resource constraints may lead to differences between the models implemented at different hospitals, even when referring to the treatment of the same disease (and to the same guideline). A quantification of these differences (and maybe a ranking of the hospitals derived from it) can be exploited for several purposes, like, e.g., administrative purposes, performance evaluation and public funding distribution. The actual medical process models are not always explicitly available at the healthcare organization. However, a database of process execution traces (also called the “event log”) can often be reconstructed starting from data that hospitals collect through their information systems (in the best case by means of workflow technology).In this case, process mining techniques [1] can be exploited, to extract process models from event log data. Stemming from these considerations, in this work we present a framework, which allows the user to:1.extract the actual process model from the available medical process execution traces, through process mining techniques;perform medical process model comparison, to fulfill the objectives described above.exploiting domain knowledge;exploiting process mining outputs and statistical temporal information.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work showed that process mining and process comparison can be applied successfully to clinical data to gain a better understanding of medical processes. It is interesting to analyze the differences, to establish whether they concern only the scheduling of the various tasks or also the tasks themselves. In this way, not only may different practices that are used to treat similar patients be discovered, but also unexpected behavior may be highlighted. Experimental results have shown the quality of our contribution, in comparison to the distance definition reported in [2]. Indeed, our metric outperformed Dijkman's [2], and provided results that were closer to those of a human expert. Thus, we could confidently use our metric to answer a very interesting research question in stroke management, about the existence of a correlation between process models and survival and improvement rate at discharge. Despite the presence of fluctuations, which can be explained by the relatively low number of traces available at some stroke units, a decreasing trend could be identified, suggesting that the greater the distance from the reference hospital, the worse these clinical outcomes become. In the future, we would like to test the correlation with additional clinical outcomes as well, and we will repeat the experiment by focusing on subparts of the process model (e.g., emergency management), which could be particularly critical in determining patient improvement. We would also like to experiment the framework in the myocardial infarction domain. Indeed, myocardial infarction regional and national registry data are available to us, on which process mining and process comparison could be applied. From the methodological and technological viewpoint, we will extend the approach along the research lines discussed in Section 5. We believe that these enhancements can represent a relevant added value to our work, by making process comparison more versatile, reliable and useful in practice. Further experiments, possibly in different application domains, will be designed in order to support this claim.