@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dopaminergic-induced dyskinesia assessment based on a single belt-worn accelerometer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The necessary algorithms to evaluate the occurrence of dopaminergic-induced dyskinesias in the activities of daily life are developed.Sensor placement at the waist provides a good resolution for almost any choreic dyskinesias and provides a good usability and comfort to the patient.A new frequency based approach is proposed to evaluate the occurrence of dyskinesias.The algorithm presented has been evaluated on a database of signals of 92 PD patients and provides specificities and sensitivities above 90%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inertial sensors,Support vector machine,Parkinson's disease,Dyskinesia,Ambulatory monitoring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundAfter several years of treatment, patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) tend to have, as a side effect of the medication, dyskinesias. Close monitoring may benefit patients by enabling doctors to tailor a personalised medication regimen. Moreover, dyskinesia monitoring can help neurologists make more informed decisions in patient's care.ObjectiveTo design and validate an algorithm able to be embedded into a system that PD patients could wear during their activities of daily living with the purpose of registering the occurrence of dyskinesia in real conditions.Materials and methodsData from an accelerometer positioned in the waist are collected at the patient's home and are annotated by experienced clinicians. Data collection is divided into two parts: a main database gathered from 92 patients used to partially train and to evaluate the algorithms based on a leave-one-out approach and, on the other hand, a second database from 10 patients which have been used to also train a part of the detection algorithm.ResultsResults show that, depending on the severity and location of dyskinesia, specificities and sensitivities higher than 90% are achieved using a leave-one-out methodology. Although mild dyskinesias presented on the limbs are detected with 95% specificity and 39% sensitivity, the most important types of dyskinesia (any strong dyskinesia and trunk mild dyskinesia) are assessed with 95% specificity and 93% sensitivity.ConclusionThe presented algorithmic method and wearable device have been successfully validated in monitoring the occurrence of strong dyskinesias and mild trunk dyskinesias during activities of daily living.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a chronic and second most common neurodegenerative disorder, behind Alzheimer's disease. The pathology of the disease is characterised by an insufficient activity in the neurons that produce dopamine, one of the main neurotransmitters involved in the control of movement [1]. First appreciable symptoms in PD are those related to an altered movement control, such as tremor, rigidity or bradykinesia (slowness of movement). These symptoms are caused by a decrease in dopamine levels. Presently, there is no known drug proven to have disease modifying effect or capable of stopping the progression of PD. Current main treatments are based on symptom reduction and centred in substances that increase the concentration of dopamine. More specifically, current treatments replace dopamine through the use of its precursor, Levodopa (L-Dopa), or substances that increase the neurotransmitter activity by stimulating dopamine receptors [2]. The main drug used in the early stages of the disease is L-Dopa taken as oral pills. During the first years of the disease, patients use to respond to oral treatment with L-Dopa in a stable way, without appreciable motor symptoms for most of the time. However, with the advance of the disease, the duration and effectiveness of the medication is reduced and patients tend to have, as a side effect of the medication, dyskinesias. These treatment-related motor complications appear in approximately 30% of patients after 2 years of L-Dopa exposure and, once established, they are very difficult to treat and significantly contribute to overall disability and disease burden [3,4]. Dyskinesia is a movement disorder that consists of involuntary movements that mainly occur in the limbs, hands, trunk and lingual-facial-buccal musculature [5,6]. At the time that these complications occur, the neurologist should consider a therapeutic change as these motor complications cannot be handled by oral medications [4].In the latter years, some research has focused on helping neurologists to make care decisions in an objective way. For example, in the work presented in [7], an algorithm that selects one of the following three treatment options for patients with advanced PD is reported: subcutaneous apomorphine infusion, Deep Brain Stimulation and intestinal infusion of L-Dopa. This algorithm is mainly based on the age of the patient and the presence of dyskinesia. The idea behind the pump-based treatments (subcutaneous apomorphine infusion and L-Dopa intestinal infusion) relies on the growing evidence that improvement in duration and severity of dyskinesia can be achieved through continuous drug administration [4]. Thus, the change of treatment in PD is being defined, mainly, on the appearance of dyskinesias since they drastically affect the quality of life of patients and they can be improved with appropriate treatments.Therefore, the gathered evidence has proven that the accurate knowledge of the appearance of dyskinesias during activities of daily living is indispensable for the neurologist in order to improve advanced PD treatment. This information can help the professionals to make informed decisions, on the one hand, to change the administration mode of the medication (oral/pump) or, on the other hand, to select another treatment to the patient (e.g. L-Dopa vs agonists). Furthermore, having this data available in real-time would open up the possibility to the on-line control of the dosage administrated by infusion pumps according to the patients’ motor fluctuations. An example of this hypothesis was tested under previous work, in which a proof of concept was performed, by remotely adjusting the apomorphine dose (administered by a modified apomorphine pump) based on the motor phase of the patient [8].The ultimate goal of the work presented in this paper is to design and validate an algorithm that can be embedded into a system that PD patients could wear during their activities of daily living with the purpose of registering the occurrence of dyskinesias in real conditions. Given that the system is designed to be employed in real conditions, its comfort and usability are crucial since patients should wear it for several hours. In this sense, one should not forget that the final system, in which these algorithms will be embedded, must be manipulated by PD patients who are generally aged over 65 and, additionally, the system must be continuously worn during waking hours (between 8 and 12h a day). These conditions, marked by patient's age, usage circumstances and PD symptoms, led us to make the system, and its method of placement in the body, to be very comfortable and very easy to use. To this end, as presented in the paper, the system is restricted to be a single device that unites sensor, processing and communication modules together.The rest of the paper is organised as follows. The next section is devoted to describing the background and related work on dyskinesia detection. Third section presents the employed methods, including the data collection and the signal processing. Then, results are provided and finally, discussion and conclusions are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
