@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Boosting drug named entity recognition using an aggregate classifier

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate drug NER using limited or no manually annotated data.We propose an algorithm for combining methods based on annotations and dictionaries.We improved drug NER recall using suffix patterns evolved by genetic programming.We improved drug NER performance by aggregating heterogenous drug NER methods.We conclude that drug NER can be performed competitively without manual annotations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Named entity annotation sparsity,Gold-standard vs. silver-standard annotations,Named entity recogniser aggregation,Genetic-programming-evolved string-similarity patterns,Drug named entity recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveDrug named entity recognition (NER) is a critical step for complex biomedical NLP tasks such as the extraction of pharmacogenomic, pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic parameters. Large quantities of high quality training data are almost always a prerequisite for employing supervised machine-learning techniques to achieve high classification performance. However, the human labour needed to produce and maintain such resources is a significant limitation. In this study, we improve the performance of drug NER without relying exclusively on manual annotations.MethodsWe perform drug NER using either a small gold-standard corpus (120 abstracts) or no corpus at all. In our approach, we develop a voting system to combine a number of heterogeneous models, based on dictionary knowledge, gold-standard corpora and silver annotations, to enhance performance. To improve recall, we employed genetic programming to evolve 11 regular-expression patterns that capture common drug suffixes and used them as an extra means for recognition.MaterialsOur approach uses a dictionary of drug names, i.e. DrugBank, a small manually annotated corpus, i.e. the pharmacokinetic corpus, and a part of the UKPMC database, as raw biomedical text. Gold-standard and silver annotated data are used to train maximum entropy and multinomial logistic regression classifiers.ResultsAggregating drug NER methods, based on gold-standard annotations, dictionary knowledge and patterns, improved the performance on models trained on gold-standard annotations, only, achieving a maximum F-score of 95%. In addition, combining models trained on silver annotations, dictionary knowledge and patterns are shown to achieve comparable performance to models trained exclusively on gold-standard data. The main reason appears to be the morphological similarities shared among drug names.ConclusionWe conclude that gold-standard data are not a hard requirement for drug NER. Combining heterogeneous models build on dictionary knowledge can achieve similar or comparable classification performance with that of the best performing model trained on gold-standard annotations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Named entity recognition (NER) is the task of identifying members of various semantic classes, such as persons, mountains and vehicles in raw text. In biomedicine, NER is concerned with classes such as proteins, genes, diseases, drugs, organs, DNA sequences, RNA sequences and possibly others [1]. Drugs (as pharmaceutical products) are special types of chemical substances highly relevant for biomedical research. A simplistic and naive approach to NER is to directly match textual expressions found in a relevant lexical repository against raw text. Even though this technique can sometimes work well, often it suffers from certain limitations. Firstly, its accuracy heavily depends on the completeness of the dictionary. However, as terminology is constantly evolving, especially in bio-related disciplines, producing a complete lexical repository is not feasible. Secondly, direct string matching overlooks term ambiguity and variability [2]. On one hand, ambiguous dictionary entries refer to multiple semantic types (term ambiguity), and therefore contextual information needs to be considered for disambiguation. On the other hand, several slightly different tokens may refer to the same semantic type (term variability). Typically, to address these issues, statistical learning models are deployed for NER.In such approaches, NER is formalised as a classification task in which an input expression is either classified as an entity or not. Supervised learning methods are reported to achieve superior performance than unsupervised ones, but previously annotated data are essential for training supervised models [2]. Data annotated by human curators are of high quality and guarantee best results in exchange for the cost of manual effort. For these reasons, they are also known as gold-standard data. Due to the cost of manual annotations, corpora for NER are often of limited size and for particular domains.Drugs are referred to by their chemical name, generic name or brand name. Since the chemical name is typically complex and a brand name may not exclusively identify a drug once the relevant patents expire, a unique non-proprietary name for the active ingredient is devised for standardised scientific reporting and labelling. This generic name is negotiated when the drug is approved for use, as the nomenclature is tightly regulated by the World Health Organization (WHO) and local agencies such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency. Several criteria are assessed, such as ensuring the drug action fits the naming scheme, ease of pronunciation and translation, and differentiation from other drug names to avoid transcription and reproduction errors during prescription [3]. Since the naming scheme, assessment criteria and cross-border synchrony have developed organically over the years, there is neither a definitive dictionary nor syntax of drug names.In this study, we investigate methods for achieving high performance in drug name recognition in cases where either very limited or no gold-standard training data is available. Our proposed method employs a voting system able to combine predictions from a number of diverse recognisers. Moreover, genetic programming is used to evolve string-similarity patterns based on common suffixes of single-token drug names occurring in the DrugBank database [4]. Subsequently, these patterns are used to compile regular expressions in order to generalise dictionary entries in an effort to increase coverage and tagging accuracy.We compare the performance of our method with several state-of-the-art NER approaches in recognising manually annotated drug names in the PK corpus [5]. Where no gold-standard data is available, the proposed method is shown to achieve competitive performance. In particular, the performance achieved without gold-standard data is comparable with the performance of the model aware of gold-standard annotations.The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 summarises previous work on drug NER and methods for dealing with data sparsity in general NER. Section 3 describes the dictionaries and data used in our experiments, as well as the experimental methodology followed. Sections 4 and 5 present and discuss the experiments and their results. Finally, section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study mainly focused on achieving high performance drug NER with very limited or no manual annotations. We achieved this by merging predictions from several heterogeneous models including models trained on gold-standard data, models trained on silver annotation data, DrugBank and, finally, evolved regular expression patterns. We have shown that state-of-the-art performance in drug NER is within reach, even in the presence of data sparsity.Our experiments also show that combining heterogeneous models can achieve similar or comparable classification performance with that of our best performing model trained on gold-standard annotations. We have shown that in the pharmacology domain, static knowledge resources such as dictionaries actually contain more information than is immediately apparent, and therefore can be utilised in other, non-static contexts (i.e. to devise high-precision regular expression patterns). Including synonyms in the dictionary or disambiguating acronyms did not improve results in this study mainly due to certain design decisions that surround the PK corpus. More specifically, none of the tagged acronyms were identified by AcroMine, whereas most of the identified synonyms have simply not been tagged appropriately in the test-set. Generally speaking however, we would expect a significant performance boost from applying these methods.We plan to extend this work in the future. First of all, we plan to take advantage of all the annotations in the PK corpus. Being able to recognise both drugs and drug-targets is essential for the task of identifying relationships and interactions between them. We are also very interested to see if we can improve on, or find more accurate regular expression patterns in order to enrich our “safety net” model. Moreover, choosing a drug name is a very long and costly process, and therefore generating good quality candidates automatically would be very useful. Finally, we would like to extend our prediction–aggregation algorithm so as to assign probabilities to predictions of the knowledge-based models (dictionaries and regular expressions).