@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of feature selection on financial distress prediction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Filter and wrapper based feature selection are employed for financial distress prediction.In addition, two bankruptcy prediction datasets and two credit scoring datasets are used.On average, GA and LR perform better over the credit and bankruptcy datasets respectively.However, there is no exact winner over the four datasets.In addition, performing feature selection does not always improve the models’ performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Financial distress prediction,Bankruptcy prediction,Credit scoring,Feature selection,Data mining,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Financial distress prediction is always important for financial institutions in order for them to assess the financial health of enterprises and individuals. Bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring are two important issues in financial distress prediction where various statistical and machine learning techniques have been employed to develop financial prediction models. Since there are no generally agreed upon financial ratios as input features for model development, many studies consider feature selection as a pre-processing step in data mining before constructing the models. However, most works only focused on applying specific feature selection methods over either bankruptcy prediction or credit scoring problem domains. In this work, a comprehensive study is conducted to examine the effect of performing filter and wrapper based feature selection methods on financial distress prediction. In addition, the effect of feature selection on the prediction models obtained using various classification techniques is also investigated. In the experiments, two bankruptcy and two credit datasets are used. In addition, three filter and two wrapper based feature selection methods combined with six different prediction models are studied. Our experimental results show that there is no the best combination of the feature selection method and the classification technique over the four datasets. Moreover, depending on the chosen techniques, performing feature selection does not always improve the prediction performance. However, on average performing the genetic algorithm and logistic regression for feature selection can provide prediction improvements over the credit and bankruptcy datasets respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Financial distress prediction is very critical in enterprise risk management, especially for financial institutions. In particular, financial institutions have to develop various risk management models, such as bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring models [37,43]. For bankruptcy prediction, financial institutions need effective prediction models in order to make appropriate lending decisions. On the other hand, credit scoring models are used for the management of large loan portfolios and/or credit admission evaluation.Specifically, bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring are two binary classification problems in financial distress prediction, which aim at assigning new observations to two pre-defined decision classes (e.g., ‘good’ and ‘bad’ risk classes) [40]. For example, bankruptcy prediction models are used to predict the likelihood that the loan customers will go bankrupt whereas credit scoring models are used to determine whether the loan applicants should be classified into a high risk or low risk group. In the literature, many supervised machine learning (or classification) techniques have been used for financial distress prediction [2,10,24,29].Though many novel sophisticated techniques have been proposed for effective prediction, very few have examined the effect of feature selection on financial distress prediction. Feature selection is an important data pre-processing step of knowledge discovery in databases (KDD). The aim is to filter out unrepresentative features from a given dataset [11,17]. As there are no generally agreed financial ratios for bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring, collected variables must be examined for their representativeness, i.e., importance and explanatory power, in the chosen dataset [29]. Therefore, the performance of classifiers after performing feature selection could be enhanced over that of classifiers without feature selection.Generally speaking, feature selection can be broadly divided into the filter, wrapper, and hybrid approaches [3,31]. The filter based method (usually based on some statistical techniques) evaluates and selects feature subsets by the general characteristics of the given dataset. The wrapper based method is based on a pre-determined mining algorithm and its performance is used as the evaluation criterion to select feature subsets. Specifically, it aims at searching for features that are better suited to the mining algorithm to improve the mining performance. The hybrid method is based on combining these two methods by exploiting different evaluation criteria in different search stages.In recent studies, the filter and wrapper based feature selection methods have been widely used for bankruptcy prediction [41,13,14,27,25,26,8,4] and credit scoring [18,7,30,16,42,5]. Most studies apply either filter or wrapper based methods for single domain problems, i.e., bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring. One reason for the lack of using hybrid based feature selection methods is because currently there is no standard and representative method. In addition, there are no guidelines for which filter and wrapper based methods should be combined to select the best features for the later prediction performance.One major limitation of current studies is that each work only considers one specific feature selection method for either bankruptcy prediction or credit scoring problems. In other words, there is no study focusing on comparing both types of feature selection methods for both bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring problems (c.f. Section 2.2). Therefore, the aim of this paper is to examine the effect of the filter and wrapper based feature selection methods on both bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring problems. Moreover, the effect of performing feature selection on different classification techniques will also be investigated.The contributions of this paper are twofold. First, we provide a comprehensive study of comparing different filter and wrapper based feature selection methods in terms of two financial distress problems, which are bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring. In particular, the most suitable methods for these two specific problems are identified. As a result, the identified methods can also be regarded as the baseline feature selection methods for future related researches. Second, the research findings also allow us to understand which classification technique(s) are more sensitive to feature selection. Therefore, this can provide a guideline for future studies to choose suitable techniques for their prediction models.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews related literature about filter and wrapper based feature selection methods. Moreover, related works are compared in terms of the feature selection methods employed, prediction methods constructed, etc. Sections 3 and 4 present the experimental setup and results, respectively. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
