@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic verification of a knowledge base by using a multi-criteria group evaluation with application to security screening at an airport

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new method of automatic verification of knowledge base is presented.The method uses a multi-criteria group evaluation of variants under uncertainty.Verification looks for discrepancy between the expert knowledge and knowledge base.Experts and automatic verification system use the half-marks in inference rules.Example: assessing the effectiveness of a security screening system at an airport.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy inference systems,Knowledge engineering,Knowledge base verification,Fuzzy inference rules,Multi-criteria group decision-making,Security screening at an airport,Transport safety and security,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Knowledge engineering often involves using the opinions of experts, and very frequently of a group of experts. Experts often cooperate in creating a knowledge base that uses fuzzy inference rules. On the one hand, this may lead to generating a higher quality knowledge base. But on the other hand, it may result in irregularities, for example, if one of the experts dominates the others. This paper addresses a research problem related to creating a method for automatic verification of inference rules. It would allow one to detect inconsistencies between the rules that have been developed and the actual knowledge of the group of experts. A method of multi-criteria group evaluation of variants under uncertainty was used for this purpose. This method utilises experts’ opinions on the importance of the premises of inference rules. They are expressed in terms of multiple criteria in the form of both numerical and linguistic assessments. Experts define the conclusions of rules as so-called half-marks in order to increase the method’s flexibility. Automatic rules are generated in a similar way. Such an approach makes it possible to automatically determine the final conclusions of inference rules. They can be regarded as consistent both with the opinions of a group of experts and with automatically generated rules. This paper presents the use of the method for verifying the rules of an expert system that is aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of a passenger and baggage screening system at an airport. This method allows one to detect simple logical errors that are made when experts are establishing rules as well as inconsistencies between the rules that have been developed and the experts’ actual knowledge.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Knowledge engineering often utilises the opinions of experts. Their participation may be important at different stages of creating an expert system. Among such stages is the development of fuzzy decision rules of a fuzzy inference system that uses rule-based knowledge [17]. The involvement of a group of experts in this process can be particularly useful and effective because this makes it possible to evaluate and interpret elementary facts more adequately, i.e. to avoid unilateral assessments and eliminate simple logical errors.However, the use of a group of experts’ opinions is not without its drawbacks. For example, it is possible that one expert will dominate the others. Personality factors can play a great role during such knowledge gaining sessions. An expert who has extensive knowledge and experience, but who does not have a strong personality can be “convinced” by other experts who are less knowledgeable [27]. This usually happens when experts choose majority voting as a means of reaching a consensus. Then the conclusion of an inference rule may reflect the opinion of the majority more than facts. This situation can be intensified when interdisciplinary problems are investigated, i.e. when particular experts only have competence in certain aspects of the analysed decision-making problem. Therefore they are not able to correctly assess the importance of the other premises that are used in a fuzzy inference system [34,9,32]. Moreover, an expert’s knowledge may be inadequately represented in such a system also when a given expert is not willing to present his/her opinion, i.e., for example, in the process of making decisions that are personal in nature [31].The above-mentioned problems that are associated with using the opinions of a group of experts can lead to creating erroneous rules, which obviously is not advantageous for an expert system that is being developed. Therefore, we propose developing an appropriate model and system for automatic verification of the rules that are generated. Such a system would be aimed not as much at carrying out formal verification as at checking whether the rules that have been obtained correspond to the actual knowledge of a group of experts (although formal verification will also be taken into account). Therefore, it is proposed that an adapted method of multi-criteria group decision-making under uncertainty be employed. It will allow the experts to freely (without any pressure or the need to reach a consensus) express their opinions concerning the importance of particular premises of a fuzzy inference system [21]. This approach can also be adopted when one of the methods that facilitate the process of achieving a consensus is used [29,35,28,7,4] because such methods only limit the problems in question during group decision-making, but they do not eliminate them.Schematically, the fuzzy inference system [20] is presented in Fig. 1.Non-fuzzy valuesX, obtained through observation or measurements constitute the input of the fuzzification block. In the fuzzification block, based on the specified membership functions, they are associated with the linguistic variables. The fuzzy valuesX∼constitute the input for the inference block. This block uses the base of fuzzy rules which in case of our example are created by experts, practitioners in the field of airport security systems. The inference block, on the basis of fuzzy prerequisites and all the fulfilled rules, specifies the conclusion in the form of a linguistic variableỹ. This conclusion is an input for the defuzzification block which on the basis of the specified membership function associates the fuzzy value with the output non-fuzzy value y. It constitutes the result of the operation of the fuzzy inference system.The rules base may in general contain classic non-fuzzy implications as well as fuzzy implications. In the second case we will use the so called compositional method of reasoning introduced by Zadeh [33] which uses a generalised “modus ponens” fuzzy reasoning rule. This results in the following reasoning scheme [15], whereP,P′,Q,Q′,S,P1,P2are fuzzy relations.(1)I:P⇒QF:P′C:P′∘P⇒Qwhere I denotes implication, F – fact (premise), C – conclusion, while “∘” is a max–min composition, defined on the setsX,Y,Z, whose result for fuzzy relationsA⊂X×YandB⊂Y×Zis a fuzzy relationA∘B⊂X×Zwith a membership function:(2)μA∘Bx,z=⋁y∈YμAx,y∧μBy,z,∀x∈X,∀y∈YRelations P andP′are often constructed on the basis of the AND operator. In this case the inference scheme is as follows(3)I:IFP1ANDP2THENQELSESF:x1ISP1′ANDx2ISP2′C:yISQ′whereP1,P1′⊂X1,P2,P2′⊂X2,Q,Q′⊂YInference resultQ′is described in accordance with the compositional inference rule as(4)μQ′y=⋁x1,x2∈X1×X2μP1′x1∧μP2′x2∧μRx1,x2,y,∀y∈YwhereR⊂X1×X2×Yis a fuzzy relation described as follows:(5)R=P1×P2×Q+∼P1×P2×SMembership function of a fuzzy relation R may be expressed in the following form(6)μRx1,x2,y=μP1x1∧μP2x2∧μQy∨1-μP1x1∧μP2x2∧μSy,∀x1,x2∈X1×X2,∀y∈YSince in the example inference scheme presented in Section 3 the set S does not exist, the membership function has the final form(7)μQ′y=⋁x1,x2∈X1×X2μP1′x1∧μP2′x2∧μP1x1∧μP2x2∧μQy∨1-μP1x1∧μP2x2,∀y∈YAs for practical applications, like those presented in Section 3 of this paper, the acceptable values of premisesP1,P2,…,Pnare usually precisely defined. The problem is how to determine the value of the conclusion of rule Q. Experts or groups of experts are often consulted when defining such values. Based on their experience and having shared their views, the experts agree on and formulate clear conclusions for all of the acceptable combinations of premises.Despite the involvement of a group of experts, there is a danger that certain rules can be constructed incorrectly. There may be simple logical errors as well as inconsistencies related to outranking and the rules may be intransitive, etc. Certainly, the appropriate selection of experts should allow one to avoid such problems, but these cannot be completely eliminated. As for expert systems that are systems of great significance, even several erroneous inference rules can lead to incorrect operation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
