@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Developing new machine learning ensembles for quality spine diagnosis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Computer aided diagnosis system integrated with MAP and SPC.Proposed hybrid machine learning models.New design for reliable inference system with higher software reliability and quality.KDE used for first time in distinguishing patients.DOE optimization in machine learning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Machine learning ensembles,Multimethod assessment process,Statistical process control,Spine diagnosis,Bayesian network,Software reliability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This research work adduces new hybrid machine learning ensembles for improving the performance of a computer aided diagnosis system integrated with multimethod assessment process and statistical process control, used for the spine diagnosis based on noninvasive panoramic radiographs. Novel methods are proposed for enhanced accurate classification. All the computations are performed considering steep error tolerance rate with statistical significance level of 5% as well as 1% and established the results with correctedt-tests. The kernel density estimator has been implemented to distinguish the affected patients against healthy ones. A new ensemble consisting of Bayesian network optimized by Tabu search algorithm as a classifier and Haar wavelets as the projection filter is used for relevant feature selection and attribute’s ranking. The performance analysis of each method along with major findings is discussed using various evaluation metrics and concludes with propitious results. The results are compared to the existing SINPATCO platform that uses MLP, GRNN, and SVM. The optimization of machine learning algorithms is obtained using Design of Experiments scheme to achieve superior prediction accuracy. The highest classification accuracy obtained is 96.55% with sensitivity, specificity of 0.966 and 0.987 respectively. The objective is to enhance the software reliability and quality of spine disorder diagnosis using medical diagnostic system and reinforce the viability of precise treatment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A medical diagnostic system [1] generally consists of a knowledge base and some methods for solving an intended problem. On the basis of the query requested to the system, it outputs appropriate solutions and provides assistance to medical physicians in diagnosing patients. The knowledge base of such medical systems relies upon on inputs that spring up from the clinical experience of field experts [2]. Knowledge acquisition is the process to transform human expertise knowledge and skills acquired through clinical practice to software, besides being quite time consuming and labor intensive task. Common methods like Case Based Reasoning (CBR) solves the knowledge acquisition problem to some extent, in which the previous clinical cases consisting of patient’s health symptoms in the form of the database is maintained with their possible remedies, past clinical decisions, preventive measures and expected diagnostic outcome measures. During patient diagnosis, the clinical database is explored for the most likely analogous past patient’s record and provides the suitable diagnosis decisions for a new subject [3]. The opinion of physicians regarding the use of inference system is also appreciable in the literature [4]. The advantages of machine learning (ML) methods are that it uses mathematical models, heuristic learning and rules acquisition process for decision making and thus provides controllability, observability, stability and easily updateable by adding a new patient’s record [5–7].The application of machine learning models in the field of medicine for human disease diagnosis aids medical experts in the identification of diseases based on the symptoms at an early stage, though some diseases exhibit similar symptoms. Current advances in research for Spondylolisthesis and Disk Hernia treatment [8] since the past decades suggest that the related risk factors are identified. The state-of-the-art of technology is needed to be improved for significant accurate diagnostic decisions. The primary motivation of the research work is to design a reliable inference system and provide guidelines to caution against the selection of inaccurate inference system design for the clinical assessment of spine disorders, besides improving the quality of the diagnosis, prognosis, reduce delay in treatment and diagnosis cost [9].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The major contributions in this work are towards development of new hybrid machine learning ensembles, computation of software reliability and quality associated with medical diagnosis systems, integrating statistical quality control evaluation strategy to have accurate and robust decisions useful for assisting physicians. The discovery of statistical relationships among the features of pelvic spine using Principal component analysis and the design of a reliable inference system for making fast decisions and with greater degree of certainty to improve the spine treatment. Also, another major contribution lies in the relevant feature selection based on an ensemble of machine learning algorithms. Here MAP is implemented as a practical technique using complexity science principles as a theoretical platform for informing practice improvement and further it could be easily adapted to any organizations other than primary health care.The primary aim of the work is to upgrade the software reliability of the spine diagnosis and reduce the rate of misdiagnosis and the obtained test and experimental results indicate that the goal is reached. But still there is lots of room at the bottom in this direction as the diagnosis is possible by several means. Also, these machine learning models need to be tested over large clinical data sets. To provide quality treatment, reduce costs and prevent misdiagnosis of patients, leading to prolonged suffering are the prime motivation of medical diagnostic systems. The work described here provides new direction towards telemonitoring applications. Recognition of disease in a patient accurately is a great challenge in medical field. Huge amount of capital investment is spent for research on medical equipments and advancing primary health care devices as they are largely considered as critical systems.Also the use of such medical system solves the problem of availability of clinical data in the electronic form for further research as against the use of paper based systems. Some of the major problems confronted while developing an expert diagnosis system such as medical experts are less interested to share acquired skill knowledge with others. The knowledge gained over experience (called common sense) is practically impossible to be separated. And designing an ideal expert system for medical application is difficult as each system is suitable for a specific health disorders due to the unique behavior of algorithms in solving specific problems. The similar diagnostic system can be developed for other chronic diseases.