@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development of a knowledge-based system for cogeneration plant design: Verification, validation and lessons learned

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper focuses on validation of a KB system for cogeneration power plant.It concentrates on generation of alternative schemes, and describes each scheme.The system was validated by a consultant and an independent expert.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Design,Knowledge-based system,Verification,Validation,Cogeneration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents the development of a knowledge-based system (KBS) prototype able to design natural gas cogeneration plants, demonstrating new features for this field. The design of such power plants represents a synthesis problem, subject to thermodynamic constraints that include the location and sizing of components. The project was developed in partnership with the major Brazilian gas and oil company, and involved interaction with an external consultant as well as an interdisciplinary team. The paper focuses on validation and lessons learned, concentrating on important aspects such as the generation of alternative configuration schemes, breadth of each scheme description created by the system, and its module to support economic feasibility analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite efforts towards renewable energy sources, renewable technologies are still not able to meet the increasing demand for energy. Thus, the available fossil resources are required in the most rational way, minimizing fuel consumption and impacts associated to its use. In this scenario, with the increasing demand for rational energy generation, the application of cogeneration power plants has gained interest.Cogeneration is a widespread energy conservation technology. It is defined as the simultaneous generation of power and useful heat (e.g. steam, hot water, chilled water and others) from the same fuel. The efficiency of a cogeneration plant is higher when compared to the separated generation of power and heat. A cogeneration plant is a thermal system, i.e. a collection of components with interrelated performance. Typical hardware of cogeneration plants can include gas turbines, steam turbines, internal combustion engines, heat exchangers, chillers, electrical generators, cooling towers, pumps, fans and other components, all interconnected with ducts and pipes. Following its fundamental concepts, a large number of different combinations have been usually considered to organize the structural elements of design.The conceptual design of any product or engineering system aims to generate several alternatives able to meet a given set of design requirements. In the case of cogeneration plant design, the main requirements are power and heat demands. Since the methods of engineering analysis and optimization can only refine specific solutions, it is essential to generate alternatives with sufficient quality to merit refining [4]. In addition, the complexity of energy systems design has increased not only due to its efficiency enhancement, but also because of the challenges associated to cost reduction and environmental impacts. Thus, the conceptual design of cogeneration plants demands increasing knowledge, creativity and experience from engineers.The need for engineering expertise makes explicit the heuristic nature of the problem, suggesting that Artificial Intelligence techniques can be used to carry out this task. Particularly, the conceptual design of energy systems is a feasible domain for knowledge-based systems (KBSs) because: (i) the required knowledge is well established (in this case, the laws of Thermodynamics); (ii) the reasoning process can be mapped through rules, semantic network and object-oriented modeling. This technique has been successfully applied to different engineering designs [17,9,7] and, more specifically, energy system designs [2,14,13,10,12]. This technique is also suited for analytic tasks, such as diagnostics [18,3].An earlier version of an expert system prototype for cogeneration power plant design has been reported in [12], on which the energy requirements were limited to small power demands and low pressure saturated steam for industrial purpose. Although that prototype was able to generate high quality solutions and explain its major decisions, the conceptual design complexity was not fully evinced in that version. Due to its limitation in terms of energy demands, just a few concepts could be generated – two when considered only power and three when considered power and steam. Furthermore, such limitation in terms of possible conceptual solutions, made the validation process less difficult.The new version is the result of the incremental model development, on which the prototype is developed in increments of functional capability. The incremental model is especially useful for KBS [6]. Besides power and steam, the expanded prototype considers also hot water and chilled water as design requirements. Thus, the expanded version generates much more concepts because the possible combination of design requirements has increased. For instance, considering only a combination of power, hot water and chilled water as design requirements, the prototype generates up to eight different concepts. Other combinations of requirements may also generate several concepts. In other words, the new version solution space is much greater than previous version presented in [12], evincing the conceptual design complexity of cogeneration plants.The objective of this paper is to discuss the impact of the solution space increasing on the verification and validation of the expanded expert system prototype. Issues on the interaction with industrial experts during the project development are also discussed. The emphasis is on main lessons learned from the application of the incremental model.The paper is organized as follows. In order to provide the basic understanding of the complexity related to this knowledge domain, Section 2 presents the cogeneration plant design problem in a design methodology perspective. Section 3 describes the main features of the prototype knowledge base. The next section discusses the main issues found in the verification and validation process. The final section summarizes the lessons learned.Conventional thermal power plants rejects large amounts of heat to the environment, typically in the range of 60–80% of the chemical energy content of the fuel. Most of this heat can be recovered to meet thermal demands of a process, increasing the efficiency from 30–50% of a power plant up to 80–90% in a cogeneration plant. Furthermore, cogeneration plants are generally located near to consumption site, avoiding the use of high voltage transmission lines. Such characteristics make biomass and natural gas cogeneration plants very attractive in the current energetic scenario.In this work the design activity is divided into four main phases, according to the methodology proposed in [16], as described as follows:i.Task clarification: information related to the plant requirements is collected. The result of this phase is the information specification.Conceptual design: one or more principle of solutions able to meet the information specified in the previous phase are generated. This is the phase that mostly demands creativity, experience and knowledge. The result of this phase is the specification of one or more solution principles.Preliminary design: a technically feasible, executable solution is generated from a principle of solution obtained in the conceptual phase. This solution is refined until it is possible to evaluate it economically. The decisions made here must be mathematically and physically justified. The result of this phase is the specification of a configuration.Detailed design: all materials and components are specified, the costs are estimated and the documentation (blueprints, diagrams) is provided in order to execute the project. The result of this phase is the specification of the execution.Since the prototype scope is the conceptual and preliminary design of natural gas cogeneration plant, these phases are detailed as follows.Similarly to other engineering systems, a cogeneration plant can be modeled as a combination of predefined circuits. A circuit is a combination of components interconnected in order to perform a specific function. Each circuit is a thermal system itself, so that its design requires expert knowledge. In the current version, the KBS prototype has 22 different circuits in its knowledge base.The plant depicted in Fig. 1is an example of circuit combination. It is designed to meet power and chilled water demands. The engine coupled to the generator meets the power demand. The heat rejected through the engine jacket water and exhaust gases are recovered in heat exchangers (water–water and gas–water, respectively) in order to fire a hot water absorption chiller. A mechanical driven chiller is used either as back-up or to complement the chilled water demand. The chilled water generated is stored in a tank, allowing a more flexible plant operation. A cooling tower is used to transfer the heat rejected in the chiller condenser to the environment.The circuits depicted in Fig. 1 are presented in Table 1, organized as follows: circuit ID refers to a label given to each circuit in order to identify it; function refers to the circuit main purpose; inlet streams refers to the mass and energy streams conveyed to the circuit; outlet streams refers to the mass and energy streams resulting from the thermodynamic processes performed by the circuit; and the circuit components. Of course, expert knowledge is also required to determine the possible circuit combinations.Since there are several circuits performing the same function, there are also several possible combinations of circuits able to meet the design requirements. In other words, each circuit combination is a conceptual solution. The complete list of components is presented in Table 2.A conceptual solution has the higher level of abstraction. In the preliminary design, the solution undergoes a more concrete level through the analysis of each single component of the plant. In order to meet the quantitative attributes of the energy demands, the specification of the components requires the manipulation of quantitative attributes in accordance to the laws of thermodynamics. Depending on the component (e.g. engines), its manufacturer data must be considered as well. Unlike heuristic knowledge required in the conceptual design, knowledge required in the preliminary design is mainly algorithmic, such that each component presents a specific calculation procedure.Once all the components are specified, plant performance can be determined. From its performance parameters, operation and maintenance costs are calculated. If a reliable estimate of each component purchasing cost is available, an economic analysis of the solution can be performed. Usually, economic profitability of energy systems is evaluated through parameters such as discounted payback, net present value (NPV) and internal rate of return (IRR).The design of a cogeneration plant can be seen as a step-by-step process, as shown in Table 3. Such process is implemented in the expert system prototype. The design process involves other details omitted here that can be found in the literature [12,15]. In this section, the design process implemented in the expert system prototype is shown in considering tutorial approach. In order to encapsulate the complexity shown above, the project had a strong attention to a knowledge representation that allows an adequate system expansion. This section also describes and discusses the fundamentals of this representation scheme, justifying the use of rules, object-oriented modeling and semantic networks. The prototype development is also presented, showing the evolution of its different versions.In order to provide a better description of the prototype, some interface features are presented here, showing the user-system friendly interaction. The prototype is named ProSisC, a Portuguese acronym for cogeneration plant designer. At first, the user needs to identify characteristics of the location where the power plant will be placed (Fig. 2).As shown in Fig. 2, the user needs to inform the plant location in order to define the environmental conditions for the operation. The location can be chosen from the drop-down list or its data can be added if the location is not available. The environmental data includes average annual temperature and average water temperature (°C); altitude (m); and the average relative humidity (%). Now the design requirements need to be specified, as shown in Fig. 3.As shown in Fig. 3, the user needs to choose the utilities. The options are saturated steam, chilled water and hot water, since power is mandatory. There is also the option to select economics, in case a feasibility study needs to be performed. In terms of specific plant operation, the first item to be defined is the operation mode. The default type is base load, i.e., a continuous operation plant for 24h per day, 7days per week. In case of peak period, the prototype system considers that its daily operation time is only 3h per day and 5days per week by default. In this case, it is possible to change the peak period in the tools menu, on top of Fig. 3. It is important to point out that the user is guided through this process by a warning/error area (on the right of Fig. 3) that is dynamically updated for each step.In the load requirements area, the user defines the electrical operation mode between isolated operation or parallel operation with the utility grid. The class of service drop-down list gives the allowed range of voltage available.2In the Brazilian integrated electric system, the classes of service are A1 (V⩾230kV), A2 (88kV⩽V⩽138kV), A3 (=69kV), A3a (30kV⩽V⩽44kV), A4 (23kV⩽V⩽25kV) and B (low voltage, 127V and 220V).2Additionally, the user may set the frequency to 50Hz, since 60Hz is default. As the primary utility, power is always selected and the power demand requirements can be either directly informed or obtained from a load profile curve. The requirements are maximum and minimum demands and daily energy consumption. Such a curve is obtained from actual power demand data collected by the utility company. These data are usually provided in a xls file. The expert system can be set to obtain the data from this file, seen in Fig. 4, and to generate the load profile curve, as demonstrated in Fig. 5.Similar guiding processes can be carried for the other utilities, according to the user’s selection in the design requirements input (Fig. 3). They are not described here for the sake of brevity. Once the selected utilities requirements are properly specified, the system presents the available solutions, as shown in the example depicted in Fig. 6.The system generates solutions based on the data defined by the user. Each solution is presented as a set of XML files. As can be seen in Fig. 6, when a specific component is pointed, its data becomes visible. In this case, the following prime-mover data are depicted: engine model; number of movers (based on the plant power demand); nominal power output and purchase cost. This diagram is presented along with options to review design requirement and check the one-line diagram, an important feature related to the electrical connections of the cogeneration plant. As a key feature of every knowledge-based system, the system provides the explanation of the created solutions. Presenting the solution as XML files allows the user to explore additional features, using navigation resources such as scrollbar and expanded menus. Thus, for example, the explanation of the selected prime mover can be accessed by rolling the scrollbar down and expanding the respective menu, as shown in Fig. 7.Some key points shown in Fig. 7 deserve attention. First, the system offers design options in terms of prime-mover, whose selection depends on the overall power demand. Thus, each selection corresponds to a different number of movers. Secondly, there are two qualitative attributes: description and explanation. The description attribute gives a general background on the component (common to all models), whereas explanation describes specific model details. In Fig. 7, details on the third option, 16V-AT27GL model, are highlighted in the explanation attribute.From the prototype overview presented above, it is clear that the system scope is related to the conceptual and preliminary design phases. Aspects of detailed design, such as pipe diameters and lengths, are out of the system scope, although they could also be handled by the prototype. The decision to let these aspects out of the system scope is mainly because detailed design is a procedural activity that involves less expertise compared to the previous activities. Nevertheless, this research served as proof-of-concept for this important aspect.In order to encapsulate the complexity shown in the previous section, the project had a strong attention to the knowledge representation, to allow an adequate system expansion. This section describes the fundamental of our representation scheme. Some aspects identified in [8] and quoted below contribute to the prototype complexity:•As the prototype deals with design, a typical synthetic task, “where there is a theoretically infinite number of solutions”, it processes heuristic knowledge that is typically more complex than analytic tasks.Besides general design guidelines, the prototype knowledge base also contains principles of thermodynamics models, which entails reasoning at a “deeper level”.Since the beginning of the prototype development, the feature of providing explanations on its solutions was considered one of the most important functions. “From a commercial viewpoint, the ability to provide good explanations is one of the most useful features of knowledge-based systems technology”.In order to encompass these aspects, it is vital to invest in a knowledge representation scheme that proved to be technically feasible to allow reasoning based on concepts, objects or states. In this work, the scheme adopted is a combination of rules, object-oriented modeling and semantic network, which was successfully applied in a previous expert system for hydraulic system design [17].Part of the knowledge is represented via object-oriented modeling. When several attributes are necessary and different procedures are involved, object-oriented modeling allows a proper representation of the entities related to a synthesis problem. Such a representation is shown in Fig. 8. The plant class relates to the utility and demand classes. The former refers to the utilities required by the plant, such as water, natural gas and power; the latter refers to the energy demands that the plant should meet – power, steam, chilled water and hot water. The fact that the system handles different real entities (e.g. the overall plant design, its specific circuits and their components) demonstrates that the class/instance structure contains an embedded framework. This framework establishes a semantic network that connects all these different entities in a coherent manner. For instance, utility supplies to plant, circuit is part of plant, steamCircuit is a circuit and so on. For the sake of clarity, some classes are omitted in Fig. 8.As viewed in other projects, object-oriented modeling proved to be fundamental to achieve modularity. In this structure, each circuit and component presented in Table 1 is represented as class/instances. Depending on the degree of details, some of them include several attributes, defining qualitative, quantitative and graphical features for each entity. In its current stage, the prototype knowledge base contains the following data-sheet equipment modeled as the following set of instances: 19 engines, 15 turbines, 23 steam-fired absorption chillers, 25 hot water-fired absorption chillers and 22 mechanically-driven chillers. As an example, Table 4brings the list of attributes and procedures of the primeMover class.The attributes presented in Table 4 are quantitative and qualitative. As the quantitative properties are more common, most of them are directly taken from manufacturer’s catalog and/or equipment data-sheets. However, the importance of the qualitative attributes cannot be underestimated. The ability to present the design rationale relies on the system capacity in manipulating both types of attributes to create the explanation attribute, which is one of the most important features required in any expert system, especially those created for design tasks. Thus, there is a difference between the description and the explanation attributes. The former is a static symbol obtained from a typical parts catalog, while the explanation feature is dynamically created by the expert system.A predetermined set of rules is the core of the prototype knowledge base. The rules are obtained from the knowledge elicitation from technical literature and industrial experts. Since there are about 60 rules, it is not possible to present all of them here, but a pictorial representation of the main rules are presented as follows. Fig. 9shows a rule to select a mover circuit based on engine.Three facts and three objects are the premises of the rule. The first one is a control fact used to control the flow of information in the system (the details of this control are described ahead). The other two facts refer to the energy range on which the mover circuit based on engine is suitable. Two of the objects refer to the energy demands; the other one refers to the mover circuit. The rule action is to manipulate the attribute selected of the object moverCircuit, changing its value to yes through a specific procedure for engine selection. Following the same scheme, examples of rules for circuit combination and mover optimization are shown in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively.A group of rules is associated to each step described in Table 3. Despite the unstructured nature of an expert system, grouping the rules brings some structure to the prototype. This approach demands control on the prototype information flow, which is assured by a controlling rule that manipulate the control facts previously mentioned. The first premises of the rules presented in Figs. 9–11 are control facts. The scheme of the controlling rule is shown in Fig. 12. The controlling rule identifies the end of each step, retracting the control fact of the concluded step and creating the control fact related to the new one [6].The prototype development was carried through the incremental development model, which is suited to cope with the system expansion and complexity. The incremental approach implies that the phases of acquisition, representation and implementation of knowledge and system validation are conducted in degrees with increasing complexity. Table 5illustrates the increasing functionality of the system with the expansion of its knowledge base. The first energy demands chosen for the implementation were power and steam, because these are the most common utilities found in both industrial and commercial applications, such as hotels and health centers.The first version approaches the conceptual design and the second one presents an additional steam circuit and some few features related to the preliminary design. Version 3 includes more functions related to the preliminary design and a new optimization function for prime mover selection. Version 4 includes chilled water as energy demand, so that new heat recovery circuits are available. In order to keep the focus in the conceptual solutions, this version has no basic sizing function, which is included in version 5. The current version includes hot water as energy demand and more heat recovery circuits, as well as new functions related to economic analysis and presentation of one-line diagrams.As expected, the space solution increases as more circuits are available. However, the number of possible solutions is not given by the combinatorial permutation among the different circuits, because some combinations are not allowed according expert knowledge, in this context mostly based on thermodynamics laws and equipment details. For instance, a hot water circuit that requires jacket water as energy input cannot be combined with a power circuit based on turbine, because jacket water is not an energy output of any turbine.It is worth noting that the incremental approach requires a knowledge representation scheme expandable, modular and robust. The combination of rules, object-oriented modeling and semantic network meets such requirements. Fig. 13presents the system functional structure.The user communicates with the prototype through a graphical interface developed in Delphi, whose windows were presented in the previous section. The input data are the design requirements supplied by the user. The data are processed by a dynamic-link library that contains the inference engine. Once the solutions are created, the inference engine exports them to a XML file. The XML can be exhibited to the user in the graphical interface through a web browser component. The inference engine chosen in this work is the CLIPS [5], mainly because it allows the implementation of rules, object-oriented modeling and procedural functions.During the knowledge base development, much of the coding was adding with very few structural changes, i.e., the knowledge representation scheme proved to be modular and expandable. Such features are also interesting when considering additional cogeneration technologies for the system, e.g., fuel cells [11]. In this case, the fuel cell can be modeled as a subclass of the primeMover class, inheriting from it the main attributes and procedures. Thus, in a certain sense, the development of an expert system is an endless process, since an “expert system can never really be finished – it only keeps getting better” [6].The system was developed according an incremental approach. Thus, every version of the system passed through the following steps: knowledge acquisition, representation, implementation and verification/validation. In addition, the system was submitted to a final evaluation by two different experts. One of them acted as primary knowledge source, a consultant hired for the project, whereas the other expert approached the system only in its advanced stage.As well known in AI community, the verification task was primarily conducted by the knowledge engineering (KE) team, with some of its members having background in cogeneration. During verification, the following items were checked: errors in logic programming; errors in the communication between the Delphi, used for interface programming, and the CLIPS inference engine embedded in a dll; overall functioning of the user interface; and errors of spelling and grammar in the user interface.In order to verify the consistency of the conceptual solutions generated, the prototype was submitted to predetermined situations on which the results were already known. The predetermined situations should cover all possible combinations of input data. Since most of input data are continuous magnitudes, the possible combinations tend to infinite, so that it was established a range of values for some input data. Such ranges were defined by the expert based on the prime movers capacity and maximum numbers of movers allowed (20 engines and 6 turbines). Table 6shows the list used to verify the consistency of the conceptual solutions generated by the version 1 of the prototype. Such version deals only with power and steam as input data and there are two power circuits and two steam circuits available.Besides the conceptual design, calculations related to preliminary design functions were also verified. Each solution generated during the test was checked by applying the first law of thermodynamics (mass and energy balances) in each single component of the plant. Such procedure aimed to assure the consistency of component sizing and the plant performance.For the last version of the prototype, the verification process became very complex, because that version included chilled water and hot water demands. A list of verification similar to that presented in Table 6 was elaborated. Due to the broader possibility of input data combination, such list is very extensive to be presented here. For the current version, there were 50 alternative conceptual solutions to be verified, and the sizing, performance calculation and economic evaluation of each of them were checked independently. This verification process took many labor hours of the KE team, not only because the large number of solutions, but also because errors were eventually found, which demanded reprogramming and new verification.The project involved a team comprising knowledge engineers, programmers and domain experts, and took about two and a half years. As the incremental model was adopted, each version was referred to the consultant, with 15years of practice in cogeneration plant design. This expert was considered the main knowledge source, in addition to the available technical literature. As well known, a common challenge in this interaction is to overcome the natural communication barriers between knowledge engineers and domain expert. In this project, such obstacle was less difficult to overcome because the KE team also included researchers with expertise in thermal systems. Close to the project outline, the system was also validated by an external expert at CTGAS, a Brazilian technology research center specialized in projects with natural gas applications. As can be inferred, both validation processes consumed a great deal of attention in the prototype development, each one encompassing specific aspects. Thus, only the main outcomes of these two processes are presented here; the main conclusion from the incremental validation process are presented, followed by a brief description of the final external validation.This description is included here as lessons learned for projects of similar scope. In this project, the validation is achieved through prototype testing, an iterative process of comparing the intelligent system results to the expert́s solutions. The discrepancies between the two and the insights gained are then used to improve the intelligent system [1]. This process is repeated until the system accuracy is considered acceptable.Despite his strong background in cogeneration power plant, our consultant had no experience with AI projects. A key decision from the project start-up was to use the prototype as knowledge acquisition tool [6], so that within six months after the project start-up, a prototype system was produced in order to demonstrate the following functionalities:•Limitation to two utilities: power and steam.Data input and visualization of results to test the system user friendliness.Outputs generated as combination of diagrams, such as Fig. 2, and textual description for engines and turbines.Design solutions mostly concentrated on the qualitative aspects.The prototype interface was written in English, including the system user manual. The first version also handled some limited calculation, such as natural gas consumption and exhaust gases heat. Besides these points, the main aspect to be validated in this version was the chosen scheme for knowledge representation as a combination of rules, object-oriented modeling and semantic network. As proven with the project development and based on the expert’s feedback, these points were approved. Therefore, although the system was limited in its functionality, its main basis was firmly established. By adding functions related mainly to basic sizing, the incremental approach was initiated, so that the initial version evolved to the version 3.Regarding version 4, the main aspects validated were the acceptance of the incremental approach as model development, because this version was fully built by adding new functionalities to the previous one, mainly the inclusion of chilled water as new utility. Due to its increasing complexity, this version included no sizing because the important point was to direct the expert’s attention to evaluate the different concepts proposed by the system, since such analysis requires far deeper knowledge than the verification of calculations. To present this complexity in perspective, the corresponding report of this version included a table with 9 alternative configurations for prime mover choice and 18 alternatives for the heat recovery circuits. Only two of them were not approved by the expert and this minor discrepancy was used to improve the knowledge base.It is worthy noting that this version was focused on defining feasible design alternatives, i.e. it had a strong emphasis on conceptual design. Generally, the conceptual design deserves less attention, even by experts, who tend to draw their own key conclusion and move quickly to the sizing part (preliminary design) without a proper evaluation of alternative solutions. Therefore, by bringing this strong perspective in conceptual design, in some extent, the prototype contributes to disrupt the current design practice by many experts, see issues on this approach in [17].The next version of the system had a considerable growth towards the inclusion of more detailed information regarding the industrial equipment, as follows: 19 engines, 15 turbines, 23 steam-fired absorption chillers, 25 hot water-fired absorption chillers and 22 mechanically-driven chillers. This data was included as a set of CLIPS instances into the knowledge base. Furthermore, a new tool to insert the power demand profile from a database was added, allowing to consider, for example, the major differences between weekdays and weekend demands. The above points, along with other minor increments, were approved by the expert.At this point of the project, an important change occurred due to the different view in relation to the prime mover choice criterion. The criterion previously implemented was to choose the mover with the higher capacity factor, which in some extent was coherent, but not enough. Thus, based on the expert’s argument, the criterion was changed to select the mover with the lower fuel consumption. Here again, object-oriented modeling proved to be vital, because it kept this functionality encapsulated in a method, thus allowing virtual no major change in the KB structure.Regarding the last validation with the main expert, the fundamental points included: presentation of one-line diagrams, conceptual alternatives for hot water and functions related to economic feasibility. The economic feasibility module allows the analysis of the proposed cogeneration solution from a cost-benefit point-of-view. In order to accomplish this function, the current energy costs are informed and compared to the new energy costs related to the cogeneration solution through parameters like internal rate of return (IRR) and net present value (NPV). The system knowledge base is able to estimate the equipment costs and the energy costs of the proposed solution and detail them. To validate this functionality, a study was conducted based on a real cogeneration plant designed by early 2000s. Due to the algorithmic nature of such feature, it was clearly implemented.As mentioned, in addition to the participation of the cogeneration consultant during the whole process, it was important to have the system tested by an independent expert, i.e. one who was not involved in the development process. Therefore, close to the project deadline, an evaluation was carried out by an expert from CTGAS. This independent validation was conducted in two parts. Firstly, the expert tested the system for 9 different input scenarios, ranging from the simplest demand (only power) to the most complex available (power, steam and chilled water). In the second part, the expert was asked to complete a questionnaire with an overall evaluation, similar to the one submitted to the main expert.Regarding the first part, the disagreements between the system output and the expert́s opinion were mostly related to the chilled water circuits and their calculations. Indeed, this evaluation identified points that served to improve the knowledge base in this aspect, since this function was one of the last features added at that time.For their overall evaluation, both experts were presented a typical five-point Likert scale, where: (1) strongly disagree, (2) disagree, (3) neither agree nor disagree, (4) agree and (5) strongly agree. Both expertśs overall evaluations are presented in Table 7, where consultant identifies the expert involved in the development process.A detailed analysis of the consultant’s comments revealed that most his suggestions were related to the system interface, and the need to combine the system with manufacturer’s catalog. Although these increments are important, the KE team considers that such increments are far simpler compared to the system general functionalities and the complex knowledge representation scheme is acknowledged as the main project contribution.The comparison of both evaluations brings some insights. First, the independent expert evaluated an intermediate version, and as such, he was able to point some errors that were further corrected in the final version. Second, although the independent expert had a very limited time with the system, only few hours of explanations, he was able to understand and promptly use the prototype. Third, and the most important insight, despite of his limited exposure to the system and different background compared to the consultant, the independent expert’s overall scores were very similar to the consultant́s evaluation. This aspect demonstrates a great potential to use the system in a broader scale.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
