@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Does intellectual capital matter? Assessing the performance of CPA firms based on additive efficiency decomposition DEA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We apply a two-stage DEA model to evaluate cost efficiency and revenue efficiency.The additive efficiency decomposition DEA approach is utilized.We examine whether intellectual capital affects performance through Tobit models.We find that intellectual capital has a positive impact on CPA firms’ performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Two-stage data envelopment analysis (DEA),Tobit regression,Intellectual capital,Performance,CPA firms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study analyzed the “Cost efficiency” and “Revenue efficiency” of 207 certified public accountant firms in Taiwan by using the additive efficiency decomposition DEA approach. Furthermore, this study applied the Tobit regression to explore the relationship between CPA firms and intellectual capital (IC). The study found that the Big 4 and CPA firms that practiced auditing in China were relatively efficient in both cost and revenue. In addition, this research discovered that CPA firms relying mainly on auditing are more efficient in creating revenue and utilizing costs. Furthermore, the Tobit regression was employed to evaluate whether IC affected CPA firms’ cost efficiency and revenue efficiency. This study found that IC played an important role in performance representation both in cost efficiency and revenue efficiency. Therefore, this study suggests that CPA firms should manage IC efficiently to enhance CPA firms’ competitive abilities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Accounting scandals and the Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002 have led to more substantive auditing standards, and thus higher audit work [39]. In Taiwan, the most significant impact brought about by the foreign accounting firms is the improved auditing standards and principles. Besides, they have developed the confidence of accounting profession [20]. Due to the stricter auditing standards and the resulting increased auditing work, there is a higher demand for accounting services. A trend toward consolidation is underway in the accounting industry to strengthen their competitive advantage and this is often attributed to certified public accountant (CPA) firms’ attempt to avail themselves of economies of scale [1]. Today, the Big 5 have been reduced to the Big 4 after the collapse of Andersen due to the Enron scandal. As of today, the Big 4 are Price Waterhouse Coopers, Deloitte, Ernst & Young and KPMG.Due to personal and corporate demand for accounting information, the number of Taiwanese CPA firms grew quickly from 762 in 2002 to 854 in 2007 (see the data from the Survey Report of CPA Firms in Taiwan). In addition, an increase in the pass rate for the CPA certification exam has caused the auditing market to be saturated with CPAs and thus the market has become more competitive. However, the earnings of CPA firms declined after the increase in the pass rate [21]. As a result, tackling this decline and surviving in this competitive environment have become important issues in the public accounting industry. It is therefore more urgent than ever for CPA firms to consider how to manage their costs and resources more efficiently to maximize revenue.Data envelopment analysis (DEA), a performance management tool for evaluating efficiency between multiple inputs and multiple outputs [18], has been widely applied in evaluating CPA firms’ performance (e.g., [33,34]; Cheng et al., 2000; [1,3,2,16]). However, the traditional DEA model has some weaknesses [6]. One of the weaknesses is that the traditional DEA can only consider a single-process system. In other words, it neglects intermediate measures [44], in which the ‘black-box’ process of efficiency performance is ignored. Thus, this study employed a two-stage approach [23]. This study separated the two-stage production process into “Cost efficiency” and “Revenue efficiency” using a sample of 207 Taiwanese CPA firms from the Survey Report of CPA Firms in Taiwan over the period of 2003–2007. Cost efficiency indicates the relationship between a CPA firms’ spending and resources used. Revenue efficiency refers to the process that CPA firms create more valuation by using the resources.Furthermore, this study evaluated whether Taiwanese CPA firms that practiced in auditing in China were more efficient than those that did not practice auditing in China. To illustrate this point, since China opened the CPA exam to accountants from Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan in 1994, it expanded the services scope for Taiwan CPAs. On the other hand, the current situation for Taiwan CPAs service in the mainland China is still in progress to meet customer needs. In addition, Taiwanese CPAs need to expand their geographical coverage of the market. In terms of the practice auditing projects, checking audits, examination of business and financial records in Taiwan Investment Company is the main object, and their approach is that Taiwanese CPA firms send Taiwanese personnel to work in China. 12 Taiwanese CPA firms set up branches in China in 2010.Note that the public accounting industry is a knowledge-intensive industry, and knowing how to use intangible assets efficiently in order to survive and grow has become vital. There are many previous articles which used the human capital to evaluate CPA firms’ efficiency (e.g., [28,8]), but this study explores whether intellectual capital (IC) affects CPA firms’ efficiency. The concept of IC goes beyond the traditional performance of financial market value to represent intangible assets as embedded in an entity. Compared to traditional tangible assets, IC has become the dominant concern for an enterprise. Edvinsson and Malone [29] divided IC into three portions, organizational technology (structural capital), customer relationships (customer capital), and professional skills (human capital) that provide Skandia with the value framework in the market. Therefore, this study uses these three dimensions of IC to examine the relationship between IC and CPA firms’ performance.To explore the impact of IC on CPA firms’ performance, Banker and Natarajan [5] used Monte Carlo simulations to evaluate the influence of contextual variables on efficiency through one-stage and two-stage parametric approaches to compare the different methods of estimation. The results indicated that the DEA-based procedures with OLS, maximum likelihood, or even Tobit estimation in the second stage worked as well as the parametric methods in the estimation of the impact of contextual variables on productivity. For example, Hoff [31] advocated using Tobit regression in second-stage DEA efficiency analyses. Therefore, this study utilized Tobit regression to analyze the relationship between IC and CPA firms’ performance. Hoff [31] argued that Tobit regression will be sufficient in estimating the coefficients in the second-stage regression analysis that involves DEA scores in most cases.In summary, this study focused on three issues. The first issue explored CPA firms’ efficiency separated into cost efficiency and revenue efficiency by using additive efficiency decomposition DEA [23,27]. Furthermore, this study evaluated whether the Taiwanese CPA firms that practiced auditing in China were more efficient than those that did not practice auditing in China every year, and whether the Big 4 were more efficient than the non-Big 4 firms. Finally, this study used Tobit regression to analyze the relation between IC and CPA firms’ performance. The findings can help us understand the trends in the public accounting industry.The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides a literature review of empirical evidence on the evaluation of CPA firms’ operation efficiency. Section 3 describes the research design, including the two-stage DEA methodology, Tobit regression, and collection of sample data. Section 4 describes the empirical results. Section 5 presents the conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
After the increase in the pass rate of the CPA exam since 1988 and the Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOX) in 2002, the accounting industry has become more competitive and this phenomenon has caused CPA firms’ market shares to shrink. Therefore, how to utilize resources more efficiently has become vital in this industry. This study used the DEA model to evaluate 207 Taiwanese CPA firms’ efficiency in the aspects of cost and revenue. Unlike previous literature, this study utilized the two-stage DEA model rather than the traditional DEA model, which only considers single-process systems. On the other hand, this study utilized Tobit regression to examine the relation between IC and CPA firms’ performance. This study showed that on average, IC was positively related to the operating efficiency and affected CPA firms’ performance in different dimensions. This study can help in CPA firms’ resource allocation and the development of IC investment strategies, particularly on how to survive in this competitive environment.A few notes of caution are listed here. Since the data of this study come only from the Survey Report of CPA Firms in Taiwan, our sample is limited. Therefore, there are many dimensions that this study cannot explore. We argue that CPA firms might have to foster organizational learning process3We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising this point. According to Peters and Waterman [30], organizational learning can effectively initiate the development of “knowledge energy” or the accumulation of “intellectual capital”, eventually improving innovation capability.3in terms of improving their human capital, which include learning from past experience [11,13] or learning through training [38]. However, it is important to note that we do not measure the key factor of organizational learning in this study for at least three reasons: (1) data availability – As discussed earlier, there are many dimensions that we are unable to examine, among which include the proxy of organizational learning; (2) the main purpose of this study – We examined the impact of IC on firm performance. Specifically, the stock of IC is the focus of our study, rather than the initiator of IC, i.e. organizational learning; and (3) our proxy of human capital – On the merits of using postgraduate degree holders employed and used as a proxy of human capital, this study argues this approach may be relevant in reflecting organizational learning, in that the educational qualifications could reflect commitment to learning. Researchers will have an opportunity to examine how organizational learning affects IC and ultimately firm performance. Moreover, while Tobit regression is sufficient in representing second-stage regression analysis, the existence of bootstrapped truncated regression (see [46] for further details) to address the problem of performing second-stage regression analysis involving DEA scores is worthy of note. Future studies may consider applying the truncated regression; however, our results lend preliminary empirical support through Tobit regression. It is also suggested that in the future other researchers can consider the quality index such as balanced score-card to compare the CPA firms’ service quality. In addition, other researchers can compare CPA firms’ operating efficiency between pre-IFRS and post-IFRS. This study provides guidance to CPA firms to improve their operating efficiency in the future and the methods used in this study can be applied in many areas.