@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The creation and management of organizational knowledge

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A mental model is proposed to clarify knowledge acquisition and creation processes.Two insight capabilities exist for comprehension and creation of knowledge.Innovation is achieved by those who have well-developed insight for creation.Insight for creation is developed by extensive use of the PDCA cycle in daily work.Approaches to entrench the PDCA methodology in individual-based work are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Innovation,Knowledge management,Knowledge acquisition,Knowledge creation,Tacit knowledge transfer,Timed-PDCA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper explores what kinds of management actions are needed by businesses to enhance their innovation capabilities. The first step is to clarify the differences between information and knowledge. To do this, the author introduces a model that can explain an individual’s mental processes in knowledge acquisition and creation. With this model, it becomes explainable in a comprehensive way how “explicit” knowledge received as information is turned into individual knowledge; how “tacit” knowledge can be successfully transferred between workers; and how new knowledge can be created by individuals. The model assumes that knowledge workers can be classified into two categories, i.e., Type-1 and Type-2. A Type-1 knowledge worker is one whose knowledge acquisition depends almost exclusively on learning. A Type-2 worker is one who has a substantial amount of self-created knowledge in addition to learned knowledge. It is quite common to find Type-1 workers, but there are not that many Type-2 workers. Successful business firms are usually led by Type-2 workers, who are more innovative. In order to enhance the innovation capabilities of business firms, rather than waiting for the fortuitous advent of Type-2 workers, management should make an effort to transform existing Type-1 workers into Type-2 workers. The author makes the assertion that such a transformation is possible by putting Type-1 knowledge workers into situations where their “insight for knowledge creation” is constantly stimulated. Constant stimulation is made possible by using an IT system based on the Timed-PDCA concept that was proposed by the author in his previous papers. When this system is deployed seriously by management, it becomes possible to facilitate workers’ breakthrough efforts and to promote close collaboration among workers through information sharing and visualization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For businesses to survive, they must have sustainable growth. Sustainable growth is achieved by out-performing the competition. In order to beat the competition, products or services that are differentiated from those of the competitors have to be introduced into the market continuously. To accomplish this, we can ask, what kind of management actions must be taken by executives?To find the answer to this question, studies on corporate culture, behavior and the actions by successful businesses have been actively studied (e.g., [5]). Especially in 1980’s, because of the superior performance of Japanese industry, comparative studies on management approaches between Japanese companies and those of the Western world searched for any meaningful success factors (e.g., [2–4]). However, the conclusions derived from those studies were not general or comprehensive enough to be applicable to complex environments. For example, companies that were once considered excellent by Peters and Waterman [5] have not survived the test of time. Also, because Japanese industry lost its luster after the beginning of 1990’s, the differences pointed out as success factors are not necessarily convincing now.There was also another class of studies. This stemmed from an idea that differentiation can be achieved by the effectiveness of knowledge utilization and continued knowledge creation. This is the research on so-called Knowledge Management (KM). It became popular in 1990’s, though its origins date back to much earlier time [12]. Many researchers started to work on KM especially after Peter Drucker’s book, Post Capitalist Society[9], which pointed out that knowledge is not just another resource alongside the traditional factors of production – labor, capital, and land – but it is the only meaningful resource in the new economy.KM studies, in the early phase, assumed that knowledge can be documented, focusing on how to learn, transfer, and share it. Gradually, a distinction was made between explicit and tacit knowledge. In the beginning, researchers’ interests were in “explicit knowledge.” Nonaka and Takeuchi [8,10] made a stir by asserting that what determines the competitive strength of a business is its ability to utilize “tacit knowledge.” They discussed the importance of “organizational knowledge creation,” pointing out that organizational knowledge creation can be achieved through the sharing of tacit knowledge in an organization. They indicated that Japanese companies are better at exploiting tacit knowledge utilization in an organization than Western companies were, citing different management approaches that originated from two different cultures. Since then, KM studies have been expanded to deal with both explicit and tacit knowledge. To deal with tacit knowledge, especially in handling its transfer, corporate culture and behavior have also become key issues in KM studies. Rasula et al. [21] discuss the impact of KM on organizational performance, and conclude that effective KM cannot be implemented without significant behavioral and cultural change.As a natural consequence of recent information technology (IT) advancement, useful KM strategies can now be implemented as knowledge management systems (KMS). This has led to the integration of KM with organizational business processes [14,15,22]. Malhotra [14] discusses a way to bridge the critical gaps between technology inputs, related knowledge processes, and business performance outcomes, after comprehensive review of theory, research, and practices on knowledge management. Herschel and Jones [15] provide a thorough analysis of the difference between business intelligence (BI) and KM, establishing a framework for relating one field to the other. Shehzad and Khan [22] also claim the importance of BI and KM integration and show that the combined model of BI and KM is more useful as compared to their individual utilization.Despite all of these useful efforts to improve organizational productivity, there are still few satisfactory answers to the above basic question, “What kind of management actions must be taken (additionally) by executives to grow their companies and attain product differentiation?” The SECI-model introduced by Nonaka and Takeuchi [10] might have been effective in explaining at what stages in the innovation process tacit knowledge was converted to explicit knowledge and how new tacit knowledge was created from sharing explicit knowledge for reviewing the innovation actually happened, but it is hard to tell how to make the innovation happen by this model. Therefore, business executives still have difficulty in figuring out how to generate innovation within the model of their daily management procedures.The author, as a management executive, initially thought that use of KM might be helpful in nurturing innovation capabilities in his organization. Inspired by KM papers describing the usefulness of sharing knowledge and information in the organization, he developed a database system for knowledge and information and conducted trials to promote their utilization [18]. However, he soon realized that even though sharing knowledge and information in an organization is useful for conducting daily work efficiently, it was not helpful for promoting the knowledge creation necessary for innovation. Reading KM papers and books not only did not provide answers to the above managerial question, but it also did not help with such very basic questions like “what is knowledge?” and “how is knowledge created?”Realizing this, the author decided to research the details of knowledge management more carefully. His first study dealt with an application to improve knowledge work productivity [19]. The application helps visualize “sales processes” and assists sales people’s thinking to improve sales progress. This approach was based on the author’s proposed timed “Plan, Do, Check, Analyze” (Timed-PDCA) concept, which is a revised and systematized version of the conventional Plan, Do, Check, and Act (PDCA) cycle used in team manufacturing processes [6,7]. Then, the author generalized the concept to be applicable to any “knowledge work” [20]. These two publications assumed that the use of the Timed-PDCA was effective for developing the innovation capabilities of knowledge workers. However, they did not address how innovation actually took place.This current paper is intended to provide an answer to the question “what kind of management actions must be taken by executives to be productive and ensure differentiated products?” In Section 2 below, we will first clarify the differences between information and knowledge. Then, we will examine an individual’s mental processes using functional diagrams. With this model, questions such as how explicit knowledge received as information is turned into one’s own knowledge; how tacit knowledge can be successfully transferred between workers; and how new knowledge can be created by an individual are explained comprehensively and systematically. Section 3 introduces the categorization of knowledge workers into two classes, i.e., Type-1 and Type-2, depending on their degree of development of “insight for creation,” one of the functional elements introduced in the mental model. How such segregation occurs is described in detail. Section 4 discusses how organizational knowledge is acquired, managed, and enhanced, thereby indicating why it is important to include Type-2 workers in the organizational management. Then in Section 5 we will discuss first what kind of Type-1 knowledge workers can be transformed into Type-2 workers by training through PDCA cycles. This is shown with reference to the success of Japanese industry from the 1960’s through 1980’s. Next, we will discuss what management actions should be taken by business executives to enhance their organizational innovation capabilities for winning in the marketplace. Section 6 is a summary of our findings.Before discussing the acquisition, the creation, and the transfer of knowledge, let’s make the distinction between knowledge and information clear. Many KM researchers have tried to distinguish between data, information, and knowledge. Awad and Ghaziri compiled the definitions of this research in a summary form (Fig. 2, page 62, [17]). They showed a variety of definitions for knowledge, implying there is no commonly established definition of knowledge yet.One common element to existing definitions is that they all tried to define knowledge as a resource utilized only by humans. This may be related to the ancient Greek philosophers who tried to define knowledge as the human mind soaring. However, knowledge and information are not a monopoly of humans. All living organisms respond to information and knowledge. Highly developed human knowledge is the result of step-by-step accumulation of knowledge over generations. If we think of information and knowledge at a very primitive level applicable to any living organism, we may be able to differentiate information and knowledge and define them in related yet mutually exclusive expressions. Table 1shows the author’s attempt at such an approach. The table also includes examples showing how the definition works in a concrete manner. With these definitions, information and knowledge can be understood as different resources. Their difference may be clear from the following description: Although we can receive someone’s knowledge as information, if we cannot understand it to be usable for one’s own purpose, the received information remains just information and does not become one’s own knowledge. A lack of understanding of this very point is the reason for the frequent confusion about the difference between information and knowledge.All knowledge can be classified according to its complexity along a continuum from explicit to tacit [16]. It was Michael Polanyi [1] who identified the distinction between these two types of knowledge. Explicit knowledge is knowledge that is articulated in formal language such as sentences, software program codes, drawings, and equations. Tacit knowledge is, on the other hand, personal knowledge embedded in individual experience and involving such intangible factors as personal beliefs, perspective, instinct, and values. It is hard to codify tacit knowledge; hence its transfer must depend on explanations using analogy, metaphor, or demonstration. Although sharing explicit knowledge among workers can be carried out efficiently through education, training, and/or the self-study of documents, the most efficient way to convey tacit knowledge throughout the organization is limited to face to face contact. Practices such as apprenticeships, mentoring and communities of practice also prove effective [16]. This difficulty creates value: Tacit knowledge plays a pivotal role in distinguishing companies and poising them for success. Nonaka and Takeuchi showed that sharing tacit knowledge among organizational members can lead to organizational knowledge creation [8,10].A question may arise here: Who classifies an element of knowledge as either explicit or tacit? It is no one other than the owner of that particular knowledge. Hence, not all tacit knowledge judged as such by an owner can be really called tacit. Therefore, it is appropriate to divide tacit knowledge into two sub-categories; pseudo-tacit and genuinely tacit[19]. Pseudo-tacit knowledge is knowledge that is judged tacit by the knowledge owner, but is able to be turned into explicit knowledge with extra effort. Genuinely tacit knowledge cannot be turned into explicit knowledge by any means.Knowledge acquisition, creation, and transferring together with its sharing have been the main subjects of KM studies. In order to discuss these in a more unified manner, it may be desirable to make all mental processes explainable in a single model. The author has attempted to do this in Fig. 1.The figure assumes that all mental processes are represented by two functions, i.e., the memory function and the processing function. The memory function consists of three separate elements (as shown in the figure), one for explicit knowledge, the second for tacit knowledge and the last for other information. The processing function consists of two elements, one for insight for comprehension, and the other for insight for creation, shown separately in the figure.Inputs to the mental model are in four categories as shown in Fig. 1: experiencing, learning, awakening, and other inflows. The fourth group of information is not in the category of knowledge, but may be useful to get inspiration for activating Insight for Comprehension and/or Insight for Creation. Outputs from the mental model are: explicit knowledge, tacit knowledge, and other information – all utilized for the individual’s actions as well as sharing within the organization. It will be made clear in the following sub-sections that all mental activities regarding knowledge acquisition, creation, and transfer can be explained comprehensively using this model.As suggested in Table 1, one’s “experience” can be turned into one’s knowledge. Such knowledge acquisition is not peculiar to humans, but is common to all living organisms. In that sense, “experiencing” is the most fundamental source of knowledge. One can also turn someone else’s knowledge into one’s own knowledge. This is knowledge acquisition through learning. “To learn” means to transfer knowledge. Well-developed languages and writing systems help humans acquire and accumulate vast amounts of knowledge as well as enabling them to handle very complex and abstract knowledge. The goal of school education is to inherit the fundamental and universal knowledge acquired and systemized from the past. In professional work, learning specific knowledge for the job is needed in addition to fundamental knowledge from school education. Knowledge workers (The definition of knowledge workers here is based on that made by Davenport [13].) can also get additional knowledge through self-study.Not all information inputs are turned into individual knowledge. In order to turn received information into one’s own knowledge, the content needs to be comprehended. “To comprehend it” means to make it reusable for one’s own purpose whenever the necessity arises. This comprehension is achieved by relating the input to existing knowledge, either explicit or tacit or both. New knowledge is added on top of earlier acquired layers of knowledge. Other (non-knowledge) information may also help this comprehension process. Insight for Comprehension in Fig. 1 governs this comprehension process. After comprehended, the knowledge in the received information is stored in either the Explicit Knowledge Memory or the Tacit Knowledge Memory. Knowledge gained from experience may be either explicit or tacit, but if it is from learning (education, professional training, or self-study) it is explicit in nature.The ability to comprehend the given information depends on the ability of each individual: Individuals who have acquired knowledge systematically from a very basic level to an advanced level may easily have the given information related to knowledge already acquired, but those who lack appropriate knowledge to be related to the given information cannot comprehend the given information readily. In order to comprehend the given information, they need an additional process to learn or re-create lacking knowledge for relating it to the new knowledge in the given information. This difference in necessary steps varies the speed of acquiring knowledge. Those who are superior in comprehension can level up their knowledge level smoothly, but those who have difficulty in immediate comprehension are slow in learning. This is the reason why there are differences in the amount of knowledge held by people.Even if external knowledge is provided to a worker as information, if it is not comprehended, it is going to be memorized partially or totally just as information in the worker’s Information Memory. There are some people who know the latest information and they can talk on any issue by referring to the stored content in their Information Memory. They may view themselves as knowledgeable. Other people may think they are knowledgeable, too. But if they are incapable of applying their “knowledge” to specific tasks, what they have is not knowledge but mere information.The other source of knowledge acquisition is by creating knowledge oneself. This is governed by Insight for Creation in the mental model shown in Fig. 1. The inputs are explicit and tacit knowledge as well as other information from memory. Suppose you are struggling to resolve an issue, but you cannot find a solution even by fully exploiting all of your available knowledge and information sources. After trying to combine a select set of knowledge each time, you may suddenly have an idea for a new method to resolve the issue. That is the creation of knowledge. If what you created is new to you, but it is already known by someone else, it is categorized as the “re-creation” of knowledge. Created or re-created knowledge may be either explicit or tacit.While knowledge acquisition by Insight for Comprehension can be done as the result of logical thinking, knowledge creation can never be done by logical thinking alone. Something irregular beyond logical thinking may result in its creation: this is called inspiration. You may find a rational path for a created solution if you look back after getting inspiration, but you cannot see any possible path a priori, as the nature of creation. We cannot predict when inspiration will occur. But we know that inspiration never occurs without an intense effort to resolve an issue, because inspiration occurs due to tension and relaxation in the brain.Inspiration can be triggered either externally or internally. External inspiration may occur when one is being coached by superiors, in discussions or brainstorming with other people, and/or observing a demonstration by somebody else. It should be noted here that someone who caused the triggering of inspiration is not necessarily understanding the focused issue or sharing the created result. He or she simply acted as a catalyst. Internal inspiration occurs in one’s own brain activities. Its occurrence is rarer than external inspiration, and its dependency on individual capability is fairly large. Those who are able to get internal inspiration are creative individuals, people who are invaluable to any organization. Although this ability may be genetic or developed during infancy and childhood, there is no need to despair for those who have not been creative up to now. Anyone can improve their creativity to some degree, as will be discussed in Section 5.1.Explicit knowledge can be transferred and shared between a knowledge owner and a learner through verbal explanation and/or documents. If an organizational database system is used as a knowledge-base, explicit knowledge becomes accessible to multiple learners in the organization at anytime from anywhere. The same process applies to “pseudo-tacit” knowledge after it is codified through a “questions-and-answers” process with other knowledge workers. The box labeled “Transformation through Interaction” in Fig. 1 shows this codification between the knowledge owner and others. The mental activity of the knowledge owner here is governed by Insight for Creation. Questions and comments by other members act as an external inspiration to it.Genuinely tacit knowledge can only be transferred indirectly. The knowledge owner and the learner are closely linked as apprentice/trainer and trainee. The learner must acquire tacit knowledge by carefully listening to or observing the owner’s explanations using analogy, metaphor, or demonstration. If the learner is sensitive enough, he or she can get external inspiration to trigger Insight for Creation for re-creating knowledge. In other words, tacit knowledge transfer from an owner to learner is achieved through the re-creation of knowledge.Education systems in society provide ample opportunities to stimulate Insight for Comprehension. Although not as systematic, individuals have opportunities for their Insight for Creation to be stimulated externally. However, for the average person there is no imminent necessity to exploit their Insight for Creation with internal inspiration. Because of this, knowledge workers are classified into two types; Type-1 and Type-2. Fig. 2illustrates these two types.The Type-1 worker believes that knowledge is acquired through learning and exerts himself to acquire it by activating his Insight for Comprehension. Increased activation quickens the development of this insight capability. The majority of knowledge workers fall into this category because they are accustomed to acquiring knowledge through learning opportunities such as school education. This acquisition of knowledge is often referred to as “common sense.”Type-1 knowledge workers are generally highly motivated to study and acquire the latest information and knowledge. They accomplish their daily assignments promptly and smartly and show well thought-out opinions on issues. Thus, they are viewed as very dependable workers. Upon assuming management responsibilities, this type of workers will make their best effort to make the right decision on any issue. This effort deserves praise in a stable business environment and they can climb up the management hierarchy.The weakness of Type-1 knowledge workers surfaces when they face unprecedented situations that cannot be handled only with learned knowledge. They tend to think that their past learning was not sufficient to handle the situation and unsuccessfully seek new knowledge more and more. This learning process inevitably locks them into a follower position. Their planning activities also tend to be incomplete because of the random information process. Too much knowledge and information is confusing and they tend to hang back from making any decisions. All of this tends to inhibit innovation.In short, Type-1 knowledge workers can be good actors, but not good innovators. Also, in an organization headed by a Type-1 leader, it is hard to prepare any systematic approach for transforming Type-1 workers into Type-2 workers.The Type-2 worker has ample experience with creating or re-creating knowledge in addition to learned knowledge. Whenever facing a situation where existing knowledge is not sufficient to solve an issue, they naturally try to find a resolution using their own thinking. Therefore, even when their available knowledge is very limited, they can raise their knowledge level by thinking for creation or re-creation. Although there are some people who have been successful in their profession despite of low level of education, they compensate for this by having lots of knowledge acquired through their own creation and re-creation activities.Since most organizations are operated by Type-1 knowledge workers, Type-2 workers may have difficulty proving themselves in such an environment. While knowledgeable Type-1 workers can lead discussions intelligently, independent thinking Type-2 workers tend to be slow to react. Moreover, a point presented by a Type-2 worker may not be readily understood by other “common sense” members because of its uniqueness. Only when Type-2 workers overwhelm Type-1 workers in both the amount and the quality of knowledge possessed, they can overcome the competition to lead the organization. Innovation is carried out by such Type-2 people. They can be called “innovation workers” as a small subset of knowledge workers [19]. Founders of successful businesses and top executives who have successfully revitalized a business in decline are doubtlessly Type-2. They have been successful because they are not bound by the so-called “common sense” of Type-1 knowledge workers.Business firms are “organizations that know how to do things” (Sidney Winter, 1994). A company is a collection of people organized to do something, whether it be goods, services, or some combination of the two. Their ability to produce depends on what they currently know and on the knowledge that has become embedded in the routines and machinery of production [11]. This means that organizational knowledge is a collection of knowledge acquired and created by past and present members of the organization. Whether an organization is traditionally strong or not depends on the total amount of useful knowledge inherited from the past members. The current strength of an organization is dependent on the presence of those who are good at acquiring and creating knowledge. Businesses without their own knowledge creation capabilities can only depend on knowledge externally available, which means a lack of useful competitive advantages other than the speed of deployment or pricing reduction strategies with thinner profits.Fig. 3illustrates how an organization, consisting of collaborating individuals (numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, k, n), collects, acquires, creates, and shares knowledge and information. As long as it is called an “organization,” it should have some sort of workplace collaboration platforms. Individuals perform their assigned work by using knowledge and information acquired externally and/or available internally through workplace collaboration platforms. Some individuals (Type-2 knowledge workers) may create new knowledge performing their work. Results gained and approaches used in their work can be shared with other members of the organization through these platforms. Knowledge acquired or created by past members of the organization is also made available in the platforms in the form of as documents, software codes, machine settings, rules, routines, know-how, and other traditional practices.Effective workplace collaboration platforms vary from organization to organization: Some advanced organizations may have established a very sophisticated platform including IT-based database systems: Some traditional style organizations may only depend on people-centered approaches. In any implementation, the platform has two components; one for transferring and sharing explicit knowledge and information and the other for transferring and sharing tacit knowledge. The former is done through organizational databases, training courses, reporting and meetings. Methodologies are fairly well established to do this. The second “people-centered approach” relies on less systematic approaches such as apprenticeships, on-the-job training, mentoring, and brainstorming. Nonaka and Takeuchi explained the differences in these approaches between Western and Japanese management [10]: Western managers are more accustomed to dealing with systematic platforms while Japanese managers are more people-centric.Rather than expecting the fortuitous employment of Type-2 workers, businesses must be proactive in developing innovative Type-2 workers for some positions. One common approach may be finding and hiring qualified persons outside the company, but Japanese industry preferred a totally different approach: They transformed existing Type-1 workers into Type-2 workers through daily operations. Japanese industry showed remarkable recovery from devastation of World War II, and dominated world markets at its peak in the 1980’s. That was not done by a handful of select innovators, but by numerous anonymous knowledge workers in the fields of product design and manufacturing. The knowledge workers employed by Japanese firms were mostly typical Type-1 workers due to the Japanese traditional education approach which emphasized rote learning – listening calmly to lectures given by teachers instead of rigorously discussing their own ideas and thoughts. The fact that Japanese industry overwhelmed the world market with innovative products indicates that a significant number of Type-1 knowledge workers were successfully transformed into Type-2 workers in the workplace.The driving force for this transformation was the extensive use of the “Plan, Do, Check, and Act” (PDCA) methodology performed by teams of workers. The concept of the PDCA cycle was born and deployed in Japan based on the quality improvement lectures given by W.E. Deming after World War II [7,6]. His ideas were initially used as a quality improvement method on production lines, but its application was soon expanded to the improvement of team-based collaboration. Target setting and the process of “check, act, and plan for the next stage” were left to the responsibility of a team: this was true in case of sharing designs by multiple engineers, even in the case where the entire design was done by a single designer. In the pursuit of team objectives to develop better products, knowledge workers needed to develop breakthrough ideas under the constraints of time, cost, and performance. This developed their Insight for Creation and brought about a successful transformation.The author finds that there were two key factors critical to this successful transformation; norm consciousness and aesthetics. Trying to make a deadline and meet the objectives set by the team involves the worker’s norm consciousness. Workers strive to avoid the awkward situation of the “team objective” not being met due “any one individual’s” insufficient work achievement. Japanese worker loyalty to the organization contributed to the successful adoption of this norm. When a target objective is set, some workers may try to go beyond the target. That is what the author means by worker’s aesthetics. It has its origin in traditional craftsmanship and professionalism. In all ages and cultures, whenever craftsmen were requested to make something, they tried to please the client by exceeding the client’s product expectation. This requires not only skill but creativity. In order to make something, appropriate knowledge must be applied. In the case where knowledge is not available, new knowledge must be created. This process is innovation. In Japan, the pride of craftsmanship has penetrated the thinking of ordinary people. Therefore, Japanese workers tend to pursue aesthetics which became part of the core activities of the PDCA cycle. The same process stimulated knowledge workers’ Insight for Creation transforming them into Type-2 workers.But if this is so, why did Japanese industry lose its luster after its peak in 1980’s? The answer is that there was a major change in the way that business was conducted. The electronics industry lost world market share because of the digitalization of products and the wide spread utilization of the internet. Digitalization undermined traditional product design and manufacturing because all product features were now determined by a conceptual idea and algorithm implementation. Traditional quality work in detailed product design and manufacturing was no longer a prime factor in product differentiation. Furthermore, the spread of the internet has invalidated the strength of the vertical integration which characterized Japanese manufacturers. With the internet, it became easy to find necessary components, parts or sub-assemblies anywhere in the world. In short, there was a paradigm shift in the way product differentiation was accomplished.In the new era, after the paradigm shift, competitiveness was determined by creativity in incubating product concepts and making investment decisions to move a plan into a reality. Companies headed by top executives who could personally lead the conceptualization of innovative products and be decisive about financial issues were successful in the newly emerged marketplace. Successful companies in the electronics market were headed by these Type-2 top executives. However, people assisting them were mostly Type-1 workers, very knowledgeable and capable in execution. But they were not trained through team-based PDCA activities. Through the good days for their business, Type-1 knowledge workers moved up the corporate hierarchy, some of them having achieved the top positions after the retirement of Type-2 founders. But they had to confront difficult competitive situations with only their Type-1 skills; they ushered in the decline of once-innovative companies.PDCA was a successful team-based management tool, but knowledge workers in headquarters functions are usually given individual work assignments without direct supervision. They rely on their own professional knowledge and work to accomplish a specific goal. Workers tend to avoid interfering in the work of others. Interaction among workers in the organization is weak during the process of their assigned work. This work style is referred to as “individual-based work.” Because the PDCA cycle that was so successful in transforming Type-1 team-based workers into Type-2 workers was not adopted as an organizational management tool, there was no organizational means to nurture Type-2 workers within an organization.Nevertheless, the PDCA cycle can be useful for application to knowledge work executed individually in a non-team-based work environment. Unfortunately, there was no established procedure for the application of the PDCA cycle to individual work and typical Type-1 knowledge workers did not know how to use it. Only a few Type-2 workers grasped the essence of the PDCA concept and applied it for their own purposes. The author has published detailed procedures for application of the PDCA cycle to individual-based knowledge work (Fig. 1 in [20]. Its essence is summarized below with reference to Fig. 4.If knowledge workers are interested in using the PDCA cycle in their work, they simply have to follow the procedures in Fig. 4. The first step is to set a clear goal for completing a given assignment. The goal should specify what must be done by what time. The second step is to formulate plans by estimating how many step-by-step approaches are required to achieve the given goal. If the number of step-by-step approaches is estimated to be “n,” the worker then needs to set (n−1) intermediate milestones and “n” execution plans for the work to be done between milestones. The third step is actual execution of “n” PDCA cycles. In each cycle, the worker must check the result in the cycle against the plan for that cycle. This is the “Check stage.” In the “Analyze stage,” the worker should review the progress towards the goal, analyze causes of success or failure against the milestone and find ways to remove any obstacles. (The author prefers to use the word “analyze” instead of the word “act” used in the conventional PDCA cycle.) Next, in the “Plan stage,” the worker needs to revise the execution plans to better achieve the goal. In the case where the milestone is achieved, there is no need for change. If the achievement in the execution stage slightly misses the milestone, changes will be made to the next execution plan only or at most additionally on the next milestone. If it significantly misses the milestone, changes need to be made to all of the following midway milestones and midway execution plans. Depending on the degree of difficulty encountered midway, the number of cycles might be increased or decreased.To apply the PDCA cycle for individual-based work, it is necessary for two consciousness factors, norm consciousness and aesthetics, to be consistently stimulated. However, because mid-process activities are not clear, the worker’s norm consciousness does not function well. Although workers do not want to fail at the end of the process, the invisibility of the mid-process activities eases the daily struggle for progress. As a result, it is highly possible that the achievement at the end of the process is quite unsatisfactory. Also, without daily visibility, exercising aesthetics would be relaxed in the worker’s daily job execution. To make the PDCA cycle as effective with individuals as with team-based work, an environment similar to team-based work must be replicated for individual-based work. An important fact here is that even individual-based work is not totally independent from other members’ work in the organization. An organization is essentially a team with its own goal. Each individual’s assignment is for achieving that goal. Therefore, organization members in individual-based work also need close collaboration. If all members use the PDCA cycle for their own work and the status of their work progress is visible and can be easily shared in the organization, workers in individual-based work will also behave in a similar manner as those in team-based work.The Timed-PDCA concept proposed by the author [19,20] makes this possible. Its base is the PDCA cycle as described in Fig. 4, but two rules are built on it additionally. Letting workers follow those rules is enhanced by use of information technology (IT). The first rule is that the cycle time is to be pre-determined. The second rule is to make each worker’s PDCA activity visible promptly and sharable within the organization. The first rule helps align the pace of all workers’ work efforts. It also guides organization managers to make it a required routine to check workers’ activities regularly and to give them timely advices. Its duration should be shortened. A short cycle time helps promptly detect problems, stop activities not proving useful, and start corrective actions without wasting time. The minimum duration is determined by the time necessary for corrective actions, coordinating with other people, and planning an alternative approach. On top of these factors, taking the workers stress factor into consideration, a week-long cycle time might be a good choice.Being able to track worker performance (visualizing and sharing worker activities) as required by the second rule can be achieved by deploying an electronic bulletin board where all PDCA work assignments are displayed. With the help of an IT bulletin board, anyone interested can know if a PDCA work assignment is being done in a timely way; if the work assignment is progressing well; if there remains enough time until the finishing due date; if there is no significant imbalance among entire work assignments; and detailed information on each work assignment. This approach for visualizing and sharing all workers’ activities on a single electronic bulletin board can provide a similar environment as that for team-based PDCA activities.The purpose of introducing the Timed-PDCA for individual-based work is to have the worker face the facts of their own work progress and have them think seriously about how to improve it and overcome any difficulties encountered. Adopting the electronic bulletin board mentioned above may make the PDCA application for a specified cycle time routine for workers. But if the worker is serious about analyzing their own progress, it is up to them to plan necessary actions for achieving their goals. They may try to cover over their work effort in the PDCA report. Actually, all too often, workers will write superficial reports about what they did, what they were told, or what is being planned by someone else. As a Type-1 worker, they tend to avoid getting to the bottom of the problem using their own thinking. Without serious self-evaluation, their transformation into Type-2 worker can never be achieved.Although navigating workers towards organizational goals is the role of managers, the use of IT may help them to fulfill their goals more easily. Rather than letting workers write their work report arbitrarily in the PDCA review, the IT system for the Timed-PDCA implementation can guide workers to answer more specifically: instead of asking workers to “check” the work result in the cycle in their words, the system first gives simple “answer choice” options to the worker in two steps. The first step question is “Were you engaged in this work in the previous cycle?” The answer is either Yes or No. The second step question is “What was the work progress in the previous cycle?” The answer is one of three possibilities: upgraded, downgraded, or no change. Answering these two-step questions results in one of four possible “cases,” that is sufficient enough to check the “do” stage result. There is no room for ambiguity in this approach. In the next “analyze” and “plan” stages, the IT system gives a more focused question according to the case determined in the “check” stage. For example, in case where there was no change despite the worker’s effort, the question from the system in the analyze stage may be “What is the reason for no movement? Describe your analysis.” Likewise, in the plan stage, the question from the system may be “What should you do in the next cycle in order to move forward? Explain your thoughts concretely.” To these two questions, the worker is prompted by the system to answer in his/her own words. Because the question and its answer are displayed as a pair in every cycle PDCA report, the worker needs to answer using thoughtful consideration. Inconsistent answers to the given questions are revealed to everybody in the organization. This situation is expected to invite worker’s norm that has worked in team-based work. Some workers may think that careful reporting is a good opportunity for them to demonstrate their organizational commitment as well as their capabilities. This can be a driving force for nurturing their aesthetics in daily work.The usefulness of the Timed-PDCA concept was first proved by applying it to improve accounts receivable (A/R) collection in an organization of an American company by the author himself. Before its application, the on-time collection ratio for the A/R of the organization was very low (around 30% averages). Applying the Timed-PDCA concept with one-day cycle time pushed the average performance steadily up to a level around 90% or above. This resulted in a drastic reduction in the organization’s total loan balance from an 160 million dollar level down to a minus 50 million dollar (deposit balance) level in 24months. More importantly, the person in charge was transformed from a simple data handling clerk to a thoughtful knowledge worker, who strived for searching effective actions to expedite cash collection. In this application, the PDCA cycle time was fixed at one day, and visualization/sharing of the worker performance was made through an excel graph updated and distributed daily. In other words, the function of the electronic bulletin board described above was essentially achieved by an excel graph shared through e-mailing. Interaction between management and the worker was made through e-mail exchanges transparently shared among all those who are concerned. Because of the simplicity of the work, the above described simple mechanisms nicely accomplished necessary functions discussed in Sections 5.3 and 5.4. More detailed descriptions on how to apply this concept to work and what improvements were actually observed through performance measurements are given in a previous publication [20].A much more complex application requiring full functionalities discussed in Sections 5.3 and 5.4 was implemented as a software system for improving the B2B sales work. A B2B sales organization has a number of sales people to achieve its sales target. The organization manager assigns sales persons their target customers and their individual quota and requests them to report their progress. Sales persons pursue their assignments. Their working mode is that of the typical individual-based work as discussed above. Their direct supervisors may be able to obtain a certain level of current progress statuses through daily contact, but for others it is hard to know if a sales person is pursuing his/her objective seriously and effectively. They would be told only good news, if any, in the mid-process and told the final result after any support might be useless.The software system implemented by applying the ideas presented in Sections 5.3 and 5.4 has made it possible to visualize all sales people’s weekly activities on the one-webpage user interface. On a funnel image, all of sales prospects are plotted in symbol marks in the funnel area. Each symbol has multiple messaging functions: its plotting area shows the prospect’s distance towards the successful order receipt, its base color shows if the work is making progress at a reasonable speed, its internal mark indicates if the remaining time is enough to make the prospect turn into a sales order by the target date, and its outer frame line thickness indicates if the report is updated timely. Therefore, just by watching the funnel image, one can know if there are any problems in the organization’s sales activities. If there is a concern on a specific prospect, just by clicking on the symbol, the detailed prospect information as well as the sales person’s PDCA report on the prospect can be examined in detail. The system overview and user interface features of the developed sales process management system as well as its deployment review are described in depth in a previously published paper [19]. The effectiveness of the proposed concept has been successfully demonstrated.Using the Timed-PDCA stimulates norm consciousness and the aesthetics of knowledge workers in the individual-based work environment. The use of the original PDCA has stimulated those of workers in team-based work. Yet, there is an issue that cannot be overlooked: in team-based work, any delay or fault caused by any one worker has a direct impact on the team activity. Corrective actions are quickly initiated by other members as soon as any problem is detected. However, in individual-based work, other workers can continue their own work for a time without detecting a problem even if there is a problem in a worker’s assignment. In other words, even though the use of the Timed-PDCA may indicate something undesirable in a worker’s performance, other workers may not react quickly to that.Here, the importance of the management role should be recognized. In order to make the deployment of the Timed-PDCA system really functional, the system should not be considered as an IT tool only for workers. All managers, including executives, must use the system to monitor the progress of all work in the organization and detect any potential issues. When they have management meetings, they should discuss issues based on the data in the PDCA report concerning specific work. If management gives an order or provides direction to subordinates, that should be managed by the Timed-PDCA system for tracking its progress. In other words, a new corporate culture based on the extensive use of the Timed-PDCA system must be formulated. This can be achieved only when the top executives of the organization become enthusiastic supporters of the deployment of the system. When the new culture is established, the organization will perform better and foster more Type-2 innovative knowledge workers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
