@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new user similarity model to improve the accuracy of collaborative filtering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We first analyze the shortages of the existing similarity measures in collaborative filtering.And second, we propose a new user similarity model to overcome these drawbacks.We compare the new model with many other similarity measures on two real data sets.Experiments show that the new model can reach better performance than many existing similarity measures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Collaborative filtering,User similarity,Recommended precision,Cold user,Recommender systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Collaborative filtering has become one of the most used approaches to provide personalized services for users. The key of this approach is to find similar users or items using user-item rating matrix so that the system can show recommendations for users. However, most approaches related to this approach are based on similarity algorithms, such as cosine, Pearson correlation coefficient, and mean squared difference. These methods are not much effective, especially in the cold user conditions. This paper presents a new user similarity model to improve the recommendation performance when only few ratings are available to calculate the similarities for each user. The model not only considers the local context information of user ratings, but also the global preference of user behavior. Experiments on three real data sets are implemented and compared with many state-of-the-art similarity measures. The results show the superiority of the new similarity model in recommended performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, more and more people have their own smart phone, tablet PC and other intelligent terminals. Which has enabled them to spend more time in accessing all kinds of social networks (such as Facebook and Twitter) and e-commerce sites (such as Amazon and eBay). However, the huge amount of available information and products makes them overwhelmed and indecisive. Users have to spend more time and energy in searching for their expected information. Even then, they cannot get satisfactory results. Fortunately, the behaviors of users can be tracked and recorded on the social networks and e-commerce sites. This makes it easier to analyze the preference of users. In this regard, recommender systems are used to recommend information of user expectations and provide personalized services through analyzing the user behaviors, such as the recommendation of photo groups in Flickr [1], the books in Amazon [2], videos in YouTube [3], and results in the Web search [4].The collaborative filtering [5] has become the most widely used method to recommend items for users. It makes recommendation according to the similar users with the active user or the similar items with the items which are rated by the active user. The collaborative filtering includes memory-based method and model-based method [6]. The memory-based method first calculates the similarities among users and then selects the most similar users as the neighbors of the active user. Finally, it gives the recommendations according to the neighbors. However, the model-based method first constructs a model to describe the behavior of users and, therefore, to predict the ratings of items. The memory-based method can give considerable recommended accuracy, but the computing time will grow rapidly with the increasing of users and items. In some conditions, it is difficult to respond in real-time. The model-based method tends to be faster in prediction time than the memory-based method, because the construction of the model can be finished in a considerable amount of time and this process is executed off-line. The shortcoming of the model-based method is that the recommendation performance is not as good for the memory-based method. In addition to collaborative filtering, content-based technique [7], social recommendation [8], semantic recommendation [9] are also applied in prediction of user preference.This paper focuses on the recommended performance in memory-based collaborative filtering algorithms. The core of collaborative filtering is to calculate similarities among users or items. The generic traditional similarity measures, such as Pearson correlation coefficient [10], cosine [11], mean squared difference [6], are not enough to capture the effective similar users, especially for cold user who only rates a small number of items. This paper presents an improved heuristic similarity measure model. The new similarity model combines the local context for common ratings of each pair users and global preference of each user ratings. In order to test and verify the new similarity measure, experiments are implemented on three most used real data sets. In comparison with many state-of-the-art similarity measures, new model can show better recommended performance and better utilizes the ratings in cold user conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper first analyzes the disadvantages of the existing similarity measures. In order to overcome these shortages, a novel similarity measure approach is proposed, which is based on the PIP measure. The initial PIP similarity is not normalized and the computing is complex. Hence, the paper proposes a new similarity model to overcome these shortages. Moreover, the improved similarity measure takes the proportion of the common rating between two users into account. Considering different users have different rating preferences, the paper uses the mean and variance of the rating to describe the rating preference of user. For demonstrating the effectiveness of the novel similarity measure, several experiments are conducted on three popular used data sets. From the experimental results, we see that the novel similarity measure can obtain the better performance than most other methods. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of the novel similarity measure and it can overcome the drawbacks of the traditional similarity measures.