@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
User profiling approaches for demographic recommender systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Many DRSs are available in our daily life and many online services will be more personalized if demographic data is taken into account.Unipolar or bipolar similarity measures can be used for categorical attributes profile.Treating age as a fuzzy variable improves the system performance and reflects the real life case.Results of the unified profiling approaches are almost similar with minor differences.Single-attribute profiling approach brings to light the advantage of each attribute of the profile.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Recommender system,User profile,Demographic data,Similarity computation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many of our daily life decisions rely on demographic data, which is a good indicator for closeness of people. However, the lack of these data for many online systems let them search for explicit or implicit alternatives. Among many, collaborative filtering is the alternative solutions especially for e-commerce applications where many users are reluctant to disclose their demographic data. This paper explores, discusses and examines many user-profiling approaches for demographic recommender systems (DRSs). These approaches span many alternatives for profiling users in terms of the attribute types, attribute representations, and the profiling way. We present layout, description, and appropriate similarity computation methods for each one of them. A detailed comparison between these different approaches is given using many experiments conducted on a real dataset. The pros and cons of each approach are illustrated for more advantage that may open a window for future work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The huge amount of data and the emerging new ways of marketing enforce the administrators of online systems to search for automatic tools that may facilitate their systems. These systems offer many services to their users ranging from a joke to read or listen to many expensive things to buy online. Literature calls these automatic systems as recommender systems (RSs) with the aim to personalize the user navigation through the Web and direct their action. Today, these systems cover social networks, e-commerce, e-Business, e-Tourist, and many others [1–5]. Recently, Lu et al. [6] reviewed the applications of recommender systems, clustered them into eight main categories and summarized the related recommender system types used for each category.Formally, there are five phases for building a RS, namely, data collection, user profiling, similarity computation, neighborhood selection, and finally predictions and recommendations. Based on the profile data, RSs can be content-based RSs (CBRSs), collaborative RSs (CRSs), or demographic RSs (DRSs) [1–5]. If the user profile is a set of features extracted from the descriptions of the items user liked before then we have a content-based RS. However, if the user profile is a set of attributes that describe the demographic class or group of the user then we have a DRS. Finally, if the user profile is a list of ratings for items the user has provided before, then we have a CRS which may follow a user-based approach or an item-based approach. Zhang et al. [7] developed a hybrid fuzzy collaborative recommender system which combined user-based and item-based approaches of CRS for mobile products and service recommendations.The main goal of recommender systems is to address the online information overload problem and to improve the relationship between the system and its customers (users). Both issues are closely related to how the system represents the users and how much processing time is required for fulfilling the customer desire. Among many, DRS is the only system that has a limited number of features that can be fast for thousands if not millions of users. This makes DRS a suitable candidate for many online systems that faces rapid increasing of items and users.Actually, DRSs do not gain that much popularity due to security and privacy concerns which stand on the top for the user hesitation and the difficulty to obtain true demographic data from the users. However, DRSs are available with a good percentage in our daily life and many online services will be more personalized if this data is taken into account. Age, gender, occupation, income, nationality, and many other demographic data are essential for many applications. For example, age groups are very important when suggesting movies while income ranges are very important when suggesting tourist places. In marketing, male and female shopping requirements are sometimes totally different and we cannot recommend some items without taking the gender of the targeted user into account. Moreover, some RSs suffer from many inherent problems that cannot be solved without hybridization between them and the DRS.This motivates us to explore in some details the profiling approaches of DRS along with the advantages and the appropriate similarity computation methods for each profiling approach. Intuitively, the most important demographic data are age, gender and occupation. Sometimes Zip Code is considered as a demographic data but it is important for some applications only. This makes the research in this field too difficult as the available options are very limited. However, this is not the case if we consider the ways of representing each attribute and the associated similarity methods for comparing them.This paper studies the user profiling and the similarity computation phases and assumes that the other phases are the same for all approaches. The contributions of this paper are four-fold.1.Many approaches for profiling users of DRS are studied.We introduce similarity measures for some profiling approaches.We propose a cascaded profiling approach for the neighborhood set generation.We propose a single-attribute profiling approach by treating each attribute as an isolated profile and then merge their predictions.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: a literature review is given in Section 2. Section 3 is an introduction to DRSs which gives a brief description of DRSs and discusses their advantages and disadvantages. Section 4 introduces the demographic user profile and the nature of the basic attributes for building it. The user profiling approaches for DRSs and the corresponding similarity measures are introduced in Section 5. Section 6 describes the experiments’ dataset and the experimental methodology used for examining the profiling approaches. Section 7 discusses the results of the conducted experiments. Finally, we conclude our work in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work is an attempt to uncover some aspects of demographic recommender systems which have been underestimated and do not gain much attention till now although they mimic many real life decisions. Broadly, we can summarize profiling approaches of demographic recommender systems into two main approaches, a unified profiling approach (approaches A, B, and C) and an isolated profiling approach (approaches D and E). All approaches belonging to the unified profiling approach are very close in their results and preforming closely similar with some minor differences. The variants within each profiling approach are almost similar in their results and the improvement of the best variant over the worst one is minor for many approaches. This improvement is not a good superiority indicator of the best variant over the worst one. However, the minor changes show that there are some priorities for some attributes, for example age is more important than the others for some approaches.The results of the unified profiling approach show that the system performance does not improve considerably with different ways of representing the profile attributes. However, once we change the profiling way, new results occur positively as in approach-E or negatively as in approach-D. The reasonable improvements mean that close neighbors and consequently predictor are found and hence the way of profiling users play an important role for enhancing the system performance.This paper conducts experiments using three demographic attributes, as they are the only available for MovieLens dataset. However, many other can be used for other applications. In the future work, we will examine the studied approaches for different datasets and try to explore more approaches for them. Moreover, we will try hybridization between DRS with different approaches and the collaborative recommender system.