@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sensor-based human activity recognition system with a multilayered model using time series shapelets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We exploit time series shapelets for complex human activity recognition.We present a multilayered activity model to represent four types of activities.We implement a prototype system based on smartphone for human activity recognition.Daily living and basketball play activity recognition are conducted for evaluation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human activity recognition,Complex activity,Multilayer,Time series,Sensor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human activity recognition can be exploited to benefit ubiquitous applications using sensors. Current research on sensor-based activity recognition is mainly using data-driven or knowledge-driven approaches. In terms of complex activity recognition, most data-driven approaches suffer from portability, extensibility and interpretability problems, whilst knowledge-driven approaches are often weak in handling intricate temporal data. To address these issues, we exploit time series shapelets for complex human activity recognition. In this paper, we first describe the association between activity and time series transformed from sensor data. Then, we present a recursively defined multilayered activity model to represent four types of activities and employ a shapelet-based framework to recognize various activities represented in the model. A prototype system was implemented to evaluate our approach on two public datasets. We also conducted two real-world case studies for system evaluation: daily living activity recognition and basketball play activity recognition. The experimental results show that our approach is capable of handling complex activity effectively. The results are interpretable and accurate, and our approach is fast and energy-efficient in real-time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increased accessibility of wearable and environmental sensors has raised interest in the development of human activity recognition techniques in ubiquitous computing [1]. The maturity of the miniaturized sensors and supporting technologies has pushed the research focus on context-aware triggered activity recognition and inference for a number of real-world applications, such as home monitoring and assisted living [2–4], smart hospitals [5,6], rehabilitation [7,8], physical and sport activities [9–11], terrorist detection [12], and so forth. Particularly, the prevalence of mobile devices, such as the smartphone, equipped with powerful sensors and high-speed processors, can offer advanced capabilities to recognize human activity for developing smartphone-based healthcare and wellbeing applications [13,14]. Consequently, a substantial number of projects and initiatives have been undertaken [15].One goal of activity recognition is to uncover the knowledge of a user’s behaviour that allows computing systems to proactively assist users with their tasks [16]. Computer vision-based activity recognition has been at the forefront in this research field, where a large number of researchers investigated machine recognition of gestures and activities from still images and video in well-controlled environments or constrained settings [17]. Advances in mobile devices motivated steps towards more challenging and real-world applications in unconstrained daily life settings or dedicated scenarios, where cameras cannot be deployed everywhere nor can be employed anytime.Successful research so far has focused mainly on simplified scenarios involving single-user simple-activity recognition using sensors. The nature of human activities is complex and pose challenges that the majority of approaches and algorithms designed for simplified scenarios cannot handle in more complex scenarios [18].Recent works have tried to address the modeling and recognition of complex activities. They generally can be categorized into two kinds of approaches, knowledge-driven and data-driven [15]. The data-driven approaches first collect sensed data, and then exploit the unseen correlations between activities and sensor data, and eventually establish a model to classify the activities. Some commonly used data-driven approaches are Hidden Markov Models [19–25], Conditional Random Fields [26–28], Bayesian Networks [29–33] and pattern mining techniques [34–37]. Despite the fact that most of these probabilistic and stochastic methods can handle sequential and concurrent activities with high classification accuracy, they suffer from inflexibility in recognizing different levels of activities [38,39]. They often need to construct a separate network structure for each class of activities at different levels. Unfortunately, for some applications like daily living behavior monitoring, relevant activities even cannot be clearly defined upfront [17]. On the contrary, knowledge-driven approaches start with an abstract model of common knowledge and then implement and evaluate the model through sensed data. One commonly used technique for building such a model is ontology modeling. The ontology-based approaches are semantically clear, logically elegant, and easy to interpret [15]. However, they often lack the expressive power to capture and propagate the temporal dependencies [33,40]. In addition, it would be rather difficult to handcraft each formula whose temporal relations among activities are intricate [41].To address the aforementioned issues, we believe that time series shapelets (or shapelets for short) is a promising technique basis for recognizing complex human activities. The shapelet has been shown efficiently in classification with extensive experiments [42]. It can inherently handle the temporal information for designing real-time recognition systems, and provide accurate and interpretable results. Most importantly, it is possible to combine shapelets with semantic-based techniques in order to recognize activities in different levels and granularity [43].This paper extends the concept and usage of shapelets to the area of sensor-based complex human activity recognition. We present four contributions: a description of the transformation from sensor data to time series, a complex activity model, a shapelet-based recognition framework, and extensive experiments with public datasets and our dataset on daily living activities and sport activities. For the transformation approach, we represent a user’s activity as a set of time series, each one from a particular measured sensor attribute. A shapelet is a representative of a class of time series [44]; that is to say, an activity can be represented by a shapelet. For instance, to represent activities in a game of basketball, “walking” can be represented as a set of time series collected from accelerometer sensors on a user’s leg. For the activity representation and modeling approach, we present a recursive model of complex activities that are sequentially or concurrently composed of atomic activities. For instance, the activity “dribbling” is concurrently composed of overlapping atomic activities, like “running” and “bouncing ball”; the activity “slam dunk” is composed of a sequence of atomic activities, like “jumping”, “throwing ball” and “hanging on hoop”; the higher level activity “offensive” is sequentially composed of some sequences of concurrent activities “dribbling” and one sequential activity “slam dunk”. For shapelet-based recognition, we employ shapelets that represent atomic activities to recognize different types of activities whose time series are defined as a combination of shapelets through sequencing and overlapping.Compared to other activity recognition approaches, time series and shapelets have a natural temporal ordering that make the recognition approach distinct from other data-driven or knowledge-driven approaches. A major limitation of ontology-based models concerns activities with temporal intra-relationships [39]. Although the time-domain or frequency-domain features are often extracted from sensor data in data-driven or knowledge-driven approaches, they are treated as independent points without taking into account these intra-relationship among data points over time [26]. In addition, the overlapping activities are hard to distinguish using such features [18]. In terms of temporal information, time series shapelet-based recognition can handle the intra-relationship. For instance,“set-shot” and “dribbling” are two concurrent activities, but the way that atomic activities concurrently compose them are different over time. For “set-shot”, “throwing ball” is performed during the “jump” and has to occur after “jumping” starts, whereas “running” and “bouncing” are performed simultaneously from the beginning for “dribbling”. Time series can record the occurrence time of each atomic activity, thereby recognizing the sequencing and overlapping activities.To evaluate the time series shapelet-based approach for complex human activity recognition, we have implemented a prototype system comprising a server for training shapelets and a smartphone app for recognizing activities in real-time. We first evaluate our approach on two open datasets for atomic activity recognition, and then conduct two case studies for complex activity recognition, namely daily living activity recognition lasting for eight days, and basketball play activity recognition with 17 basketball play relevant activities of different levels. The experimental results are promising and show the capability of handling complex activity recognition effectively. We discuss the limitations and several directions to improve our approach in the conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
