@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A survey of fingerprint classification Part I: Taxonomies on feature extraction methods and learning models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The state-of-the-art on fingerprint classification is reviewed.A double perspective of the fingerprint classification problem is considered: feature extraction and learning models.Three taxonomies are proposed: orientation map extraction, singular point detection and feature extraction.The different classification approaches considered in fingerprint classification are reviewed.A critical discussion is presented, which has led us to develop the second part of this paper.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fingerprint classification,Feature extraction,Classification,Fingerprint recognition,SVM,Neural networks,Ensembles,Orientation map,Singular points,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper reviews the fingerprint classification literature looking at the problem from a double perspective. We first deal with feature extraction methods, including the different models considered for singular point detection and for orientation map extraction. Then, we focus on the different learning models considered to build the classifiers used to label new fingerprints. Taxonomies and classifications for the feature extraction, singular point detection, orientation extraction and learning methods are presented. A critical view of the existing literature have led us to present a discussion on the existing methods and their drawbacks such as difficulty in their reimplementation, lack of details or major differences in their evaluations procedures. On this account, an experimental analysis of the most relevant methods is carried out in the second part of this paper, and a new method based on their combination is presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Classification in Machine Learning (ML) is the problem of extracting knowledge from a set of n input examplesx1,…,xncharacterized by i featuresa1,…,ai∈A, including numerical or nominal values, where each instance is labeled with a desired output class labelyj∈C(considering a m class problemC={c1,…,cm}) and the aim is to learn a system capable of predicting this output for a new unseen example in a reasonable way (with good generalization ability) [26]. The system generated by the learning algorithm is a mapping function defined over the patternsAi→Cand it is called a classifier.Therefore, fingerprint classification problem consists of learning a classifier from a set of labeled fingerprints, which should be able to classify new fingerprints in the corresponding class. The most commonly used fingerprint classification model was given by Henry [37]. Most of the classification approaches reviewed in this paper consider the five major classes shown in Fig. 1: Arch, Tented Arch, Right Loop, Left Loop and Whorl. These fingerprint classes are unevenly distributed in the population (3.7%,2.9%,31.7%,33.8%and27.9%, respectively), which increases the difficulty of the classification problem from the ML point of view [33], but also makes the reduction of the search space class-dependent.The fingerprint classification problem arises from the problem of fingerprint identification, which aims to claim the identity of a person by their fingerprint [77]. Unlike in the verification problem (where the aim is to check whether two fingerprints are the same), the number of matchings that need to be carried out grow along with the number of individuals in the database. Hence, a reduction of the number of comparisons is required in order to maintain the response times as short as possible. This reduction is usually quantified with the ratio of penetration [99] in the database, which measures the percentage of the database that is searched before matching the fingerprint. Classification is the most extended method to reduce the ratio of penetration, which is also directly related with the classification accuracy (percentage of correctly classified examples) obtained by the classification methods. This paper focuses on this type of methods to reduce the search space even though other techniques have also been developed such as indexing [6,64,14], continuous classification [15,17,19] or clustering and classification [47,68,69].Although classification in ML typically refers to learning a classifier from a set of examples characterized by several features, fingerprint classification usually stands for the problem as a whole, including feature extraction [89]. Feature extraction (FE) consists of obtaining a set of features that are able to properly characterize an object for its posterior processing. In fingerprint classification, FE aims to describe a fingerprint as accurately as possible in order to facilitate its classification among the predefined classes. FE is a key issue, since the classification problem directly depends on the quality of the features considered.However, from our point of view, fingerprint classification can be divided into two well-differentiated steps, which is the viewpoint considered in this paper (although some proposals [46,104,38,61] consider strongly related models).1.First, we deal with FE, that is, how to obtain a suitable representation of the fingerprint so as to achieve an accurate classification.Second, we consider the classification problem as it is commonly done in ML, considering the construction of a classifier capable of classifying previously unknown fingerprints using the features extracted in FE phase.Our aim is to review the different works proposed in the literature paying attention to both phases independently. As a result, we will put forward a taxonomy in which the different FE methods presented in the literature can be placed depending on the nature of the characteristics considered. Additionally, we will present two taxonomies in which the methods considered in fingerprint classification papers for the extraction of orientation maps and singular points can be classified (Sections 3 and 4). We should emphasize that these are the two most important features for fingerprint classification. Finally, we will make an overview of the techniques that have been used to address the classification problem; we consider different groups of algorithms and their evolution in the literature will be analyzed.The study of all these methods has led us to a thorough discussion in Section 6, where a critical view of the reviewed works is presented regarding the lack of details in their descriptions, their reimplementability and the existing differences on the way they are evaluated, among others. On this account, we aim to experimentally show this problem in the second part of this paper [34], where several relevant methods have been implemented by the authors and an exhaustive experimental evaluation is carried out in a common experimental framework. This way, their results will be objectively analyzed and their validity for their usage by other researchers will be shown.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the fingerprint classification problem and recalls the most important concepts on this topic. Next, Section 3 deals with the two most important processes in fingerprint classification: the extraction of orientation maps and singular points, and presents their taxonomies. Then, Section 4 puts forward our taxonomy proposal for the classification of FE techniques and reviews the existing works in each one of the categories considered. Afterwards, Section 5 describes the different ML models that have been considered in the fingerprint classification literature. The discussion on the works reviewed along this paper is presented in Section 6, whereas Section 7 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have reviewed the fingerprint classification literature which started in 1975. During these years, a variety of methods have been considered, both in terms of FE and classification, which is the double perspective we have considered. For this reason, we have classified the different FE methods in a new taxonomy and grouped the different classification approaches. Additionally, we have thoroughly reviewed two of the most important features used in fingerprint classification: orientations (OMs) and SPs, for which we have also presented two taxonomies where the methods considered in the fingerprint classification problem can be placed.This review and the aim of finding which method performs better for the problem have led us to the discussion in Section 6, where we have outlined some of the key problems we have perceived in the specialized literature as well as possible future research lines. There is no way of knowing which method would perform better because each author tends to consider different experimental frameworks (different database, different usages of the same database, etc.); moreover, most of the papers lack of detailed descriptions of the models presented, which directly affects their reimplementability by other researchers.In this context, we aim to carry out an experimental comparison over some of the most relevant methods, both from FE and classification. This way, we will be able to analyze which methods would be easier to be considered for future developments in the field as well as we will provide an objective evaluation of the different models in a common experimental framework, which can be used in future works. We think that such a deep study is necessary in order to continue the research of this mature problem. Due to the space needed in order to properly present these experiments, the second part of this paper [34] is devoted to it.