@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid term–term relations analysis approach for topic detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We extract co-occurrence term relations using IdeaGraph.We extract semantic term relations using topic model.We fuse multiple types of relations to form a coupled term graph.We extract topics from the graph using a graph analytical approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Topic detection,Topic modeling,Semantic relations,Co-occurrence relations,Graph analytical approach,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Topic detection as a tool to detect topics from online media attracts much attention. Generally, a topic is characterized by a set of informative keywords/terms. Traditional approaches are usually based on various topic models, such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). They cluster terms into a topic by mining semantic relations between terms. However, co-occurrence relations across the document are commonly neglected, which leads to the detection of incomplete information. Furthermore, the inability to discover latent co-occurrence relations via the context or other bridge terms prevents the important but rare topics from being detected.To tackle this issue, we propose a hybrid relations analysis approach to integrate semantic relations and co-occurrence relations for topic detection. Specifically, the approach fuses multiple relations into a term graph and detects topics from the graph using a graph analytical method. It can not only detect topics more effectively by combing mutually complementary relations, but also mine important rare topics by leveraging latent co-occurrence relations. Extensive experiments demonstrate the advantage of our approach over several benchmarks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid development of Web 2.0, the amount of online text is experiencing explosive growth by means of online news media and social media. The rich information within the text data can be utilized to reveal some meaningful trends/topics or the evolution of certain social phenomena, such as the presidential election of the USA. Besides, it can also be exploited for detecting some emergency events or natural disasters, such as 2014 Shanghai Stampede22http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2014_Shanghai_stampede.and 2014 Kangding earthquake.33http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2014_Kangding_earthquake.In general, an event is considered as something non-trivial happening at a specific date/time and in a specific location [1]. A topic can be considered as a kind of “abstract” event which consists of some “concrete” events with semantic relatedness. Being consistent with [1] and [2], “events” and “topics” may be used interchangeably in this paper.Topic detection is a sub-task of Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) [2]. It aims at detecting topics or trends from various text corpus such as online media. Topic detection as a fundamental problem of information retrieval can help the decision makers to efficiently detect meaningful topics. Therefore, it has attracted much attention such as public opinion monitoring, decision supporting and emergency management [3–6].In topic detection research, a topic is usually represented as a set of descriptive and collocated keywords/terms. Initially, document clustering techniques are adopted in topic detection to cluster content-similar documents and extract keywords from clustered document sets as the representation of topics. Currently, most approaches utilize various topic models, a type of generative probabilistic model such as LDA [7], pLSA [8] and their extensions, to detect topics. Among them, LDA has been proved to be a powerful algorithm because of its ability on mining the semantic information from the text data. Terms having semantic relations with each other are collected as a topic.However, there are two challenges to existing topic model based approaches.Firstly, as claimed by Sayyadi and Raschid [1], “Current topic modeling methods do not explicitly consider word co-occurrences”. “Co-occurrence” means two terms co-occur in the same document. Unfortunately, due to the fact that “Extending topic modeling to include co-occurrence can be a computationally daunting challenge” [1], their proposed graph analytical approach only made an approximation to this extension: they merely took into account co-occurrence information alone while ignoring semantic information. Therefore, how to combine semantic relations and co-occurrence relations to complement each other remains to be a challenge.Secondly, existing approaches usually focus on detecting prominent or distinct topics by mining explicit semantic relations or frequent co-occurrence relations. However, they neglect to uncover latent co-occurrence relations. The inability to uncover latent relations prevents the important but rare topics, which are hidden in large scale and noisy data collections, from being detected. Such important rare topics have two attributes: significant for human decision making but rare that cannot be discovered easily [9]. In other words, their features are commonly implicit or latent. Here gives some examples: the latent omens such as the abnormal behaviors of some animals may reveal that the disasters such as earthquake will occur soon; the early incubations of the disease may trigger the subsequent cancer. The reason why such topics are commonly ignored is: they differ from the distinct topics indicating common patterns; besides, they are not outliers or noises in the sense of anomaly detection [9].How to uncover latent co-occurrence relations? How to discover important rare topics? In Chance Discovery (CD) theory and Idea Discovery (ID) theory, a chance is defined as a rare but important event or situation which has a strong impact on human decision making [9–11]. CD and ID as extensions of Knowledge Discovery have been used to detect chances by uncovering latent co-occurrence relations among terms. In the ID process, text data is analyzed and converted into a term graph by mining co-occurrence relations, where latent co-occurrence relations are uncovered and visualized to capture chances. Latent co-occurrence relations means there may be no frequent co-occurrence relations between two terms (the terms do not frequently co-occur in the same documents); however, the two terms can be implicitly related/linked by considering the “context” of one of the terms or other bridge terms. Here “context” denotes neighbors of the term which are strongly interconnected terms in the form of a community (cluster). In other words, latent co-occurrence relations between two terms cannot be measured in an isolated term-term view; the context of the term should be taken into account.To address these challenges, we propose a novel systematic approach to integrate semantic information and co-occurrence information among terms for topic detection. Specifically, the approach fuses multiple types of relations into a uniform term graph by incorporating ID theory with topic modeling method. Firstly, an Idea Discovery algorithm called IdeaGraph is adopted to mine co-occurrence relations (especially latent co-occurrence relations) for converting the corpus into a term graph. Then, a semantic relations extraction approach is proposed based on LDA to enrich the graph with semantic information. Lastly, a graph analytical method is presented to exploit the graph for detecting topics.To the best of our knowledge, the coupling of ID and topic model for topic detection has not been researched until now. As demonstrated in the experiment section, the key superiorities of our approach are as follows:(1)It can detect topics more effectively to support human decision making by combing mutually complementary relations: semantic relations and co-occurrence relations.It can mine important rare topics by leveraging latent co-occurrence relations, which may aid human to perceive the topics with great significance.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces related work. Section 3 outlines the framework of our approach.Sections 4, 5 and 6 present the core components of our approach: Section 4 details IdeaGraph algorithm for generating the term graph; Section 5 proposes a semantic-relations extraction approach for refining the graph; Section 6 discusses a graph analytical method for extracting the topics from the term graph. Extensive experiments are performed in Section 7 to evaluate the performance of our approach. The conclusion is summarized in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
