@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development, test and comparison of two Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) models: A case of healthcare infrastructure location

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
2 MCDA models: ER and AHP were developed to support the optimisation of the site location for a future healthcare.The Evidential Reasoning’s processes and results were compared with the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP).The ER and AHP models led to the same solutions; however, the scores were significantly different.A hybrid model is suggested based on the analysis of the experiments.It is argued that the most reliable MCDA framework was achieved by merging ER process with the pair-wise comparison.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA),Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP),Evidential Reasoning (ER),Location decision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When planning a new development, location decisions have always been a major issue. This paper examines and compares two modelling methods used to inform a healthcare infrastructure location decision. Two Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) models were developed to support the optimisation of this decision-making process, within a National Health Service (NHS) organisation, in the UK. The proposed model structure is based on seven criteria (environment and safety, size, total cost, accessibility, design, risks and population profile) and 28 sub-criteria. First, Evidential Reasoning (ER) was used to solve the model, then, the processes and results were compared with the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP). It was established that using ER or AHP led to the same solutions. However, the scores between the alternatives were significantly different; which impacted the stakeholders’ decision-making. As the processes differ according to the model selected, ER or AHP, it is relevant to establish the practical and managerial implications for selecting one model or the other and providing evidence of which models best fit this specific environment. To achieve an optimum operational decision it is argued, in this study, that the most transparent and robust framework is achieved by merging ER process with the pair-wise comparison, an element of AHP. This paper makes a defined contribution by developing and examining the use of MCDA models, to rationalise new healthcare infrastructure location, with the proposed model to be used for future decision. Moreover, very few studies comparing different MCDA techniques were found, this study results enable practitioners to consider even further the modelling characteristics to ensure the development of a reliable framework, even if this means applying a hybrid approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The National Health Service (NHS) in the UK has a requirement to develop reliable, robust and transparent operational decision-making processes; and, when appropriate, to include the local population within the process (Department of Health (DoH), 2010). Within the planning of new healthcare infrastructure such as hospitals, clinics or healthcare centres, a key operational decision is the choice of the location. The infrastructure site decision influences and shapes the overall healthcare network within an area. It is also a delicate decision for the local population who are traditionally consulted via a mailed questionnaire. However, this method is not the most rational or transparent way for optimising the location and other methods are needed to improve the site location decision-making process (Dehe, Bamford, Bamford, & Moxham, 2011; Feldmann & Olhager, 2013). Formal decision-making models and intelligent systems can be used to support the decision-making processes and it is suggested, in this paper, that MCDA models are appropriate techniques to resolve the location issue, especially when considering the NHS environment and the objectives set by the stakeholders: robustness and transparency. Healthcare organisations are becoming increasingly accountable to the local population (DoH, 2010) and modelling techniques such as location-allocation models and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have been promoted to optimise site locations (Rosero-Bixby, 2004). However, it is suggested that these types of modelling technique do not entirely satisfy the transparency and inclusivity objectives of the NHS; it is difficult to simulate and model the more qualitative criteria and inputs gathered from the ‘Voice of the Customer’ (Bamford & Forrester, 2010).This paper reports on the empirical differences perceived between the operational application of ER and AHP, when applied to the healthcare site selection, as well as identifying some of the managerial and practical implications for the decision-makers. The research make a practical contribution rather than a purely theoretical one, hence the technical and mathematical background will not be considered, and rather it is the socio-technical aspect of the models implementation that are the focus in this paper (Singh & Wood-Harper, 2011). To direct the study two specific research questions (RQ) were developed: RQ1: Are the operational processes and outcomes significantly different according to the MCDA model implemented: ER or AHP; RQ2: According to the decision-makers, what is the most reliable and appropriate modelling techniques to provide a rational, inclusive and transparent operational solution?Various model definitions have been discussed over the years, for instance Ackoff and Sasieni (1968) defined a model as a representation of the reality. However, Pidd (2003) explained this simplistic definition did not address the fact that people have different worldview and perception of the reality, as well as that a model can never be entirely complete and accurate. Therefore, Pidd (2003) preferred defining a model as an external and explicit representation part of a reality as seen by the decision-makers and modellers. This means, models are an approximation of the reality and that according to the specific model used to look at a real world problem the processes and outcomes might be different. In this paper, it is intended to establish, whether by looking at the same real world problem – the site location for a new healthcare centre – throughout two different MCDA models: ER and AHP, the processes and the outcomes are different or not, and whether one is more appropriate than the other, in this particular setting.According to Box and Draper (1987, p.424)“Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are more useful than others”. Hence, models have different characteristics, and one may want to identify the most appropriate model to use for solving a specific problem in an identified environment. To identify the most appropriate model, one may want to look at: (i) the robustness and the representativeness of the results generated, which are measures and perceptions of accuracy; and (ii) the repeatability and the reproducibility, associated with the consistency and transparency, which are measures of precision of the model and its process (Breyfogle, 2003). For instance, will the models allow the decision-makers and participants to be consistent at a different time? And, how representative of the perceived reality are the results? Moreover, the consistency, transparency and the facilitation or practicality must be taken into account when implementing a model. Fig. 1illustrates an assessment framework to determine what model would lead towards the optimum solution.Ram, Montibeller, and Morton (2011) and Golmohammadi and Mellat-Parast (2012) stated that when strategic options are being evaluated for instance in supplier or location selections, MCDA is the suitable approach to handle conflicting and both qualitative and quantitative objectives. MCDA provides a framework to aid with making complex decision by creating a platform where all stakeholders can share information, in order to develop a consensus or find a compromise. The sequence of tasks becomes logical, first by structuring the problem; second, by modelling the criteria preference and their importance; then, by aggregating the alternatives evaluation; and finally allowing the decision to be made (Saaty, 1980; Santos, Belton, & Howick, 2002; Yang, 2001).Ren, Gao, and Bian (2013, p. 3) pointed out that, from a mathematical perspective, a MCDA model is defined by a set of alternatives, denoted by A={a1,a2,…,am}, from which a decision-maker will select the optimal alternative, according to the identified set of criteria, denoted by C={C1,C2,…,Cn}. Also, an interval weight vector, denoted by Ω=(ω1,ω1,…,ωn), will be given, where ωj=[ωL j,ωR j] (j∊N={1,2,…,n}) and 0⩽ωL j⩽ωR j⩽1. This represents the relative importance of each criterion.Tavana and Sodenkamp (2010) explained that MCDA enables the stakeholders to create a framework to exchange their information and knowledge while exploring their value systems through the weighting and scoring mechanisms. Furthermore, Ormerod (2010) suggested that different frameworks and mechanisms inform the stakeholders’ beliefs about the relationship between the options and the outcomes. While, Belton and Stewart (2002) explained the myths of MCDA, emphasising that there are no right answers due to the subjectivity of the inputs. The subjectivity is inherent to the choice of criteria, the weighting and the assessment. Therefore, according to the framework selected, the subjectivity might be different, even when the common final aim leans towards a transparent, informed and sensitive decision.Xu and Yang (2001) wrote that there are many methods available for solving MCDA problems. Amongst the most theoretical and empirically sound techniques, there are ER and AHP (Guo, Yang, Chin, & Wang, 2007; Saaty, 1980; Saaty & Vargas, 2001; Xu & Yang, 2001). Other methods which can be found are: TOPSIS, VIKOR, ELECTRE, and UTASTAR (De Moraes, Garcia, Ensslin, Da Conceição, & De Carvalho, 2010; Grigoroudis, Orfanoudaki, & Zopounidis, 2012; Liao & Xu, 2013; Santos et al., 2002; Yang, 2001). The literature reports several applications of MCDA. Some applications are associated with a sector of activity; manufacturing, healthcare or construction. Other applications are related to a specific type of decision. Is one technique more appropriate than another, in a specific context?The literature shows a worldwide use of MDCA in the healthcare sector. Its use and applications remain varied, to support both clinical (Miot, Wagner, Khoury, Rindress, & Goetghebeur, 2012; Tony et al., 2011; Youngkong, Teerawattananon, Tantivess, & Baltussen, 2012) and managerial (De Moraes et al., 2010; Dey, Hariharan, & Clegg, 2006; Grigoroudis et al., 2012; Kornfeld & Kara, 2011) decision-making during complex problem solving.Büyüközkan, Çifçi, and Güleryüz (2011) showed how a fuzzy AHP model supported the evaluation and the perception of the service quality in a Turkish hospital; they determined the factors and criteria that hospitals should focus on to optimise their service quality.Site selection is a critically strategic decision as it could potentially make or break a business, independently of the industry because location decisions involve long term resource commitment and have significant impacts on the operations strategy and the key operations performance indicators such as cost, flexibility, speed and dependability (Ertuğrul & Karakaşoğlu, 2008; Salles, 2007; Yang & Lee, 1997). The literature is very diverse regarding site selection or facility location, however, as for complex processes it requires rationalised decision-making, often subject to uncertainty (Hodgett, Martin, Montague, & Talford, 2013).There are numerous MCDA applications in the site selection problem; this is one of the first problems studied in the MCDA literature for instance with the work of Keeney and Raiffa (1993) where they explore airport location. Furthermore, several papers have been published regarding landfill site selection considering the economic, ecological and environmental issues associated with the decision, often the MCDA models were associated with the use of Geographic Information System (Fatta, Saravanos, & Loizidou, 1998; Gorsevski, Donevska, Mitrovski, & Frizado, 2012; Guiqin, Li, Guoxue, & Lijun, 2009; Onut & Soner, 2007). Other papers, less specific, presented MCDA models for other infrastructure location, for instance, Chen (2006) explained the complexity in the convention site selection and suggested AHP as a method to support the decision by making sense of the multitude of variables encompassed; they demonstrated the use of their five criteria and 17 sub-criteria model within a site selection in Taiwan. Ertuğrul and Karakaşoğlu (2008) chose to demonstrate the MCDA application to optimise the facility location of a textile organisation in Turkey.However, case studies investigating the healthcare site selection problem, using MCDA, are limited. It was identified that, in their paper, only Vahidnia, Alesheikh, and Alimohammadi (2009) developed an AHP model to find the best site for a new hospital. Their model has five criteria: distance from arterial routes, travel time, contamination, land cost and population density.Additionally, very few studies comparing results between different models were found. Only Ertuğrul and Karakaşoğlu (2008) compared the AHP method with TOPSIS, and Zhang, Wang, Sun, and Wang (2011) who compare their methods with two different authors Beynon (2002) and Hua, Gong, and Xu (2008) methods, which lead them to observe contradictory results. This is noted, despite the common recognition of the compensation involved in any aggregation models and the subjectivity incurred in a framework. For example, Grigoroudis et al. (2012) explained that results are affected by both the model reference sets and by the decision-makers consistency and interpretation of the model mechanisms. In their paper, however, Ertuğrul and Karakaşoğlu (2008) contrasted two modelling techniques: AHP and TOPSIS, and concluded that, despite that both AHP and TOPSIS having their own characteristics, the ranking of the three alternatives was the same. They demonstrated that, when the decision-makers were consistent, both methods could be appropriate, even if they recognised that decision-makers should choose the methods fitting the problems and the situation. However, the study did not address the process differences and preferences of the decision-makers in great depth, and this is the reason why it will be attempted here in comparing two methods: AHP and ER, and evaluate the managerial consequences of choosing one or the other.There are many methods available for solving MCDA problems, however, some methods were criticised for lacking theoretical soundness and empirical evidence (Xu & Yang, 2003). Nevertheless, both ER and AHP are both theoretical and empirical grounded (Saaty, 1980; Saaty & Vargas, 2001; Xu & Yang, 2003). Therefore, it was useful to test whether or not by implementing this two different MCDA models the optimisation of the decision-making process of the site selection was going to be affected.The ER approach is amongst the latest MCDA technique, developed to handle uncertainty and randomness. Xu (2011), Liu, Bian, Lin, Dong, and Xu (2011) and Wang and Elhag (2008) stated that the ER was first developed by Yang and Singh (1994) to solve multiple criteria decision problems taking into account qualitative and quantitative attributes as well as the inherent uncertainty, by combining the Dempster–Shafer (D–S) theory (Shafer, 1976) with a distributed modelling framework. The difference with the other more traditional MCDA models is that ER uses an extended decision matrix in which each attribute of an alternative is described by a distributed assessment using a belief structure (Liu et al., 2011; Xu & Yang, 2001; Xu & Yang, 2003). For instance the distributed assessment results of the sub-criteria regeneration impact for alternative A can be {(Best, 33%), (Good, 33%), (Average, 33%), (Poor, 0%), (Worst, 0%)}, whereas for B it can be {(Best, 0%), (Good, 50%), (Average, 50%), (Poor, 0%), (Worst, 0%)}. ER uses a Simple Additive Weighting as scoring methods to calculate the overall score of an alternative as the weighted sum of the attribute scores or utilities (Xu, 2011; Xu & Yang, 2001; Xu & Yang, 2003; Yang, 2001). This process can be facilitated by the Intelligent Decision Systems (IDS) software developed and tested by Yang and his collaborators between 1998 and 2006 (Wang & Elhag, 2008; Xu, 2011; Yang 2007). Xu and Yang (2001), Xu and Yang (2003) also clearly explained that by using a distributed assessment technique decision-makers can capture the diverse type of uncertainties and model subjective judgement. Hence, they clarified that ER approach uses the Dempster–Shafer (D–S) theory as aggregation mechanisms; Bi, Guan, and Bell (2008) explained that the D–S theory is an appropriate and suitable approach for dealing with uncertainty and imprecision. It provides a coherent framework to cope with the lack of evidence and discard the insufficient reasoning principle. ER enables to translate the relationship between the object and the degree of goodness or badness of its sub-criteria, which is measured by both “the degree to which that sub-criteria is important to the object and the degree to which the sub-criteria belongs to the good (or bad) category” (Xu & Yang, 2001, p. 8). Furthermore, it allows decision-makers preferences to be aggregated in a structured and rigorously without accepting the linearity assumption (Chin, Wang, Yang, & Poon, 2009). This makes to some extent ER different from other MCDA approach such as AHP or TOPSIS (Ertuğrul & Karakaşoğlu, 2008; Seçme, Bayrakdaroglu, & Kahraman, 2009; Zhang et al., 2011). Furthermore, ER has been applied in different sectors and industries construction, security, transport, and IT, with diverse applications such as supplier selection, performance measurement, assessment, risk management, new product development, and data aggregation (Chin, Xu, Yang, & Lam, 2008; Liu et al., 2011; Wang & Elhag, 2008; Wang, Yang, & Xu, 2006; Yang, Wang, Bonsall, & Fang, 2009; Zhang, Deng, Wei, & Deng, 2012). However, not many publications were found in the Healthcare sector, only Tang et al. (2012) used ER in order to assess and analysed the risks in an NHS organisation.AHP is a general theory of measurement; it is an effective approach to handling decision-making and certainly the most popular MCDA methodology (Bozbura, Beskese, & Kahraman, 2007; Chen & Huang, 2007; Jakhar & Barua, 2013; Kang & Lee, 2007; Partovi, 2007). It was developed by Saaty in the 1980’s for resolving unstructured problems in any disciples or business areas (Wu, Lee, Tah, & Aouad, 2007). Saaty and Vargas (2001) explained that it was designed to cope with the uncertainty, and to optimise the evaluation the available alternatives. By undertaking pair-wise comparison judgments and aggregating the scores, a ranking of alternative is developed. The advantage resides in the fact that it allows inconsistency to be assessed but simultaneously improving the consistency of the decision (Saaty & Vargas, 2001).The logic behind AHP is in building a three level hierarchy model with the goal, the criteria and the alternatives to be assessed. Cousins, Lamming, Lawson, and Squire (2008) explained that to express the relative importance of one criterion over another AHP uses the pair-wise comparison method. The scale can be selected to accommodate the needs of the decision-makers as Tiwari and Banerjee (2010) demonstrated. We have used the fundamental five levels scale to offer a wide range of possibilities as Table 1shows. This fundamental scale was defined by Saaty and Vargas (2001), and has been theoretically justified and its effectiveness validated. This scale is used with the reciprocals values when the relationship between two activities is inverted.Belton and Gear (1983), Chin et al. (2008) and Taround and Yang (2013, p. 1222) recognised the excellence of the AHP approach. However, they also explained that it has a number of limitations. Firstly, as AHP treats criteria weights and scores in the same way, applying pair-wise comparison, which, they believed, leads to ranking reversal problems, moreover, one needs to be concerned with the number of judgments required to derive relative priorities, which can create inconsistency issues (Mustafa & Al-Bahar, 1991). Furthermore, AHP lacks the capacity to cope with uncertainty. Finally, the introduction of new criteria, or alternatives, will require the modification of the whole model (Belton & Gear, 1983; Belton & Stewart, 2002). The limitations of AHP do not undermine its usefulness, but have stimulated researchers to develop alternative techniques, such as ER (Taround & Yang, 2013, p. 1222).To solve the developed model, a software called ‘Make it Rational’ (MiR) was used (http://makeitrational.com/). This allowed comparing ‘like-for-life’ modelling techniques; it was felt that by not implementing both models via a software interface the results could have been compromised or at least biased toward one or another model.Evidential Reasoning (ER) and Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) were the two approaches presented and selected, because it was considered that AHP was the most popular approach, and ER was an excellent complementary approach. However, the researcher recognises and acknowledges the other powerful techniques, such as VIKOR and TOPSIS. ER and AHP major practical differences reside in the assessment level and in the assessment technique. ER focuses on the sub-criteria level of the model, uses a degree of belief for the assessment, and the Likert scale for the weighting; whereas AHP focuses on the aggregate criteria and uses pair-wise comparison, as Fig. 2illustrates. These differences influence the subjectivity within the modelling process, and may lead to practical and managerial implications.Both ER and AHP use equivalent hierarchical structures therefore one can follow the same process with the identified group of stakeholders to satisfy the accountability objectives by engaging with the stakeholders. However, the differences will take place in the weighting and scoring phases. The assessment of alternatives follows different type of mechanisms. Also, one can wonder whether, by using one or the other method, it will influence the results interpretation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
