@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SCOlog: A logic-based approach to analysing supply chain operation dynamics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A knowledge-based framework for modelling, simulating and analysing SC operation dynamics is proposed, named SCOlog.SCOlog can explicitly and rigorously analyse the operation dynamics of complex SC scenarios.SC disruptions are detected and analysed, along with low SC performance.The automated explanation support provided improves the understanding of the domain for non-SCM experts.The solution proposed is shown to be maintainable and reusable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain modelling,Supply chain simulation,Supply chain operation,Supply chain dynamics,Knowledge based system,Workflow,Business rules,Intelligent agent,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In a complex business world, characterised by globalisation and rapid rhythms of change, understanding supply chain (SC) operation dynamics is crucial. This paper describes a logic-based approach to analysing SC operation dynamics, named SCOlog. SC operation is modelled in a declarative fashion and it is simulated following rule-based execution semantics. This approach facilitates the automated explanation of simulated SC operational behaviours and performance. The automated explanation support provided by SCOlog is found to improve the understanding of the domain for non-SCM experts. Furthermore, SCOlog allows for maintainability and reusability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The modern business landscape is highly dynamic and competitive. The current boundaryless corporate arena is characterised by rapid rhythms of change and a high degree of uncertainty. In order to succeed in the 21st century global and volatile market, companies can no longer compete in isolation from their Supply Chain (SC) partners. SC- rather than enterprise-based competition is now experienced (Harrison & van Hoek, 2008), and thus “supply chain management consciousness is accelerating up the corporate agenda” (Storey, Emberson, Godsell, & Harrison, 2006, p. 757).One of the most prominent problems in supply chain management (SCM) involves the end-to-end integration of supply chains (Gunasekaran & Ngai, 2004). This involves aligning objectives with upstream and downstream SC partners, streamlining SC operations and coordinating activities across the supply chain. In today’s distributed and uncertain environment there is an imperative requirement for SC integration (Butner, 2010). At the same time, the emergence of global SC operations poses a great challenge to integrating supply chains and increases SC risk. Achieving resilient and fully integrated supply chains is a demanding task that requires a deep understanding of supply chain management dynamics.Although the SCM research community has long recognised the significance of analysing SCM dynamics (Choi, Dooley, & Rungtusanatham, 2001; Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997; Sarimveis, Patrinos, Tarantilis, & Kiranoudis, 2008), relatively little has been reported on the matter of analysing SC operation dynamics. Hence, the interrelationships between the operational behaviour (i.e. decisions, actions and interactions) of SC members during SC operation have been overlooked by existing literature, despite the fact that understanding SC operation dynamics is essential for coordinating SC activities and integrating supply chains. First, companies need to understand the interdependencies between different aspects of their SC operational behaviours in order to achieve internal integration. For example, how do their every-day sourcing decisions and actions affect their production activities? Such information is crucial for streamlining and synchronising the operation of separate business functions. Second, SC managers need to have a deep understanding of the interrelationships between the operational behaviour of different SC members; this is particularly important when employing upstream and downstream SC integration initiatives, as SC-wide process transparency is a critical antecedent to effective coordination of SC activities (Fawcett & Magnan, 2002). This involves, for instance, understanding how the production decision-making of an organisation at the very first tiers of the supply chain affects the sourcing activities of a company within the last SC tiers. Third, the effect of individual SC members’ operational behaviour on SC-wide performance should be clear to SCM practitioners. Such knowledge could help towards repairing problematic SC operation and improving SC performance. Fourth, the interrelationships between SC members’ operational behaviour and SC disruptions should be taken into account when planning or implementing SC integration projects. This involves identifying the effect of disruptive events on individual SC members, and how this may be propagated along the supply chain. It also includes discovering whether specific disruptions occur due to the operational behaviour of certain SC members. The above illustrate the significance of understanding SC operation dynamics and motivate our research.The interdependencies described above are often non-obvious, and discovering them is a challenging task. The problem becomes even harder when one considers the distributed, dynamic and complex nature of modern supply chains. Artificial intelligence and knowledge-based techniques (Stefik, 1995) are well-known for analysing complex and dynamic systems, and providing rigorous decision support. More relatively, they can automatically derive transparent explanations of complex behaviours. They also enable the explicit diagnosis of problematic situations, which can be supported by valuable explanations.This paper employs artificial intelligence techniques for analysing supply chain operation dynamics. In accordance with the four aspects of SC operation dynamics described above, we focus on identifying the interrelationships that lie:•between different aspects of an SC member’s operational behaviour,between the operational behaviour of different SC members,between SC members’ operational behaviour and SC performance,between SC members’ operational behaviour and SC disruptions.We propose a logic- and knowledge-based approach to the research problem, named ‘SCOlog’ (Supply Chain Operation dynamics explained through a LOGic-based approach). SCOlog consists of three components: First, a framework for modelling SC operation is proposed, covering commonly agreed aspects of SC operation, while recognising current trends and issues of the field. The modelling constructs are declaratively specified and they can be directly used to model SC operation scenarios. Second, rule-based execution semantics of this model are specified, based on which a simulation environment is implemented. The developed system can be used to simulate complex SC operation scenarios and perform what-if analysis. Third, a mechanism for generating explanations of simulated SC operation is designed by utilising the declarative formalism of SC operation constructs and the rule-based specification of execution semantics. An explanation system is implemented which can automatically answer questions on SC operation dynamics.We hypothesise that SCOlog generates explanations that improve the understanding of the domain for non-SCM experts and employs a logic-based approach to the modelling and simulation of supply chain operation, allowing for maintainability and reusability. This hypothesis is decomposed in two research claims:1.The use of automated explanation support improves the understanding of the domain for non-SCM experts, with respect to their (a) time-efficiency and (b) correctness when explaining SC operation dynamics. The correctness improvement is bigger compared to the case where no automated explanation support is available, without loss of time-efficiency.A logic-based approach for modelling, simulating and explaining SC operation scenarios allows for maintainability and reusability with respect to (a) the specified SC operation input models, (b) the developed simulation system and (c) the developed explanation system.This paper is organised in six sections. Section 2 provides background knowledge on SCM and artificial intelligence technologies relevant to SCOlog, and it discusses related work in the area of SC simulation. Section 3 presents the proposed framework for modelling, simulating and explaining SC operation. With the use of a supply chain scenario, Section 4 demonstrates the value of SCOlog. Section 5 evaluates the research claims with the use of empirical and analytical methods. The paper concludes with a discussion of the implications and limitations of SCOlog.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The research presented in this paper tackled the problem of analysing supply chain operation dynamics, a problem that has been understudied by existing literature. Yet, understanding SC-wide operation dynamics is highly important for coordinating and integrating global supply chains. A knowledge-based solution to this problem was proposed, named SCOlog. SC operation was modelled in a declarative fashion and it was simulated following rule-based execution semantics. This approach facilitated the automated explanation of simulated SC operational behaviours and performance, and it allowed for diagnosing problematic SC operation.The automated explanation support provided by SCOlog was found to improve the understanding of the domain for non-SCM experts; this has great potential for use in business and SCM education. The maintainability of the approach is a prominent attribute, given the dynamic aspects of SC operation and the evolving nature of the SCM field. Furthermore, SCOlog’s reusability makes it possible to explore its potential in a different domain setting. Finally, it is worth mentioning that this work is tailored to the SCM domain, a quality that is beneficial from a practical point of view.This work has both theoretical and practical implications. As far as theory is concerned, this is the first attempt for an explicit and thorough solution to the problem of analysing SC operation dynamics. We regard this as a contribution to the SCM state of the art, and we hope that it will help begin a fruiful discussion among scholars. At the same time, the research presented in this paper demonstrates the applicability and promising prospects of artificial intelligence techniques for SCM problems, even for issues that have not been previously explored. It is now time to get the two communities together and benefit from the synergies that can be produced. As far as practical implications are concerned, SCOlog can be readily used by supply chain managers to aid relevant decision-making. The provided simulation and explanation systems can be used to support daily SC operation or SC coordination initiatives. The automated diagnosis of problematic situations can serve as a foundation for SC improvement projects, and the rigorous insight provided can be of great value during SC integration efforts.Two research limitations must be pointed out. Firstly, stochastic aspects of SC operation are not considered. Nevertheless, only minor modification of SCOlog would be required to simulate and explain SC operation models that include probabilities. Secondly, SCOlog provides an approach to the analysis of operation dynamics of generic supply chains. The advantage of this design decision is the generality of the solution and the corresponding wide audience. The price to be paid is that some specific requirements of particular business sectors may not be satisfied. Extending SCOlog to address such issues would be an interesting topic to explore.A number of avenues for future research are identified, given the contributions and the limitations of this research. Extending our approach for teaching SCM is regarded as a promising direction of future work, especially since SCOlog was found to improve non-experts’ understanding of SCM. To this end, we plan to improve the usability of the simulation and explanation systems by incorporating animation and rich graphical interface. There is also opportunity to employ SCOlog for studying industry-specific supply chains, such as food supply chains. In this context, we intend to enrich the proposed modelling framework to address requirements on food SCM, such as the ones discussed by van der Vorst, Tromp, and van der Zee (2009). We believe that the approach presented in this paper can serve as a basis for exploring further SCM problems and for studying alternative domains with complex dynamics.